Jury gives Hamdan 51/2 years
USA TODAY
August 8, 2008 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 607 words
Byline: Alan Gomez
Body


GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba -- A jury of six military officers sentenced a bodyguard and driver for Osama bin Laden to 5 1/2 years in prison for aiding al-Qaeda's terrorism -- far less than the minimum 30 years requested by the prosecution.
Since he has served more than five years awaiting trial in the U.S. detainee facility here, Salim Hamdan will be eligible for release in less than five months. Even so, the Pentagon has said it does not have to free detainees until they are considered no longer a danger to the United States.
Hamdan, who was convicted of aiding al-Qaeda but acquitted of conspiring to carry out attacks such as 9/11, lowered his head and wiped his eyes with his head scarf. He stood and thanked the jurors, then smiled and was hugged and patted on the back by defense lawyer Charlie Swift.
Leaving the courtroom, Hamdan waved his hands and said in English, "Bye, bye everybody."
Prosecutors said they were not entirely disappointed by the sentence or the acquittal on a charge of conspiracy. They said the results had no bearing on upcoming prosecutions of about 80 other detainees at this Navy base.
"Certainly we would've hoped for a higher sentence," prosecutor John Murphy of the Justice Department said. "As a whole, the process worked."
Though Hamdan will complete his sentence just shy of New Year's Eve, he will still be classified as an "enemy combatant." Whether he would be held for the duration of the war on terrorism was in question.
"I wouldn't want to speculate on that," Pentagon spokesman Cmdr. J.D. Gordon said.
Hamdan was convicted of "providing material support for terrorism" based largely on admissions he made to interrogators after his capture by U.S. forces that invaded Afghanistan in 2001.
Prosecutors showed videos of a masked Hamdan protecting bin Laden with an AK-47 rifle. A naval investigator testified Hamdan had sworn allegiance to bin Laden and al-Qaeda, and two surface-to-air missiles were found in a car he was driving.
At sentencing, Hamdan's lawyers and even the tribunal judge made clear to the jurors that his acquittal on the charge of conspiracy meant he could not be held responsible for specific terrorist attacks, including the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, which killed 2,974 people, not including the hijackers.
Trial judge Navy Capt. Keith Allred said Hamdan was "such a small player, and so little involved in the planning" that jurors could not allow the impact to victims of the terrorist attacks or their families affect their ruling.
Hamdan was the first accused terrorist to stand trial in the military commission system created by President Bush and Congress. Next to be tried is a Canadian man accused of murdering an Army special forces medic in Afghanistan in 2002. Also awaiting trial is Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the alleged mastermind behind the 9/11 attacks.
Hamdan has the right to appeal his conviction but Swift said the five months left on his prison term may not leave enough time to do so. Swift was appointed by the Pentagon to represent Hamdan and stayed on with the defense team despite having retired from the military.
Prior to Hamdan's sentencing, a videotape was shown of his wife asking for his release. "It's been very difficult on me," she said.
Hamdan apologized to U.S. victims of terrorist attacks, saying, "It was a sorry thing to see innocent people killed." Afterward, Allred told Hamdan he hoped the Yemeni man would reject his past life.
"I hope the day comes that you return to your wife and daughters and your country, and you're able to be a provider, a father and a husband in the best sense of all those terms," Allred said.
"God willing," Hamdan responded. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP file photo

Load-Date: August 8, 2008


End of Document