JURY CONVICTS MUSLIM TERRORISTS
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
October 02, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. 03A
Length: 323 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK - The plan was to paralyze Manhattan with a 10-minute spree of
bombings at the United Nations, a federal building, two tunnels and a
bridge, then kill the Egyptian president and other political figures.
But the plot aimed at making the United States change its Middle East
policies was foiled - and now the 10 conspirators will have to pay for
it with lengthy prison terms.
In a federal courtroom just 100 feet from one building the militant
Muslims hoped to destroy, Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine others were
convicted Sunday of seditious conspiracy.
"If terrorism is theater, the acts of terrorism planned by these
defendants was theater of the absurd," said James Kallstrom, chief of
the FBI's New York office. But he said the verdict would not guarantee
relief from terrorism.
Security was heightened in Manhattan, where special precautions were
already in place for the visit of Pope John Paul II this week and the
50th anniversary of the United Nations' founding two weeks later.
In Washington, Secretary of Transportation Federico Pena ordered tighter
security at the nation's airports because of "a general threat against
all U.S. interests at home and abroad."
The jury in the biggest terrorism trial in U.S. history finished after
just 37 hours over seven days of deliberations. The verdict was reached
quickly considering the hundreds of exhibits and more than 200 witnesses
jurors viewed over nine months.
Defense lawyers said they would appeal.
Abdel-Rahman, 57, did not react, except to console his sobbing lawyer,
Lynne Stewart. Stewart said the blind Muslim cleric had told her, "I am
not the first person to go to prison for his beliefs and I won't be the
last."
FBI Director Louis J. Freeh said the arrests had headed off "what could
have been another catastrophic terrorist attack" such as the February
1993 bombing of New York's World Trade Center, which killed six people,
injured more than 1,000 and caused a half billion dollars damage.

Load-Date: October 4, 1995


End of Document