Jury selection starts today in animal activists' retrial
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 6, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B09
Length: 735 words
Byline: Wayne Parry, Associated Press
Body


The undercover videos on the group's Web site show animals being slapped, force-fed, screamed at and otherwise manhandled, allegedly by workers at a Somerset County research laboratory that uses animals to test the safety of drugs and chemicals.
But federal prosecutors say the Philadelphia-based group, Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty, also used its Web site to incite violence against the testing company, Huntingdon Life Sciences, and its employees.
When both sides face off this week for a retrial in federal court in Trenton, what the animal activists call an exercise in free speech will be portrayed by the government as domestic terrorism.
Seven members of the group were arrested in May 2004 and charged with animal enterprise terrorism, conspiracy, and interstate stalking. Charges against one defendant were dropped, and three weeks of testimony in June ended in a mistrial after one of the defense lawyers became too ill to continue.
U.S. Attorney Christopher Christie would not discuss the case, citing today's scheduled start of jury selection. But in a news release the day of the arrests, he said the group used "violence and intimidation" to further its cause.
"This is not activism," Christie said at the time. "This is a group of lawless thugs attacking innocent men, women and children."
The indictment lists numerous acts of vandalism, harassment and intimidation that followed postings on the group's Web site. The acts included overturning a Huntingdon employee's car in his driveway and throwing rocks through his windows; smoke-bombing the offices of two Seattle insurance companies that did business with Huntingdon, leading to the evacuation of two high-rises; spray-painting and threatening to burn down the homes of several officials of companies doing business with Huntingdon; and attacking Huntingdon's computer network.
The group makes no apologies for its five-year campaign against Huntingdon, saying the British company kills 500 animals per day and vowing to shut it down. Criticizing the company's operations - and even applauding the illegal actions of others who lash out against it - is not against the law, said Andrea Lindsay, a spokeswoman for the group.
"Anything they can pin on the defendants is an act of free speech," she said. "The government contends it rises to the level of domestic terrorism. We say it's free speech.
"The defense contention is they [the defendants] were only reporting information," Lindsay added. "Even if they said we support the illegal actions of somebody, that's not illegal."
Officials of Huntingdon, which has a research lab in Franklin Township, Somerset County, stressed that their company is not on trial.
"The defendants are being tried for inciting criminal attacks against law-abiding citizens carrying out essential research that is required by government authorities," said Mike Caulfield, Huntingdon's general manager. "We're grateful for the Justice Department's efforts in bringing this case, and we, along with the rest of the biomedical research community, will be watching the outcome very carefully.
"We've heard one preposterous claim after another leveled against our company by these defendants over the past five years. If the defendants' claims about HLS were even fractionally true, we would have been put out of business long ago."
The defendants - Kevin Kjonaas, Lauren Gazzola, Jacob Conroy, Joshua Harper, Andrew Stepanian and Darius Fullmer - could face as much as 13 years in prison and fines of up to $750,000 each if convicted.
They are the first people charged in New Jersey under the federal Animal Enterprise Protection Act, a 1992 law that was expanded in 2002 and equates their alleged activities with domestic terrorism.
The indictment alleges the defendants incited others to commit vandalism and harassment against employees of Huntingdon and companies that did business with it by putting employees' names, addresses, and other personal information on a Web site. Afterward, the Web site provided reports on the incidents.
But the group says it never told anyone to break the law or commit illegal acts. A section of its Web site urging people to call Huntingdon and companies that deal with it "and ask them to justify their involvement in animal cruelty" includes a caution that Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty "does not encourage repetitive, rude or threatening phone calls and e-mails. Make your point politely."

Load-Date: February 6, 2006


End of Document