Jury to decide if shooting threats are terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 12, 2013, Wednesday


Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P5A
Length: 431 words
Byline: CHERYL CASWELL, DAILY MAIL STAFF
Body


A jury is trying to decide if homicidal confessions made by a Sissonville man to a therapist constituted a terrorist threat.
Prosecutors believe that when Shawn Foglesong, 40, told a counselor at Highland Hospital that he feared he might kill people "up close and personal" at a local football game last fall, he committed a crime.
He was arrested shortly after his release from the mental facility on Sept. 28 and a grand jury charged him with making terrorist threats. He has been incarcerated since then.
A jury deciding the case went home Tuesday evening and was returning to deliberate at 9 a.m. today.
In his closing argument to the jury, court-appointed defense counsel John Sullivan said, "Shawn was trying to get better, and John Proctor was trying to help him.
"It's the exact opposite of trying to threaten people and make them afraid," Sullivan said. "To make sure you are not going to be a danger to yourself or others."
Foglesong was responding to questions about whether he had homicidal or suicidal thoughts when he told his counselor he was afraid he might act on his ideas of going in a mask to Sissonville High School with a gun.
He imagined that he might shoot a gun at the crowd, drawing police gunfire to himself.
"Suicide by cop," Assistant Prosecutor Michelle Drummond said. "The threat alone is all that is required by law. It is not necessary that a person intends to commit the act, or that a person commits the act."
At issue in the trial has been whether Foglesong's statements while in therapy should have resulted in his arrest and formal charges.
"The treatment professionals thought that they were threats," Drummond said. "Police and school officials took those threats seriously."
The state brought three witnesses in the trial taking place this week in Kanawha Circuit Court. Two were Highland employees, and one was a county deputy stationed at Sissonville High School.
Foglesong did not speak in his own defense, and his court-appointed defense counsel, John Sullivan, called no other witnesses.
"You would want him to tell his therapist those things," Sullivan told the jurors. "Because that was the right thing for Shawn to do under those circumstances.
"What reason should there be to punish Shawn at this point?" asked Sullivan. "I don't know."
Assistant Prosecutor Reagan Whitmyer said no one forced Foglesong to reveal such detailed ideas of violence. But when he did, she said, it rightfully set the criminal system into drive.
"Perhaps you think that may be harsh," Whitmyer said. "But there is not room in your deliberations for feeling sympathy for Shawn."

Load-Date: June 12, 2013


End of Document