JURY GETS BREAK IN ANTI-TERRORISM CASE;
PANEL IMPASSE CAUSES JUDGE TO CALL RECESS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 23, 1997, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 335 words
Byline: DAVID SHARP, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WHEELING, W.Va.
Body


Jurors in the trial of a firefighter accused of making copies of blueprints in preparation for an assault on an FBI complex were given a break after reaching an impasse yesterday.
The jury sent a message alerting Judge Frederick Stamp Jr. shortly before 5 p.m., after nearly 14 hours of deliberations over two days. Stamp gave them the weekend off and asked them to return Monday.
Fire Lt. James ''Rich'' Rogers and his lawyer declined to comment on the development as they left the courtrooom.
Rogers, 41, of Jane Lew, is accused of taking photographs of blueprints that were sold by the Mountaineer Militia leader for $ 50,000 to the middleman for what he believed was a terrorist group.
He is the first person to be tried under a 1994 anti-terrorism law that makes it a crime to provide material resources for use in preparing for an assault on government property.
Rogers faces up to 15 years in prison if convicted of violating the anti-terrorism statute, along with a separate conspiracy count.
Yesterday, the day began with one of the jurors in the case arriving for deliberations in a T-shirt declaring his right to bear arms.
The black T-shirt bore an eagle with the message surrounding it: ''The right to bear arms is the right to be free.'' Underneath was the name of a gunmaker, ''Smith & Wesson.''
The juror's T-shirt caught the attention of the judge, who summoned lawyers to his chambers to inform them.
Lawyers who emerged from the closed-door session placed little significance on the shirt.
''It could have been National City Bank,'' quipped defense attorney Gary Zimmerman of Pittsburgh.
Zimmerman contends that his client did not know Looker planned to sell or distribute the blueprints and that they were widely available. Anyone could ask to see them at the city engineer's office, he said.
Assistant U.S. Attorney David Godwin said Rogers' fear and hatred of the government drove him to copy the photographs as the militia discussed attacking the FBI's Criminal Justice Information Services division.

Load-Date: August 25, 1997


End of Document