Jury seeks jail for Navy lawyer He revealed the names of terrorism detainees.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 20, 2007 Sunday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 331 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NORFOLK, Va. 
Body


A military jury recommended Friday that a Navy lawyer be discharged and imprisoned for six months for sending a human rights attorney the names of 550 Guantanamo Bay detainees.
Lt. Cmdr. Matthew Diaz was convicted Thursday of communicating secret information about Guantanamo Bay detainees that could be used to injure the United States and three other charges of leaking information to an unauthorized person.
The jury of seven Navy officers recommended that Diaz receive his pay and benefits while incarcerated, but the sentence must be approved by Rear Admiral Rick Ruehe. The dismissal will also be reviewed by a military appellate court, the Navy said.
Diaz, 41, gave emotional testimony during the sentencing hearing, apologizing for his actions.
"The prosecutors were right: I'm a meticulous man. I should have done better. It was extremely irrational for me to do what I did," Diaz said.
After the first day of his trial Monday, Diaz had told The Dallas Morning News he felt sending the list - which was inside an unmarked Valentine's Day card - was the right decision because of how the detainees were being treated.
"My oath as a commissioned officer is to the Constitution of the United States," Diaz said. "I'm not a criminal."
In early 2005, as he was concluding a six-month tour of duty as a legal adviser at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, Diaz sent an anonymous note to a New York civil liberties group containing the detainees' names.
The Center for Constitutional Rights earlier had won a Supreme Court ruling that terrorism suspects had the right to challenge their detention. But the Pentagon was refusing to identify the men, hampering the group's effort to represent them.
"I had observed the stonewalling, the obstacles we continued to place in the way of the attorneys," Diaz told the newspaper. "I knew my time was limited. ... I had to do something."
Diaz, of Topeka, Kan., said he now believes it was "cowardly" to release the names and other identifying information in that manner.

Load-Date: May 20, 2007


End of Document