Jury convicts 3 in terrorism plot
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 6, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: National/World, Pg. c 4
Length: 405 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


A Muslim extremist who allegedly masterminded the World Trade Center bombing and two other men face life in prison after being convicted of plotting to blow up a dozen U.S. airliners and kill thousands of people.
Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, Abdul Hakim Murad and Wali Khan Amin Shah were convicted Thursday of all seven charges related to the terror conspiracy. Sentencing was scheduled for Dec. 5.
The attacks, planned for two days in 1995 but never executed, would have killed 4,000 people in planes headed to Los Angeles, San Francisco, Honolulu and New York City, prosecutors said. The bombers hoped to force the United States to pull out of the Middle East and stop supporting Israel.
U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White said the horror of what the defendants planned was "almost impossible to comprehend."
The convictions came as investigators seek proof that TWA Flight 800 was destroyed in July by terrorists. Shah's lawyer, David Greenfield, said the jurors were probably influenced by the TWA investigation.
He said that he may appeal on grounds that the United States had no jurisdiction in the case. "No overt act occurred within 10,000 miles of the United States," he said.
U.S. District Judge Kevin Duffy told the defendants they received "an extraordinarily fair trial."
FBI Assistant Director James Kallstrom, who investigated the terror case and is currently leading the probe into the downing of TWA Flight 800, would not comment on the possibility of a connection.
"The rule of law has prevailed today," Kallstrom said. "It's a good day for law enforcement. It's a good day for public safety."
Yousef, 28, who will soon stand trial in the 1993 Trade Center attack, also was convicted of killing a man with a bomb placed aboard a Philippine Airlines jet. That bombing, in December 1994, was a test run for the plot to blow up a dozen commercial airliners over Asia, prosecutors said.
Yousef fled the United States hours after the Feb. 26, 1993, bombing of the World Trade Center that killed six people and injured more than 1,000. Four other men already have been convicted and each sentenced to 240 years in prison in that attack. Yousef was captured last year in Pakistan with the help of a $2 million reward.
During the four-month trial, Yousef added to his reputation as an egotistical daredevil by serving as his own lawyer. With a good command of English, he argued that the case was based on fabricated evidence planted by authorities.

Load-Date: December 6, 1996


End of Document