Justice plans sweeping reorganization;
Attorney General Ashcroft would have terrorism prevention
be the central mission of the FBI and immigration service.<
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 9, 2001 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A23
Length: 719 words
Byline: Chris Mondics and Lenny Savino INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Calling Sept. 11 a turning point in U.S. law enforcement, Attorney General John Ashcroft yesterday announced a "wartime reorganization" of the Justice Department that makes the fight against terrorism its central mission.
Major changes in how Justice Department agencies do their business - and what business they do - are likely to follow. The FBI would probably reduce its role in investigating white-collar crime, interstate auto theft, bank robberies, and major drug conspiracies. The Immigration and Naturalization Service would do more policing of visitors once they enter the United States.
In another development, the Justice Department has decided to listen in on the conversations of lawyers with clients in federal custody, including people who have been detained but not charged with any crime, whenever that is deemed necessary to prevent violence or terrorism.
Ashcroft approved the eavesdropping rule on an emergency basis last week, without the usual waiting period for public comment. It went into effect immediately, permitting the government to monitor conversations and intercept mail between people in custody and their attorneys for up to a year at a time. The move was criticized by defense lawyers and civil libertarians.
In the reorganization of the department, Ashcroft said in a speech to Justice Department officials that the FBI and the INS would be refocused to concentrate on counterterrorism. He also said that he would take 10 percent of Justice's budget - about $2.5 billion - from other functions and give it to units directly involved in fighting terrorism.
The goal of federal law enforcement is no longer to prosecute terrorists after they act, but to roll up their networks before they can do harm, he said.
"The war on terrorism has required adjustments by the American people, and so too, we must adjust," Ashcroft said. "We cannot do everything we once did, because lives now depend on us doing a few things very well."
Ashcroft can shift some Justice resources immediately, but the full reorganization plan will not be done before February. Much of it will require congressional approval or executive orders from President Bush.
The restructuring plan reflects the view of the White House, and much of official Washington, that the Sept. 11 attacks thrust Justice into the largely unaccustomed mode of seeking to prevent another devastating attack.
Ashcroft instructed top aides to break down barriers between federal, state and local law-enforcement agencies so that crucial information about terrorist activities can get to those who can use it to make arrests.
He said about 10 percent of the department's headquarters staff would eventually be shifted to field offices to beef up operations aimed at disabling terror groups.
A Justice official, speaking on background, said the $2.5 billion reallocation would go mostly to a computer linking of the department's component agencies - mainly the FBI, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the immigration service - with counterintelligence agencies, local prosecutors and police.
The immigration service has been heavily criticized since the discovery that several of the Sept. 11 hijackers had traveled freely in the United States on expired visas or appeared to have no valid immigration documents at all.
In the future, the agency "will focus on preventing aliens who engage in or support terrorist activity from entering our country," Ashcroft said. In addition, immigration "will lead the campaign to detain, prosecute or deport the terrorist aliens who are already inside the nation's borders."
Ashcroft has already made clear that some traditional FBI tasks, such as investigating bank robberies, will be handed over to local law enforcement.
Drug Enforcement Administration head Asa Hutchinson noted this week that the FBI's effort to thwart further terrorist attacks was diverting FBI staff from drug enforcement work.
Since the attacks, the FBI strategy has been to cast a broad net for terrorist groups and hold even the most tangential suspects when charges can be found. To date, there have been more than 1,140 arrests. Such tactics are necessary to disabling terror groups, Ashcroft said yesterday.
Chris Mondics' e-mail address is cmondics@krwashington.com.  
This article contains information from the Washington Post.

Notes

At War With Terror

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document