Justice over terror denied
Daily News (New York)
September 3, 2016 Saturday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22
Length: 403 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


In a moral error of major proportions, a Manhattan federal appeals panel has thrown out one of the most important anti-terrorism court decisions in years.
The initial ruling came down in 2015: The Palestinian Authority and Palestine Liberation Organization were, a jury found, responsible for terror attacks that killed and maimed Americans in Israel - and liable for $655 million, the largest such judgment ever.
The case was brought under the 1990 Anti-Terrorism Act, designed to give American victims of terror attacks anywhere in the world recourse in federal courts.
The verdict and the sum validated an exhausting, complex, decade-long trial, based on charges filed by the families of 40 American victims.
Evidence presented at trial focused on six atrocities committed in 2002 and 2004. Many New Yorkers were among the 33 people murdered or many more forever scarred.
On Jan. 22, 2002, six Palestinian Authority employees planned to have one of their cops shoot up a bus stop. He killed two and wounded many. New Yorker Shmuel Waldman had his leg blown apart.
On Jan. 27, 2002, a suicide bombing on the streets on Jerusalem killed one person and badly injured four people - including Rena and Mark Sokolow, of Long Island, and their two daughters.
On July 31, 2002, five Americans were killed in a Hebrew University cafeteria bombing. One of them was Janis Coulter, of Brooklyn, in Israel on a two-day trip with a group of students.
The PLO and PA were clearly responsible. Not only through planning, but through incitement. Official PA TV in 2000 encouraged viewers to "kill those Jews and those Americans who are like them, and those who stand with them."
The appeals panel cared not. The decision acknowledged the attacks were "unquestionably horrific" - but claimed that the crimes were outside the law's jurisdiction. Mass carnage was sought, said the court, but not necessarily of Americans.
Setting this standard would leave American victims of international terrorism and their families legally homeless in pursuing justice against their attackers - and effectively render the entire law in question moot.
This is especially dangerous when the Palestinian Authority continues to encourage attacks on innocents. Arafat's successor, Mahmoud Abbas, sponsors bloodshed by paying millions in salaries to imprisoned terrorists.
The ruling offends the conscience. It must go to the Supreme Court, which cannot let it stand.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: September 3, 2016


End of Document