Just in case...;
County now boosting anti-terrorism preparations -- and suggests that you should, too
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 25, 2001, Tuesday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 570 words
Byline: Janet Kelley
Body


For the past two years, Lancaster County officials have been talking about "What if...?"
What if there was a major disaster? A widespread emergency? An attack by terrorists?
Would Lancaster County's communication equipment be adequate? Would emergency personnel be properly trained? Would procedures and plans be in place?
#GETREADY.ELL#
Now that terrorist threats have become a reality, local and state officials want every phase of that coordinated emergency effort to be ready as soon as possible.
"It's not something we have to create," said Paul Thibault, chairman of the Lancaster County Commissioners. "We don't have to reinvent the wheel. We have to make for a bigger wheel."
Thibault said that an anti-terrorism committee has been in place for more than two years, comprised of representatives of fire, hazardous materials, emergency medical services, police and other emergency service organizations, under the direction of Randall Gockley, head of the county's Emergency Management Agency.
Local emergency agencies are prepared for physical/mechanical disruptions of some kind, as was anticipated for Y2K, Thibault said, or biological/chemical problems, such as a hazardous waste spill that could happen during a traffic accident.
"We're already designed to handle that," Thibault said. "But now we have to take the basic initiative and enlarge it."
Lancaster County is also a member of the newly-created South Central Pennsylvania Regional Counter-Terrorism Task Force, which includes York, Lebanon, Dauphin, Perry, Franklin, Adams, and Cumberland counties.
"We've seen from the New York City attack that some terrorist strikes could overwhelm any single county response," Thibault said.
The benefit of the regional task force, in addition to receiving state funds for equipment and training, Gockley explained, is the ability to share trained emergency personnel if the need arises in one part of the region.
Gockley emphasized that the concerns of his units, both state and local, differs from the anti-terrorist effort involving District Attorney Donald Totaro and his staff.
Last week, prosecutors from across America formed investigative task forces to ferret out terrorists and prevent further attacks.
Thibault said county emergency officials are focusing on three things: training -- for emergency personnel; equipment -- especially for the testing of airborne contamination; and the creation of uniform procedures.
"We want to assure the residents of Lancaster County that we have looked at terrorism as a potential threat within the area and we have taken steps to deal (with it)," Thibault said.
"While we expect nothing will happen in Lancaster County, it is prudent nevertheless that we prepare," Thibault said, "just in case."
Gockley suggested residents should always be prepared for any type of disaster, natural or man-made, just as they would for a snowstorm, flood or even the anticipated Y2K problems.
Those preparations should include a three-day supply of food, water and other basic necessities in the home at all times, which would include flashlights, battery-operated radios and extra batteries.
If the emergency required evacuation, Gockley said, residents would be instructed to go to designated locations, such as a neighborhood school, under the care of the American Red Cross.
Citizens with questions on emergency preparedness are welcome to call the Emergency Management office at 1-800-808-5236.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Randall Gockley; Emergency Management Chief

Load-Date: September 26, 2001


End of Document