JUSTICE DEPT. ASKS FOR TERROR CASE CONVICTION DISMISSAL;
 FILING CITES MISCONDUCT;
 BY FEDERAL PROSECUTORS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 1, 2004 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 439 words
Byline: ALLAN LENGEL AND SUSAN SCHMIDT, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Justice Department will ask a federal judge in Detroit to dismiss the convictions of three men in a high-profile terrorism case last year, saying it had uncovered serious prosecutorial misconduct in the case.
 Department lawyers have told U.S. District Judge Gerald Rosen and defense attorneys that the convictions should be thrown out because prosecutors failed to share potentially exculpatory evidence with the defense during last year's trial, legal sources said last night.
 The convictions of two Morrocan immigrants of conspiracy to provide material support for terrorism and of a third man on document fraud charges represented one of the government's most significant victories in the war on terrorism in the aftermath of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
The move to vacate the convictions comes in the midst the Republican National Convention, where President Bush is highlighting his success in the war on terrorism as the centerpiece of his re-election campaign.
 Rosen and the Justice Department have been investigating allegations that two assistant U.S. attorneys withheld information from the defense. The department is continuing an investigation of one of the prosecutors, Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard Convertino, who has responded by suing the government, alleging that the Justice Department undermined the prosecution and sought to make him the scapegoat.
 William Sullivan, Convertino's lawyer, declined to comment yesterday, citing a gag order in the case. Other lawyers in the case also cited the order.
 A filing from the Justice Department is expected as early as today seeking to have the convictions overturned and detailing the alleged misconduct. The department is expected to say it will not seek reinstatement of the terrorism-related charges against defendants Karim Koubriti and Abdel-Ilah Elmardoudi, but will seek to retry them and a third man, Ahmed Hannan, on document fraud charges.
 Details of the government's request to vacate the convictions was first reported on U.S. News & World Report's Web site last night.
 In the first terrorism-related trial since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, Elmardoudi, 37, of Minneapolis and Koubriti, 26, of Detroit were convicted in June 2003 of conspiring to provide material support to terrorists and document fraud. Hannan, 35, of Detroit was convicted of document fraud, and Farouk Ali-Haimoud, 22, of Detroit was cleared of all charges.
 Justice Department officials, including Attorney General John Ashcroft, , asserted that the men were in a sleeper cell associated with al-Qaida and had plans to secure weapons and attack targets in the United States and abroad.

Load-Date: September 2, 2004


End of Document