Just-in-time extension for terror coverage backstop
Business Insurance
January 2, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: SPOTLIGHT: YEAR IN REVIEW--RISK MANAGEMENT; Pg. 12
Length: 518 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


A report delivered at the last possible minute helped assure that the fate of the federal reinsurance backstop created by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act wouldn't be determined until the last possible minute, either.
The Treasury Department prepared the report in question, which was required by TRIA to be completed by June 30. And on the morning of June 30, Treasury released its report on the state of the terrorism insurance market. Proponents of extending TRIA didn't like what they read.
The report said that the Bush administration-which had pushed hard for TRIA's enactment in 2002-could not support extending the backstop beyond its scheduled Dec. 31, 2005, expiration unless lawmakers scaled back the program considerably. The report said the very existence of the backstop had discouraged the private insurance market from tackling the terrorism exposure. Insurers responded, as they had during the initial debate over TRIA, that they could not bear the entire terrorism risk, which they regarded as uninsurable.
Both the House Financial Services Committee and the Senate Banking Committee held hearings on TRIA after the issuance of the report, but neither moved on legislation immediately. Meanwhile, the devastation wrought by Hurricane Katrina wrought havoc with the congressional calendar as well, as lawmakers scrambled to respond to the needs of people displaced by the record-breaking storm. Action on TRIA reauthorization, initially expected in September, was delayed until November.
When the time to act arrived, the House and Senate took radically different approaches to the issue. The House Financial Services Committee approved a bill that, rather than remove lines of coverage from TRIA's protection as the administration sought, added group life insurance to covered lines while increasing the size of the terrorist losses needed to trigger the backstop. The Financial Services Committee bill also called for the creation of a broad-based commission that would be charged with recommending long-range solutions to the question of insuring terrorism exposures.
The Senate Banking Committee instead hewed close to the Treasury Department report, calling for a scaled-back program with higher triggers. Rather than create a commission, the Banking Committee bill entrusted a presidential working group with the task of reporting back to Congress on the state of the terrorism insurance market, much as Treasury had been assigned in the original bill.
The Senate and House of Representatives approved their respective bills. But the administration announced its preference for the Senate bill, and although the House quickly named conferees to iron out differences between the bills, the Senate balked at following suit. Finally after days of on-again, off-again discussions, representatives of both sides agreed on an extension bill that looked almost identical to the Senate bill.
The measure passed the Senate on Dec. 16 and the House one day later, arriving at the president's desk barely a week before the original backstop was set to expire.
President Bush signed the bill into law Dec. 22.

Load-Date: January 6, 2006


End of Document