Just Because You Are Paranoid Doesn't Mean the FBI Wasn't Monitoring You: Occupy Wall Street Edition
New York Observer
December 24, 2012 Monday


Copyright 2012 The New York Observer, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Length: 443 words
Byline: Drew Grant
Body


FBI keeps tabs on OWS
It turns out that all you crazy, post-hippy Occupy Wall Streeters were right: the government does not have your best interest at hearts. In fact, the FBI just released a heavily redacted memo that details some of the ways that it used its anti-terrorism surveillance power to keep last year's OWS campaign heavily guarded.Released by the Partnership for Civil Justice after it pursued the documents under the Freedom of Information Act, the items included will just serve to (depending on your worldview) reinforce your paranoia American security bureaus having the carte blanche to become Big Brother, or terrify you into validating the belief that those kids with the drums and the dreadlocks were planning another 9/11.
 -As early as August 19, 2011, the FBI in New York was meeting with the New York Stock Exchange to discuss the Occupy Wall Street protests that wouldn't start for another month. By September, prior to the start of the OWS, the FBI was notifying businesses that they might be the focus of an OWS protest.
Translation: You guys never had a chance. The FBI knew about the plans to occupy Zuccotti Square before most of you did.
 -Documents released show coordination between the FBI, Department of Homeland Security and corporate America. They include a report by the Domestic Security Alliance Council (DSAC), described by the federal government as "a strategic partnership between the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security and the private sector," discussing the OWS protests at the West Coast ports to "raise awareness concerning this type of criminal activity." The DSAC report shows the nature of secret collaboration between American intelligence agencies and their corporate clients - the document contains a "handling notice" that the information is "meant for use primarily within the corporate security community. Such messages shall not be released in either written or oral form to the media, the general public or other personnel..." (The DSAC document was also obtained by the Northern California ACLU which has sought local FBI surveillance files.)
Translation: You want to know how Citibank had the drop on protesters last October? They were tipped off by the FBI/Department of Homeland Security and/or the Domestic Security Alliance Council.
 -The Memphis FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force met to discuss "domestic terrorism" threats, including, "Aryan Nations, Occupy Wall Street, and Anonymous."
Translation: One of these things is not like the other...
To read the entirety of the document, click here. But don't even bother clearing your browser history: the FBI already knows you're reading this article.

Load-Date: December 26, 2012


End of Document