Justin Timberlake's new CD helps ease fears of terrorism
University Wire
September 15, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Kentucky Kernel via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 886 words
Byline: By Jonathan Meador, Kentucky Kernel; SOURCE: U. Kentucky
Dateline: LEXINGTON, Ky. 
Body


Five years ago this week, America was gripped with fear.
Since then, it's not like we haven't tried to come to grips with that fear: The Iraq War, re-electing Bush for a second term, Taylor Hicks ? not even the foiling of the London bombing plot or Gnarls Barkley 's "St. Elsewhere" could inoculate this country against our great, unseen enemy.
Yet like a light at the end of the tunnel, Jive Records has provided a clearer solution to our nail-biting five-year predicament than the Department of Homeland Security could ever dream of.
Packing more beats to the rhyme than President Bush's 9/11 stump speeches, Justin Timberlake's sophomore effort, "FutureSex/LoveSounds," is a spectacular salvo against terrorism of both the Islamofacist and antisexy varieties (because if there's one thing Islamofascists hate more than freedom, it's sexiness).
If you couldn't already tell, I'm in love with the album, which I initially tried to purchase from CD Central, with no luck. Lo and behold, they didn't have a copy, and it appeared as if they didn't carry any Justin Timberlake albums at all. Which got me thinking: Could CD Central be a secret al-Qaeda sleeper cell? Think about it ? dour art-rock snobs by day ? blood-thirsty Islamofacists by night ? listening to Harry Belafonte albums?
Fortunately, my unwavering American pride and love of good music led me to Target - consumer oasis for technocrats and little Eichmanns like myself - where I bought a censored copy of "FutureSex" for $9.99. Over the course of that evening, I put the stereo on REPEAT ALL mode and blasted "FutureSex" as I gorged on CNN and Fox News coverage of all things 9/11. Now I realize that America's greatest tragedy is inseparable from her greatest pop music superstar, and although it's sad - like apple pie with tears on it, or hot dogs and baseball in prison - the comparison made me appreciate them much, much more.
Granted it's been nearly four years since the release of "Justified," Timberlake's multi-platinum solo debut, and many thought he'd rest on his laurels after just one smash hit (2003's "Rock Your Body") then slip away into the great ether like early Osama bin Laden (1993's " WTC bombing"). Nonbelievers take note: The former Mouseketeer has returned with his most accessible music to date, putting to rest any misgivings of one-hit-wonderism.
Unlike the most horrific act of terrorism in this nation's history, "FutureSex/LoveSounds" is an eclectic pastiche of contemporary pop-staples spiced with slick electro-beats, sensual vocal stylings and pelvis-thrust-inducing grooves worthy of classic Prince.
Vocally, Timberlake is in top form. On "My Love", he channels the falsetto of Thriller-era Michael Jackson, set against the backdrop of a sleek, minimalist R&B slow-jam. Especially satisfying is "Until The End of Time," on which he stretches his range to subtle heights, calling to mind R. Kelly and John "Let the Eagle Soar" Ashcroft.
At certain points he gives to crooning like an ecstasy-fueled Sinatra, making lounge-lizard references to whips and other S&M-allusions. Clearly, the man likes his sex as much as we like our freedom ? that is to say, a lot!
Speaking of freedom, Timberlake's dance-friendly N*SYNC pedigree serves as a launching pad for his War on Non-Sexiness, as "FutureSex's" smashing first single, "SexyBack," fires round after round of club-worthy Timbaland-produced beats heavy enough to shock and awe even the most jaded clubber or jihadist.
And make no mistake. "FutureSex's" campaign of funk is a multilateral one, as Timberlake custom-built a Coalition of The Illin' to help produce the album, enlisting the talents of the aforementioned Timbaland, Rick Rubin and Black Eye Peas' Will.i.am. The result? Pure genius that in no way resembles the collapse of World Trade Center Tower No. 7.
Toward the end of the album, the ballads tend to get rather bland, and even the Rubin-produced "(Another Song) All Over Again" degenerates into an overall quagmire of Sunni/Shiite civil war. Too much, too late, I guess.
Though the record does have its rough spots (a ridiculous anti-crack/pro-Syria song), and can come across as just another disposable trash-disco knock-off, for the most part FutureSex/Love Sounds is a high watermark in the annals of good booty-movin' music - something this country is in dire need of. Five years of paranoia, dread, and being afraid of our own shadow is a long enough time to wait for America to rediscover her sexiness and other freedoms.
Questions remain - Can the scars cut by terrorism ever heal? Will we ever be "safe"? Will FutureSex/Love Sounds earn seven Grammy nominations? And although the answers might elude us, we can take comfort knowing that there is someone out there being sexy enough for all of us.
So, on this fifth anniversary of 9/11, I salute you, Justin Timberlake, for bringing the sexy back to a fearful people and for being such a fine-looking American. Plus, people think we look alike, so I could totally be one of your body-doubles.
Maybe we could play basketball sometime, have dinner, you know. Get an apartment, hang out in dungeons. Oh! I'll think of a fun safe word! ... as for the other heroes of 9/11, what else can I say? See you next year!
Jonathan Meador is a journalism senior. E-mail opinions@kykernel.com
(C) 2006 Kentucky Kernel via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 15, 2006


End of Document