Justice Is a Defense Against Terrorists
The New York Times
February 12, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 12CN; Page 31, Column 2; Connecticut Weekly Desk; letter
Length: 404 words
Body


Sharon L. Bass's interview with Caroline O. Dinegar (Connecticut Q&A, Jan. 15) brings out an all too typically skewed view of what the overused word ''terrorism'' means and who practices it.
Taking Professor Dinegar's definition of terrorism as ''violence for political objectives'' and ''an unacceptable level of the use of violence,'' I find it strange that she does not denounce the Israeli repression of the intifada or the United States directed counter-insurgency effort in El Salvador. Or why not a denunciation of all wars?
The reason for this failure is found in the caveat she links her definition to: ''The political objective is always to take over. He wants what you've got.'' By her definition, terrorism is violence committed by the ''have-nots.'' She never answers the question as to why the ''have-nots'' resort to violence. It is usually because the ''haves'' have blocked all other avenues of social change and struggle.
I would argue with her that many of the acts she speaks about are heinous and should be denounced. But at the same time we must denounce the grossest perpetrators of terrorism, who are usually the ''haves.'' Their violence is often not just of the overt type, such as aerial bombings, torture and death squads, but also of a more mundane but equally insidious type, the daily denial of the necessities for a decent life: food, shelter, education, medical, care and a decent job.
I am reminded of a scene in the film ''Battle of Algiers'' by Gilla Pontecorvo, in which a captured leader of F.L.N. (a group denounced at the time as terrorist) is brought by his French captors to a press conference. The assembled members of the French and Western press ask the Algerian prisoner why the F.L.N. uses ''terrorist'' tactics such as planting bombs in public areas and assassinating police and civilians. He responds that the F.L.N. would gladly halt such activities if they could have the planes and napalm that the French use against Algerian villages.
The best way to protect ourselves against terrorism is to strive for justice both here and abroad. I, too, am horrified by 18-month-old children being sucked out of airplanes, but I am also horrified by 18-month-old children being maimed and killed by United States-supplied white phosphorous bombs in El Salvador. Until we end the reasons for the violence by the ''have-nots,'' conflict in all forms is inevitable.
 
BLAIR F. BERTACCINI
  Southbury


End of Document