JUSTICE BUILDING NAMED FOR RFK;
 DAUGHTER RAPS ADMINISTRATION OVER ITS ANTI-TERRORISM TACTICS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 21, 2001 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 415 words
Byline: MELISSA B. ROBINSON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush named the Justice Department headquarters after former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in a ceremony yesterday attended by a phalanx of Kennedys, including a daughter of RFK who earlier in the day sharply criticized the Bush administration.
 Kerry Kennedy Cuomo said her father would not have approved of the administration's efforts to give broad new powers for police and prosecutors to fight terrorism because they undermine civil liberties.
 "My daughter, Cara, is here today," Cuomo said at a ceremony honoring Darci Frigo, a Brazilian lawyer and land reform advocate who won this year's Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award. "Cara, if anyone tries to tell you this is the type of justice your grandpa would embrace, don't you believe it."
Critics have said Kennedy was willing to restrict civil liberties in certain instances. For example, he authorized FBI wiretaps on Martin Luther King Jr., whom FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover thought was a communist.
 Bush did not mention Cuomo's comments at the dedication ceremony for Kennedy, who would have turned 76 yesterday. The president praised RFK's war on organized crime and support for civil rights.
 "From this day, his birthday, everyone who enters this building or passes by will think of Robert F. Kennedy and what he still means to this country," said Bush, who was joined on stage by Attorney General John Ashcroft and former Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy, one of RFK's 11 children.
 He didn't refer to his own war on terrorism, except to say the country was going through "a time of incredible testing, and as we do, we admire even more the spirit of Robert Kennedy."
 Civil libertarians have criticized some of the efforts by the Bush administration to prosecute terrorists. Among them: keeping secret the identities and status of those detained in the Sept. 11 investigation; new rules allowing the monitoring of communications between some detainees and their lawyers; and Bush's decision to try by military tribunals foreigners charged with acts of terror.
 Cuomo, who did not speak, attended the dedication with her mother, Ethel Kennedy; uncle, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass.; and other siblings and relatives.
 Earlier, while referring to the Bush administration's tactics, Cuomo said her father "was determined to use the law to bring criminals who threatened our country to justice. But that eagerness was always tempered by his commitment to protecting civil liberties even when it meant letting the accused … go free."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Win McNamee/Reuters: Ethel Kennedy, surrounded by family and helped by the Rev. Gerry Creedon, lays a rose at the grave of her husband, Robert F. Kennedy, at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia, yesterday, which would have been his 76th birthday.

Load-Date: November 21, 2001


End of Document