JUSTICES APPLY MIRANDA TO KIDS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 17, 2011 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-7
Length: 552 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court ruled, 5-4, Thursday against the state of North Carolina in the case of a juvenile who was questioned in a school conference room without being read his Miranda rights.
As a result, law enforcement officials across the United States will have to consider a young suspect's age carefully before deciding whether to inform that person that he or she has the right to remain silent and the right to an attorney.
In the case, J.D.B. v. North Carolina, the court concluded that police must consider a suspect's age in determining whether the questioning is "coercive." If a juvenile would find the situation coercive, the officer must therefore read the Miranda rights.
Justices Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan joined Justice Sonia Sotomayor in her decision.
McConnell's terrorism flap
WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department on Thursday fired a stern warning shot at Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, who plans to meet today with local leaders and law enforcement in Bowling Green, Ky., where two Iraqis were recently arrested on charges of plotting to send arms to their home country to be used against U.S. troops.
Mr. McConnell, R-Ky., has called on the men to be sent to the detention facility in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
"Critical decisions on national security cases should be handled by the veteran counter-terrorism agents, intelligence analysts and prosecutors around the country who for years have been doing this work for a living -- often at great risk to themselves -- not politicians looking to score political points," said Dean Boyd, a Justice Department spokesman.
Alaska oil leases
WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration on Thursday reiterated its commitment to speeding up lease sales and possible oil production in the National Petroleum Reserve on Alaska's North Slope.
But the Interior Department announcement, which followed on the heels of a similar pledge by President Barack Obama last month, wasn't enough for Alaska's Rep. Don Young and other Republicans in the House, who also held a hearing Thursday about the petroleum reserve's prospects.
Republicans complained that delays in federal permitting had held up the roads, bridges and pipelines needed to transport oil from the reserve.
Romney's 'jobless' quip
TAMPA, Fla. -- Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney told a group of out-of-work Floridians Thursday that "I'm also unemployed," quickly drawing criticism from Democrats who said it showed the former Massachusetts governor and multimillionaire was out of touch.
Mr. Romney made the comment while criticizing President Barack Obama's economic plan to a small group of business owners and unemployed workers at a Tampa coffee shop. The former equity firm CEO told the group that he did have his eye on one particular job, however.
Also in the nation
Six people, including four children, died in a house fire early Thursday in Warren, Ohio. ... Energy Transfer Equity LP said Thursday it will buy Southern Union Co. for $7.9 billion, including debt assumption, in a deal to bulk up its natural-gas transport business with an additional 20,000 miles of pipelines. ... Adm. Jonathan Greenert, a longtime submarine officer, was selected to become the new leader of the Navy, Defense Secretary Robert Gates announced Thursday.

Load-Date: June 17, 2011


End of Document