JUSTICE DEPARTMENT;
EXTRADITION: HOT TOPIC IN CRUSADE ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 1093 words
Byline: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20
Body


The Reagan Administration, trying to rally the community of nations against international terrorists, is increasingly frustrated by some judicial rulings on the homefront that stand in the way of its crusade.
To make things worse, Congress has resisted its proposals to take the power to decide who is an international terrorist and who is a freedom fighter away from Federal judges and put it in the hands of the State Department.
The conflict is at the heart of a debate over the ruling of a Federal judge in Manhattan last week that an Irish Republican Army fugitive who had been convicted of murdering a British soldier was exempt from extradition to Britain because his offense was ''political.''
Judge John E. Sprizzo said, in essence, that the I.R.A. man was more like the American revolutionaries who overthrew British rule two centuries ago than like the perpetrators of ''the paramilitary terrorism that has become the plague of the modern age.''
Justice Official Is 'Outraged'
Stephen S. Trott, head of the Justice Department's Criminal Division, said he was ''outraged'' that a judge could make the United States a haven for a terrorist sought by one of its closest, and most democratic, allies.
Mr. Trott said the Administration, which still hopes to persuade Congress to curb judicial power over extradition, was also seeking to amend extradition treaties with ''free, friendly nations'' to achieve much the same result.
But some civil libertarians are lying in wait to oppose any clipping of the courts' wings, which they fear might lead to extradition of nonviolent political dissidents to face charges trumped up by repressive regimes with which the Administration is friendly. They cite the Philippines as an example &or concern.
In last week's case, Judge Sprizzo refused a request made by the Justice Department in Britain's behalf to extradite Joseph Patrick Thomas Doherty. Mr. Doherty, who escaped from prison and fled to the United States, was convicted of murder by a British court in Northern Ireland for shooting down an armed British soldier who approached a house in which he and three other I.R.A. men were planning an ambush.
 
3 Other Refusals Since 1979
It was not an isolated case. Since 1979 Federal judges and magistrates have turned down three other extradition requests against I.R.A. suspects on similar grounds. Mr. Trott said France had used similar logic in refusing to hand over to the United States an Armenian accused of planting a bomb in the Los Angeles airport.
While the law in this area remains somewhat murky, these decisions show that the distinction between a terrorist and a freedom fighter, so readily made by Administration officials, can become elusive when subjected to judicial analysis.
In the Doherty case, for example, Judge Sprizzo was interpreting a provision in the United States' extradition treaty with Britain that exempts from extradition those offenses ''of a political character.''
While saying that the treaty should not be read to ''afford a haven for persons who commit the most heinous atrocities for political ends,'' the judge said it was designed to protect from extradition genuine revolutionaries who follow ''international standards of civilized conduct.''
 
Qualified as a Revolutionary
To fit Mr. Doherty into this framework, Judge Sprizzo reasoned that by killing a soldier rather than random civilians, and by belonging to an organization with a formal command structure and a long history of fighting British rule, Mr. Doherty had qualified as a revolutionary.
Would the judge have extradited Mr. Doherty if, like other I.R.A. members, he had assassinated a British civilian official or killed innocent bystanders by bombing a public building? Or if he had hijacked a jet to Teheran, robbed an armored car to raise money for revolution, been in the pay of the Soviet Union or belonged to a lesser known organization?
Judge Sprizzo did not say where he would draw the line, except to say that those responsible for mass murders such as ''the atrocities at Dachau, Aushwitz and other death camps'' would not qualify as ''political'' offenders even though their motives were political.
Neither the Federal extradition statute, which dates to the 19th century, nor the Supreme Court has offered much guidance on when an offense qualifies as ''political.'' Moreover, under current law, lower court rulings denying extradition are not appealable. Therefore, each of the hundreds of Federal district judges and magistrates has rather broad discretion when presented with a politically tinged extradition case.
 
'Give Me a Break'
To executive branch officials eager to move against terrorists worldwide, this is an intolerable situation.
''A guy can kill somebody, hide in another country and it's a political offense?'' Mr. Trott said. ''Give me a break.''
Rudolph Giuliani, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said Judge Sprizzo's ''dubious'' reasoning ''may come back to haunt us'' when the United States seeks extradition of terrorists who have harmed its own citizens.
But Morton Halperin, head of the American Civil Liberties Union's Center for National Security Studies here, said Judge Sprizzo's decision was correct because ''rebellion against military forces is the classic case'' of a nonextraditable offense.
Mr. Halperin said he shared the Administration's view that I.R.A. members or others who commit terrorist violence against civilians should be handed over for prosecution and that the archaic extradition law should be amended to make this clear.
The Administration has sought legislation to give the State Department the power to determine whether an international fugitive's offense was ''political'' or a law at least to specify that political motivation is not a basis for refusing to extradite someone accused of certain violent crimes.
But Mr. Halperin said he was wary of trying to curb the courts' powers on extradition because the executive branch ''is subject to the political pressures that come from our relationship with a country.'' Such pressures might lead to extradition of ''people who in fact were really engaged in peaceful protest but who were accused of violent acts,'' he said.
On a related issue, the Administration urged Congress earlier this year to make it a crime to provide support to groups and governments abroad that the Secretary of State has designated as ''terrorist'' and to prohibit judges from second-guessing his designations.
This proposal was quickly buried amid controversy. The Administration is expected to push for an amended version next year.

Graphic

 
drawing


End of Document