Justices reject Gitmo tribunals; Court: Bush plan exceeds authority
USA TODAY
June 30, 2006 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 489 words
Byline: Joan Biskupic and Laura Parker
Body


WASHINGTON -- The fate of more than 400 detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, was thrown into question when the Supreme Court rejected President Bush's plan to hold military tribunals for foreign terrorism suspects.
In a 5-3 vote Thursday that brought a dramatic end to the court's term, the justices said Bush exceeded his authority by setting up the trial system without authorization from Congress. The justices said Bush's plan -- which would not allow a detainee to see all the evidence against him or attend all court hearings in his case -- lacked sufficient protections for detainees. The court said the plan violated the U.S. Military Code of Justice and the Geneva Conventions dealing with prisoners of war.
The five-justice majority led by John Paul Stevens also said a congressional resolution passed just after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks did not grant Bush as much authority to fight terrorism as his administration claimed. The administration has said the resolution gave Bush the power to impose the tribunal system. The court's finding could have repercussions for other Bush policies, including a secret surveillance program overseen by the National Security Agency.
The ruling came in a case involving Salim Hamdan, a Yemeni accused of being a guard for Osama bin Laden and delivering weapons to al-Qaeda. It forces the administration to devise another way to try foreign terror suspects and possibly to seek Congress' approval.
Bush and Pentagon officials said they were reviewing the ruling. It was unclear what would become of the 14 Guantanamo detainees who have been designated for tribunals at the prison that has spurred international controversy. Bush said he would work with Congress on whether "military tribunals will be an avenue" for terror suspects. Absent action by Congress, Bush could court-martial detainees under military law.
"This is a blockbuster decision," said Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, a supporter of Bush. "But (the court) opened the door to a legislative remedy."
Critics of Bush's moves to hold foreigners in Cuba indefinitely and keep them out of civilian courts suggested the prison could be closed. It was set up "to evade the jurisdiction of federal courts," said Gene Fidell of the National Institute of Military Justice. "The whole purpose has been undercut."
Stevens, a World War II veteran, emphasized that Bush cannot go it alone in the war on terrorism. After Stevens read the ruling, Justice Antonin Scalia read an acerbic dissent. Justice Clarence Thomas then read a dissent, noting it was the first time in 15 years on the court he had been moved to announce his dissent. He said Bush, as commander in chief, could form the tribunals.
Scalia and Thomas were joined by Justice Samuel Alito. Chief Justice John Roberts did not participate; he had been on a lower court that upheld Bush's plan. Stevens' majority included Anthony Kennedy, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer.

Load-Date: June 30, 2006


End of Document