JUST SUPPOSE IT'S TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 18, 2002 Friday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 626 words
Body


CALEB CARR
 The psychological profiling that has consumed the media since the start of the sniper killings has produced in almost every case a rather cliched portrait of a killer or killers who are white, in their 20s or early 30s, have military experience, enjoy exercising the godlike power of life and death, and are alienated from society. Some describe the culprit as a serial killer, and some label him a spree or thrill killer. Yet the salient aspects of the shootings do not fit with our knowledge of these types; if the perpetrator does turn out to be disaffected, white and male, he will constitute an important new subcategory.
 Should the killings be the work of international terrorists, on the other hand, they will fit a textbook pattern that has been on ample display in every part of the world.
The killings have featured few of the bizarre but consistent ritual phases characteristic of the serial killer. He does not display the type's taste for stalking specific victims. Rather, he shoots whoever is at hand at the moment most propitious for escape. The case that a spree killer is at work is even weaker. Spree killers are characterized by bursts of murderous rage that can go on for days. But unlike serial killers, they are disorganized, and their anger rarely lasts or subsides long enough to allow careful planning and execution.
 Similarly, the locations of the shootings have been trumpeted as "random," but of course they are not. They have formed an ever-thickening ring around Washington, making it clear that the killer is concerned with throwing this area into the state of contained panic that now characterizes it.
 A terrorist (or the members of a terrorist cell) could be expected to conduct himself exactly as the Washington sniper has. The killings began just before the anniversary of the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, when intelligence pipelines were full of chatter about al-Qaida resuming the offensive, in smaller ways than those demonstrated on 9/11 (such as the recent attacks in Kuwait, Yemen and Bali), to avenge the overthrow of the Taliban. Employing paramilitary tactics such as those seen in al-Qaida training videos, the members of this hypothetical cell could be using several vehicles but only one weapon to create the illusion of a single superhuman killer capable of striking almost anywhere.
 The purpose of so terrorizing the nation's capital? To steal the initiative, to force all other news, perhaps especially the possibility of war with Iraq, off the airwaves and the front pages, and thus ensure that terror and defense are the main stories once again. Certainly, this is what has happened, and if al-Qaida or its allies are behind the killings, they have planned and are executing them brilliantly -- and the American media and public are playing along perfectly. The fact that no one has claimed responsibility for the deaths fits the terrorism scenario: Al-Qaida does not make a habit of claiming responsibility for its work. The group keeps focused on results and anonymity, and looks within and to God, rather than to the Western media, for glory.
 Whether or not terrorism is the explanation for this case, a terrorist campaign resembling these killings could well take place in this country soon. Certainly, the Washington area killings may end up being the work of a lone, young white male psychopath. But we must now look beyond this theory, with its horribly comforting familiarity, to the even more terrifying possibility that a new kind of enemy is conducting an unprecedented campaign within our borders -- and is, for the moment, winning it.
 Caleb Carr, a novelist and military historian, is the author of "The Lessons of Terror." A longer version of this appeared in The Washington Post.

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document