Justice Dept. Is Cleared In Suit
The New York Times
July 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 310 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 9
Body


A Federal district judge today dismissed a $29 million damage suit filed by L. Patrick Gray 3d, former Acting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, against top Justice Department officials who he charged maliciously prosecuted him on a conspiracy charge in 1978.
The charges against Mr. Gray, which stemmed from break-ins at the homes of friends and relatives of some political radicals opposing the Vietnam War, were dropped nearly three years later by the Government, which said there was ''insufficient evidence to warrant a criminal trial.''
WASHINGTON, July 9 (AP) - A Federal district judge today dismissed a $29 million damage suit filed by L. Patrick Gray 3d, former Acting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, against top Justice Department officials who he charged maliciously prosecuted him on a conspiracy charge in 1978.
Judge John Lewis Smith ruled that two former Attorney Generals and 14 current and former Justice Department lawyers named as defendants in Mr. Gray's suit were immune from civil suits as a result of their duties in presenting cases to a grand jury.
Quoting from a previous court ruling on the issue, Judge Smith said, ''Never has a prosecutorial official been held liable for causing a prosecution to be brought.''
Mr. Gray and two former top bureau officials, W. Mark Felt and Edward S. Miller, were indicted on a single conspiracy charge on April 10, 1978. They were accused of authorizing warrantless breakins at the homes of friends and relatives of fugitives from the Weather Underground, a radical antiwar organization.
Mr. Gray's case was separated from those of Mr. Felt and Mr.  Miller, who were tried and convicted in November 1980. They were pardoned on April 15, 1981, by President Reagan, who said they had ''acted on high principle to bring an end to the terrorism that was threatening our nation.''


End of Document