Justice Dept. is right to reward contributors to fight against terrorism
University Wire
December 3, 2001


Copyright 2001 Harvard Crimson via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 686 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Harvard Crimson
Dateline: Cambridge, Mass.
Body


Last Thursday, Attorney General John D. Ashcroft made an announcement about the Justice Department's "Responsible Cooperators Program," which allows immigrants faster access to U.S. visas in exchange for valuable information about terrorism. The public announcement follows a series of controversial efforts by the Justice Department to obtain information on terrorism from recent immigrants. But the program, which has been in place since 1994, is a reasonable way to assuage the fears of those who may have knowledge of terrorist activities and to encourage them to come forward.
Despite the breathless tone of the announcement last week, the Responsible Cooperators Program is not new. Originally instituted in 1994 as a means to reduce violent crime, the program was swiftly renewed by Congress this past September and signed into law by President George W. Bush on Oct. 1. As with many crimes, those who have information that could help the Justice Department solve old cases of terrorism or prevent new ones should be able to come forward without fear of being deported for minor visa violations.
Harvard U.
As terrorist organizations operate a variety of locations around the world, it also makes sense to provide the special opportunities to those outside the United States. Under the program, foreigners with useful information who wish to enter the country may receive a visa in exchange for providing pertinent knowledge to American embassies.
Terrorism poses a significant threat to our national security, and there is nothing wrong with using visas as an incentive for information. Our current immigration policies allow those with needed skills to receive expedited admittance to the United States. Under this program, the United States offers similar benefits to those who help it by providing information or who fear retribution at home.
However, the Responsible Cooperators Program is not without its faults. The Justice Department has admitted that some visa violations will be not be excused even by helpful information, meaning that individuals who do give information may still find themselves deported afterwards. If no changes are made to the program, the danger of deportation could lead those who could help in the fight against terrorism to stay as far as they can from Justice Department offices.
Additionally, an American visa -- especially as it is an eventual means to American citizenship -- is a valuable asset to many foreigners. The administration should be wary of the possibility of false or misleading information from those who would manipulate the program as a means of obtaining a visa. We also urge the Justice Department to be attentive to the fact that those with specific information on terrorism may have other connections that were not revealed in their interview.
In light of its recent widely unpopular initiatives affecting immigrants, the administration should be careful in its rhetoric regarding the initiative. While promoting the program last week, Ashcroft accentuated the link between providing essential information and becoming a United States citizen. "If the information that you provide is reliable and useful," he said, "we will help you obtain a visa to reside in the United States and ultimately become a United States citizen." Although citizenship can potentially follow after a visa-holder undergoes the naturalization process, the incentive of the program is not citizenship. The privileges and responsibilities of citizenship should be given through a fair process, and it would be wrong to naturalize informants before other legal applicants.
We support the move by the Justice Department to publicize a valuable incentive for immigrants and residents of other nations to help combat terrorism. It certainly presents a better face to the world than the Department's previous actions that seemed to accuse all Arab-Americans of fraternizing with the enemy. Most importantly, it seems likely to generate new information that will help keep all Americans safe, regardless of their country of origin.
(C) 2001 Harvard Crimson via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 3, 2001


End of Document