Justice Dept. Unveils Gun Plan, Sidestepping a Preoccupied Washington
The New York Times 
November 13, 2019 Wednesday 11:02 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 694 words
Byline: Katie Benner
Highlight: The initiative is aimed at expanding enforcement of existing gun laws, but critics said it would not seriously address the root causes of gun violence.
Body


WASHINGTON — Attorney General William P. Barr unveiled a new Justice Department initiative on Wednesday to tackle gun violence as Congress and the White House remain largely immobilized on the issue.
The initiative, Project Guardian, is focused primarily on strengthening partnerships among the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, federal prosecutors and state and local law enforcement to enforce and expand the use of existing gun laws. It will also create partnerships with community organizations aimed at preventing gun violence, and increase scrutiny of people convicted of violent felonies or domestic violence, potentially reducing their access to firearms.
At a news conference, Mr. Barr described Project Guardian as intended to help federal and local law enforcement “better target offenders who use guns in crimes and those who try to buy guns illegally.”
The result should “cut the pipeline of crime guns from those violent individuals who seek to terrorize our communities,” Regina Lombardo, the acting deputy director of the bureau, said in her public remarks.
Project Guardian includes no new statutes or policies, which has opened it up to criticisms about its potential effectiveness.
An initiative that focuses on enforcement and increased policing makes “no serious effort to address the supply of guns and how they fall into the hands of individuals who have proven themselves a danger to themselves or to others,” said Kris Brown, the president of Brady, a gun control advocacy group.
Mr. Barr’s announcement comes after more than 30 people died in back-to-back mass shootings in El Paso, Texas, and Dayton, Ohio, prompting a renewed push for gun violence solutions. The Justice Department even sent a packet of proposals to the White House for tackling gun violence, hopeful that Congress would take up some of those suggestions in the fall.
But the public outcry and momentum fizzled only a few weeks later, as questions about whether President Trump tried to pressure the Ukrainian leader for personal gain overtook Washington.
Mr. Barr said local law enforcement would work more closely with the United States attorney’s offices under the new initiative to consider federal prosecution in cases involving people who were arrested while in possession of a firearm, or who used guns to commit a federal crime, like drug trafficking or violent crime.
The initiative will bring more scrutiny to individuals convicted of violent felonies or misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence, and potentially restrict their access to guns. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives will provide state and local law enforcement with regular lists of people who have failed their background checks.
And each federal prosecutor’s offices will share more information with local law enforcement, and work with mental health organizations to assess whether treatment could improve public safety.
The initiative’s rollout shows that Mr. Barr remains committed to highlighting the issue, even as it has faded as a priority for the White House and Congress amid a fast-moving impeachment inquiry.
But the initiative is far less aggressive than the proposals the department had sent the White House over the summer. That packet included ideas such as banning gun purchases by people on terrorism watch lists, including minors in background-check databases and expediting the death penalty for mass shooters. It also included draft legislation related to domestic terrorism, which some law enforcement agents believe could help them crack down on political extremists or white supremacists who go on killing rampages.
Weeks later, after gun rights lobbyists at the National Rifle Association and some of Mr. Trump’s advisers had urged him to reject any measures that could impair the public’s access to guns and the president himself signaled a lack of interest on moving forward, the House began exploring a whistle-blower complaint that eventually developed into a full-blown impeachment inquiry.
On Wednesday, as Mr. Barr rolled out his new gun initiative, the first public hearing in the impeachment inquiry had already begun.
PHOTO: William Barr

Load-Date: November 15, 2019


End of Document