Juvenile terrorism must stop, people say
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 27, 1991, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: BRANDON TIMES; Pg. 8
Length: 401 words
Byline: KIM DUTRA
Dateline: TAMPA
Body


They've stabbed dogs, cut off the tails of cats, killed birds and attacked homeowners. They've stolen cars, burglarized homes and vandalized property.
 
    And residents of Sunset Park are tired of it.
   For the past three months, packs of rowdy young people ranging from 10 to 19 years old have been terrorizing the neighborhood of  Sunset Park in south Tampa.
 
    On Thursday, area homeowners told the Tampa City Council they have had enough, saying they are determined to rid their neighborhood of thieving and sometimes violent youths.
 
    "It makes me feel very uneasy," homeowner Judith Diaz said.  "The juvenile problem is a serious one, and not just in our own neighborhood."
 
    Recently, Tampa police reported at least 15 burglaries and 16 auto thefts in the neighborhood. But many more incidents have never been reported, homeowners said.
 
    Statistics on other crimes were not available Thursday.
 
    During the same period, police made five arrests, Maj. Earl Pegram said. The juveniles arrested were responsible for 30 crimes z z and some had been arrested at least nine times previously, he said.
 
    By combining efforts with police officers, homeowners hope to identify the trouble-making teens. During an emergency neighborhood meeting Tuesday, nearly 200 residents agreed to participate in a neighborhood watch program, resident Karen Smith said. She said she hopes the number of people looking out for those responsible will reduce further crime.
 
    At Thursday's council meeting, the group submitted a petition with signatures from 130 people demanding the council provide more police protection, stronger crime enforcement and a police substation in their neighborhood.
 
    Alma DeWald, a longtime Guernsey Estates homeowner, said she was working outside her home recently when she noticed two teen-agers hanging around suspiciously. She said she was alone and nervous, but before she could act, they were arrested by police and taken away.
 
    "It was very frightening," she said. "I could have been victimized myself. We really need to band together and look out for each other, because the police can't do it by themselves."
 
    Several other residents reported break-ins, strong-arm robberies and personal attacks, but did not want to give their names for fear of reprisals.
 
    The council agreed to step up security in the area and explore locating a new substation in the area.
 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE MAP; Map shows location of Sunset Park

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document