Kanawha to update anti-terrorism plan plan plan
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
June 03, 1998, Wednesday wednesday wednesday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1C P1C P1C
Length: 281 words
Byline: Dawn Miller miller miller
Body


STAFF WRITER
Kanawha County officials are looking for someone to computerize its
terrorism and civil disturbance plan.
The plan, to be used in case of a riot or terrorist attack, would
guide emergency workers on traffic, toxic chemicals and important
names and phone numbers, according to the county's specifications.  specifications.  specifications.
The plan was put out for bid last week. Bids are due June 3.
County Emergency Services Director Bill White said a state grant will
pay for the plan.
About $ 10,000 will be spent on planning. Another $ 5,000 will be spent
on training, White said.
Specifically, county officials are looking for someone to:
- Reformat the computerized content of the plan.
- Provide graphics and animation for the plan.
- Revise general toxicological information.
- Verify names, addresses and phone numbers.
- Refine and update a pocket guide.
- Develop a terrorist target list. Terrorists tend to go for
government buildings, airports, chemical plants and newspapers, for
example, White said. The list would include important information
about such sites and contacts.
"It brings a lot of things to light," said Tim Snyder, assistant
director of Kanawha's Metro 911 center.
"It makes the people who are responsible for security aware of their
weak spots so they can beef up security and be aware of things."
The company that develops the plan would electronically maintain the
targets, contacts and results, and submit monthly progress reports.
Eventually, the plan will be available on the Internet, according to
the county's specifications. The plan also will be supplied on 10
computer compact discs and 10 diskettes, as well as two printed
copies.
The plan is due Aug. 1.  1.  1.

Load-Date: June 4, 1998


End of Document