Karzai urges military action in Pakistan
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 11, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 3
Length: 285 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


KABUL, Afghanistan (AP) - President Hamid Karzai said Sunday that airstrikes carried out in Afghan villages by U.S. and NATO troops are only killing civilians and that the international community should instead go after terror centers in Pakistan.
International forces serving under NATO and the separate U.S.-led coalition insist that the vast majority of those killed in air raids are militants. However, they also acknowledge that civilians are sometimes killed in bombing runs, though they accuse militants of firing on international troops from civilian homes they have commandeered.
Karzai said the international community should take its fight across the border into Pakistan, where militants find safe havens in Pakistan's tribal region.
"The struggle against terrorism is not in the villages of Afghanistan," Karzai said. "The only result of the use of airstrikes is the killing of civilians. This is not the way to wage the fight against terrorism."
Afghan officials say U.S. or NATO airstrikes killed dozens of civilians in two incidents last month, including 47 people who were killed while walking to a wedding in the eastern province of Nangarhar on July 6.
Karzai's comments come the same day as Afghan officials announced that airstrikes and clashes in Kapisa province, north of the capital, killed more than 10 people Saturday. A defence ministry spokesman, Gen. Mohammad Zahir Azimi, said those killed were militants.
However, provincial deputy governor, Rahimullah Safi, said 11 people were killed and all were civilians.
The NATO spokesman, Mark Laity, said there was no record of airstrikes in the Kapisa clash but that helicopters fired cannons at militants. Laity said NATO was still investigating.

Load-Date: August 20, 2008


End of Document