Kasey Sailer
The Bismarck Tribune
December 18, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8C
Length: 334 words
Body


Kasey Sailer, 28, passed away Dec. 8, 2011, at his residence. A memorial service will be held at 11 a.m. Wednesday, Dec. 28, at Bismarck Funeral Home. Burial will be at North Dakota Veterans Cemetery at a later date.
Kasey Sailer was born on June 11, 1983, in Bismarck. He graduated from Mohave High School in Bullhead City, Ariz., in 2001. He entered the U.S. Air Force in April of 2002. He was stationed at Hill Air Force Base in Utah as an Integrated Avionics System Craftsman, working on the F-16 Jets. He was in the 421st Squadron - the Black Widows. In 2003, his squadron was deployed to Qatar. After returning to Utah for a few months, he was again deployed to Balad, Iraq, the first Air Force squadron in Iraq, operating on the base known as 'Mortaritaville,' named as such due to daily mortar attacks. He then served a tour of duty at Osan Air Force Base in South Korea. His Air Force service was completed at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada. He was medically retired from the U. S. Air Force in 2008 with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. During his service he was awarded the Air Force achievement medal with one oak cluster, the national defense service, medal, the global war on terrorism expeditionary medal, the global war on terrorism service medal, Korean Defense Service Medal, Air Force Overseas Short, Air Force Expeditionary Service Ribbon with Gold Border, Air Force Longevity Service, Air Force NCO graduate ribbon and training ribbon. On Dec. 8, 2011, Kasey lost the battle, but he won the war as a believer in Jesus Christ. He was promoted and is now in the loving hands of our savior.
Kasey left the family he loved the most behind. Parents, Bruce and Marilyn Sailer, Washburn; a brother, Wade (Angie) Fischer, and their daughter, Karee, Las Vegas, Nev.; a sister, Heidi (Adam) Eckel, and their two sons, Colton and Dylan, Las Vegas; also numerous cousins, aunts and uncles.
Go to www.bismarckfuneralhome.com to sign the online guest book or to send a message of condolence to the family.

Load-Date: December 19, 2011


End of Document