Katrina and Bush; Paul Krugman
The New York Times 
(Paul Krugman)
December 30, 2008 Tuesday 13:15 EST


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 255 words
Highlight: Presidential Not presidential So everyone is talking about the Vanity Fair article in which Bush aides say that Katrina is what did him in. I don&#8217;t think that&#8217;s entirely true, but what I&#8217;d like to focus on is why Katrina was such a problem for Bush. Above are two photos. The second one shows Bush [&#8230;] 
Body


So everyone is talking about the Vanity Fair articlein which Bush aides say that Katrina is what did him in. I don’t think that’s entirely true, but what I’d like to focus on is why Katrina was such a problem for Bush.
Above are two photos. The second one shows Bush flying over New Orleans; it was widely regarded as a PR disaster, because he seemed so disconnected. But it looks an awful lot like the first photo, of Bush on Air Force One on 9/11. And that photo was considered a wonderful picture of leadership in action — so much so that there was a mini-scandal when the GOP started selling copies of that photo for political fundraising.
In fact, my guess it that the infamous Katrina photo was released precisely because the White House thought everyone would see the parallel, and rally around Bush’s wondrous leadership qualities. Hey, it worked on David Broder. 
So why didn’t it work? I think the answer is simple: in the case of Katrina people could actually see the results of Bush policy. The truth is that Bush did as terrible a job fighting terrorism as he did responding to Katrina — who would have thought that Osama would still be out there, making videos, 7 years later? But on the terrorism front, and even in Iraq, the administration could invent a reality that impressed the public. 
When Katrina struck, however, everyone could see the reality on their TVs.
So what happened with Katrina wasn’t that the administration started to fail; what happened was that for the first time its failures were visible to all. 

Load-Date: August 23, 2017


End of Document