KEAN NOT JUST A MONDAY QUARTERBACK
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 10, 2004 Saturday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12
Length: 535 words
Body


THOMAS H. KEAN, THE REPUBLICAN FORMER governor of New Jersey who chairs the commission on whether 9/11 could have been avoided, says he thinks it could have been: "There are so many threads and so many things, individual things, that happened. If we had been able to put those (al-Qaida) people on the watch list of the airlines, the two who were in the country; again, if we'd stopped some of these people at the borders; if we had acted earlier on al-Qaida, when al-Qaida was smaller and just getting started. . . . The whole story might have been different."
Mr. Kean also complains about the "lack of coordination within the FBI" and the failure of the government to understand the importance of the August 2001 arrest of Zacarias Moussaoui while he was in flight school.
Mr. Kean is not the first to say what he is saying. Ever since 9/11, stories have surfaced in the media about intelligence failures, security failures and lack of governmental coordination of anti-terrorism efforts.
Nevertheless, when the bipartisan 9/11 commission was established, one possibility was that it would conclude that after-the-fact criticisms of the government are too easy. The commission could settle for concluding only that there are lessons to be learned for the future. It still might.
But Mr. Kean and, to some degree, his deputy chair, former Democratic Rep. Lee Hamilton, seem to be heading toward something more hard-hitting than that.
Bush administration spokesmen immediately rejected the Kean analysis. That's understandable. Although the Kean criticism is of people who are way below the White House level, the question does arise: Would those people have behaved differently if the White House - either the Bush or Clinton White House - had put more emphasis on the terrorism issue?
It's ironic: Former terrorism official Richard Clarke has been accused of partisanship for suggesting that the Bush White House wasn't sufficiently focused on terrorism. But he has stopped short of saying that the White House could have prevented 9/11 by following his advice. Now it's the certifiably nonpartisan figure, Mr. Kean, who is talking about preventability.
Every instinct of the commission is to avoid a partisan split. Its final language is likely to. Meanwhile, however, we have here two fair-minded men of the American establishment who have been immersed in the study of 9/11 for months and are willing to say - notwithstanding their reluctance to take cheap shots - that things didn't necessarily have to go the way they went.
The commission is set to meet with more administration officials, including Attorney General John Ashcroft, for whom it is said to have some tough questions ready.  Mr. Ashcroft has been harshly criticized from the left for overzealousness in abridging civil liberties in the name of thwarting terrorists since 9/11. But he is going to have to answer the charge that before 9/11 he gave terrorism a strikingly low priority.
The Kean concerns noted above relate more to law enforcement, security and intelligence than to foreign policy. So the commission shouldn't be going too far in drafting its conclusions yet. But clearly it has some inklings that are not going to be easily dispelled.

Load-Date: April 13, 2004


End of Document