Keeping Terrorism's Advocates Off British Air
The New York Times
November 13, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 435 words
Body


To the Editor:
Your editorial of Nov. 3 takes Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to task for banning appearances by terrorists in the news media and for putting to Parliament a proposal to allow the courts to draw an inference from a suspect's exercising his or her continuing right to remain silent under questioning.
There is no restriction on news media reporting, only on direct appearances on radio and television by representatives of certain organizations in Northern Ireland that advocate violence. The Government realizes that this is a serious step. It was decided only after long and careful consideration. It has been debated fully in Parliament and was approved by a substantial majority.
Those who use and advocate violence cannot in all circumstances be accorded the same rights as the rest of the population. It is deeply offensive to the majority of people to see them appearing on television and radio on the same basis as members of constitutional parties. It gives organizations such as Sinn Fein and the Loyalist paramilitary organizations a spurious respectability. The Republic of Ireland reached the same conclusion and has imposed similar restrictions.
On the measure affecting the right to silence of an accused person, the British Government believes that the proper functioning of the system of justice must allow the courts to give due weight to the accused's refusal to answer questions in certain precisely defined circumstances. Under the present system, those who commit crimes so defined, and then pursue a deliberate policy of total silence, have successfully evaded justice without being challenged to explain the evidence against them. It has to be asked whether justice can be done in such circumstances.
The British Government concluded that a change was required in the interest of justice. But the decision to put this matter before Parliament was not taken lightly. It follows an earlier recommendation of the Criminal Law Revision Committee for England and Wales (a body quite independent of Government). The British Government and the British system of justice fully uphold the need to be fair to the accused, and that fundamental principle will never change.
Under the new proposals, nothing will oblige an accused person to make a statement, nor is it proposed that silence should be an offense. The challenge that is faced by justice today is not the threat of the Star Chamber, but the cynical planned exploitation of the criminal justice system by those involved in organized terrorist crime.
 
FRANCIS CORNISH
Counselor, Information
British Embassy
  Washington, Nov. 4, 1988


End of Document