KEEPING JUSTICE AT BAY
Daily News (New York)
September 21, 2010 Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22
Length: 421 words
Body


Report from a parallel universe: Tomorrow marks eight months since the terrorist detention facility at Guantanamo Bay was closed, in accordance with the executive order signed by President Obama in the heady early days of his administration.
Report from the real world: Many of the most dangerous terrorists on Earth remain locked up at the naval base, and the task of bringing the worst of the worst among them, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, to justice awaits a proper time and place.
Fully 610 days after Obama took office, his terrorist detention and prosecution policy remains a riddle wrapped inside an enigma stuffed inside out-of-date campaign talking points.
The White House is still bent on shuttering the prison at Guantanamo Bay, even as it has shown no inclination or ability to stand up an alternative site - say, a Supermax prison in Illinois - for holding the lawless terrorists.
Meanwhile, the Defense and Justice departments have inched oh-so-haltingly toward trying detainees before military tribunals. The Obama team has begun only one such proceeding, a case against a man captured at the age of 15 after he allegedly threw a grenade at a U.S. soldier in Afghanistan.
Most depressing of all, after almost a year's deliberations, the administration has yet to scuttle or endorse the horrendous idea of trying KSM in civilian court here, with all the security nightmares such a proceeding would cause.
And now comes word that the White House walked away from a Republican partner eager to help clean up the whole mess - the relentlessly reasonable Sen. Lindsey Graham.
As revealed by Politico, he attempted to fashion a grand bargain that would pave the way to close Guantanamo and move some detainees to a mainland prison in exchange for Republican-sought amendments to terrorism prosecution laws. Importantly, the administration would also commit to trying Mohammed before a military tribunal.
Graham told Politico that his conversations with the White House stopped cold in May.
"It went completely dead," Graham said. "Like it got hit by a Predator drone."
He continued, "I think administration officials are reluctant to bring any legislation before the Congress because they think it could alienate their base."
Alienate the base by presenting the case against KSM where it belongs? Alienate the base by bringing some consistency and common sense to terrorism prosecutions? Alienate the base by fulfilling a top campaign pledge, however wrongheaded closing Guantanamo will be?
Please, Mr. President, alienate. Alienate away.

Load-Date: September 21, 2010


End of Document