Keeping Rushdie in focus
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 26, 1992, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 604 words
Body


Tuesday marked a significant event in American publishing, the distribution of Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses in paperback. That it was ever released or unleashed, as it were in soft cover is a triumph; Rushdie himself risked his life for an unannounced appearance in the United States, holding the book aloft. As with everything connected to this novel and its beleaguered author, though, the victory was a momentary standoff in a mortal conflict between freedom of expression and state-sponsored terrorism.
    "Voltaire suggested that it was advisable for writers to live in close proximity to a frontier, so that if necessary they could hop across it to save themselves," Rushdie told his audience at a Washington-area conference sponsored by American University and the Freedom Forum, an independent media foundation.  "Frontiers will not defend a writer now. Not if this new form of terrorism, terrorism by remote control, terrorism by edict and bounty, is allowed to have its day."
 
     History will judge the final victor in the "Rushdie affair," and history may not be kind to the nation that most prides itself on defending freedoms. Rushdie had planned to ask the U.S.  government for help during his clandestine visit, but the appointment with members of Congress was abruptly canceled Tuesday. No explanation was given, although members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee tried to make amends by eating lunch with Rushdie on Wednesday.
 
    In contrast, State Department Spokewoman Margaret Tutwiler said the Bush administration "will not be meeting with this gentleman." Any meeting with Rushdie "could and probably might be misinterpreted," she explained.
 
     With a $ 1-million bounty on his head, Rushie can't afford prolonged Washington exposure while politicians decide if his plea for help might be too hot to handle.
 
     In Europe, publishers defied the Iranian government and its threats by banding together to make The Satanic Verses available in paperback. The more names on the book, the more diffused the threat of harm and the stronger the message about free expression, they reasoned.
 
     The new U.S. edition was brought out by a group that simply calls itself the Consortium, Inc. "Instead of publishers and others putting their mouths where their money is, they decided to hide behind a consortium of anonymity," said Mike Wallace of 60 Minutes in introducing Rushdie.
 
     The late Ayatollah Khomeini drew a line in the sand three years ago with his fatwa, a religious decree that condemned Rushdie and his publishers to death. The Iranian government backed its threat with money $ 3-million reward for any Iranian who killed Rushdie and $ 1-million for any other bounty hunter around the world. Since then, a religious foundation has taken over the bounty offer, now a flat $ 1-million. The Iranian government renewed the death threats just last month.
 
     Rushdie, a British citizen, has been moving from safe house to safe house under government protection for the last three years. Unlike the Iranians, however, Rushdie's supporters may be losing their resolve. "I am no longer certain of the commitment of the British authorities to protecting me," said Rushdie, visibly upset. "I do not say this lightly."
 
     The Bush administration prides itself on winning a battle for freedom in the Persian Gulf, yet it seems reluctant to exert itself diplomatically on behalf of free expression. If the global decree that a man be killed for writing a book is allowed to stand, history may well decide that the United States stood by while "terrorism by edict and decree" had its day.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, Clay Bennett; A worried George Bush asks the doctor after his checkup what he meant by saying that he was as sound as a dollar

Load-Date: November 4, 1992


End of Document