Keep Foreign Terrorism Foreign
The New York Times
March 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Editorial
Length: 633 words
Body


The latest arrests in New York and the Middle East in connection with the World Trade Center bombing add a bit more focus to the conspiracy that produced the worst terrorist attack in American history. Much still remains to be learned about the conspirators' motives and possible foreign involvement, though now investigators believe the five individuals arrested are members of a group called Liberation Army Fifth Battalion, which has threatened further terrorist acts aimed at reversing U.S. policies throughout the Middle East. The arrests also intensify interest in their spiritual mentor, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman.
As well, they underscore the urgency of monitoring known terrorists' movements and tightening visa and deportation procedures accordingly.
Americans ought to be enraged at the laxness that allowed Mr. Abdel Rahman to enter and remain in the United States. On two separate occasions, U.S. officials granted him visas even though his name appeared on the State Department watch list of suspected terrorists.
More than a decade ago, Egyptian authorities charged that Mr. Abdel Rahman's fiery preaching led directly to the murder of Anwar Sadat. After his acquittal on that charge, the sheik re-emerged as the pre-eminent leader of the violent Islamic opposition to President Mubarak.
Today his followers in Egypt organize attacks on Coptic Christians and foreign tourists. Cairo now asks that he be returned to Egypt for prosecution, perhaps as a tacit quid pro quo for its cooperation in the arrest of Mahmud Abohalima, a Trade Center suspect flown back to the United States last week.
Earlier in his career, Mr. Abohalima fought in Afghanistan, on the side of U.S.-backed Islamic guerrillas opposed to the Communist Government there. And Mr. Abdel Rahman helped organize the supply network providing the Afghan fighters with volunteers, weapons and money. After he fled Egypt in 1990, he shifted his base of operations first to the Sudan, then to Pakistan and finally the U.S.
Late in 1990, one of the sheik's followers, El Sayyid A. Nosair, was accused of murdering the Israeli demagogue Rabbi Meir Kahane, in a Manhattan hotel. Most of the trade center suspects regularly attended Mr. Nosair's trial and celebrating his acquittal of murder charges. Mr. Nosair's cousin, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, has also been arrested on charges related to the trade center blast.
At the time of the Kahane case, the authorities ruled out any conspiracy charges. But then, if not earlier, the group around Mr. Abdel Rahman came under official surveillance. Deportation charges against the sheik were begun last year.
Closer monitoring of the sheik may not necessarily have prevented the bombing. But it might have. Keeping him out of the country, or expelling him once his identity became clear, might have averted other violence linked to his preachings.
The official explanation for the Sudan visa is a misspelling of the sheik's name on the application form. But that's hard to accept. With one eyeball missing entirely, and the other disfigured, the sheik is hardly difficult to recognize.
Representative Tom Lantos of California wants to look more closely into the repeated slip-ups in the Abdel Rahman case. That's a good idea.  Meanwhile, Representative Charles Schumer of New York has suggested closer cooperation between the F.B.I. and the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the stationing of I.N.S. agents in foreign capitals, both useful proposals. There also needs to be consideration of accelerated deportation procedures in cases with terrorist links.
Along with the search for accountability, America needs urgently to reinforce its safeguards against foreign terrorism. If incidents like the trade center bombing can't be completely prevented, they can and should be made extremely rare.

Load-Date: March 28, 1993


End of Document