KENNEDY CALLS U.S. VOTE ON ISRAELI RAID 'DISASTROUS'
The New York Times
June 23, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 506 words
Byline: By JOSH BARBANEL
Body


Senator Edward M. Kennedy said last night that the Reagan's Administration vote in the United Nations to condemn the Israeli raid on an Iraqi nuclear reactor reflected a ''disastrous'' anti-Israel policy.
In a speech at a Manhattan fund-raising dinner for the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, the Massachusetts Democrat also rebuked Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the American representative at the United Nations, for comparing the Israeli action to other ''acts of violence'' in the area, including the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the Iraqi attack on Iran and the Libyan invasion of Chad.
''We have all heard our U.N. ambassador's excuse that the U.N.  resolution could have been worse,'' he said. ''But could anything be worse than what she herself did and said?''
Senator Edward Kennedy calls US vote in UN condemning Israeli raid on Iraqi nuclear reactor "disasterous"
And echoing the words used by Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel in defending the raid, he urged that ''never again'' should an American delegate to the United Nations sit down with the Foreign Minister of Iraq and write a resolution to condemn Israel.
 
'Double Standard' Condemned
In a 20-minute speech interrupted 16 times by applause, Senator Kennedy also criticized what he said was the Reagan Administration's decision to downgrade the importance of human rights and impose a ''double standard'' on violations.
The criticism of the Administration's human rights policy was similar to that made by former President Jimmy Carter in a speech last month at the same hotel at a dinner of the New York Board of Rabbis.
But the Senator linked that issue to policy toward Israel by suggesting the world was mute to reports of terrorism against Israel and threats to its security. ''Today the world denounces and condemns,'' he said. ''If the voices had spoken out in the beginning, when Israel was first a target, terrorism might have been stopped years ago,'' he said. ''But amid the early sounds of silence, the disease and destruction became a global epidemic.''
The Senator said that the United States ''should not second-guess Israel'' on its bombing of the Iraqi reactor because it was an issue central to the security of Israel. He urged that it instead criticize the failure to forestall Eurpean suppliers from providing sensitive nuclear technology to Iraq.
At the $500 a plate dinner for 500 people at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, Senator Kennedy received the Scopus Award of the Hebrew University. The dinner was sponsored by the American Friends of the Hebrew University, with the proceeds going to an endowment for the School for Overseas Students in Jerusalem.
Senator Kennedy, who was a strong supporter of Israel throughout last year's Presidential election campaign and who criticized President Carter for holding ''pro-Palestinian positions,'' repeated his appeal for a halt in the sale of offensive weapons to Saudi Arabi.
He also urged President Reagan to resume shipments of F-16 aircraft to Israel, which were suspended after the Iraqi reactor was bombed.


End of Document