KENNETH A. MOSKOW; DIED SEPT. 19, 2008; CIA AGENT RETURNED TO FIGHTING TERRORISM AFTER 9; 11
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 28, 2008 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: OBITUARY; Pg. D-5
Length: 887 words
Byline: Bryan Marquard, The Boston Globe
Body


Writing in early anniversary reports of his Harvard class, Kenneth A. Moskow had to be vague about the profession that defined his life in the 1980s and in the years following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Only after leaving his government job could he write an autobiographical sketch for his 25th anniversary report that began: "Shortly after graduation, I was recruited into the CIA."
Family members say serving as an undercover operations officer and in counterterrorism was only part of the way he filled his few decades with enough adventures for a much longer life.
"He was the first born -- he was seven minutes older -- and was the type of guy who would push, push, push himself to do the best he could in any activity," Keith Moskow of Cohasset said of his identical twin. "If he boxed, he was going to be in the Golden Gloves. If he was in academics, he was going to Harvard."
Mr. Moskow, whose real estate company developed projects locally and abroad, died Sept. 19 of causes related to altitude sickness, his family said. Mr. Moskow, who was 48 and lived in Concord, had been on an expedition with friends, hiking near the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania.
"He just had this energy, this twinkle in his eye," said his wife, Shelagh. "He had great ideas and was constantly going from one thing to the next. ... He got me on a surfboard, and we went away every weekend doing different things. I never had a passport until I met him."
An inveterate traveler even while attending Buckingham Browne & Nichols School in Cambridge, Mr. Moskow and his twin spent a year living with separate families in Barcelona. After returning to Cambridge to graduate from the private high school, it was time to see North America. They soon were riding in the open back of a pickup truck in Wyoming, gazing at the Grand Tetons mountain range.
"During high school, one of the requirements was to plow through Jack Kerouac's 'On the Road,'" his brother said. "So after high school, we decided to do our own 'On the Road' and hitchhiked across America. It's a great way to see the country, standing on the road in Wyoming getting toasted by the sun. And when we couldn't get rides together, we would split up. These were the days before cellphones, so we would arrange to meet at the bus station in a particular city. It was the Jack Kerouac experience, minus the drugs."
While at Harvard, Mr. Moskow was a Golden Gloves boxer and graduated in 1983 with a bachelor's degree in history. And then he joined the Central Intelligence Agency, though for his fifth and 10th anniversary class reports he wrote of working for the State Department and the Foreign Service.
By the 25th anniversary, he could write: "I served as an undercover operations officer in southern Europe and the eastern Mediterranean. As a young officer in the early 1980s, it was an exciting time to be part of the agency with the Cold War in full force and the growing threats of international terrorism."
With the Cold War ending, he left the CIA and received a master's degree in 1991 from Harvard's Kennedy School of Government.
Mr. Moskow formed American Venture Corp., a Boston firm that focused on real estate development in this area, Mexico and Central America, and also volunteered to teach taught English as a second language to immigrants in Boston.
One evening, he ran into Shelagh Lafferty in a restaurant. Although they lived near each other on Beacon Hill and attended the Kennedy School together, they did not meet before that night. They soon began dating.
True to Mr. Moskow's sense of adventure, they eloped in Paris on Valentine's Day in 2000. The couple returned home for a private family ceremony on April Fool's Day, followed by a reception for a few hundred people from all over the world.
"The normal things he liked to do in a special, different way," his wife said. "He was in perpetual motion and was just enthusiastic about everything. ... And a friend of ours once described him as the most polite person she had ever met."
After the Sept. 11 attacks occurred, he set his private life aside and returned to the CIA.
"It was a very difficult decision," his brother said, "but he said, 'How many people in the United States have actually been trained in antiterrorism?'"
Mr. Moskow traveled throughout Europe and to several former Soviet republics, his brother said. As he worked to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, his efforts and sacrifice did not go unnoticed.
"Ken was always at the top of our profession and was considered one of the top officers in the agency," said a CIA officer who is not allowed to speak publicly and requested anonymity. "He did the hard things, and he always looked for the biggest challenges."
Leaving the CIA in 2006, Mr. Moskow returned to American Venture Corp. and settled in Concord, where he wrote for his Harvard report that it's "great to finally spend time with our three young kids, each uniquely special."
He kept journals during each child's first three years, and told his wife he wanted his observations and thoughts given to them when they turned 21. Samantha is now 7, Michaela is 5, and Jack is 3.
On Wednesday, a postcard arrived in the mail for Mr. Moskow's wife and children.
He had jotted a note of love and affection and mailed it before starting up Mount Kilimanjaro.

Load-Date: September 30, 2008


End of Document