Kenya fails to convict three in bombing of Israeli-owned hotel Third terrorism case with same result turns focus on prosecutors
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 28, 2005 Tuesday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 387 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya 
Body


Kenya's latest attempt to convict suspects in an al-Qaida-linked hotel bombing that killed 15 people ended with acquittals Monday, raising questions about the readiness of Kenyan prosecutors to handle such cases.
After two years and scores of witnesses, Kenyan prosecutors have failed to convict in three terrorism cases:
- The hotel bombing in November 2002.
- The 1998 U.S. Embassy bombing, which killed 219 people, including 12 Americans.
- An alleged 2003 plot against the rebuilt embassy.
Kenyan prosecutors lack the specialized training to handle such cases, said Philip Kichana, former executive director of the Kenya chapter of the International Commission of Jurists.
Terrorism cases "are fairly new" in Kenya and require a "very high level of competence even for experienced lawyers to successfully prosecute," he said.
Patrick Kiage, a respected Nairobi criminal lawyer with 12 years of experience, said that given the case's seriousness, Kenya's attorney general should have put the best government lawyers on it or hired experienced private lawyers.
"Frankly, when you look at the state counsels that prosecute cases on behalf of the state, they don't compare with the energy, zeal and passion which defense lawyers conduct their cases," Kiage said. "They don't seem to want to go for the jugular."
In his ruling, Nairobi Chief Magistrate Aggrey Muchelule said prosecution evidence was not strong enough to connect Kubwa Mohammed Seif, Said Saggar Ahmed and Salmin Mohammed Khamis to either the bombing of the Israeli-owned Paradise Hotel in Kikambala, 12 miles north of Mombasa, or the attempt to shoot down a chartered Israeli plane at the nearby airport.
Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network claimed responsibility for both the bombing and the attempt against the plane.
"I have considered the evidence in totality, and I have come to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed beyond reasonable doubt to prove its case against the accused persons, and I set them free," Muchelule said.
An earlier trial acquitted four other men of murder in the Paradise bombing. One of the four was later charged with illegal possession of five anti-tank weapons and a hand grenade.
The government has not said whether it will appeal any of the cases. Prosecutor Edwin Okello refused to talk to journalists after the verdict.

Load-Date: June 29, 2005


End of Document