Kenya terrorism case is different
University Wire
December 3, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Massachusetts Daily Collegian via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 490 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Massachusetts Daily Collegian
Dateline: Amherst, Mass.
Body


This past Thursday morning the news told us that terrorists had struck again. This seems to be commonplace in our increasingly shrinking view of world news. Whether in Israel, Pakistan, Afghanistan, or as the case was Thursday, Kenya, the news of these attacks and threats have become so main stream that media outlets have put them into the templates of their broadcasts and publications.
U. Massachusetts-Amherst
But there is an ever-changing facet to these attacks that is lost when your head gets twisted around the stories and your mind grows numb from the media inundation we have been subjected to.
We are almost sedated by this torrent of news. The onslaught of late-breaking stories cripples the medium that made the concept practical by making the minor significant and the mediocre fantastic. The stories behind the headlines are hidden in the flashy words and the graphics we first see.
News judgment has always been a part of putting forth the news. Part of the job descriptions of editors and journalists and every rung of the journalism ladder is to determine what should be put forth as pressing, urgent, and "most important."
This discretion has been missing and news that glosses over the severity of terrorism stories has been put in the spotlight. Is there reason for concern after the attacks in Mombasa?
After a failed attempt at shooting down a plane bound for Israel and a successful attempt at bombing a primarily Jewish visited resort in the East African town, sources and stories have been ever changing and circulating.
Right away the terrorist group Al Qaeda was placed at the top of the suspect list. The anti-Israeli group Hamas disconnected themselves from the attack. Another unheard of group claimed ownership in a faxed letter to authorities, but was quickly dismissed.
U.S. interests may be at risk. An announcement released from the state department urges caution for Americans in the area, in the capitol Nairobi and generally, anywhere oversees.
The problem is that our guard has been on high for over a year now. Since September last year it has been an unsafe place both at home and abroad for Americans and "American interests."
We have been watching our backs with every inkling of a threat, and when there is substance -- a legitimate attack complete with bombs, missiles, casualties and international squabbling -- it is given the same treatment.
The equal coverage for both threats and actual occurrences poses a question about the coverage of these terrorist related events.
Outlets, particularly national news services, should take the lead in giving a fair proportion of coverage to the news behind it and allow the readers to pursue it further if they want to.
The desire to be the first one with the story, the first outlet to report on anything "terrorism" related has blurred the line between news judgment and bandwagon media approaches.
(C) 2002 Massachusetts Daily Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 3, 2002


End of Document