Kerry stumps with Sharpton, Jackson; Bush ad blasts rival's views on terrorism
USA TODAY
October 11, 2004, Monday,
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 620 words
Byline: Judy Keen
Dateline: CRAWFORD, Texas
Body

CRAWFORD, Texas -- President Bush's campaign intensified criticism of Sen. John Kerry's views of the war on terrorism Sunday and the Democratic challenger fought back forcefully as the two candidates prepared for the final debate on Wednesday.
At church services in Miami on Sunday, Kerry sought support from minority voters and equated his campaign with the civil rights movement.
"We have an unfinished march in this nation," he said at Friendship Missionary Baptist Church.
Jesse Jackson, stumping with Kerry, urged the congregation to go to the polls.
"The power is in your hands, hands that once picked cotton," he said.
Bush received 9% of African-Americans' votes in 2000; their support is key to Kerry's hopes of carrying Florida.
Meanwhile, Bush's campaign put out a TV ad blasting Kerry for telling the New York Times Magazine in an interview published Sunday, "We have to get back to the place we were, where terrorists are not the focus of our lives, but they're a nuisance." He spoke of illegal gambling and prostitution as similar problems that don't threaten lives every day.
"Terrorism, a nuisance?" the Bush ad asks. "How can Kerry protect us when he doesn't understand the threat?"
Kerry's campaign responded with an ad reminding voters that Bush, asked in August by NBC's Matt Lauer if the war on terrorism will ever be won, said, "I don't think you can win it."
Democrats seized on the remark. Bush said a few days later that he meant the United States will not get an official surrender from a defeated al-Qaeda.
"In this different kind of war, we may never sit down at a peace table," he said. "But make no mistake about it, we are winning and we will win."
Kerry's interview and comments on Iraq in Friday's debate in St. Louis gave Republicans an opportunity to try to show voters that Kerry doesn't take the war on terrorism seriously enough to be president.
During the debate Bush pounced on a suggestion by Kerry that a summit be held to improve the situation in Iraq.
"And what is he going to say to those people who show up at that summit?" Bush asked. "Join me in the wrong war at the wrong time in the wrong place?"
Wednesday's debate in Tempe, Ariz., will be solely on domestic matters. But Nicolle Devenish, communications director for the Bush campaign, says the president will try to keep the focus on his "record and vision vs. Kerry's liberal record and inability to articulate a post-911 vision for fighting and winning the war on terrorism."
On Fox News Sunday, Sen. John Edwards assailed Bush's rationale for the war. Last week's report by chief U.S. weapons inspector Charles Duelfer gives Democrats a new opportunity to challenge Bush's assertion that the war with Iraq was essential to the war on terrorism. Duelfer concluded that Saddam Hussein had no weapons of mass destruction or facilities to make them. But he also concluded that Hussein intended to restart his weapons programs as soon as U.N. sanctions against Iraq were lifted.
Edwards said Bush invaded the "axis of evil" member that posed the least nuclear threat. "Iran's moved forward with their nuclear weapon program on this president's watch," Edwards said. North Korea, he said, has "gone from one to two nuclear weapons to as many as six or seven nuclear weapons."
On ABC's This Week, Bush campaign manager Ken Mehlman said Kerry would be a timid leader of the war on terrorism.
"The difference between George Bush and John Kerry is that in a post-9/11 world, John Kerry will wait till there's a smoking gun to defend America," he said.
Kerry arrived in Santa Fe, N.M., Sunday evening to prepare for the final debate. Bush spent Sunday at his Texas ranch.
***
Contributing: Martin Kasindorf and Jill Lawrence with the Kerry campaign.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Jason Reed, Reuters; PHOTO, B/W, Gerald Herbert, AP; Bush: Attends rally in Waterloo, Iowa. <>Kerry: With Jesse Jackson at church in Miami.

Load-Date: October 11, 2004


End of Document