Kerry needs McCain to win in Nov.
University Wire
April 16, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 The Pitt News via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 645 words
Byline: By Jason Lawrence, The Pitt News; SOURCE: U. Pittsburgh
Dateline: PITTSBURGH 
Body


Now that the 2004 election battles are in full swing, we've been inundated with television ads. Here are a two that won't air but should, and a last one that I hope will.
"I'm Kim Jong Il, and I endorse this ad." The camera focuses on Kim Jong Il. "President Bush has refused to negotiate with North Korea unilaterally. John Kerry has favored unilateral negotiations with North Korea that would enhance our standing in the world. He also believes that terrorism should primarily be fought by law enforcement rather than the United States military -- which would leave weapons of mass destruction market open for us. For these reasons, John Kerry has North Korea's endorsement." This ad paid for by foreign leaders for Kerry.
"I am Prince Bandar bin Sultan and I approved this ad." Cue images of the Bush family and Saudi leaders on the Bush family ranch. "President Bush has prosecuted the war on terror with remarkable force, but is unwilling to do the one additional thing to win it: weaken the oil economy. It is no secret that Saudi oil wealth funds terrorism."
"The United States, with its economy and research capabilities, could invent marketable alternatives to oil that would markedly decrease the world demand for oil and cripple our ability to fund terrorism -- er, our economy. Because President Bush is beholden to oil interests in the United States, I endorse his bid for the presidency." This ad paid for by oil autocrats for Bush.
Kerry's foreign policy, as articulated, has our military playing too small a role in fighting terrorism. Bush, being unable to distance himself from oil, leaves himself unlikely to win the socioeconomic components of the war on terrorism. We need a president and a vice president -- like John McCain -- who will win the war on terrorism both militarily and socioeconomically.
A third ad: "I am John Kerry," "and I am John McCain," (in unison) "and we believe that an America at war requires a united, not divided government. We endorse this message of unity."
Cue Kerry. "Since Sept. 11, 2001, we have been a nation at war, and we will continue to be a nation at war until citizens from Los Angeles to New York, from London to Madrid, from Istanbul to Manila, and everywhere in between are safe from terrorism."
"However, there is more to fighting a war than the use of force. Part of war is the sacrifice every citizen makes. Both parties must do what President Bush has not, and ask every American, wealthy and not, to sacrifice for this war effort. Companies and CEOs must be willing to give up their riches gained from tax-cuts so that America may fund what Middle East expert Thomas Friedman terms 'a second Manhattan Project' of developing a cheaper energy alternative to oil. This is the only way to truly choke off the oil money that funds al Qaeda and other terrorists."
Cue McCain. "Working class citizens must also understand that the 'export' of blue-collar and service jobs to nations around the world, no matter how unpleasant in the short-term, improves the quality of life in the developing world. Economic growth and the stability it brings will give us more allies in the war on terrorism. In the long run, it also means cheaper goods and services here. Unions and those who are committed to 'protecting the jobs we have now' must sacrifice their vision of an American economy built on manufacturing and simple service jobs, and embrace a fluid economy where education, creativity, and adaptability are the most prized characteristics."
Cue Kerry and McCain in unison. "We are here to tell the powerful interests on both sides of the aisle, those representing big business, and those representing the 'little guy,' that they must sacrifice for the security of America and the future of the free-world."
Paid for by citizens for a unity government to fight and win the war on terrorism.
(C) 2003 The Pitt News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 16, 2004


End of Document