Kerry claims America needs 'neighborhood watch' system; Democrat says that people should do more to protect themselves against terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 9, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a5
Length: 269 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: TRINIDAD, Colo.
Body


Americans should do more to protect themselves against terrorism by setting up neighborhood watch groups, Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry says.
"If we do that to protect ourselves against vandals or a burglary, why would we not do it to protect ourselves against a terrorist?" Kerry asked during a Saturday interview with reporters aboard his campaign train.
Kerry, who was joined on the train by his running mate, John Edwards, said the current system of nationwide, color-coded alerts is confusing.
"We need a neighborhood watch kind of system so that we have a way to notify people, they know what they're supposed to do," Edwards said. "We shouldn't have millions of Americans, or hundreds of thousands, trying to figure out at 3 o'clock in the morning what they are supposed to do. They ought to know what they're supposed to do."
Kerry also said he would continue research on a program to develop weapons to shoot down incoming missiles if he is elected.
"I believe in pursuing and researching and developing missile defense. I've supported missile defense research," Kerry said. But "I don't believe in rapid deployment of a system that hasn't been adequately tested. I will continue missile defense research, I will continue missile defense work, because it's important for the country."
The two Democrats also criticized the Bush environmental record.
"I think they have done a number of things that are troublesome," Edwards said. "They have rolled back protections for the quality of our air. They have lowered the standards and the regulatory requirements that have been in place for over 25 years."

Load-Date: August 9, 2004


End of Document