Kerry Says Bush Has Not Acted Quickly Enough on Terrorism Defenses
The New York Times
August 3, 2004 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DEMOCRATIC NOMINEE
Length: 1153 words
Byline: By DAVID M. HALBFINGER
Dateline: GRAND RAPIDS, Mich., Aug. 2 
Body


Senator John Kerry accused President Bush on Monday of dragging his feet in bolstering the nation's defenses against terrorism and said that he should call a special session of Congress to adopt the recommendations of the Sept. 11 commission.
 ''We cannot afford reluctance in the protection of our country,'' Mr. Kerry said after Mr. Bush announced that he planned to establish a director of national intelligence and a national counterterrorism center, one day after reports of threats against financial centers in New York, Newark and Washington.
 Senator Kerry also accused the president of ''encouraging the recruitment of terrorists'' by alienating moderates in the Muslim world, in part through his handling of Iraq -- prompting Mr. Bush to retort from the Rose Garden that his opponent showed ''a fundamental misunderstanding of the war on terror.''
 The televised back-and-forth between the Democratic presidential nominee and the incumbent president overshadowed Mr. Kerry's campaign trip through swing states for a second straight day.
 ''If the president had a sense of urgency about this director of intelligence and about the needs to strengthen America, he would call the Congress back and get the job done now,'' Mr. Kerry told reporters at a campaign stop here. ''That's what we need to do. That's the urgency that exists in order to make America as safe as possible.''
 ''The terror alert yesterday just underscores that if we're being serious about this, we have to move on every possible option to make our nation as safe as possible,'' he added. ''The time to act is now, not later.''
 Mr. Kerry said the administration had resisted making needed improvements in the intelligence system.
 ''We have a commission that was stonewalled, that people didn't want to even put into existence, that you had to struggle to empower, that finally has come up with recommendations, many of which I've made over the course of the last few years,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''We need leadership, not followship.'' 
 Mr. Kerry also ridiculed Mr. Bush for a new line in his stump speech. ''They said, when it comes to fighting the threats of the world, and making America safer and promoting the peace, 'we're turning the corner,''' Mr. Kerry said outside a Grand Rapids fire station. ''Saying that we turned the corner doesn't make it so, just like saying 'mission accomplished' doesn't make it so.''
 And a foreign policy adviser to Mr. Kerry, James P. Rubin, said, ''Why did President Bush flip-flop'' on the national intelligence director's post, using a term the Bush-Cheney campaign has tried to affix to Mr. Kerry.
 ''First he was against it; now he's for it,'' Mr. Rubin said. ''Does that sound familiar?''
 A Bush campaign spokesman, Steve Schmidt, responded, ''Facing no bounce in the polls, John Kerry threw away any pretense of a positive campaign today with a prolonged dawn-to-dusk personal attack on the president.''
 Mr. Kerry, who has argued for months that Mr. Bush's post-Sept. 11 conduct of foreign policy has made the United States less safe, also shifted his line of attack.
 ''The question we ought to be asking ourselves is not, 'Are we safer than we were on Sept. 11?''' he said. ''That's an easy one. We walk into an airport, there are screeners where there weren't screeners. We've got some air marshals where there weren't air marshals. Sure, we can say we're safer.
 ''The question is, 'Are we as safe as we ought to be, given the options that were available to us?''' he continued. ''And the answer is no, and we should be, and I will make us as safe as we ought to be.''
 Mr. Kerry also said repeatedly, starting in a morning interview on CNN, that he believed that the administration was encouraging the recruitment of terrorists through policies that ''have resulted in an increase of animosity and anger'' at the United States and by failing to reach out to moderates in the Muslim world.
 He said Islamic religious schools that are believed to be breeding grounds for terrorists ''are using our actions as a means of recruitment.'' He cited a new book by a senior C.I.A. officer warning that the invasion of Iraq only played into Al Qaeda's hands.
 Told of Mr. Kerry's remarks, Mr. Bush said it represented ''a fundamental misunderstanding of the war on terror.'' He added: ''It is a ridiculous notion to assert that because the United States is on the offense, more people want to hurt us. We're on the offense because people do want to hurt us.''
 Moments after Mr. Bush was through, Mr. Kerry arranged his own news conference, where he said that when it came to fighting terrorism, ''obviously I'm on the offense,'' but that the administration was ignoring nonmilitary approaches to fighting terrorism.
 Later, at a boisterous rally in an overflowing, windblown plaza in downtown Grand Rapids, Mr. Kerry told thousands of Michiganders that he would ''fight a more effective, smarter, war on terror that makes our nation safer'' by cooperating more with other governments.
 ''I can do it because I understand, No. 1, yes, you have to take it to the terrorists -- of course you do,'' he said. ''You've got to know who they are, you've got to know where they are, you've got to be able to go get them before they get us. But to do that, you've got to have the best intelligence in the world, and to have the best intelligence in the world, you've got to have the best cooperation with our countries you've ever had.''
 ''This administration doesn't know how to do that. I do,'' he thundered. ''I understand that working with other countries is not a sign of weakness, it is a sign of strength.''
 Mr. Kerry also, describing his intentions in Iraq, appeared to shift his emphasis from fixing what he says has been done wrong in that country to withdrawing American troops as soon as possible, though the means is the same: working with allies, involving more countries and reducing the demand for American troops.
 ''I know what we need to do now in Iraq; it's what we should've done in the first place,'' he said at the rally. ''The fact is, it will take new leadership, a fresh start, a new president with credibility to bring people to the table and bring our troops home. That's what we need to do.''
|||
|--------------------||

Heinz Kerry Responds to Heckler
By The New York Times
 MILWAUKEE, Aug. 2 -- Teresa Heinz Kerry was introducing her husband to a downtown rally here Monday night and discussing how important it was to ''take a stand'' when from a nearby street she heard a man shouting ''Four more years!'' over a bullhorn.
 ''Four more years?'' she said acidly. ''They want four more years of hell.''
 The crowd roared. ''Three more months!'' the audience started chanting.
 Mr. Kerry took the stage and said his wife ''speaks her mind, and she speaks the truth -- and she's pretty quick on her feet, too.''
 ''That's why America is going to embrace her, and she's going to make a spectacular first lady,'' he said.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: At a rally in Grand Rapids, Mich., Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts said, ''I understand that working with other countries is not a sign of weakness, it is a sign of strength.'' (Photo by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)                                                         

Load-Date: August 3, 2004


End of Document