Kerry links assault weapons to terrorism
 Philadelphia Daily News
SEPTEMBER 11, 2004 Saturday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 03
Length: 295 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: ST. LOUIS
Body


John Kerry linked U.S. assault-weapon sales to worries about terrorism yesterday and said President Bush was bowing to the National Rifle Association by not pushing to keep alive an expiring ban.
If Bush is serious about fighting terrorism, the Democratic presidential candidate said, he would extend the 10-year ban on sales of assault weapons, due to expire on Monday.
"In the al Qaeda manual on terror, they were telling people to go out and buy assault weapons, to come to America and buy assault weapons," Kerry said.
Bush has said he would sign the assault-weapons extension into law if Congress passed it.
But Kerry pointed out, here and in Allentown, Pa., that the president hasn't pressured the GOP-controlled Congress to pass the measure. He said Bush was caving in to the NRA and "America's streets will not be as safe because of a choice that George Bush is making."
Not all Democrats on Capitol Hill are eager to take up the issue, however. They lost control of the House 10 years ago when then-President Clinton signed the original legislation into law. And Al Gore's support of gun control brought on the ire of the NRA in 2000, costing him in the swing states of West Virginia and Ohio.
Kerry, who has been pictured holding a shotgun and talking about his years as a hunter, is again fighting the NRA in battleground states - also including Pennsylvania, Florida, Michigan, and Missouri.
The NRA is funding a 30-minute anti-Kerry infomercial in several states. It says Kerry's voting record in the Senate shows he would erode gun rights if elected president.
Kerry cited a poll by the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania that said two-thirds of the public and one-third of NRA members support an extension of the assault- weapons ban. *

Notes

ASSAULT-WEAPONS BAN

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Associated Press
Supporters greet Kerry on a
visit yesterday to Allentown.

Load-Date: August 31, 2005


End of Document