Kerry's Illinois lead shrinks Concern about terrorism erodes support
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 27, 2004 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A01
Length: 1285 words
Byline: KEVIN MCDERMOTT Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


If Illinois is a bellwether for what's going on in "blue-state" America one week out from the presidential election, John Kerry may have some problems.
Kerry is still positioned for a comfortable victory in heavily Democratic Illinois, where he is leading President George W. Bush by a 12-point margin, according to a new Post-Dispatch/KMOV-TV (Channel 4) poll.
But Bush has shaved that margin compared to an identical poll conducted last month, possibly on the strength of two factors: More Illinoisans are listing terrorism as a top concern; and fewer believe that Kerry is the better candidate to address that concern.
The telephone poll of 800 likely voters was conducted Thursday through Saturday by Research 2000, a Maryland-based firm. It has a margin for error of 3.5 percentage points, which means that any number could be that much higher or lower.
In Missouri, the presidential contest is a statistical tossup. Of the 800 likely Missouri voters polled Friday through Sunday, 48 percent back Bush and 45 percent support Kerry. The remaining 7 percent backed other candidates or were undecided. A month ago, Bush was ahead 49 percent to 42 percent, with 9 percent undecided.
Though a Bush upset in Illinois would seem unlikely at this point, the numbers may hint at trouble for Kerry's chances of keeping his supporters together in states where the split is closer -- particularly when security from terrorism is the major issue on people's minds.
"As far as economics, I can't go along with (Bush) . . . but I think he has better leadership on terrorism. That's what I'm concerned about," said poll respondent Ronald Robinson, a retired teacher in Vandalia, Ill.
Robinson called himself an independent, and is supporting Illinois' Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate, but will vote for Bush because "I just feel like he's the one to get us through this war."
When asked whether he meant the actual war in Iraq, or the less-defined "war on terror," Robinson responded: "Both."
That linkage, said Research 2000 pollster Del Ali, is what the Bush camp is counting on.
"Iraq is still a huge issue, and it's an issue that absolutely breaks against Bush" when the question is considered separately from the general issue of terrorism, said Ali. "But anything to do with terrorism, Bush comes out on top."
The war vs terrorism
That dynamic is evident when the issues of Iraq and terrorism are separated. The poll found Illinoisans as a whole believe Kerry is more capable of successfully resolving the Iraq conflict.
"I don't care for Bush," said poll respondent Marian Brewer, a 79-year-old retired dry-cleaning employee from Sorento, Ill., outside of Springfield, who says she's backing Kerry primarily because of the war. "There's a lot of things about Kerry I don't care for, but I really don't care for Bush. This war -- all these boys getting killed."
Yet the same pool of respondents said they believe Bush is more capable of preventing a second terrorist attack on the United States -- an issue that, for some, trumps concerns about the validity of the Iraq war.
"That's one of the things I don't agree with (Bush) on, the war. I don't think it was thought through," said poll respondent Darrell Casey of Vandalia, a state employee. He said he is going to vote for Bush, anyway, because of his concerns about homeland security: "He's keeping America safe."
Another reason for the narrowing of Kerry's Illinois lead could be that his strongest issue -- the economy -- has slipped slightly in the minds of some Illinoisans, while concerns about war and terrorism have risen slightly.
The economy is still the top issue in Illinois, with almost a quarter of Illinois poll respondents ranking it there, but that's slightly down from the percentage on that question last month.
Meanwhile, both Iraq and terrorism got slightly higher percentages as issues of concern for Illinoisans compared to last month -- making it that much more crucial for the Bush campaign to try and meld those two issues into one.
"I call it the 'Vote for us or die' campaign," quipped Chicago-based Democratic political consultant David Axelrod, who alleged -- as other Democrats have -- that Bush has purposefully blurred the difference between the Iraq war and homeland security in an attempt to attract votes.
Axelrod said Kerry's slight slip in the numbers in Illinois doesn't concern him, because the campaign has all but stopped here, as in most states that aren't battlegrounds. As a result, he said, Kerry hasn't responded to Bush's attempts to use the terrorist threat to woo voters.
"The oddity of this election campaign is that we have two-thirds of the country watching and a third of the country actively involved," Axelrod said. "There's been great 'push-back' " by Kerry in battleground states, he said, while the candidate has left alone places like Illinois, where he can afford to lose a few points.
Independents for Kerry
News from the poll remained mostly good for Kerry. Illinoisans gave him a 52 percent "favorable" rating (Bush's is 40 percent), with related issues generally going Kerry's way. On the question of who can better handle the economy and who "cares more about people like you," Kerry won by significant margins.
"The economy is the main reason," said poll respondent Gene Potthast, a retired farmer in Greenville, Ill. "When the Democrats were in, we had a surplus, now we have the biggest deficit in history. "
Poll respondents unaffiliated with either major party continued to cut in Kerry's direction, with "independent" support for him approaching 2-to-1 in some cases.
In the vice presidential race, too, the Democratic ticket remained comfortably ahead. The poll found that Vice President Dick Cheney is remarkably unpopular in Illinois, with a little over a third of respondents giving him a "favorable" rating. (Among women, almost twice as many viewed Cheney unfavorably as viewed him favorably.) Kerry running-mate John Edwards, meanwhile, did much better, with even higher "favorables" than Kerry himself.
Illinois' solidly Democratic record in presidential politics since the early 1990s belies a state that has actually been very bipartisan and even Republican on the state level. Until two years ago, Illinois had had an unbroken succession of Republican governors since 1977.
The reason for that apparent contradiction has to do with Illinois' particularly moderate brand of Republicanism, said Mike Lawrence, a top aide to former Republican Gov. Jim Edgar.
"Republican gubernatorial candidates (in Illinois) have been viewed as very moderate" compared to their GOP counterparts elsewhere in the country. On social issues, particularly, state-level Republican leaders have tended to support abortion rights and gun control. It was former Gov. George Ryan, a Republican, who instituted a freeze on executions that is still in place in Illinois.
"There have been a lot of changing demographics in the state . . . especially increases in minority residents," said Lawrence, prompting state-level Republicans toward moderate politics. Meanwhile, "Republican presidential candidates have been more conservative than our mainstream Republicans here."
Lawrence said that trend is especially evident in the state's gender gap -- the traditional preference of women for liberal candidates and causes than men.
The narrowing of the gender gap nationwide has been one of the major stories of the presidential race, but it hasn't been mirrored in Illinois. In the latest poll, women generally were 6 to 8 points closer to Kerry and his issues than to Bush.
"We seen the continuing gender gap in Illinois largely because of the abortion issue and other social issues on the national Republican platform," Lawrence said.

Notes

CAMPAIGN 2004 PRESIDENT

Graphic

 
graphic and map; (1) graphic/map - electorial vote map (2) graphic/chart - Bush vs. Kerry (3) Graphic/chart - Bush vs. Kerry (4) Graphic/chart - Illinois Survey results

Load-Date: October 27, 2004


End of Document