Kerry Repudiates B.C.C.I. Panel Assertion
The New York Times
October 9, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 8; Column 4; Financial Desk; Column 4;
Length: 400 words
Byline: By BARNABY J. FEDER

By BARNABY J. FEDER
Body


Senator John F. Kerry, who heads the Senate subcommittee investigating the activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, yesterday repudiated the conclusion the subcommittee reached last week that former Senator John Culver had played a key role in the bank's lobbying campaign to quash Congressional scrutiny.
Mr. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said Mr. Culver's contacts with Congressional staff members had been made at the request of his law partners, who were representing B.C.C.I., and were "neither improper or unusual." He minimized those contacts as a "limited part" in B.C.C.I.'s attempts to halt the investigation.
The draft report made available last Thursday offered the broadest portrait yet of how influence peddling, bribery and government action allowed the bank to support drug-money laundering and international terrorism through a range of fraudulent activities.
 
'Neither Improper Nor Unusual'
 In a section discussing attempts by the bank to stop Mr. Kerry's subcommittee from investigating the bank's involvement in drug-money transfers, the report named Mr. Culver, Democrat of Iowa, as the main source of calls on the bank's behalf that led the staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to question whether Mr. Kerry's Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations had any jurisdiction over international banking.
In an unusual statement given that he was correcting a committee report issued under his auspices, Mr. Kerry said that Mr. Culver's contacts " were neither improper nor unusual and were a limited part of B.C.C.I.'s very substantial overall effort regarding this investigation."
Mr. Culver was unavailable for comment, but according to statements released yesterday, he first learned of the accusation in news reports last Friday and had never been told by the subcommittee staff of his purported involvement or queried about it. Mr. Kerry said yesterday that Mr. Culver had provided "additional information" on Tuesday about the contacts that would be made public in the final report.
Mr. Culver characterized his involvement as "a few hours over a period of years" and "absolutely beyond reproach by any moral or ethical standard." He said that the draft report had layered "innuendo on falsehood on misrepresentation repeatedly and recklessly" to imply that he had used his influence to delay and impede the investigation.

Load-Date: October 9, 1992


End of Document