KERRY ASSAILS BUSH OVER BACKING CHALABI, TERRORISM ASSESSMENT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 3, 2004 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 496 words
Byline: JODI WILGOREN, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: TAMPA, Fla.
Body


Responding to reports that Ahmad Chalabi may have leaked critical U.S. secrets to Iran, Sen. John F. Kerry yesterday blasted the Bush administration for ever backing Chalabi as an Iraqi exile leader. Kerry said he had met Chalabi in London years ago and had deemed him unworthy of U.S. support.
 "That was a judgment I made, and I regret that this administration, for whatever reasons, bought into Mr. Chalabi hook, line and sinker," Kerry, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, told reporters.
The Massachusetts senator was referring to his meeting in 1998 with Chalabi, whose exile group, the Iraqi National Congress, fed intelligence to the Bush administration about unconventional weapons in Iraq that helped the drive toward military action. "I think it's cost us significantly," Kerry said.
 In a 15-minute news conference, his first since May 14, Kerry disputed President Bush's assessment that Iraq is the main front in the effort against terror and said the administration was creating a "backdoor draft" by repeatedly extending military duty tours.
 Kerry also used the session, which followed a panel discussion on biological weapons, to praise the recent outreach to the United Nations, saying, "All of us want the president to be successful."
 But he said the internationalization of the Iraq mission had to include "boots on the ground" from other countries. "The Guard and Reserve have been turned into almost active duty," Kerry said. "People serving beyond the time of their voluntary service are no longer volunteers."
 Regarding Bush's statement yesterday in a speech at the Air Force Academy that Iraq is the main front in the anti-terror effort, Kerry said: "I think it is a much bigger and broader operation than that. It's multi-front almost -- a war with so many fronts that it's a mistake to singularize it in that way."
 Instead, he said, the main front is "60 countries around the world," including some friendly to the United States, where the al-Qaida terror network and other rather radical organizations operate freely. Arguing that the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks have not been convincingly linked to Iraq and that unconventional weapons were the rationale given Congress for the military action there, Kerry said of Bush's statement, "I think that's once again misleading America, frankly."
 Kerry also distanced himself from a statement by French President Jacques Chirac that urged further Iraqi sovereignty, countering, "American troops will not be put under the command of another country or another institution."
 Asked whether politics might have heightened terror alerts last week, Kerry said he "wouldn't want to believe that." But he added: "The problem is, for many Americans, however, they can't take it at face value. Which means something has happened about the credibility of this administration in this process. It's a question of the level of confidence Americans have in this administration, and I think that's a serious issue."

Load-Date: June 4, 2004


End of Document