Key Points From Jeb Bush's Detroit Speech
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
February 4, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 332 words
Byline: ALAN RAPPEPORT
Highlight: Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush gave a campaign style speech in Detroit on Wednesday, touching on a range of themes including economics, education, immigration and global terrorism. Here are some key points from his remarks: 
Body


Former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida gave a campaign-style speech in Detroit on Wednesday, touching on a range of themes, including economics, education, immigration and global terrorism. Here are some key points from his remarks:
 On vaccination mandates: "Parents ought to make sure their children are vaccinated," Mr. Bush said, without criticizing any of his potential 2016 opponents who have suggested that parents should be able to opt out. 
 On the economic recovery: Mr. Bush said that the recovery was too little, too late and that a persistent "opportunity gap" is a threat to future growth. "The American dream has become a mirage for too many," he said. Criticizing President Obama, Mr. Bush said that welfare programs and taxes would not give Americans a better future.
 On immigration: Mr. Bush made an economic case for fixing the immigration system, arguing that fresh talent could help make the United States an "economic driver" of the world. He also said that education reforms should help integrate immigrants so that they are as American as anyone else. 
 On education: Mr. Bush avoided the words "Common Core" but said that education is a business issue because it affects the talent pool, and that it is "the great moral issue of our time."
 On terrorism: Avoiding the forceful rhetoric that his brother George W. Bush often used to talk about terrorism, Mr. Bush spoke of alliances with other countries and took a pragmatic tone, saying, "These new asymmetric threats are not going to go away."
 On being a Bush: The former governor said that having a brother and father who served as president gave him a front-row seat to history, but that there were obvious challenges associated with those relationships. But he did not try to distance himself from them, saying that his father is "the greatest man alive" and that his brother was "a great president."
 On running for president: "I'm getting involved in politics again because that's where the work has to begin," Mr. Bush said. 

Load-Date: February 4, 2015


End of Document