KEY TERRORISM INFORMANT CONCEDES PAST LIES HE ACKNOWLEDGED THAT HE ENJOYED BRAGGING AND BEING THE "BIG SHOT." NOW, HIS CREDIBILITY COULD BE CRUCIAL.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 8, 1995 Wednesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 393 words
Byline: Gail Appleson, REUTERS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


The government's key informant in the biggest terrorism trial in American history acknowledged yesterday that he was a braggart who lied to just about everyone about his background.
Emad Salem, a shadowy former Egyptian military officer, told a federal jury in Manhattan that he enjoyed being a "big shot" and that when he came to the United States in 1987, he frequently lied about his professional past.
Salem is the government's main informant in the trial of Sheik Omar Abdel- Rahman and 10 other defendants accused of plotting the fatal 1993 World Trade Center blast and of planning to blow up other U.S. landmarks.
Salem's credibility may play a pivotal role in the trial's outcome. He infiltrated Abdel-Rahman's inner circle and learned of what prosecutors allege was a massive plot to "wage a war of urban terrorism" in the United States.
Under questioning by Assistant U.S. Attorney Andrew McCarthy, Salem, a burly man with glasses, readily admitted lying to his former wife to impress her and said he portrayed himself as a "big shot."
"I told her I was a big security (man) for the president of Egypt," Salem said in a heavy accent. ". . . I told her a lot of bragging stories."
"Did you tell these stories to just about anyone who would listen to you?" McCarthy asked.
"Yes, sir," Salem said.
He testified that among those he lied to was an FBI agent who had asked him for help in an unrelated case. Salem also acknowledged lying during a civil trial involving a traffic accident.
The witness also said that he had a $1.056 million contract for helping the FBI in its probe of Abdel-Rahman and the others, and that he was being paid $7,000 every month. He said he had already been paid $116,000.
Because he is in the witness protection program, he is also receiving $2,700 a month from the U.S. Marshals Service, he said, adding that he had been relocated 14 times.
Defense attorneys have argued that Salem had worked as a double agent for Egypt and the United States. They argue that he hatched the plan to entrap Abdel-Rahman, who advocates the overthrow of the Egyptian government.
Then he lured the defendants into the scheme to earn more than a million
dollars in fees from the FBI, the defense lawyers alleged.
Salem testified yesterday that he had been contacted by members of Egyptian intelligence during the investigation but was not working for them.

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document