KEY RABBI REPORTED ARRESTED IN ISRAELI TERROR INVESTIGATION
The New York Times
May 14, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 377 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: JERUSALEM, May 13
Body


Rabbi Moshe Levinger, a leader of the movement to build Jewish settlements in the occupied West Bank, was arrested today by police investigating a Jewish terrorist ring, Israeli radio and television broadcasts reported.
Rabbi Levinger would be the most prominent of more than two dozen Israelis arrested in recent weeks on suspicion of cooperating with a terrorist group that has attacked Palestinians for the last four years.
According to the radio, the police were holding him for 48 hours. If the authorities wish to keep him in custody beyond that time, they can do so only on a judges' order and it was not clear whether he will be charged.
Israeli radio and TV broadcasts report that Rabbi Moshe Levinger, leader of movement to build Jewish settlements on occupied West Bank, was arrested by police investigating Jewish terrorist ring (S)Founder of Gush Emunim
Rabbi Levinger is a founder and the spiritual leader of Gush Emunim, the movement sponsoring the building of Jewish settlements in the Israeli-occupied West Bank of the Jordan River.
In 1968, he led a group of squatters who refused to leave the Palestinian city of Hebron until the Government agreed to build a Jewish settlement nearby.
The late Prime Minister Golda Meir agreed to Rabbi Levinger's demands and founded Kiryat Arba, now the largest of more than 100 settlements in the territory seized in the 1967 war.
Earlier today, before the broadcasts reported that the rabbi had been arrested, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir told other Gush Emunim leaders that he would work to strengthen the settlements despite the disclosure of the Jewish terrorist underground.
A statement by Mr. Shamir's office quoted him as saying that terrorism against Palestinians ''can harm the nation and the settlements.'' But it also said the settlement movement should not be tainted ''by those who strayed'' and he promised that ''the settlement enterprise in the land of Israel will continue.''
The statement also said that settlement leaders had condemned the terrorists' actions and reaffirmed the authority of the state for providing security for the settlers.
Rabbi Levinger has refused to condemn the terrorist ring and said the Government was to blame for failing to control Palestinian violence against the settlers.


End of Document