KEY THREAT SEEN IN TERRORISTS' USE OF ATOM BOMBS
The New York Times
June 22, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 742 words
Byline: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 21
Body


Specialists on terrorism and nuclear arms say that terrorists could obtain nuclear explosives with relative ease and that it may be only a matter of time before they do so.
''There is very little that can be done to prevent a skilled, determined, well-organized terrorist organization from setting off a nuclear detonation on United States territory,'' says Bernard J. O'Keefe, chairman of EG&G, a Cambridge, Ma., company that makes advanced timing and triggering devices called krytrons. It was reported recently that Israel had purchased 800 krytrons, apparently through another company, without EG&G's permission or a valid export license.
In a paper prepared for a conference here on nuclear terrorism, Mr. O'Keefe asserts that smuggling nuclear explosives is not difficult. ''A very powerful device will fit into a small trunk and, properly disguised, would be much easier to handle than a bale of marijuana, to which our borders are virtually transparent,'' he says.
Specialists in terrorism and nuclear arms, in paper prepared for conference in Washington, DC, on nulcear terrorism, say that terrorists can obtain nuclear explosives with relative ease and that it may be only matter of time before they do so; Bernard J O'Keefe, chairman of EG&G, says there is very little that can be done to prevent skilled group from taking such action (S)'Greatest Threat to Civilization'
Mr. O'Keefe, author of the book ''Nuclear Hostages,'' an examination of nuclear war and nuclear terror, says, ''I believe that the greatest threat to civilization today is the prospect of a terrorist-implemented nuclear explosion.''
''Simultaneous explosions in Moscow and Washington would be duck soup for a skilled, determined, well-organized terrorist group,'' Mr. O'Keefe says.
The conference on nuclear terrorism, scheduled for Monday and Tuesday, has been arranged by the Nuclear Control Institute, a nonprofit organization that deals with issues related to nuclear proliferation. The institute made available the papers to be discussed at the meeting.
Mr. O'Keefe's contention was reflected in other papers to be presented at the conference. A physicist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bernard T. Feld, said in a comment on Mr. O'Keefe's report, ''I believe this possibility is bound to become a certainty.''
 
Question of Terrorists' Aims
Brian Jenkins of the RAND Corporation, a research organization in California, asserts in another paper, ''If terrorists had a nuclear capability, they would be more likely to brandish it as a threat than detonate it without demand.''
But Mr. Jenkins, an authority on terrorists, says he could ''conceive of a more emotional use of a nuclear weapon as the ultimate instrument of revenge or a 'doomsday machine' by a desperate group.''
Having studied the actions and motives of terrorists who have operated since the beginning of the century, Mr. Jenkins asserts, ''Killing a lot of people has seldom been an objective.'' Rather, he says, ''Terrorists want a lot of people watching, not a lot of people dead.''
Once started, Mr. Jenkins asserted, ''an incident of nuclear terrorism, perhaps even an alarming hoax, depending on circumstances, would almost certainly increase the probability of other terrorists going nuclear.''
Rear Adm. Thomas Davies of the Navy, retired, said, ''When we look at the terrorist record of the past few years, it is safe to conclude that sabotage of military and civilian nuclear facilities is at the top of the danger list.''
 
Wide Range of Possible Targets
''The spectrum of targets for sabotage - at mines, enrichment and reprocessing plants, reactors, storage facilities, waste sites - is very broad, and the consequences of destruction or damage range from unpleasant to cataclysmic.''
The admiral, formerly in charge of nonproliferation matters at the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, contends that the possibilities of sabotage directed at commercial nuclear plants is ''infinite.''
He adds, ''The risk of theft of special nuclear materials and of weapons or their components is also very real.'' Explosive materials are ''always traveling - moving by air, sea, truck, and railway from the mines to the enrichment plants, the fabricators, bomb assembly depots, power reactors, processing plants, and storage.''
''Transport of so much dangerous material in open commerce may well turn out to be the Achilles heel of the nuclear industry,'' he says, ''a number one target for terrorist theft.''


End of Document