KEY SECTIONS OF PENTAGON'S REPORT ON ATTACK ON THE MARINES
The New York Times
December 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk; Text
Length: 15336 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28
Body


Following are the key sections of ''Report of the D.O.D. Commission on Beirut International Airport Terrorist Act, Oct. 23, 1983,'' which was dated Dec. 20 and made public today by the Pentagon:
 
Preface
On 23 October 1983, a truck laden with the equivalent of over 12,000 pounds of TNT crashed through the perimeter of the compound of the U.S. contingent of the multinational force at Beirut International Airport, Beirut, Lebanon, penetrated the Battalion Landing Team headquarters building and detonated. The force of the explosion destroyed the building, resulting in the deaths of 241 U.S. military personnel. This report examines the circumstances of that terrorist attack and its immediate aftermath.
 
Executive Summary
 
Introduction
The D.O.D. Commission on Beirut International Airport (B.I.A.) Terrorist Act of 23 October 1983 was convened by the Secretary of Defense on 7 November 1983 to conduct an independent inquiry into the 23 October 1983 terrorist attack on the Marine Battalion Landing Team (B.L.T.) headquarters in Beirut, Lebanon. The commission examined the mission of the U.S. marines assigned to the multinational force, the rules of engagement governing their conduct, the responsiveness of the chain of command, the intelligence support, the security measures in place before and after the attack, the attack itself and the adequacy of casualty handling procedures.
The commission traveled to Lebanon, Israel, Spain, Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom, interviewed over 125 witnesses ranging from national policy makers to Lebanese armed forces privates and reviewed extensive documentation from Washington agencies, including the Department of State, Central Intelligence Agency, National Security Council and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as well as all echelons of the operational chain of command and certain elements of the Department of the Navy administrative chain of command.
The commission focused on the security of the U.S. contingent of the multinational force through 30 November 1983. Although briefed on some security aspects of other U.S. military elements of Lebanon, the commission came to no definitive conclusions or recommendations as to those.
 
Summary of General Observations
 
Terrorism
The Commission believes that the most important message it can bring to the Secretary of Defense is that the 23 October 1983 attack on the Marine Battalion Landing Team headquarters in Beirut was tantamount to an act of war using the medium of terrorism. Terrorist warfare, sponsored by sovereign states or organized political entities to achieve political objectives, is a threat to the United States that is increasing at an alarming rate. The 23 October catastrophe underscores the fact that terrorist warfare can have significant political impact and demonstrates that the United States, and specifically the Department of Defense, is inadequately prepared to deal with this threat. Much needs to be done, on an urgent basis, to prepare U.S. military forces to defend against and counter terrorist warfare.
 
Security Following The Attack
The security posture of the U.S.M.N.F. subsequent to the 23 October 1983 attack was examined closely by the commission. A series of actions was initiated by the chain of command to enhance the security of the U.S.M.N.F. and reduce the vulnerability of the U.S.M.N.F. to further catastrophic losses. However, the security measures implemented or planned for implementation as of 30 November 1983 were not adequate to prevent continuing significant attrition of U.S.M.N.F. personnel.
 
Intelligence Support
Even the best of intelligence will not guarantee the security of any military position. However, specific data on the terrorist threats to the U.S.M.N.F., data which could best be provided by carefully trained intelligence agents, could have enabled the U.S.M.N.F. commander to better prepare his force and facilities to blunt the effectiveness of a suicidal vehicle attack of great explosive force.
The U.S.M.N.F. commander did not have effective U.S. Human Intelligence (Humint) support. The paucity of U.S. controlled Humint is partly due to U.S. policy decisions to reduce Humint collection worldwide. The U.S. has a Humint capability commensurate with the resources and time that has been spent to acquire it. The lesson of Beirut is that we must have better Humint to support military planning and operations. We see here a critical repetition of a long line of similar lessons learned during crisis situations in many other parts of the world.
 
Casualty Handling Procedures
The Commission found that, following the initial, understandable confusion, the response of the U.S., Lebanese and Italian personnel in providing immediate on-scene medical care was professional and, indeed, heroic. The C.T.F. 61/62 Mass Casualty Plan was quickly implemented: triage and treatment sites were established ashore, and medical support from afloat units was transported to the scene. Evacuation aircraft were requested.
Within 30 minutes of the explosion, the British offered the use of their hospital at the Royal Air Force base in Akrotiri, Cyprus, and this offer was accepted by C.T.F. 61. The additional British offer of medical evacuation aircraft was also accepted. Both offers proved invaluable.
Offers of medical assistance from France and Israel were subsequently received but were deemed unnecessary because the medical capabilities organic to C.T.F. 61 were already operational and functioning adequately, the hospital at Akrotiri was by then mobilized and ready and sufficient U.S. and Royal Air Force medical evacuation aircraft were en route. The commission found no evidence to indicate any considerations but the desire to provide immediate, professional treatment for the wounded influenced decisions regarding these offers of outside assistance.
The commission found no evidence to indicate that deaths among the wounded in action resulted from inadequate or inappropriate care during evacuation to hospitals.
The commission did find several serious problem areas in the evacuation of casualties to U.S. military hospitals in Germany. Actions were taken that resulted in some seriously wounded patients being delayed about four hours in arriving at hospital facilities. The commission believes that these actions warrant further investigation. The commission found no evidence, however, that any patient was adversely affected by these delays.
 
Accountability
The commission holds the view that military commanders are responsible for the performance of their subordinates. The commander can delegate some or all of his authority to his subordinates, but he cannot delegate his responsibility for the performance of the forces he commands. In that sense, the responsibility of military command is absolute. This view of command authority and responsibility guided the commission in its analysis of the effectiveness of the exercise of command authority and responsibility of the chain of command charged with the security and performance of the U.S.M.N.F.
The commission found that the combination of a large volume of unfulfilled threat warnings and perceived and real pressure to accomplish a unique and difficult mission contributed significantly to the decisions of the Marine Amphibious Unit (M.A.U.) and Battalion Landing Team (B.L.T.) commanders regarding the security of their force. Nevertheless, the commission found that the security measures in effect in the M.A.U. compound were neither commensurate with the increasing level of threat confronting the U.S.M.N.F. nor sufficient to preclude catastrophic losses such as those that were suffered on the morning of 23 October 1983. The commission further found that while it may have appeared to be an appropriate response to the indirect fire being received, the decision to billet approximately one- quarter of the B.L.T. in a single structure contributed to the catastrophic loss of life.
The commission found that the B.L.T. commander must take responsibility for the concentration of approximately 350 members of his command in the B.L.T. headquarters building, thereby providing a lucrative target for attack. Further, the B.L.T. commander modified prescribed alert procedures, thereby degrading security of the compound.
The commission also found that the M.A.U. commander shares the responsibility for the catastrophic losses in that he condoned the concentration of personnel in the B.L.T. headquarters building, concurred in the relaxation of prescribed alert procedures and emphasized safety over security in directing that sentries on Posts 4, 5, 6 and 7 would not load their weapons.
The commission found further that the Uscinceur operational chain of command shares in the responsibility for the events of 23 October 1983.
Having reached the foregoing conclusions, the Commission further notes that although it found the entire Uscinceur chain of command, down to and including the B.L.T. commander, to be at fault, it also found that there was a series of circumstances beyond the control of these commanders that influenced their judgment and their actions relating to the security of the U.S.M.N.F.
 
Foreword
In preparing this report, the commission analyzed those factors bearing upon the security of the U.S.M.N.F. in Lebanon in general and the security of the B.L.T. headquarters building in particular. The comission began with the premise that U.S. participation in the multinational force was designed to support the efforts of the United States and its allies to facilitate the withdrawal of foreign military forces from Lebanon and to assist the Lebanese Government in establishing sovereignty and authority over the Beirut area. The commission did not question the political decision to insert the Marines into Lebanon and did not address the political necessity of their continued participation in the multinational force following the 23 October 1983 terrorist attack. Although those political judgments are beyond the purview of the commission's charter and are not addressed in the report, that fact did not impede the work of the commission in examining the impact of those policy decisions on the security of the U.S.M.N.F.
The commission reviewed the responsiveness of the military chain of command as it pertained to the security requirements of the U.S.M.N.F. The commission did not conduct an administrative inspection of any headquarters element during the review process.
The commission's focus was on the bombing of 23 October 1983 and the seurity of the U.S.M.N.F. both prior to and subsequent to that catastrophic event. The security of offshore supporting forces was not reviewed in depth by the commission. The security of other American personnel in Lebanon was not considered, being outside the commission's charter
The substantive information to be gathered necessarily involved highly classified matters of national security concern. Because these matters could not reasonably be segregated into separate classified categories, all witnesses were interviewed in closed session.
The commission arrived in Beirut before the rotation of the 24th M.A.U. from Lebanon. The commission toured U.S.M.N.F. positions on the perimeter of Beirut International Airport and inspected the rubble of the B.L.T. headquarters building. Eyewitnesses to the explosion were interviewed in depth.
 
Major Events
 
23 October
At approximately 0622 on Sunday, 23 October 1983, the Battalion Landing Team (B.L.T.) headquarters building in the Marine Amphibious Unit (M.A.U.) compound at Beirut International Airport was detroyed by a terrorist bomb. This catastrophic attack took the lives of 241 U.S. military personnel and wounded over 100 others.
The bombing was carried out by a lone terrorist driving a yellow Mercedes-Benz stakebed truck that accelerated through the public parking lot south of the B.L.T. headquarters building, crashed through a barbed wire and concertina fence and penetrated into the central lobby of the building, where it exploded.
The truck drove over the barbed and concertina wire obstacle, passed between two Marine guard posts without being engaged by fire, entered an open gate, passed around one sewer pipe barrier and between two others, flattened the sergeant of the guard's sandbagged booth at the building's entrance, penetrated the lobby of the building and detonated while the majority of the occupants slept.
The force of the explosion ripped the building from its foundation. The building then imploded upon itself. Almost all the occupants were crushed or trapped inside the wreckage. Immediate efforts were undertaken to re-establish security, to extricate the dead and wounded from the building's rubble and to institute a mass casualty handling and evacuation operation.
Almost simultaneously with the attack on the U.S. Marine compound, a similar truck bomb exploded at the French M.N.F. headquarters.
 
24 October - 30 November
As cleanup and rescue operations continued at the bombing site in the ensuing days, the U.S.M.N.F. came under sporadic sniper fire. Deployment of forces to replace those lost began on the day of the bombing. By the day following, replacement personnel had been airlifted into Beirut. On 28 October, the Secretary of Defense approved the assignment of an additional Marine rifle company to the U.S.M.N.F. That augmenting force was airlifted into Lebanon and deployed at B.I.A. by the end of October.
On 4 November 1983, the Israeli military governor's headquarters in Tyre was destroyed by a suicide driver in a small truck loaded with explosives. There were 46 fatalities. The Israeli Air Force conducted retaliatory strikes later that day against Palestinian positions east of Beirut.
On 8 November 1983, the B.L.T. company located at the Lebanese Scientific and Technical University was withdrawn to B.I.A. and subsequently redeployed aboard ship as the U.S.M.N.F. ready reserve.
Ambassador Rumsfeld, appointed by the President on 3 November 1983 to replace Ambassador McFarlane as the President's Special Envoy to the Middle East, began his first Middle East mission on 12 November.
On 16 November 1983, the Israelis conducted additional retaliatory air strikes, hitting a terrorist training camp in the eastern Bekaa Valley. The next day the French conducted similar strikes against another Islamic Amal camp in the vicinity of the northern Bekaa Valley town of Baalbek.
Throughout the 23 October to 30 November period, U.S.M.N.F. positions at B.I.A. were the target of frequent sniper attacks and occasional but persistent artillery, rocket and mortar fire. On 16 November, four 122-millimeter rockets impacted at B.I.A. The M.A.U. received small arms fire several times on 19 November, the date the turnover by the 24th M.A.U. to the 22d M.A.U. was completed.
Persistent and occasionally heavy fighting between the L.A.F. and Shia militias in the southern suburbs of Beirut continued through November. As the month ended, the mountainous Shuf continued to be the scene of frequent artillery and mortar exchanges between the L.A.F. and Druse forces.  pick up MARINES TEXT 2
 
The Military Mission
 
The Changing Environment
 
Principal Findings
The mission of the U.S.M.N.F. was implicitly characterized as a peacekeeping operation, although ''peacekeeping'' was not explicit in the mission statement. In September 1982, the President's public statement, his letter to the United Nations Secretary General and his report to the Congress, all conveyed a strong impression of the peacekeeping nature of the operation. The subject lines of the J.C.S. Alert and Execute Orders read, ''U.S. force participation in Lebanon multinational force (M.N.F.) peacekeeping operations.'' (Emphasis added)
Alert and Execute Orders were carefully worded to emphasize that the U.S.M.N.F. would have a noncombatant role. Operational constraint sections included guidance to be prepared to withdraw if required by hostile action. This withdrawal guidance was repeated in Cinceur's Oprep-1.
A condition precedent to the insertion of U.S. forces into Beirut was that the Government of Lebanon and the L.A.F. would insure the protection of the M.N.F., including the securing of assurances from armed factions to refrain from hostilities and not to interfere with M.N.F. activities.
Ambassador Habib received confirmation from the Government of Lebanon that these arrangements had been made. These assurances were included by the Government of Lebanon in its exchange of notes with the United States.
It was contemplated from the outset that the U.S.M.N.F. would operate in a relatively benign environment. Syrian forces were not considered a significant threat to the M.N.F. The major threats were thought to be unexploded ordnance and possible sniper and small unit attacks from P.L.O. and leftist militias.
It was anticipated that the U.S.M.N.F. would be perceived by the various factions as evenhanded and neutral and that this perception would hold through the expected 60- day duration of the operation.
The environment into which the U.S.M.N.F. actually deployed in September 1982, while not necessarily benign, was, for the most part, not hostile. The marines were warmly welcomed and seemed genuinely to be appreciated by the majority of Lebanese.
By mid-March 1983, the friendly environment began to change as evidenced by a grenade thrown at a U.S.M.N.F. patrol in 16 March, wounding five marines. Italian and French M.N.F. contingents were the victims of similar attacks.
The destruction of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut on 18 April was indicative of the extent of the deterioration of the political/military situation in Lebanon by the spring of 1983. That tragic event also signaled the magnitude of the terrorist threat to the U.S. presence. A light truck detonated, killing over 60 people (including 17 Americans) and destroying a sizable portion of the building.
An F.B.I. investigation into the explosion later revealed that the bomb was a ''gas enhanced'' device capable of vastly more destructive force than a comparable conventional explosive.
Although the technique of gas-enhanced bombs had been employed by Irish Republican Army terrorists in Northern Ireland and, on at least two occasions, in Lebanon, the magnitude of the explosive force of the device used in the embassy bombing was, in the opinion of F.B.I. explosive experts, unprecedented.
During August, rocket, artillery and mortar fire began impacting on B.I.A. On 28 August 1983, the marines returned fire for the first time. Following the deaths of two marines in a mortar attack the following day, the U.S.M.N.F. responded with artillery fire. On 31 August, Marine patrols were terminated in the face of the sniper, R.P.G. and artillery threats.
Fighting between the L.A.F. and the Druse increased sharply with the withdrawal of the I.D.F. from the Aleih and Shuf districts on 4 September 1983. Two more marines were killed by mortar or artillery rounds at B.I.A. on 6 September 1983. By 11 September, the battle for Suk al Gharb was raging. The U.S.M.N.F., under frequent attack, responded with counterbattery fire and F-14 Tactical Air Reconnaissance Pods (Tarps) missions were commenced over Lebanon.
On 16 September 1983, U.S. naval gunfire support was employed in response to shelling of the U.S. Ambassador's residence and U.S.M.N.F.  positions at B.I.A. On 19 September, following a National Command Authority (N.C.A.) decision, naval gunfire support was employed to support the L.A.F. fighting at Suk al Gharb. On 20 September, the F-14 Tarps aircraft were fired on by SA-7 missiles.
During the period 14-16 October 1983, two marines were killed on the B.I.A. perimeter in separate sniper incidents.
By the end of September 1983, the situation in Lebanon had changed to the extent that not one of the initial conditions upon which the mission statement was premised was still valid. The environment clearly was hostile. The assurances the Government of Lebanon had obtained from the various factions were obviously no longer operative as attacks on the U.S.M.N.F. came primarily from extralegal militias.
Although U.S.M.N.F. actions could properly be classified as self-defense and not ''engaging in combat,'' the environment could no longer be characterized as peaceful. The image of the U.S.M.N.F., in the eyes of the factional militias, had become pro-Israel, pro-Phalange, and anti-Moslem.
After the U.S.M.N.F. engaged in direct fire support of the L.A.F., a significant portion of the Lebanese populance no longer considered the U.S.M.N.F. a neutral force.
 
Discussion
The inability of the Government of Lebanon to develop a political consensus, and the resultant outbreak of hostilities between the L.A.F. and armed militias supported by Syria, effectively precluded the possibility of a successful peacekeeping mission.
It is abundantly clear that by late summer 1983, the environment in Lebanon changed to the extent that the conditions upon which the U.S.M.N.F. mission was initially premised no longer existed. The commission believes that appropriate guidance and modification of tasking should have been provided to the U.S.M.N.F. to enable it to cope effectively with the increasingly hostile environment. The Commission could find no evidence that such guidance was, in fact, provided.
 
The Expanding Military Role
 
Principal Findings
The ''presence'' mission assigned to the U.S.M.N.F. contemplated that the contending factions in Lebanon would perceive the U.S.M.N.F. as a neutral force, evenhanded in its dealings with the confessional groups that comprise Lebanese society. The mission statement tasked the U.S.M.N.F. to ''establish an environment which will permit the Lebanese Armed Forces to carry out their responsibilities in the Beirut area.''
When hostilities erupted between the L.A.F. and Shiite and Druse militias, U.S.M.N.F. efforts to support the L.A.F. were perceived to be both pro-Phalangist and anti-Moslem.
U.S.M.N.F. support to the L.A.F. increased substantially following their arrival in September 1982. The first direct military support to the L.A.F. was in the form of training which the U.S.M.N.F. began to provide in November 1982.
In August and September 1983, the U.S. resupplied the L.A.F. with ammunition. The L.A.F. were engaged in intense fighting against the Druse and various Syrian surrogates. The ammunition came from M.A.U., Conus and Uscinceur stocks and was delivered by Military Sealift Command, Mobile Logistic Support Force (C.T.F. 63), and C.T.F. 61 ships.
On 19 September 1983, naval gunfire was employed in direct support of the L.A.F. at Suk al Gharb.
Following the U.S. action in providing naval gunfire support for the L.A.F. at Suk al Gharb, hostile acts against the U.S.M.N.F. increased, and the Marines began taking significantly more casualties. A direct cause and effect linkage between Suk al Gharb and the terrorist bombing on 23 October 1983, cannot be determined.
The views of the senior civilian and military officials interviewed by the commission varied widely on this issue. Some believe that it was not a consequence of our relationship with any faction; that regardless of its actions, the U.S.M.N.F. would still have been targeted by terrorists. Others believe that certain factions wanted to force the M.N.F. out of Lebanon and that the bombing of the B.L.T. headquarters building was the tactic of choice to produce that end.
The prevalent view within the Uscinceur chain of command, however, is that there was some linkage between the two events. Whether or not there was a direct connection between Suk al Gharb and the increase in terrorist attacks on the U.S.M.N.F., the public statements of factional leaders confirmed that a portion of the Lebanes populace no longer consided the U.S.M.N.F. neutral.
 
Discussion
The commission believes that from the very beginning of the U.S.M.N.F. mission on 29 September 1982, the security of the U.S.M.N.F. was dependent upon the continuing validity of four basic conditions.
(1) That the force would operate in a relatively benign environment;
(2) That the Lebanese Armed Forces would provide for the security of the areas in which the force was to operate;
(3) That the mission would be of limited duration; and
(4) That the force would be evacuated in the event of attack.
As the political/military situation evolved, three factors were impacting adversely upon those conditions.
First, although the mission required that the U.S.M.N.F. be perceived as neutral by the confessional factions, the tasks assigned to the U.S.M.N.F. gradually evolved to include active support of the L.A.F..
A second factor was the deep- seated hostility of Iran and Syria toward the United States combined with the capability to further their own political interests by sponsoring attacks on the U.S.M.N.F.
And finally, the progress of diplomatic efforts to secure the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon faltered. The combination of these three factors served to invalidate the first two conditions and to complicate the third.
U.S. policy makers recognized that the conditions upon which the mission of the U.S.M.N.F. was premised were tenuous and that the decision to deploy the U.S.M.N.F. into Beirut involved considerable risk. The military mission was directed in concert with extensive diplomatic intitiatives designed to shore up the Government of Lebanon and establish a climate for political reconciliation.
At the same time that the political/ military conditions in Lebanon deteriorated, the U.S. military role expanded in the form of increased U.S.M.N.F. training and logistic support for the L.A.F. and in the form of increased U.S.M.N.F. training and logistic support for the L.A.F. and in the form of changes to the rules of engagement of the U.S.M.N.F. to permit active support of L.A.F. units engaged in combat with factional forces.
That expanded role was directed in an effort to adjust to the changing situation and to continue to move toward realization of U.S. policy objectives in Lebanon.
On the diplomatic front, achieving the withdrawal of foreign troops proved to be more difficult than had been anticipated. The overall result was the continued erosion of the security of the U.S.M.N.F.
 
Rules of Engagement
''Rules of Engagement: Directives issued by competent authority which delineate the circumstances and limitations under which United States forces will initiate and/or continue combat engagement with other forces encountered.''
 
J.C.S. Pub 1
 
Rules of Engagement Development
 
Principal Findings
The basic Rules of Engagement (R.O.E.) for U.S.M.N.F. forces in Beirut have been in effect since the second U.S.M.N.F. insertion on 29 September 1982. The R.O.E. were promulgated on 24 September 1982 by Uscinceur, the responsible authority for contingency operations in the eastern Mediterranean. They are consistent with the guidance provided in the J.C.S. Alert Order of 23 September 1983. The R.O.E. developed by Uscinceur are derived from U.S.  European Command Directive 55- 47A. ''Peacetime Rules of Engagement.''
They were tailored to the Lebanon situation by the adaptation of R.O.E. developed through the summer of 1982 for use in the evacuation of P.L.O. elements in Beirut from 24 August to 10 September 1982. There had been extensive dialogue on R.O.E. up and down the European theater chain of command during July and August 1982.
J.C.S. guidance to Uscinceur was that U.S.M.N.F. forces were not to engage in combat and would use normal Useucom peacetime R.O.E. Force was to be used only when required for self-defense against a hostile threat, in response to a hostile act, or in defense of L.A.F. elements operating with the U.S.M.N.F.
Uscinceur incorporated the J.C.S. guidance and elaborated thereon. Reprisals or punitive measures were forbidden. U.S.M.N.F. elements were enjoined to seek guidance from higher authority prior to using armed force for self-defense unless an emergency existed. the R.O.E. defined ''hostile act'' and ''hostile force,'' and designated the Combined Amphibious Task Force Commander (C.T.F. 61) as the authority to declare a force hostile. ''Hostile threat'' was not defined.
If non-L.A.F. forces infiltrated or violated U.S.M.N.F. assigned areas or lines, they were to be informed they were in an unauthorized area and could not proceed. If they failed to depart, the U.S.M.N.F. commander (C.T.F. 62) was to be informed and would determine the action to be taken.
The L.A.F. had responsibility for apprehension and detention of any intruders. The U.S.M.N.F. was authorized to use force only if the intruder committed a hostile act. Finally, commanders were to be prepared to extract forces if necessary.
By message to subordinate commands on 28 September 1982, Cincusnaveur elaborated on the R.O.E. provided by Uscinceur and directed that further R.O.E. development for U.S. forces ashore be for self-defense only. Detailed R.O.E., consistent with command guidance, were issued by C.T.F. 62 on 27 October 1982, and again on 12 November 1982.
Following the terrorist bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut on 18 April 1983, a U.S.M.N.F. unit was formed to provide external security for U.S. Embassy functions relocated at the Duraffourd Building, the British Embassy and the U.S. Ambassador's residence at Yarze. On 1 May 1983, C.T.F. 62 requested specific R.O.E. to counter the vehicular and pedestrian terrorist threat to those buildings.
On 7 May 1983, Uscinceur promulgated R.O.E. specifically for that security force which expanded the definition of a hostile act to encompass attempts by personnel or vehicles to breach barriers or roadblocks established on approaches to the Duraffourd Building, the British Embassy or the U.S. Ambassador's residence.
Following the 4 September 1983 I.D.F. pullback to the Awali River, fighting intensified in the mountainous Shuf region southeast of Beirut. Phalange and Druse militias fought for control of the territory vacated by the I.D.F.  pick up MARINES TEXT 3
L.A.F. units also moved to gain control of the strategically important Shuf high ground, and were engaged by Druse forces in heavy fighting at Suk al Gharb. When defeat of the L.A.F. appeared imminent, the National Command Authorities (N.C.A.) authorized the use of naval gunfire and tactical air strikes in support of the L.A.F. at Suk al Gharb.
Occupation of the dominant terrain in the vicinity of Suk al Gharb by hostile forces would pose a danger of U.S.M.N.F. positions at B.I.A. Direct support of the L.A.F. in those circumstances was to be considered as an act of self-defense authorized by the existing R.O.E. Early on 12 September 1983, the acting C.J.C.S. notified Uscinceur of that decision.
Later that day, Uscinceur directed Concusnaveur to inform his subordinate commands to provide fire support to the L.A.F. when the U.S. ground commander (C.T.F. 62) determined that Suk al Gharb was in danger of falling to an attack by non- Lebanese forces. Uscinceur directed in the same message, ''Nothing in this message shall be construed as changing the mission or R.O.E. for U.S.M.N.F.''
In the aftermath of the 23 October 1983 terrorist attack at the B.L.T. headquarters, review of the basic U.S.M.N.F. R.O.E. was conducted at virtually every level of command. R.O.E. were promulgated to govern the use of electronic warfare, and reviews of specific R.O.E. for F-14/ Tactical Aerial Reconnaissance Pods (Tarps) flights, for air defense and for defensive activities of afloat elements of the U.S. presence (i.e., C.T.F. 60 and C.T.F. 61) were conducted.
Late on 23 October, C.T.F. 61 submitted a R.O.E. change request to Comsixthflt requesting that U.S.M.N.F. personnel at B.I.A. be authorized to take under fire any civilian vehicle which approached U.S.M.N.F. positions at a high rate of speed and failed to acknowledge signals to stop. Comsixthflt forwarded the request up the chain of command.
On 25 October 1983, Uscinceur responded that the authority requested was already covered under the self- protection rules of the R.O.E. in effect. The Uscinceur response noted that the promulgation in early May 1983 of additional R.O.E. for the U.S. Embassy security tasking was considered necessary because the U.S.M.N.F. had been assigned an additional mission which went beyond its self-defense. On 26 October 1983, Cincusnaveur approved the R.O.E. modification requested by C.T.F. 61.
On 26 November 1983, Comsixthflt proposed to Cincusnaveur that the R.O.E. be further changed to authorize the taking of prompt, forceful action against any unauthorized attempt to gain entry into an area occupied by the U.S.M.N.F. Cincusnaveur and Uscinceur responded on 27 November 1983 that such action was already authorized by existing R.O.E. Uscinceur, however, agreed to provide specific rules in a forthcoming revision of the original R.O.E.
 
Discussion
The environment into which the U.S.M.N.F. was inserted on 29 September 1982 was clearly permissive. The judgment that the U.S.M.N.F. was perceived as a neutral, stabilizing presence by most, if not all, factions in the Beirut area can be drawn from the general absence of hostile reactions in the initial months of their presence.
The R.O.E. were appropriate for such a permissive environment. But the environment proved to be dynamic, and became increasingly hostile to the U.S.M.N.F. component as the U.S. presence stretched beyond the brief stay envisioned by the original exchange of notes.
The commission believes that for any R.O.E. to be effective, they should incorporate definitions of hostile intent and hostile action which correspond to the realities of the environment in which they are to be implemented. To be adequate, they must also provide the commander exxplicit authority to respond quickly to acts defined as hostile. Only when thee two criteria area satisfied do R.O.E. provide the on-scene commander with the guidance and the flexibility he requires to defend his force.
By these measures, the R.O.E. in force at B.I.A. subsequent to the U.S. Embassy bombing in April were neither effective nor adequate. That event clearly signaled a change in the environment: the employment of terrorist tactics by hostile elements.
The emergence of the terrorist threat brought the guidance and flexibility afforded by the R.O.E. into question. The modified R.O.E. promulgated for the security force assigned to U.S. Embassy facilities were necessary. For the first time, threatening actions such as attempts to breach barriers or check points were specifically defined as hostile acts justifying the use of military force. U.S.M.N.F. personnel providing security for the embassy were authorized to take adequate defensive action in those circumstances.
But the commander of the U.S.M.N.F. perceived that the new R.O.E. from Uscinceur were for use only by the embassy security element. The presumption at H.Q. Useucom, subsequently apparent in both messages and discussions with principals, was that the U.S.M.N.F. commander had already been given sufficient guidance and authority to respond to vehicular terrorist attacks against his forces at B.I.A. in the original R.O.E. promulgated on 24 September 1982.
In the view of the commission, the R.O.E. provided in May for the embassy security contingent should have been explicitly extended to the entire U.S.M.N.F.
 
Rules of Engagement Implementation
 
Principal Findings
Briefly summarized, the following points constitute the R.O.E. guidance utilized by the individual members of the U.S.M.N.F. from 29 September 1982 until 7 May 1983.
- Action taken by U.S. forces ashore in Lebanon would be for self-defense only.
- Reprisal or punitive measures would not be initiated.
- Commanders were to seek guidance from higher headquarters prior to using armed force, if time and situation allowed.
- If time or the situation did not allow the opportunity to request guidance from higher headquarters, commanders were authorized to use that degree of armed force necessary to protect their forces.
- Hostile ground forces which had infiltrated and violated U.S.M.N.F. lines by land, sea or air would be warned that they could not proceed and were in a restricted area. If the intruder force failed to leave, the violation would be reported and guidance requested.
- Riot-control agents would not be used unless authorized by the Secretary of Defense.
- Hostile forces would not be pursued.
- A ''hostile act'' was defined as an attack or use of force against the U.S.M.N.F., or against M.N.F. or L.A.F. units operating with the U.S.M.N.F., that consisted of releasing, launching or firing of missiles, bombs, individual weapons, rockets or any other weapon.
Following the 18 April 1983 destruction of the U.S. Embassy, Uscinceur promulgated an expanded set of R.O.E. for use by U.S.M.N.F. personnel assigned to provide security for the British Embassy and the Duraffourd Building where U.S. Embassy functions had been relocated. Those expanded R.O.E. were implemented by C.T.F. 62 through the issuance to each marine assigned to embassy security duty of an R.O.E. card, the so- called Blue Card. Since the Uscinceur expanded R.O.E. were promulgated for specific use of those members of the U.S.M.N.F. assigned to provide security for the embassy, U.S.M.N.F. elements at B.I.A. continued to operate under the R.O.E. previously provided. In order to insure that each marine of the U.S.M.N.F. understood what set of R.O.E. were applicable to him at any given time, C.T.F. 62 issued a ''White Card'' delineating the R.O.E. for those not assigned to embassy duty, as follows:
''The mission of the Multinational Force (M.N.F.) is to keep the peace. The following rules of engagement will be read and fully understood by all members of the U.S. contingent of the M.N.F.:
''When on post, mobile or foot patrol, keep a loaded magazine in the weapon; weapons will be on safe, with no rounds in the chamber.
''Do not chamber a round unless instructed to do so by a commissioned officer unless you must act in immediate self-defense where deadly force is authorized.
''Keep ammunition for crew- served weapons readily available but not loaded in the weapon. Weapons will be on safe at all times.
''Call local forces to assist in all self-defense efforts. Notify next senior command immediately.
''Use only the minimum degree of force necessary to accomplish the mission.
''Stop the use of force when it is no longer required.
''If effective fire is received, direct return fire at a distinct target only. If possible, use friendly sniper fire.
''Respect civilian property; do not attack it unless absolutely necessary to protect friendly forces.
''Protect innocent civilians from harm.
''Respect and protect recognized medical agencies such as Red Cross, Red Crescent, etc.
''These rules of engagement will be followed by all members of the U.S.M.N.F. unless otherwise directed.''
All U.S.M.N.F. personnel were required to carry the appropriate card and know its content at all times while on duty. The practical result was that U.S.M.N.F. elements operated under two sets of R.O.E. from early May 1983 until after the 23 October 1983 bombing of the B.L.T. headquarters building.
The Blue Card/White Card R.O.E. guidance continued in effect until 24 October 1983 (the day following the B.L.T. headquarters bombing) when C.T.F. 62 sought a R.O.E. change from Uscinceur, via the chain of command, to allow U.S.M.N.F. personnel to take under fire speeding vehicles approaching U.S.M.N.F. positions at B.I.A. On 26 November 1983, Comsixthflt requested that U.S.M.N.F. personnel be authorized to fire, without warning if necessary, on vehicles attempting unauthorized access to an area of U.S.M.N.F. positions. As noted in Section I of this part, on both of those occasions Cincusnaveur and Uscinceur held the view that the original R.O.E. (24 September 1982) authorized C.T.F. 62 to take such ations as he, the on-scene commander, considered necessary to defend his force against hostile action. Nonetheless, approval was provided to C.T.F. 62.
 
Discussion
C.T.F. 62 determined that restraint in the use of force was key to accomplishing the presence mission he was assigned, and that strict adherence to the R.O.E. was necessary if his forces were to maintain the ''neutral'' stance that the presence role entailed.
The commission views with concern the fact that there were two different sets of R.O.E. being used by U.S.M.N.F. elements in Beirut after the embassy bombing on 18 April 1983. Those R.O.E. used by the embassy security detail were designed to counter the terrorist threat posed by both vehicles and personnel.
Marines on similar duty at B.I.A., however, did not have the same R.O.E. to provide them specific guidance and authority to respond to a vehicle or person moving through a perimeter. Their ''White Card'' R.O.E. required them to call local forces to assist in all self-defense efforts.
Message transmissions up and down the Uscinceur chain of command revealed that Comsixthflt subordinate elements had different perceptions of the commander's latitude in implementing R.O.E. than did Cincusnaveur and Uscinceur.
The latter believed authority to forceably halt vehicles attempting unauthorized entry into the area of U.S.M.N.F. positions was inherent in the original 24 September 1982 R.O.E. C.T.F. 62 obviously did not share that view.
The commission believes there were a number of factors which cumulatively affected the ''mind-set'' of the marines at B.I.A. One factor was the mission, with its emphasis on highly visible presence and peacekeeping. Another was the R.O.E., which underscored the need to fire only if fired upon, to avoid harming innocent civilians, to respect civilian property and to share security and self-defense efforts with the L.A.F.
Promulgation of different R.O.E. for those performing embassy security duties contributed to a sense among the officers and men at B.I.A. that the terrorist threat confronting them was somehow less dangerous than that which prevailed at the embassy. The ''White Card-Blue Card'' dichotomy tended to formalize that view.
Interviews of individual marines who performed duty at the two locations confirm this mind-set.
In short, the commission believes the marines at B.I.A. were conditioned by their R.O.E. to respond less aggressively to unusual vehicular or pedestrian activity at their perimeter than were those marines posted at the embassy locations.
 
The Chain of Command
 
Principal Findings
Command authority and responsibility flows from the President to the Secretary of Defense, through the Joint Chiefs of Staff to commander in chief, U.S. forces Europe (Uscinceur). In the theater, operational command runs from Uscinceur to commander in chief, U.S. Naval forces Europe (Cincusnaveur), and from Cincusnaveur to commander, Sixth Fleet (Comsixthflt). Operational command flows from Comsixthflt to commander, amphibious task force (C.T.F. 61), who is designated commander, U.S. forces Lebanon. The M.A.U. commander, C.T.F. 62, is commander, U.S. forces ashore Lebanon; subordinate to him is the battalion landing team (B.L.T.) commander, who has immediate command of the Marine combat companies assigned to the M.A.U.. C.T.F. 62 is also commander, U.S.M.N.F.
The commission sought to determine the degree of command involvement in supporting the U.S.M.N.F. throughout the period of its development, with particular emphasis on the initial 13 months, from September 1982 through 23 October 1983.
The commission's inquiry revealed a general attitude throughout the chain of command that security measures in effect ashore were essentially the sole province of the U.S.M.N.F. commander and that it would somehow be improper to tell him how best to protect his force. As a consequence, the chain of command promulgated no direction to U.S.M.N.F. elements ashore with respect to physical security at B.I.A. prior to 23 October 1983.
The commission was apprised of a H.Q. Useucom staff element with specific responsibility for analyzing security against terrorist attack. The special assistant for security matters (S.A.S.M.) went to Beirut following the terrorist bombing of the U.S. Embassy to evaluate the security of the operations of the Office of Military Cooperation (O.M.C.) against terrorist actions. S.A.S.M. subsequently initiated a number of antiterrorist actions designed to enhance the security of O.M.C. personnel. The S.A.S.M. survey team was not charged by Uscinceur to evaluate the antiterrorist defenses of the U.S.M.N.F. elements at B.I.A., and did not do so.
 
Discussion
The commission holds the view that military commanders are responsible for the performance of their subordinates.
The commander can delegate some or all of his authority to his subordinates, but he cannot delegate his responsibility for the performance of any of the forces he commands. In that sense, the responsibility of military command is absolute.
The commission believes there was a fundamental conflict between the peacekeeping mission provided through the chain of command to the U.S.M.N.F., and the increasingly active role that the United States was taking in support of the L.A.F. The commission believes that as the political/military situation in Lebanon evolved, aggressive follow-up and continuing reassessment of the tasks of the U.S.M.N.F. and the support provided by the chain of command were necessary.
As the environmnt changed, the unique nature of the ''presence'' mission assigned to the U.S.M.N.F. demanded continuing analysis and the promulgation of appropriate guidance to assist the U.S.M.N.F. commander to take those actions necessary to protect his force.
Although the documentation gathered by the commission clearly established that every echelon of the chain of command was concerned with the safety of the U.S.M.N.F. in the deteriorating political/military environment of Beirut, the commission's investigation revealed a lack of systematic and aggressive chain of command attention to the antiterrorist security measures in use by the U.S.M.N.F. on the ground at B.I.A.
This was in sharp contrast to the direct involvement of the Uscinceur S.A.S.M. team in the security posture of the O.M.C. in Beirut against terrorist attack.
The prompt, positive action taken by Uscinceur to improve the security of the O.M.C. is illustrative of the aggressive command involvement that could and should have been directed toward the U.S.M.N.F. as well.
 
Intelligence
 
The Threat
 
Principal Findings
The potential use of terrorist tactics against American targets in Beirut - the U.S.M.N.F., U.S. Embassy offices in the Duraffourd Building and co-located with the British Embassy, the U.S. Ambassador's residence, apartments housing U.S. military and embassy personnel, hotels housing U.S. oficials and even American University Beirut - is not the exclusive province of Iranian-backed Shiite terrorists.
Radical Palestinian and Lebanese groups, some in conjunction with or with the support of Syria, could also employ terrorist tactics against the U.S.M.N.F. or other American targets. Stockpiles of explosives, built up over a decade prior to the Israeli invasion of June 1982, are reportedly still in place and available for future terrorist operations in and around Beirut.
 
Discussion
The commission believes it important to recognize that the ''threat'' to the U.S.M.N.F., as described above, did not exist in that form when the U.S.M.N.F. was inserted into Lebanon in the wake of Sabra-Shatila refugee camp massacre by Christian militia forces. A good many Lebanese Shiites were among the victims of that massacre, and American marines arriving to position themselves between the largely Shiite populace of the southern Beirut suburbs and the I.D.F. were initially welcomed by that populace as heroes and protectors.
Clearly, important segments of that citizenry no longer regard them as such, to say nothing of the hostility manifested toward the U.S.M.N.F. by Iranian-inspired fanatics and Syrian- supported Druse gunners.
In the view of the commission, the threat confronting the U.S.M.N.F. evolved incrementally to its present alarming state and relects the fact that internally, Lebanon continues to suffer from violent political competition among a number of domestic sectarian groups, some of whom consider the M.N.F. troops to be less peacekeepers than supporters of the Maronite Christian faction of the Lebanee ethnic fabric.
The warmth of the reception first accorded the U.S.M.N.F. did not, however, reflect the U.S. intelligence community's estimation of the likely pitfalls that awaited American peacekeepers in Lebanon. The commission considers the following passage from a study dated 23 July 1982 (weeks before the first insertion of U.S. marines) to be particularly instructive:
''If a peacekeeping force is to avoid the problems of divining the intentions of armed elements and avoiding entrapment in Lebanese internal conflicts, it will be essential for the question of extralegal armed presence in the area to be settled before it deployment. If a multinational force is to be used, basic issues affecting its ability to accomplish its mission must be settled in advance. If these issues are not clarified and resolved during a predeployment phase, no one should be surprised if the peacekeeping force encounters intractable political and military problems on the ground (as was the case with Unifil).''
In short, the experience of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (Unifil) demonstrated that a peacekeeping force requires certain conditions to be present if it is to operate effectively. In the context of Lebanon, this meant that extralegal militias could not be allowed to operate in or near the M.N.F. area of responsibility. There was, however, no force in being to prevent them from doing so.
An abundance of open-source statements by Syrian and Druse spokesmen makes it clear that there is a widespread belief among its adversaries that the key actors within the Government of Lebanon - the President of the Republic and the Commander in Chief of Lebanese Armed Forces - are Maronite Phalangists first and foremost, and that Moslem and Druse officials and soldiers in the Government or serving in the L.A.F. are either traitors, opportunists or unwitting dupes of the Maronite establishment.
The factual basis of this perception is moot. What counts is that certain measures undertaken by the U.S.M.N.F., such as training the L.A.F. and providing naval gunfire support to the defenders of Suk al Gharb, has - in the eyes of the L.A.F.'s opponents - confirmed their belief that by 23 October 1983, the U.S.M.N.F. had long since abandoned its peacekeeping/presence position.
Cincusnaveur advised the commission that ''by mid-to-late August 1983, Druse, Shia and Syrian leaders had begun making statements to the effect that the multinational forces, especially the U.S. element, was one of 'the enemy.' '' On 25 August Druse Progressive Socialist Party (P.S.P.) leader Walid Jumblat claimed that ''the marines have bluntly and directly threatened us. This is proof of the U.S. alliance with the Phalange Party.''
The conventional threat to the U.S.M.N.F. - land, sea, and air - is largely a function of the progress (or lack thereof) toward an internal Lebanese political settlement acceptable to Syria. All data available to the commission suggest that a strong relationship exists between Lebanon's steady slide back toward anarchy and the tendency of some parties to label the U.S.M.N.F. a belligerent. The Government of Lebanon is not an antiseptic instrument of a collective Lebanese will; nor is it a collection of disinterested public servants isolated from the forces of family, clan, religion and localism that are fundamental to life in Lebanon.
President Gemayel is a Maronite Phalangist who is the son of the Phalange Party's founder and the brother of the man who built the Lebanese Forces (L.F.) militia. General Tannous is likewise a Maronite who has a history of close connections with the Phalange Party and the L.F. militia.
Whatever their true intentions may be concerning the future of Lebanon, they are caught in the same tangled web of distrust, misunderstanding, malevolence, conspiracy and betrayal that has brought Lebanon to political bankruptcy and ruin.
Whatever good will, decency, competence and dedication they now bring to bear in the execution of their duties, they can neither undo that which they have been in the past nor renounce their origins. No Lebanese can easily escape the rigid categorizations that begin with the circumstances surrounding his birth. For someone named Genayel, the escape is all the more difficult.
The commission views Lebanon as an ideal environment for the planning and execution of terrorist operations. For over eight years, Beirut has been an armed camp featuring indiscriminate killing, seemingly random acts of terror and massive stockpiling of weapons and ammunition.
We are told that it is difficult, if not impossible, to find a Lebanese household which does not possess firearms. Nothwithstanding the opportunity present the Government of Lebanon by the evacuation of the P.L.O. and the dispersal of L.N.M. militias in September 1982, there are still neighborhoods in and around Beirut's southern suburbs which the L.A.F. dare not enter.
The Iranian connection introduces a particulary ominous element to the terrorist threat in that the incidence of Iranian-inspired terrorism need not be connected directly with the reconciliation process in Lebanon.
Iranian operatives in Lebanon are in the business of killing Americans. They are in that business whether or not the U.S.M.N.F. trains the L.A.F. or provides indirect fire support to the defenders of Suk al Gharb. If the reconciliation process succeeds in restoring domestic order and removing foreign forces, it may be more difficult for Iranian inspired terrorist to avail themselves of the support mechanisms (personnel, basing, supply, training) now so readily available.
It is clear, however, that progress toward reconciliation in Lebanon will not dissuade Iran from attempting to hit American targets; indeed, any evidence of such progress may spur new Iranian-sponsored acts of political violence as a means of derailing the process. The only development which would seriously impede the terrorist activities of Iranian-dominated Shia groups in Lebanon, short of a change of regime in Teheran, would be a decision by Syria to shut down the basing facilities in the Bekaa Valley and sever the logistical pipeline.
In the wake of the 23 October 1983 bombing, intelligence reporting continues to be voluminous regarding the plans of various groups to use terrorist tactics against the U.S.M.N.F. None of the reports specify the date or time of the purported operations. Moreover, most individual reports cannot be independently verified.
It is difficult to overstate the magnitude of the intelligence problem in a millieu where high casualty terrorist acts are relatively easy to perpetrate yet hard to stop. The types of attacks mounted thus far in Beirut - and those most likely to be attempted, according to available reporting - require little in the way of material resources or manpower, making them particularly difficult to intercept in the planning stage.
The entire spectrum of treat - conventional and terrorist - is further complicated by something which, over the past eight years, has assumed the character of a national pastime in Lebanon: covert provocation.
''X,'' hidden from view, hits ''Y'' with the expectation that ''Y'' will lash out at ''Z,'' who is the mortal enemy of ''X.'' The U.S.M.N.F. and other American personnel in Lebanon are ideal targets for this sort of activity. The U.S.M.N.F. is well aware of this prospect, which constitutes yet another threat multiplier in what amounts to a veritable jungle of threats.
 
Intelligence Support
 
Principal Findings
Although intelligence was provided at all levels that presented a great deal of general information on the threat, there was no specific intelligence on the where, how and when of the 23 October bombing.
It should be noted that the F.B.I. report on the 18 April 1983 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, a report which described the use of explosive- activated bottle bombs in that incident, stayed within F.B.I., C.I.A. and Department of State channels. With regard to the B.L.T. headquarters bombing, F.B.I. forensic experts have stated that it was the largest nonnuclear blast that they have ever examined; perhaps six to nine times the magnitude of the embassy bombing.
Intelligence support to conventional, tactical military requirements received praise from many in the administrative and operational chains of command. The ability to locate hostile artillery positions, tanks and militia strongholds was considered excellent.
At the direction of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, the D.O.D. conducted a survey from 13 to 27 May 1983 to determine whether there was a need to improve military intelligence or counterintelligence support to the U.S.M.N.F.
The D.O.D. survey team made the following recommendations:
(Section deleted by the Defense Department.)
 
Discussion
The intelligence structure should be reviewed from both a design and capabilities strandpoint. We need to establish ourselves early in a potential trouble spot and find new techniques to isolate and penetrate our potential enemies.
Once established, our military forces (and especially ground forces) need to have aggressive, specific intelligence to give the commander the hard information he needs to counter the threats against his force. U.S. intelligence is primarily geared for the support of air and naval forces engaged in nuclear and conventional warfare.
Significant attention must be given by the entire U.S. intelligence structure to purging and refining of masses of generalized information into intelligence analysis useful to small unit ground commanders.
 
Pre-Attack Security
 
B.L.T. Headquarters Organization, Operation And Security
Notwithstanding the utility derived from the use of the building in question, and acknowledging the fact that the building did provide protection to personnel from incoming fire, the B.L.T. commander failed to observe the basic security precaution of dispersion.  The practice of dispersion is fundamental and well understood by the military at every echelon. It basically is the spreading or separating of troops, material activities or establishments to reduce their vulnerability to enemy action.
The B.L.T. commander did not follow this accepted practice and permitted the concentration of approximately one-fourth of his command in a relatively confined location, thereby presenting a lucrative target to hostile elements. The M.A.U. commander condoned this decision.
 
Security Guard Organization And Execution
 
Principal Findings
Only sentries at Posts 1, 2 and 3 kept magazines in their weapons at all times. Post 4, 5, 6 and 7 were manned with one sentry during daylight hours. Post 8 was not manned at the time of the attack. The security posture on 23 October 1983 at the M.A.U./B.L.T. compound, as described in testimony by surviving witnesses, was not in compliance with published directives for Alert Conditions II or III.
Marines assigned to the B.L.T. guard wore the utility uniform with helmet, flak jacket, belt suspenders, M16 rifle, flashlight and a cartridge belt containing two filled canteens, first-aid kit, two magazine pouches with six magazines and a total of 120 rounds. The S.O.G. was armed with a .45-caliber pistol. All personnel carried an R.O.E. card in their flak jacket. During hours of darkness, night vision goggles were issued. There were no antitank weapons on any post. Antitank missile launchers (T.O.W.) were, however, positioned on the roof.
 
Discussion
Every marine interviewed expressed concern over the restrictions against inerting magazines in weapons while on interior posts during Alert Condition II, III and IV. The most outspoken were the sentries on Posts 6 and 7 where the penetration of the compound occurred on 23 October 1983.
The M.A.U. commander explained that he made a conscious decision not to permit insertion of magazines in weapons on interior posts to preclude accidental discharge and possible injury to innocent civilians.
This is indicative of the emphasis on prevention of harm to civilian, notwithstanding some degradation of security. The threat to the M.A.U./ B.L.T. compound was perceived to be direct and indirect fire, ground attack by personnel, stationary vehicular bombs and hand grenade/R.P.G. attack.
In accordance with existing R.O.E. (White Card), instructions pertaining to moving vehicles involved search and access procedures at gates. Hostile penetration of the perimeter by cars or trucks was not addressed in these instructions provided by the B.L.T. guards.
Whether full compliance with the actions prescribed for Alert Condition II would have prevented, in full or in part, the tragic results of the 23 October 1983 attack cannot be determined, but the possibility cannot be dismissed.
 
Command Responsibility
 
Prior to 23 October 1983 Although deluged with daily threat information, the M.A.U. commander received no specific warning of the time, place or technique of the 23 October 1983 attack. Moreover, he was not briefed on the 18 April 1983 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in specific terms until after the B.L.T. Headquarters bombing.
 
Casualty Handling
 
Israeli Offer Of Assistance
 
Principal Findings
The Government of Israel communicated an offer of medical assistance to the United States Government approximately two hours (0830 Israel/Beirut local time) after the bombing attack. The initial offer of assistance was made by telephone from the Israel Defense Forces (I.D.F.) chief of external affairs to the U.S. Defense Attache in Tel Aviv who immediately directed the duty officer to report to the embassy and send a message to C.T.F. 61 informing him of the offer.
The offer was general in nature and specifics were not requested because the duty officer was not aware of the enormity of the disaster or the nature of the on-scene requirements.
The Israeli offer of assistance was relayed within an hour (0922B) by flash message to C.T.F. 61 stating: ''REFERENCE THE ATTACK ON THE BLT HQ AT BIA THIS MORNING. PER TELECOM WITH COL ALTER, CHIEF OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS, IDF, THE GOI OFFERS WHATEVER ASSISTANCE MAY BE DESIRED BY THE USG IN THE EVACUATION/MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CASUALTIES.''
C.T.F. 61 saw the message at approximately 1030 to 1045 local time. His message response, after consultation with his medical staff, to the U.S. Defense Attache office in Tel Aviv at 1145B stated: ''OFFER OF ASSISTANCE REFERENCE (A) SINCERELY APPRECIATED. CURRENTLY HAVE AMPLE ASSETS EN ROUTE OR ON STATION TO MEET REQUIREMENTS.''
Similar Israeli offers were subsequently transmitted by telephone calls involving the Secretary of Defense, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Uscinceur and Comsixthflt.
C.T.F. 61 asked separately for Israeli support in providing 200 body bags for the dead. Israeli authorities in Tel Aviv immediately provided the bags which were forwarded to Beirut by U.S. Navy aircraft.
Although there had been informal Government-to-Government level discussions in 1981 concerning Israeli medical support for U.S. forces, no agreement existed, and very few in the chain of command were familiar with those discussions or with Israeli military hospital facilities.
 
Discussion
The commission found no evidence that any considerations other than a desire to provide immediate, professional care for the wounded influenced the decision not to take advantage of the Israeli offer of medical assistance.
The commission's interview with C.T.F. 61 revealed that his only concern was for the appropriate care and evacuation of the casualties. He did not review the message from Tel Aviv immediately upon receipt because of the large volume of critical traffic requiring his attention.  When he did review it (between 1030 and 1045 local time) he had a reasonable estimate of the casualty situation (including the number of wounded requiring further care); of the estimated time of arrival of aeromedical aircraft then en route; and of the fact that the R.A.F. hospital at Akrotiri, Cyprus, was prepared to receive the most seriously wounded.
Thus, after consultation with the medical staff, C.T.F. 61 felt that adequate capabilities were already available or en route.
C.T.F. 61 and his medical staff had no direct communications with the Israelis (as they did with the British through the British liaison officer onboard U.S.S. Iwo Jima). Further, C.T.F. 61 had no details about the Israeli offer; whether, for example, it included Medevac aircraft, or the nature of available hospital facilities in Israel.
When asked why he did not pursue these questions, C.T.F. 61 replied that there was no need - the facility at Akrotiri was already mobilized and evacuation to Cyprus had been arranged.
Subsequent offers of assistance to U.S. representatives conveyed by Israel were promptly and properly referred down the chain of command. By this time, however, evacuation was well under way to hospitals in Cyprus, Germany and Italy.
Discussions between a commission member and senior officials of the I.D.F. confirmed the substance and spirit of the offers. The discussions also revealed, however, that the Israeli authorities were not really aware of the resources C.T.F. 61/62 had available locally or en route.
 
Terrorism
 
23 October 1983 - A Terrorist Act
 
Principal Findings
D.O.D. Directive 2000.12 defines terrorism as ''the unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence by a revolutionary organization against individuals or property, with the intention of coercing or intimidating governments or societies, often for political or ideological purposes.''
The bombing of the B.L.T. headquarters building was committed by a revolutionary organization within the cognizance of, and with possible support from, two neighboring states. The bombing was politically motivated and directed against U.S. policy in Lebanon in the sense that no attempt was made to seize Marine positions or to drive the marines from the airport.
The availability of a suicide driver to deliver the bomb significantly increased the vulnerability of the B.L.T. headquarters building.
 
Discussion
While those responsible appear to qualify as a revolutionary organization, the commission notes that the formal D.O.D. definition of terrorism does not include conduct or participation in such acts by sovereign states. Since at least indirect involvement in this incident by Syria and Iran is indicated, the commission believes that the D.O.D. definition should be expanded to include states which use terrorism either directly or through surrogates.
The use of terrorism to send a political or ideological message can best be understood when viewed from the mind-set of a terrorist.  The strength of that message depends on the psychological impact generated by the attack. This, in turn, largely depends on the nature and breadth of media coverage. The political message in the 23 October 1983 attack was one of opposition to the U.S. military presence in Lebanon.
An attack of sufficient magnitude could rekindle political debate over U.S. participation in the M.N.F. and possibly be the catalyst for a change of U.S. policy. There were ample military targets in Beirut that were vulnerable to terrorist attack, but the sympolic nature of the B.L.T. headquarters building, and the concentration of military personnel within it, made it an ideal terrorist target of choice.
The building was extremely well- constructed and located inside a guarded perimeter. This apparent security, however, may have worked to the advantage of the terrorists because the target, in fact, was vulnerable to a very large truck bomb delivered by a suicidal attacker. The first challenge would be to gain access to the U.S.M.N.F. perimeter at the parking lot south of the B.L.T. headquarters building.
Once there, the barbed-wire barriers could not prevent a large truck from penetrating the perimeter into the compound. Civilian traffice around the airport aided in reaching the parking lot undetected. From that point, the terrorists had reasonable confidence of succeeding.
First, there would be the symbolic success of penetrating the guarded compound. Second, the bomb carried was of such size that once through the perimeter, it would cause sufficient damage and casualties to have a major psychological impact and receive worldwide media coverage.
From a terrorist perspective, the true genius of this attack is that the objective and the means of attack were beyond the imagination of those responsible for Marine security. As a result, the attack achieved surprise and resulted in massive destruction of the B.L.T. headquarters building and the deaths of 241 U.S. military personnel.
The psychological fallout of the attack on the U.S. has been dramatic. The terrorists sent the U.S. a strong political message.
 
International Terrorism
 
Principal Findings
While the figures vary according to collection criteria, over all there has been a three to fourfold increase in the number of worldwide terrorist incidents since 1968. The Defense Intelligence Agency (D.I.A.) notes that over the past decade, 53 percent of all recorded terrorist incidents were directed against U.S. personnel and facilities.
Terrorism against military personnel and facilities is becoming more frequent. According to D.I.A. figures, incidents in which U.S. military personnel or faciities were targeted jumped from 34 in 1980, to 57 in 1981, to 67 in 1982.
In addition, there is a growing lethality of terrorism. According to the Rand Corporation, the number of terrorist incidents involving fatalities has been increasing about 20 percent a year since the early 1970's. Of this number, incidents involving multiple fatalities have risen approximately 60 percent this year, as compared to a 37 percent average increase of the previous three years.
Through November 1983, there have been 666 fatalities due to terrorism, compared to 221 in 1982 and 374 in 1981. Even excluding the massive carnage of the 23 October 1983 bombing of the B.L.T. headquarters building in Beirut, terrorism has already killed more people in 1983 than in any other year in recent history.
 
Discussion
Terrorism is deeply rooted in the eastern Mediterranean region. Mr. Brian Jenkins, a recognized expert on terrorism, calls this area ''the cradle'' of international terrorism in its contemporary form. He notes that the ideological and doctrinal foundations for campaigns of deliberate terrorism, which exist today in Lebanon, emerged from the post-World War II struggles in Palestine and the early guerrilla campaigns against colonial powers in Cyprus and Algeria.
Certain governments and regional entities which have major interests in the outcome of the struggle in Lebanon are users of international terrorism as a means of achieving their political ends. Such nationally sponsored terrorism is increasing significantly, particularly among Middle Eastern countries. The State Department has identified 140 terrorist incidents conducted directly by national governments between 1972 and 1982. Of this total, 90 percent occurred in the three-year period between 1980- 1982.
 
Terrorism as a Mode Of Warfare
 
Principal Findings
The political/military situation in Lebanon is dominated by a host of diverse national, subnational and local political entities pursuing their own ends through an expedient but orchestrated process of negotiation and conflict. The spectrum of armed conflict in Lebanon is bounded by individual acts of terrorism on one end and formal conventional operations on the other. Within these boundaries, warfare continues on three levels: conventional warfare, guerrilla warfare and terrorism.
There is little about conflict in Lebanon that reflects the traditional models of war. The distinctions between war and peace are blurred. The use of military force varies from constrained self-defense by the M.N.F. participants to terrorism by others. Military successes are therefore temporary and hard to measure. Cease- fires have become an inherent part of the process, providing exhausted belligerents with needed respite to regroup, mobiize patron support or switch to a more suitable form of struggle; all of which insure that the armed struggle will continue in this open-ended fashion.
In Lebanon, violence plays a crucial role in altering an opponent's political situation. Therefore, the solutions are political ones in which the losers are not defeated but maneuvered into a politically untenable position. Terrorism is crucial to this process because it is not easily deterred by responsive firepower or the threat of escalation. Terrorism, therefore, provides an expedient form of violence capable of pressuring changes in the political situation with minimum risk and cost.
The systematic, carefully orchestrated terrorism which we see in the Middle East represents a new dimension of warfare. These international terrorists, unlike their traditional counterparts, are not seeking to make a random political statement or to commit the occasional act of intimidation on behalf of some ill-defined long-term vision of the future. For them, terrorism is an integrated part of a strategy in which there are well- defined political and military objectives. For a growing number of states, terrorism has become an alternative means of conducting state business, and the terrorists themselves are agents whose association the state can easily deny.
The terrorists in Lebanon and the Middle East are formidable opponents. In general, they are intensely dedicated and professional. They are exceptionally well trained, well equipped and well supported. With state sponsorship, these terrorists are less concerned about building a popular base and are less inhibited in committing acts which cause massive destruction or inflict heavy casualties. Armed with operational guidance and intelligence from their sponsor, there are few targets beyond their capability to attack. Consequently, they constitute a potent instrument of state policy and a serious threat to the U.S. presence in Lebanon.
 
Discussion
The Commission believes that terrorism as a military threat to U.S. military forces is becoming increasingly serious. As a superpower with worldwide interests, the United States is the most attractive terrorist target and, indeed, statistics confirm this observation. Terrorism is warfare ''on the cheap'' and entails few risks. It permits small countries to attack U.S. interests in a manner which, if done openly, would constitute acts of war and justify a direct U.S. military response.
Combating terrorism requires an active policy. A reactive policy only forfeits the initiative to the terrorists. The commission recognizes that there is no single solution. The terrorist problem must be countered politically and militarily at all levels of government. Political initiatives should be directed at collecting and sharing intelligence on terrorist groups and promptly challenging the behavior of those states which employ terrorism to their own ends. It makes little sense to learn that a state or its surrogate is conducting a terrorist campaign or planning a terrorist attack and not confront that government with political or military consequences if it continues forward.
U.S. military forces lack an effective capability to respond to terrorist attacks, particlarly at the lower ends of the conflict spectrum. The National Command Authorities should have a wide range of options for reaction. Air strikes or naval gunfire are not always enough. The whole area of military response needs to be addressed to identify a wider range of more flexible options and planning procedures.
State-sponsored terrorism poses a serious threat to U.S. policy and the security of U.S. personnel and facilities overseas and thus merits the attention of military planners. The Department of Defense needs to recognize the importance of state-sponsored terrorism and must take appropriate measures to deal with it.
 
Military Preparedness
Of great concern to the commission is the military's lack of preparedness to deal with the threat of state-sponsored terrorism. The commission found two different mind-sets in Beirut regarding the nature of the threat and how to counter it. The U.S.M.N.F. units at the airport, behind their guarded perimeter, perceived the terrorist threat as secondary and could not envision a terrorist attack that could penetrate their base and cause massive destruction. The commission found nothing in the predeployment training provided to the M.A.U. that would assist them to make such an assessment. In the commission's judgment, the marines were not sufficiently trained and supported to deal with the terrorist threat that existed on 23 October 1983.
Terrorism will continue to be an integral part of conflict in Lebanon and will present difficult challenges to our military forces.
It is a common practice to send personnel to special survival schools when their duties put them in Arctic or jungle environments. The same philosophy should apply for hostile environments like that in Lebanon. Such training currently exists in some services for Central America. A similar effort should be considered for Lebanon.
In the commission's judgment, too much faith is put in physical defenses. The British heavily fortified their positions in Palestine after World War II but the terrorists continually came up with ingenious methods to penetrate and attack them. The same is true today.
 
Conclusions and Recommendations
All conclusions and recommendations of the commission from each substantive part of this report are presented below.
 
The Military Mission
 
Mission Development And Execution
Conclusion:
The commission concludes that the ''presence'' mission was not interpreted the same by all levels of the chain of command and that perceptual differences regarding that mission, including the responsibility of the U.S.M.N.F. for the security of Beirut International Airport, should have been recognized and corrected by the chain of command.
 
The Expanding Military Role
Conclusion:
The commission concludes that U.S. decisions as regards Lebanon taken over the past 15 months have been, to a large degree, characterized by an emphasis on military options and the expansion of the U.S. military role, notwithstanding the fact that the conditions upon which the security of the U.S.M.N.F. were based continued to deteriorate as progress toward a diplomatic solution slowed. The commission further concludes that these decisions may have been taken without clear recognition that these initial conditions had dramatically changed and that the expansion of our military involvement in Lebanon greatly increased the risk to, and adversely impacted upon the security of, the U.S.M.N.F. The commission therefore concludes that there is an urgent need for reassessment of alternative means to achieve U.S. objectives in Lebanon and at the same time reduce the risk to the U.S.M.N.F.
Recommendation:
The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense continue to urge that the National Security Council undertake a reexamination of alternative means of achieving U.S. objectives in Lebanon, to include a comprehensive assessment of the military security options being developed by the chain of command and a more vigorous and demanding approach to pursuing diplomatic alternatives.
 
Rules of Engagement
 
R.O.E. Implementation
Conclusions:
(a) The commission concludes that a single set of R.O.E. providing specific guidance for countering the type of vehicular terrorist attacks that destroyed the U.S. Embassy on 18 April 1983 and the B.L.T. headquarters building on 23 October 1983 had not been provided to, nor implemented by, the Marine Amphibious Unit commander.
(b) The commission concludes that the mission statement, the original R.O.E., and the implementation in May 1983 of dual ''Blue Card-White Cars'' R.O.E. contributed to a mind- set that detracted from the readiness of the U.S.M.N.F. to respond to the terrorist threat which materialized on 23 October 1983.  pick up MARINES TEXT 7 (the last one)
 
The Chain Of Command
 
Exercise of Command Responsibility by The Chain of Command
Prior to 23 October 1983
Conclusions: (a) The commission is fully aware that the entire chain of command was heavily involved in the planning for, and support of, the U.S.M.N.F. The commission concludes, however, that Uscinceur, Cincusnafeur, Comsixthflt and C.T.F. 61 did not initiate actions to insure the security of the U.S.M.N.F. in light of the deteriorating political/military situation in Lebanon. The commission found a lack of effective command supervision of the U.S.M.N.F. security posture prior to 23 October 1983.
(b) The commission concludes that the failure of the operational chain of command to correct or amend the defensive posture of the U.S.M.N.F. constituted tacit approval of the security measures and procedures in force at the B.L.T. headquarters building on 23 October 1983.
(c) The commission further concludes that although it finds the Uscinceur operational chain of command at fault, it also finds that there was a series of circumstances beyond the control of these commands that influenced their judgment and their actions relating to the security of the U.S.M.N.F.
Recommendation:
The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense take whatever administrative or disciplinary action he deems appropriate, citing the failure of the Uscinceur operational chain of command to monitor and supervise effectively the security measures and procedures employed by the U.S.M.N.F. on 23 October 1983.
 
Intelligence
 
Intelligence Support
Conclusions:
(a) The commission concludes that although the U.S.M.N.F. commander received a large volume of intelligence warnings concerning potential terrorist threats prior to 23 October 1983, he was not provided with the timely intelligence, tailored to his specific operational needs, that was necessary to defense against the broad spectrum of threats he faced.
(b) The commission further concludes that the Humint support to the U.S.M.N.F. commander was ineffective, being neither precise nor tailored to his needs. The commission believes that the paucity of U.S. controlled Humint provided to the U.S.M.N.F. commander is in large part due to policy decisions which have resulted in a U.S. Humint capability commensurate with the resources and time that have been spent to acquire it.
Recommendation:
(a) The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense establish an all-source fusion center, which would tailor and focus all-source intelligence support to U.S. military commanders involved in military operations in areas of high threat, conflict or crisis.
(b) The commission further recommends that the Secretary of Defense take steps to establish a joint C.I.A./ D.O.D. examination of policy and resource alternatives to immediately improve Humint support to the U.S.M.N.F. contingent in Lebanon and other areas of potential conflict which would involve U.S. military operation forces.
 
Pre-Attack Security
 
Command Responsibility For Security Prior to 23 October 1983 Conclusions:
(a) The combination of a large volume of specific threat warnings that never materialized and the perceived and real pressure to accomplish a unique and difficult mission contributed significantly to the decisions of the M.A.U. and B.L.T. commanders regarding the security of their force. Nevertheless, the commission concludes that the security measures in effect in the M.A.U. compound were neither commensurate with the increasing level of threat confronting the U.S.M.N.F. nor sufficient to preclude catastropic losses such as those that were suffered on the morning of 23 October 1983. The commission further concludes that while it may have appeared to be an appropriate response to the indirect fire being received, the decision to billet approximately one-quarter of the B.L.T. in a single stucture contributed to the catastrophic loss of life.
(b) The commission concludes that the B.L.T. commander must take responsibility for the concentration of approximately 350 members of his command in the B.L.T. headquarters building, thereby providing a lucrative target for attack. Further, the B.L.T. commander modified prescribed alert procedures, thereby degrading security of the compound.
(c) The commission also concludes that the M.A.U. commander shares the responsibility for the catastrophic losses in that he condoned the concentration of personnel in the B.L.T. headquarters building, concurred in the modification of prescribed alert procedures and emphasized safety over security in directing that sentries on Posts 4, 5, 6 and 7 would not load their weapons.
(d) The commission further concludes that although it finds the B.L.T. and M.A.U. commanders to be at fault, it also finds that there was a series of circumstances beyond their control that influenced their judgment and their actions relating to the security of the U.S.M.N.F.
Recommendation:
The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense take whatever administrative or disciplinary action he deems appropriate, citing the failure of the B.L.T. and M.A.U. commanders to take the security measures necessary to preclude the catastrophic loss of life in the attack on 23 October 1983.
 
Post-Attack Security
 
Redeployment, Dispersal
And Physical Barriers
Conclusions:
(a) The commission concludes that the security measures taken since 23 October 1983 have reduced the vulnerability of the U.S.M.N.F. to catastrophic losses. The commission also concludes, however, that the security measures implemented or planned for implementation for the U.M.N.F. as of 30 November 1983, were not adequate to prevent continuing significant attrition of the force.
(b) The commission recognizes that the current disposition of U.S.M.N.F. forces may, after careful examination, prove to be the best available option. The commission concludes, however, that a comprehensive set of alternatives should be immediately prepared and presented to the National Security Council.
Recommendation:
Recognizing that the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have been actively reassessing the increased vulnerability of the U.S.M.N.F. as the political/military environment in Lebanon has changed, the commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct the operational chain of command to continue to develop alternative military options for accomplishing the mission of the U.S.M.N.F. while reducing the risk to the force.
 
Casualty Handling
 
On-Scene Medical Care
Conclusion:
(a) The commission concludes that the speed with which the on-scene U.S. military personnel reacted to rescue their comrades trapped in the devastated building and to render medical care was nothing short of heroic. The rapid response by Italian and Lebanese medical personnel was invaluable.
 
Aeromedical Evacuation/
Casualty Distribution
Conclusions:
(a) The commission found no evidence that any of the wounded died or received improper medical care as a result of the evacuation or casualty distribution procedures. Nevertheless, the commission concludes that overall medical support planning in the European theater was deficient and that there was an insufficient number of experienced medical planning staff officers in the Uscinceur chain of command.
(b) The commission found that the evacuation of the seriously wounded to U.S. hospitals in Germany, a transit of more than four hours, rather than to the British hospital in Akrotiri, Cyprus, a transit of one hour, appears to have increased the risk to those patients. Similarly, the commission found that the subsequent decision to land the aircraft at Rhein-Main rather than Ramstein, Germany, may have increased the risk to the most seriously wounded. In both instances, however, the commission has no evidence that there was an adverse medical impact on the patients.
Recommendations:
(a) The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in coordination with the services, to review medical plans and staffing of each echelon of the operation and administrative chains of command to ensure appropriate and adequate medical support for the U.S.M.N.F.
(b) The commission further recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct Uscinceur to conduct an investigation of the decisions made regarding the destination of aeromedical evacuation aircraft and the distribution of casualties on 23 October 1983.
 
Definitive Medical Care
Conclusion:
(a) The commission concludes that the definitive medical care provided the wounded at the various treatment facilities was excellent, and that as of 30 November 1983, there is no evidence of any mortality or morbidity resulting from inappropriate or insufficient medical care.
 
Israeli Offer
Of Medical Assistance
Conclusion:
The commission found no evidence that any factor other than the desire to provide immediate, professional treatment for the wounded influenced decisions regarding the Israeli offer; all offers of assistance by Israel were promptly and properly referred to the theater and on-scene commanders. At the time the initial Israeli offer was reviewed by C.T.F. 61, it was deemed not necessary because the medical capabilities organic to C.T.F. 61 were operational and functioning adequately, the R.A.F. hospital at Akrotiri was mobilized and ready, and sufficient U.S. and R.A.F. medical evacuation aircraft were en route.
 
Identification of the Dead
Conclusion:
The commission concludes that the process for identification of the dead following the 23 October 1983 catastrophe was conducted very efficiently and professionally, despite the complications caused by the destruction and/or absence of identification data.
Recommendation:
The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct the creation of duplicate medical/dental records, and assure the availability of fingerprint files, for all military personnel. The commission further recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct the service secretaries to develop jointly improved, state-of- the-art identification tags for all military personnel.
 
Military Response To Terrorism
 
A Terrorist Act
Conclusion:
The commission concludes that the 23 October 1983 bombing of the B.L.T. headquarters building was a terrorist act sponsored by sovereign states or organized politial entities for the purpose of defeating U.S. objectives in Lebanon.
 
International Terrorism
Conclusion:
The Commission concludes that international terrorist acts endemic to the Middle East are indicative of an alarming worldwide phenomenon that poses an increasing threat to U.S. personnel and facilities.
 
Terrorism as a Mode Of Warfare
Conclusion:
The commission concludes that state sponsored terrorism is an important part of the spectrum of warfare and that adequate response to this increasing threat requires an active national policy which seeks to deter attack or reduce its effectiveness. The commission further concludes that this policy needs to be supported by political and diplomatic actions and by a wide range of timely military response capabilities.
Recommendation:
The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct the Joint Chiefs of Staff to develop a broad range of appropriate military responses to terrorism for review, along with political and diplomatic actions, by the National Security Council.
 
Military Preparedness
Conclusion:
The commission concludes that the U.S.M.N.F. was not trained, organized, staffed or supported to deal effectively with the terrorist threat in Lebanon. The commission further concludes that much needs to be done to prepare U.S. military forces to defend against and counter terrorism.
Recommendation:
The commission recommends that the Secretary of Defense direct the development of doctrine, planning, organization, force structure, education and training necessary to defend against and counter terrorism.

Graphic

 
diagram ; photos of members of Commission on Beirut International Airport Terrorist act


End of Document