KEY AGENCIES SHIFT TO 'WARTIME' MODE TERRORISM FIGHT TRUMPS OTHER JOBS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 9, 2001 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 746 words
Byline: ERIC LICHTBLAU AND JOSH MEYER, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration yesterday launched a sweeping "wartime reorganization" aimed at making counterterrorism the dominant priority of federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies -- even at the expense of other traditional operations.
 Ten percent of the Justice Department's headquarters staff members will be reassigned to "front line" field offices nationwide; funding will be transferred from nonessential operations to counterterrorism; and intelligence operations that had been under the Pentagon's control may be consolidated within the CIA.
 The "blueprint for change" that Attorney General John Ashcroft unveiled before 300 Justice Department employees was as striking for what Ashcroft didn't say as for what he did. In assessing the future of the department over the next five years, the attorney general didn't spell out how specific agencies would be affected and made virtually no mention of drug enforcement, civil rights, antitrust, organized crime, white-collar crime or other law-enforcement concerns that for generations have been at the core of the department's mission.
"We cannot do everything we once did because lives now depend on us doing a few things very well," Ashcroft said. He called for "rebuilding and remaking the department" with one overriding goal in mind: "the preservation of American lives and liberty."
 Ashcroft's plan brought into sharper focus a message that the administration has been delivering with increasing urgency in recent days and weeks: that following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the fight against domestic terrorism must supersede all else.
 Even sacrosanct law-enforcement priorities such as gathering evidence for criminal prosecutions will take a back seat, Ashcroft said. The Justice Department "must shift its primary focus from investigating and prosecuting past crimes to identifying threats of future terrorist attacks, preventing them from happening, and punishing would-be perpetrators for their plans of terror," he wrote yesterday in a memo to department chiefs.
 Toward that end, the Justice Department has arrested nearly 1,200 people since Sept. 11 in connection with its wide-ranging terrorism investigation, a roundup that has drawn fire from many civil rights groups.
 Ashcroft's terror plan, some elements of which will require legislative approval, drew mixed reviews from Congress.
 Some officials praised the Justice Department's exhaustive attention to counterterrorism. Others, however, questioned whether the pendulum might be swinging too far away from other law enforcement responsibilities.
 "If counterterrorism comes at the exclusion of other things, there would certainly be concern," said one senior Democratic aide who asked not to be identified. "Too little is known right now about what the attorney general has in mind."
 Several lawmakers called on the Justice Department to broaden its reorganization.
 Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, said that reorganization of the Justice Department alone "won't alter the prevailing culture of arrogance at the FBI. Ending that culture will require real, concrete measures of improvement," he said, including ensuring that the bureau shares information with local law enforcement agencies.
 Counterterrorism legislation signed into law by President Bush last month gave the Justice Department broader powders to spy on and investigate terrorism suspects, and department lawyers already have begun providing the FBI with intelligence information on terrorism -- off-limits in previous criminal probes -- to build criminal cases. Ashcroft said authorities must now use their expanded powers to combat "a calculated, malignant and devastating evil [that] has arisen in our world."
 Ashcroft declared that "America has emerged victorious" in the opening battle of its war against terrorism. He said that while people should remain on heightened alert, he is satisfied that the immediate threats that prompted him to issue two extraordinary nationwide terror alerts last month "have passed" without incident.
 Ashcroft said the Justice Department, which employs a total of 126,000 people, plans to redeploy 10 percent of its staff at main headquarters in Washington to field offices across the country.
 Another plan in the works by a presidential commission would also mean wide-ranging changes in the fight against terrorism, giving the head of the CIA authority over intelligence duties that are now overseen by the Pentagon, officials said yesterday.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: November 9, 2001


End of Document