Kid-Kill thug's war on 'terror'
Daily News (New York)
October 9, 2012 Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 15
Length: 313 words
Byline: BY JANON FISHER NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


A BRONX gangbanger, who killed a 10-year-old girl in a hail of gunfire outside a church christening party, then became the first person convicted under a state terrorism statute, is headed to the state's highest court on Tuesday.
Edgar Morales, 27, a member of the St. James Boys street gang, stormed a christening party at St. Paul's Lutheran Church in Parkchester in 2002, firing five bullets that killed Malenny Mendez, 10, and paralyzed a rival gang member.
In 2007, Morales became the first person - and the only gang member - convicted under a state anti-terrorism statute passed just six days after 9/11, upping his maximum sentence from 25 years in prison to 40 years to life.
The Bronx district attorney's office argued that the group's behavior was terroristic, offering a litany of stickups, slashings and shooting by other members of the gang around St. James Park to support the theory.
"The terror perpetrated by gangs, which all too often occurs on the streets of New York, also fits squarely within the scope of this statute," said Bronx DA Robert Johnson at the time.
But the state appellate court found that the St. James Boys only targeted other gangs - not the general population - and struck down Morales' terrorism conviction in 2010.
"The intention by a gang member to intimidate members of rival gangs, when not accompanied by an intention to send an intimidating or coercive message to the broader community, does not, in our view, meet the statutory standard," the judges ruled.
On Tuesday, the Bronx DA's office will take its argument to the State Court of Appeals, asking the panel to reinstate Morales' terrorism conviction.
In 2011, the state charged three more men under the terrorism statute - Jose Pimentel for plotting to detonate pipe bombs across the city, and Ahmed Ferhani and Mohamed Mamdouh for plotting to bomb a synagogue.
jfisher@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Edgar Morales MARIELA LOMBARD

Load-Date: October 9, 2012


End of Document