KIDS' BOOKS;
Book series addresses terrorism on kids' level
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 13, 2002, Monday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
Section: VARIETY; FAMILY & RELATIONSHIPS; Pg. 10E
Length: 386 words
Byline: Kim Palmer; Staff Writer
Body


The events of Sept. 11 prompted many Americans to adjust their plans. For the Abdo family, owners of Abdo Publishing in Edina, Sept. 11 quickly spurred a 12-book series, "War on Terrorism," written for children in grades four through eight.
     The Abdos _ Paul, editor in chief; sister Jill, president; and brother Jim, national sales manager _ began planning the series within days of the attacks. Initially, Paul said, they were concerned the books might be viewed as an attempt to capitalize on tragedy. But after talking to library focus groups, the Abdos decided to proceed.
   Staff members (the company has 52 employees plus a freelance network of about 25people) were pulled off other projects and worked around the clock to produce the first book, "September 11, 2001; The Day That Changed America," published in early October. The frenzied pace continued for the rest of the series _ as freelance writers drafted the words, the company's 12 editors worked overtime, double-checking facts and making sure the material was age-appropriate.
     "The hardest part was to take such a tragedy and produce something that a fourth-grader could read and understand," Paul said. "A main objective was for children to know that [the attacks] were not a Muslim thing but a terrorist thing. They had nothing to do with religion."
    Other books in the series focus on heroes, the country's unity following the attacks, ground zero, President Bush and Osama bin Laden.
     Mary Ann Rentas, a library media technologist who bought the series for Centennial Middle School in Lino Lakes in mid-winter, was surprised to find titles already available on the topic. "I was totally impressed with the timeliness of the material," she said. "The graphics were poignant, and there was a nice balance." At her school, the two most popular books in the series are those focusing on Sept. 11 and Osama bin Laden.
      The books are available in schools and libraries, including Hennepin County libraries in Edina (Southdale) and Eden Prairie, Blue Earth County libraries, and school libraries in Edina, Eden Prairie, Lino Lakes, Burnsville and Mankato, Minn.
_ For more information about the series, go to http://www.abdopub.com. 
    _ This report includes material from the Houston Chronicle. Kim Palmer is at kpalmer@startribune.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: May 14, 2002


End of Document