KILGORE VOWS TO PUSH AGENDA TO FIGHT TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
January 11, 2002 Friday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-4
Length: 504 words
Byline: Gary Robertson, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Gary Robertson at (804) 649-6346 or grobertson@timesdispatch.com,  
Body


Virginia's incoming attorney general is pledging to fashion a legislative agenda aimed at preventing terrorism and punishing terrorists.
Attorney General-elect Jerry Kilgore told law enforcement officers yesterday that he wants the General Assembly to expand capital punishment laws so that the masterminds of terrorist attacks will face execution.
Kilgore, who takes office tomorrow, also would include environmental extremists who take part in criminal acts - so called eco-terrorists - in his proposed anti-terrorism package.
An aide explained that eco-terrorism, for example, might take the form of someone purposely infecting a herd of cattle with hoof-and-mouth disease.
Kilgore made his comments before more than 100 law enforcement personnel from across eastern Virginia at a summit meeting on gun violence at the Richmond Police Academy.
In other remarks, Kilgore said he would follow through on a campaign pledge to push for more stringent laws and tougher penalties on domestic violence.
Paul J. McNulty, the recently appointed U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, called the summit meeting for sheriffs, chiefs of police and prosecutors to begin working toward a strategy for reducing gun violence.
Project Safe Neighborhoods, a national program, would be the umbrella organization for implementing steps for attacking gun crime and reducing the number of guns on the street.
The steps will include hiring 113 assistant U.S. attorneys to serve as full-time gun prosecutors and spending $44 million to upgrade state criminal history records
Richmond's highly successful Project Exile was held up as an example of how a coordinated community response can take guns away from criminals and reduce crime.
Under the program, those carrying illegal guns - such as felons or drug users - face an additional five years in federal prison.
Homicides peaked in Richmond in 1994, when the city had a record 160 slayings.
In 1997, when project Exile was launched, 140 homicides were recorded.
Since then, the number of homicides has dropped every year, with 69 in 2001.
Richmond Commonwealth's Attorney David Hicks cited an uncommon partnership of federal, state and local agencies for making Project Exile a success.
He also credited business and professional groups for supporting and funding various aspects of the program, and the Martin Agency for developing an advertising campaign to market Project Exile.
Jealousy over who gets the credit for a successful program has sabotaged cooperative projects between law enforcement agencies in the past.
Hicks said that overcoming such problems, and giving your ego a rest, was essential to the success of Project Exile.
Hicks suggested that others had taken note of the program's singular success and those who had run it.
He noted, for example, that the chief federal prosecutor in Richmond, James B. Comey, has been chosen to become U.S. attorney for the Manhattan borough of New York City.
And Richmond Police Chief Jerry A. Oliver has just been named chief of police in Detroit.

Graphic

 
Photo

Load-Date: January 12, 2002


End of Document