KILLER'S BID TO TRIGGER RACE WAR REJECTED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
June 23, 2015 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2015 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. A-2
Length: 674 words
Body


It's been a tough week for Dylann Roof. During his arraignment for the slaughter of nine black people during a Bible study at the historic Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C., the 21-year-old white supremacist had to endure the forgiveness and compassion of the loved ones of those he murdered.
Even as the ninth-grade dropout was being scalded by red hot coals of forgiveness, he was also being patronized and willfully misunderstood by his own kind. If being taken alive into custody so quickly wasn't humiliating enough for a man who tried to ignite a race war, Mr. Roof had to look on as his murderous handiwork was trivialized as the act of a deranged maniac instead of a proud racial warrior.
Republican presidential candidates and conservative media initially characterized the killings as anti-Christian zealotry, most likely prompted by mental illness. There was no rush to confront the possibility that it was a hate crime grounded in old-fashioned racial animus, not terrorism.
Even FBI Director James Comey relegated Mr. Roof to the back of the terrorism bus. "Based on what I know so far," Mr. Comey said, "I don't see it as a political act. That doesn't make it any less horrific . but terrorism has a definition under federal law."
This was an odd thing for the FBI director to say about a self-avowed white supremacist who had only days before stood over the body of a church pastor whose role as a South Carolina state senator made him a public figure. If assassinating the Rev. Clementa Pinckney doesn't qualify as terrorism, what does?
But Mr. Roof had anticipated legalese from federal bureaucrats and treachery from Republican candidates. He would not allow the premeditation that went into selecting just the right church, with a rich history steeped in both the abolitionist and civil rights movement, to become pathologized by armchair apologists for his evil.
That's why he told one of his victims that he would allow her to live. He needed someone to tell the world what he did without any room for ambiguity.
The murder of nine people was his gospel - a gospel of racial terrorism. He needed the woman to be his witness and tell the world what he had done long after he killed himself.
The kindness of his victims during the hour Mr. Roof sat with them while they studied and prayed with open Bibles didn't matter to him. He shot and reloaded his .45 caliber pistol five times, covering the sanctuary with blood and the shattered remains of their prayers.
It was Mr. Roof's decision to make those nine people the first casualties of a race war he hoped would quickly envelop the country. That's terrorism as deep and wide as anything cobbled together by an amateur making a car bomb in his basement in Queens.
Though on a far smaller scale, it was just as evil as what Timothy McVeigh did. Not even the most obtuse FBI director would ever dream of describing the Oklahoma City bomber's actions as anything other than domestic terrorism.
But politicians and ideologically driven media hacks can be obtuse, which is why the manifesto Mr. Roof hastily uploaded to the Internet will come in handy. After all questions of its authenticity are finally settled, the country will understand the roots and rationale of his hatred.
The ludicrous theory that he is an anti-Christian crusader who just happened to kill blacks can be dismissed. The manifesto doesn't mention the nation's civil religion even once.
The confessed killer's blog includes photos of him waving the Confederate flag, burning the American flag and posing before plantation slave houses and Confederate monuments. His facial expressions reveal him to be a glum loser who believes he can relitigate the Civil War.
Though he absolves his family of raising him racist, Dylann Roof grew up in a region steeped in denial about why the banner of a slave republic still dominates its civic life. If anything, he's an ordinary thug who learned his lessons all too well under a flag of intolerance.
Tony Norman: tnorman@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1631.

Load-Date: June 23, 2015


End of Document