Killing their own ; SHARM EL SHEIK Terrorism displays its own futility
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
July 26, 2005, Tuesday


Copyright 2005 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Business; Pg. A10
Length: 386 words
Body


Add Sharm el Sheik to the list that includes Bali, Istanbul and Riyadh.
When Americans think of victims of terrorism, they probably think of the World Trade Center first, followed by Iraq. They may think of London or Madrid or Israel.
But the victims of radical Islamist terrorism often include Muslims in Islamic countries.
The past weekend's attacks against the Egyptian city of Sharm el Sheik, a coastal resort on the Red Sea at the southern tip of Sinai, is a reminder that terrorists often make victims of their own people, even if the primary targets are non-Muslims. That is one reason why they will fail to change things. It is hard for terrorists to win hearts and minds when they kill innocent people, often the very people they are trying to persuade.
It is not known at this writing who the bombers at Sharm el Sheik were and whether they were affiliated with al-Qaida. Because they attacked a resort that is popular with tourists from Europe as well as the Middle East, they could have been smashing symbols of western decadence. Hyatt, Ritz Carlton, Hilton and Marriott all operate hotels there.
They may have been striking against the Egyptian government. Islamic extremists despise the government of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak because it honors the peace treaty with Israel and cooperates with the United States.
By attacking tourists, the terrorists undermine a foundation of Egypt's economy. Terrorists with that same goal in mind killed tourists at Luxor on the Nile in 1997. By killing tourists, they can damage the government's finances while they drive non-Muslims away.
But by attacking tourists, they also deprive many Egyptians of their livelihoods.
It also is possible that the attacks were part of a narrower dispute between Bedouins and the Egyptian government. At this point early in the investigation, Egyptian authorities have not reached a conclusion about who was responsible and what their motives were.
What everyone should know, however, is that violence like this, directed at innocent civilians, Muslims and non-Muslims alike, is doomed to failure. It will not bring down the government in Cairo or Jakarta or Ankara, just as it did not in Washington or London. It will only strengthen the resolve of Muslims, like civilized people everywhere, to resist and renounce senseless killing.

Load-Date: July 27, 2005


End of Document