King's legacy: Equality struggle goes on
The Salt Lake Tribune
April 5, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL
Length: 700 words
Byline: By Matthew D. LaPlante The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Many people claim to have been students of Martin Luther King JR.. But Julian Bond is one of a very small number of people to have actually sat in a classroom with King as the instructor.
It happened at Morehouse College in 1960, when Bond was a student and the civil rights leader was a visiting professor of philosophy.
On the 40th anniversary of King's assassination, Bond told a Salt Lake City audience Friday that there is still very much to learn.
The insidious legacy of slavery and segregation remains staunchly powerful in modern America, said Bond, chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
"Only my father's generation stands between Julian Bond and human bondage," he said, noting that his grandfather was born in 1861 to a mother who was a slave and a father who was her owner.
Far fewer years separate modern America from a place where Bond - then a 20-year-old college student - was arrested and criminally charged for having the audacity to attempt to order lunch at the Atlanta City Hall cafeteria.
"Two-hundred-and-forty-six years of slavery and 100 years of state-sanctioned discrimination ended only after a major struggle" less than a half-century ago, Bond said at the Marriott Hotel, where he was the opening speaker in a conference, sponsored by the S.J. Quinney School of Law at the University of Utah.
Those who believe that the lasting effects of such immense wrongs have been erased in the past 40 years are "delusional," Bond said.
"The country seems proud, and rightly so, that a candidate is now campaigning in cities where he could not stay in a hotel 40 years ago," Bond said. But he said those who point to Barack Obama and suggest that King's dream had been realized are wrong.
From income to education and from incarceration to heath care, Bond said the gaps separating blacks and whites in America are part of the legacy of slavery and segregation.
Lynette Danley, an assistant professor in the University of Utah College of Education, said Bond's words were a "humbling" call for a renewed focus on the problems of race in America.
"There is a disconnect between the generations of Martin Luther King and today," said Danley, who also lectures on black history and educational gaps. "People say that because they don't see overt forms of racism that it is not there."
Danley - who was born two years after King was slain - said Bond's message was a call "to move beyond that to awareness and social responsibility."
mlaplante@sltrib.com
Nonviolent policy debate
A premise to be shared Tuesday by Gandhian scholar Bart Gruzalski - that nonviolent policies can work where military policies have failed - received a skeptical reaction from two experts on justice and terrorism on Friday.
Debating the application of Martin Luther King's teachings on the modern era of terrorism, scholar Louis René Beres and military prosecutor Morris Davis agreed that a pacifistic national approach was unrealistic.
"It would be nice if the values of Dr. King could guide our policy," said Beres, a professor of political science at Purdue University. But while the principles shared by King and Mahatma Gandhi were appropriate - even effective for bringing about civil change in the United States, Beres said they could not work in every situation. "The principles of Gandhi could not have worked against Hitler as they did against the British," he said. Beres said nonviolent action against international terrorism may be futile, but he lamented that it may be no more futile than the violent responses the U.S. has chosen to employ in its so-called War on Terror. Davis, who resigned last year as chief prosecutor at the Guantanamo Bay prison facility in Cuba, citing objections to political influence in the proceedings, said he didn't believe that one single philosophy of action could be implemented equally in all settings. "I think we need both," he said. "I think we need to kill Osama bin Laden, but we also have to address the root causes," of terrorism, he said.
Gruzalski, professor emeritus at Northeastern University, will speak at 3 p.m. Tuesday at the Hinckley Caucus Room, Orson Spencer Hall, room 225, at the University of Utah. - Matthew D. LaPlante

Load-Date: April 5, 2008


End of Document