King's hearings on Islam put fear above fact-finding
USA TODAY
March 10, 2011 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 554 words
Body


Peter King is a tough-talking congressman who, befitting his New York roots, doesn't have much use for subtlety. He lets fly bluntly with what he believes, and he believes intensely that radicalization of American Muslims is a rising threat that the Muslim community is doing too little to stop. So no wonder his hearings on the issue, beginning today, are drawing fire before the first witness is called. King isn't just on a fact-finding mission. He's trying to set off alarms.
But his pugnacious approach is triggering all the wrong ones, intensifying the very danger he wants to contain.
On one point -- but only one -- King is undeniably right: A threat exists. Who would argue otherwise? Since Sept. 11, 2001, 161 Muslim Americans have been implicated in terrorist acts at home or abroad. Just the last year has seen a Connecticut businessman charged with trying to set off a bomb near Times Square; a teenager arrested in a plot to bomb a Christmas tree lighting ceremony in Portland, Ore.; and a Pakistani-born Virginia man accused of planning to attack Washington-area subway stations.
Disturbing, surely. But to draw sweeping conclusions from those facts alone yields little of value. Much more is already known about the nature of the threat.
The latest comprehensive research emerged last month from the Triangle Center on Terrorism and Homeland Security, a collaboration between Duke University and the University of North Carolina. It sheds light on questions central to King's inquiry:
*Are Muslim Americans increasingly turning to terrorism? The center counted 20 Muslim-American terrorism suspects or perpetrators in 2010, at home and abroad. That's slightly above the post-9/11 average, but the numbers vary so wildly from year to year (47 in 2009, for instance; two in 2008) that it's hard to claim any dramatic trend.
*Are Muslims more prone to terrorism than other Americans? The center concludes that the answer is yes, proportionally.  But it documented more than 20 terrorist plots last year in the USA by non-Muslims.
*Are peaceful Muslims cooperating? Without a doubt. More terrorist plots were disrupted after tips that came from Muslims than from any other source (48 out of 120). King cites anecdotal cases of non-cooperation, which we have no reason to doubt, but that plainly is the exception, not the rule.
The center's work also debunks another common but false impression: that Muslim leaders are not speaking out against Islamist terrorism. They are. What's more, self-policing and radicalism-deterrence programs are spreading through Muslim communities. Such activities fly below the news radar, particularly because Muslims have no national leader, and in the best form King's hearings might help correct the false impression.
For that reason and others, we see no validity in demands that King focus on terrorism generally, not the Muslim component alone. Islamist radicalism poses a unique threat that demands a precise response. But scrutiny should be conducted in a way that draws support from peaceful Muslims, who are motivated to pursue the same goals because they suffer grievously from unjust association with the violent faction of their religion.
King would be wise to open his hearing on that note today. By focusing only on his fears about the traitorous few, he alienates the loyal many. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Henny Ray Abrams, AP

Load-Date: March 10, 2011


End of Document