Kings Bay runs terrorism drill
The Brunswick News (Georgia)
March 22, 2012 Thursday


Copyright 2012 The Brunswick News
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 493 words
Byline: Gordon Jackson, The Brunswick News, Ga.
Body


March 22--The scenario is terrifying and unthinkable on American soil and, unfortunately, a very real possibility despite high security at the nation's military bases.
A terrorist with explosives strapped to his body takes hostages at a military health clinic and threatens to blow up everyone inside the building. A negotiator convinces the terrorist to release most of the hostages, but the standoff ends tragically when the terrorist detonates the bomb, killing himself and two remaining hostages.
Luckily, the standoff never happened. But emergency and security at Kings Bay Naval Submarine Base responded as if the attack was real when role players acting as terrorists and hostages took over the clinic Wednesday.
All Navy bases in the nation are facing different mock disasters this week as part of an annual drill.
Officials said the national drill, called Solid Curtain -- Citadel Shield this year, will continue to disrupt some operations on and near Navy bases until Saturday.
Each Navy base has been dealing with different mock threats that may impact other bases during the drill, said Scott Bassett, a public affairs officer at Kings Bay.
The exercise at Kings Bay began Monday with a bomb threat made over the telephone. As events continue to escalate during the week, the impact will be noticed most by those on base and those trying to get on base, Bassett said. The threat level will be raised to "Condition Charlie" on base today.
"The Navy understands that raising the force protection condition may impact local traffic patterns but is committed to minimizing congestion," he said. "We're telling folks if you don't have to be on base, don't come here. They can come to work, but it would lessen the burden on everyone if they don't."
Civilian employees and contractors have been asked to take the day off work, if possible, he said.
Most Kings Bay staff won't know the specific mock threat that will lead to heightened security on base until it happens.
"I actually don't know how this will ramp up," he said. "It might not be something that specifically happens here."
After the drill ends, the response from all participating bases will be evaluated.
"Realistic training scenarios and responses like those practiced in Exercise Solid Curtain -- Citadel Shield 2012 enable the Navy to maintain our forces at a high level of readiness to ensure the safety of personnel, information and equipment," Bassett said. "The ability to safeguard our naval installations allows us to keep our homeland safe and protect U.S. interests overseas."
The results of the exercise will remain secret, he said.
"It is Navy policy to never discuss the specifics of force protection to safeguard processes and procedures that enhance security," he said. "Therefore, the details of the exercise will not be released."
___ (c)2012 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: March 22, 2012


End of Document