Kissinger has helped appease terrorism
USA TODAY
December 4, 2002, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 473 words
Body

Appointing Henry Kissinger to a commission to investigate the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks is like appointing Neville Chamberlain to probe how Adolf Hitler became so powerful ("Kissinger, Mitchell vow thorough probe," War on terrorism, News, Monday).
Kissinger is one a whole rogues gallery of unprincipled, pragmatic compromisers -- including presidents Carter, Reagan, Bush (the first) and Clinton -- who have appeased terrorists and terrorist-sponsoring states for decades.
That has included failing to retaliate when Iran took American diplomats hostage, aiding and abetting the Palestine Liberation Organization, and having diplomatic ties and giving aid to terrorist-supporting regimes.
With the engraved invitation our politicians have given them, is it any wonder terrorists have progressed from taking hostages to killing Americans by the dozens, then by the hundreds and finally by the thousands?
Bill Bucko
Mount Clemens, Mich.
'Secrecy' is his trademark
It is sad irony that President Bush's choice to investigate Sept. 11, 2001, is Henry Kissinger, a man wanted in other countries for alleged war crimes.
Kissinger has made a life of secrecy ("Kissinger announcement nearly as secretive as he," Hype & Glory column, News, Friday).
He seems to have been selected to cover up. This is shameless behavior by the president.
Robert E. Griffin
Forty Fort, Pa.
Colorblind criteria
American universities award athletic scholarships to the best athletes without regard to race. The result is that college athletes -- particularly in football and basketball -- are predominantly African American.
In the NCAA basketball tournament, which features the best basketball teams in the nation, it is not unusual to see an African-American player in every starting position. I have no problem with this because these magnificent, young athletes are chosen on the basis of their athletic abilities.
The system used to award athletic scholarships is fair and works.
Academic scholarships should be awarded on the basis of academic potential without regard to race ("Case could reshape college admissions," News, Monday). The system, practiced in schools such as the University of Michigan, is not only unfair but excludes some of the best and brightest -- perhaps future Nobel Prize winners. Universities should give academic scholarships with the same disregard for race as they award football and basketball scholarships.
James A. Bond
Maggie Valley, N.C.
Lucky turkey
I was touched by the article "Plucked from the platter" (Life, Nov. 27).
Thank you for this amazing story about a family's -- the Crisps of Somerset, Calif. -- compassion for an animal, in this case a turkey.
Many people have little feeling for the turkey as a living creature. They also have no knowledge or don't want to think about the process of eating animals.
Vicki Murfin
Satellite Beach, Fla.

Load-Date: December 4, 2002


End of Document