Knowledge is power in case of terrorism
USA TODAY
December 10, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; HEALTH AND BEHAVIOR
Length: 1284 words
Byline: Kathleen Fackelmann
Body

Only one out of four Americans passed a test indicating they had basic knowledge that would help them survive a terrorist attack, according to a survey released today.
People don't want to think about the attacks on the World Trade Center Sept. 11, 2001, or the fact that another attack could come, but information on weapons of terror can both ease the fear and help people respond better in an emergency, says Steven Brill, chairman of The America Prepared Campaign Inc., a non-profit group in New York City.
"Such knowledge can save lives," says Brill, whose group sponsored the survey on such subjects as chemical attacks, "dirty bombs" and biological terrorism. Lunz Research Companies conducted the telephone survey, which had a margin of error of 3 percentage points.
Most people flunked the test: Only 25% got five of the nine questions right. The survey found that 81% didn't know what to do to survive a chemical attack, the deliberate release of a toxic gas or chemical. Most people who got the wrong answer picked the two most dangerous things they could do: They said they would stop to find something to cover their nose or mouth or wait for an emergency crew to arrive.
Both actions could be deadly, says Irwin Redlener, director of the National Center for Disaster Preparedness at Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health and an adviser to the campaign. A toxic gas or chemical can kill within seconds, he says.
The correct answer: Get out of the area -- fast.
Only 14% of the people in the survey said they had created a family communications plan or an emergency kit. Both actions can help people survive a terrorist attack. They also can help make life easier during a natural disaster or a power outage, Brill says.
All Americans should have a three-day supply of food and water, a first-aid kit, a battery-powered radio and enough batteries to get them through an emergency, he says. In addition, families should have a plan in case they are not together when disaster strikes.
Angelo Acquista, author of The Survival Guide: What to do in a Biological, Chemical, or Nuclear Emergency, says he was not surprised by the test results. Many Americans, even after 9/11, don't really believe another attack can happen here, he says. Others don't want to deal with the anxiety the subject brings up.
"Knowledge is the antidote to fear," Acquista says. Americans can do a lot to remove the fear from the terrorist's arsenal simply by learning as much as they can about how to survive an attack, he says.
To learn the basics, log onto the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's Web site, ready.gov.
Take the test
1) Three of the following are crucial to terrorism preparedness, but one is not. Which one is not?
a. Creating a family plan
b. Stockpiling antibiotics
c. Becoming knowledgeable about types of potential attacks and responses
d. Making an emergency-preparedness kit
e. Don't know
2) Three of the following should be included in a family communications plan, but one should not. Which one should not?
a. A list of important phone numbers, including doctors and emergency services
b. An out-of-town contact that all family members can call
c. A provision for each person in the family to be at a specific land line telephone at a specific time
d. Knowledge of the emergency plan in place at your children's schools
e. Don't know
3) True or false: If a disease could become an epidemic, then it is always contagious.
True False Don't know
4) True or false: You are in the vicinity of an explosion. It is a good idea to cover your nose and mouth with a cotton T-shirt or dust mask as soon as possible.
True False Don't know
5) Which of the following is an accurate description of a "dirty bomb"?
a. A miniature nuclear device
b. An explosive device that disseminates chemicals
c. An explosive device that releases a biological agent
c. An explosive device that spreads radioactive materials over a targeted area
e. Don't know
6) Three of the following are true of a biological attack, but one is not. Which is not true of a biological attack?
a. A biological attack may not be immediately obvious
b. A biological attack is the deliberate release of germs or other biological substances that can make you sick
c. A biological agent can make you sick by being inhaled, by being eaten or through contact with the skin or mucous membranes
d. All biological attacks create contagious diseases
e. Don't know
7) True or False: A "dirty bomb" is an explosive device that is always especially dangerous, because, even if it contains a small amount of radioactive material, it will kill everyone within a 5-mile area of the explosion and make buildings in the area so radioactive that the area will be uninhabitable for years to come.
True False Don't know
Answers
(Percentage who chose each answer is in parentheses)
1) a. (8.8%) b. (64.6%) c. (9.7%) d. (6.5%) e. (10.5%)
Answer: b. Stockpiling antibiotics is not recommended; it is impossible to predict the exact nature of the next biological attack, and there is not one antibiotic that effectively treats all bioterrorist-related sicknesses. Inappropriate use of antibiotics can lead to dangerous side effects and exacerbate the problem of antibiotic-resistant strains.
2) a. (10.7%) b.(17.3%) c. (49.3%) d. (11.3%) e. (11.5%)
Answer: c. The provision for each family member to be at a specific land line at a specific time may not be possible or useful under many conditions. Family members may have to evacuate, or land-line communication may be disrupted by power failure.
A plan should be flexible enough to accommodate unforeseen conditions. Knowledge of your child's school plan is essential if you expect your family to reunite after an attack. It may be easier to reach an out-of-town contact than a number within your own city. A list of important numbers is common sense. Finally, a central meeting spot should be a fallback option.
3) True (38.9%) False (58.6%) Don't know (2.5%)
Answer: False. Anthrax, botulism and salmonella are all examples of biological agents that could create a non-contagious epidemic.
4) True (90.1%) False (8.2%) Don't know (1.7%)
Answer: True. In an explosion of an unknown cause, a dust mask or T-shirt would help to avoid exposure to particles such as asbestos or radioactive dust. Exposure to radioactive particles may not always be lethal (X-rays are not generally lethal), but the particles may be carcinogenic. It's best to limit exposure.
5) a. (8.6%) b. (14.1%) c. (23.7%) c. (37.3%) e. (16.3%)
Answer: d. The term "dirty bomb" is used to denote an explosive device that is designed to spread radioactive materials over a targeted area.
6) a. (13%) b. (3.7%) c. (5.6%) d. (70.6%) e. (7.1%)
Answer: d. See question 3; there are several biological agents (such as anthrax) that are not contagious.
7) True (44.1%) False (45.4%) Don't know (10.5%)
Answer: False. A "dirty bomb" can needlessly increase fear and panic if too much is assumed based on its frightening name. People may be killed by the initial blast, as they would with any bomb. A "dirty bomb" is designed to disperse radioactive dust. That dust may contaminate the surrounding area and cause radiological sickness in some people who were not killed by the blast. But the area may be only contaminated for a short time depending on the amount of radiological material used, and although some of those who were exposed to the blast and/or radioactive material may be subject to an increased risk of cancer, not all of the individuals struck by radiation sickness will get cancer and even fewer will die.
Source: Telephone random survey of 1,004 adults by the Luntz Research Companies over three nights beginning on Dec. 1, 2003. Margin of error is plus or minus 3 percentage points.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Sara Phipps for USA TODAY; Preparing for the worst: A firefighter examines a victim" during a bioterrorism drill in Edmond, Okla. Experts say that many Americans, even after 9/11, don't believe that an attack can happen here.

Load-Date: December 10, 2003


End of Document