KOHL PUSHES TOUGHER LAWS TO BLOCK TERRORISTS; PROPOSED BILL MAKES BOMBINGS FEDERAL CRIMES
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
April 21, 1995, Friday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 487 words
Byline: KAREN J. COHEN WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing, the Senate has scheduled hearings next week on an anti-terrorism bill that Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., said is needed to deal with the increased threat of terrorism.
Kohl, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee's terrorism panel, Thursday declared the bombing ''a grim wake-up call that we need to be more vigilant to prevent these attacks in the future.''
The bill, he said, ''will make it far easier for the federal government to swiftly deal with suspected terrorists.''
The measure, introduced at the request of the Clinton administration, would make political terrorism a federal crime and increase punishment to include the death penalty -- already available for some terrorist acts.
The bill also lets the government prohibit fundraising in the United States by known terrorist organizations. It would also make it easier to deport aliens living in the United States who had once engaged in terrorism or are presently involved in terrorist activities.
Kohl introduced the measure in concert with Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., who chairs the terrorism subcommittee; Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, and Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the Republican from New York, where terrorists bombed the World Trade Center two years ago.
Read in the light of Wednesday's attack, Kohl's words spoken on the Senate floor in February are eerie: ''Though Americans are less at risk of terrorist attack than citizens of other countries, we are not immune and we never will be, so long as we are a democracy with open borders. The concrete barriers now gracing the entrances to the World Trade Center… are a stark reminder of that.''
But, he continued, the United States with its free and open society, ''should not be free and open to movements and organizations that facilitate terror and wanton violence -- whether in our communities or across the world.''
And in hindsight, D'Amato's remarks were nearly prophetic.
''What we are seeing today is an exponential increase in violence across the globe,'' D'Amato said. ''We must prevent another World Trade Center-like operation from taking place. The bill we are introducing here today will close loopholes and shore up jurisdiction problems and allow us to get our hands on these murdering terrorists before they get a chance to act
'' The House held hearings on the measure in early April, where Arab and Muslim groups argued that under the bill, Islamic communities would be singled out for government surveillance and possible persecution.
It would, said the group's leaders, stifle fund raising for educational and social efforts designed to benefit refugees in the Middle East.
Also drawing controversy is a provision in the bill that would give judges power to review and use classified evidence that might not be provided to the accused.
Specter said that hearings on the measure will explore these areas as well.

Load-Date: April 22, 1995


End of Document