Koreas unite against terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 16, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 713 words
Byline: New York Times News Service
Body


SEOUL, South Korea -- A ministerial delegation from North Korea arrived here Saturday to begin four days of meetings heavily dominated by the issue of terrorism. It is the first high-level dialogue between the nations in six months.
The hastily arranged discussions came about after North Korea suddenly accepted a South Korean invitation last week. It was apparently an effort by the North to shield the South's former unification minister, Lim Dong Won, from mounting domestic criticism that South Korea had been providing large-scale economic aid to the North with scant political benefits to show.
Lim has been a forceful advocate of rapprochement between the two countries. North Korea's acceptance of the invitation came too late to save Lim, who resigned last week and was replaced, along with much of the Cabinet.
Meanwhile, analysts of Korean affairs said the international context for talks between the two countries has shifted drastically because of this week's terrorist attacks on the United States. Long-stalled projects, like opening rail lines between the two countries and arranging more frequent visits between families separated by the Korean War, are taking a back seat to declarations of opposition to international terrorism.
During a toast before the talks began, the South Korean prime minister, Lee Han Dong, proposed to North Korea that it join the front against terrorism. But the North's chief negotiator, Kim Ryong Song, had already declared that North Korea "felt sorry about the attacks." Earlier, the North Korean government had described the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon as "a shocking incident, which we think is very regrettable." Kim insisted, however, that the issue of terrorism must be kept separate from reconciliation talks between the two countries. Comments like these reflect how the week's events in the United States have abruptly taken on a central importance in rapprochement between the two countries, in which little progress has been made since a summit meeting in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, in June 2000. The Bush administration had taken a much more skeptical view of North Korea than the Clinton administration, citing North Korea's production of crude missiles as a prime justification for a proposed shield against intercontinental weapons.
Missile exports to Pakistan and a variety of Middle Eastern counuries are widely believed to be a leading earner of foreign currency for impoverished North Korea, and the country is unlikely to abandon them without'a guarantee of a suitable substitute.
North Korea's access to badly needed international financial assistance has been blocked in large part by Washiogton's classification of the country as a sponsor of international terrorism. This label dates to a series of distant but unforgotten events, from the harboring of the hijackers of a Japanese Airlines jet in 1970 to a 1987 bombing attack against a Korean Air jet in Myanmar, which killed 115 people.
Thomas C. Hubbard, the U.S. ambassador to South Korea, said this week that the United States supports the resumption of high-level diplomacy between the two Koreas. "I can't imagine why they should have any impact," he said of the terrorist attacks. "We remain interested in building peace around the world even as we deal with this terrible terrorism problem."
But others said that both governments have reason to fear that the United States, which has declared all-out war against terrorism, will also now begin to define Pyongyang's missiles -- which could be used to carry nuclear, chemical or biological arms -- as weapons of terrorism. If the United States were to take such an approach, progress in bilateral relations between the two Koreas would become vastly more difficult.
"Personally, I don't think we can expect much from these talks because of the problems in the United States," said Park Young Ho, an adjunct fellow at the Hudson Institute and analyst at the Korea Institute for National Unification. "North Korea may try to take advantage of the situation by being more conciliatory and more positive. But they are also likely to ask for more assistance, and the Bush administration is likely to take a harder stance, especially on issues like missile exports and terrorism."

Load-Date: September 16, 2001


End of Document