Kosovo rebels agree to sign accord Serbs say efforts by U.S. make envoys advocates of terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
February 23, 1999, Tuesday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 446 words
Body


RAMBOUILLET, France - After 17 days of negotiations, the ethnic
Albanians have agreed to sign a Kosovo peace agreement within two
weeks, the State Department said today.
James P. Rubin, the State Department spokesman, told reporters that
ethnic Albanians said they would sign after "technical consultations"
with residents in Kosovo, where a year-long conflict between
separatists and the Serbs has killed more than 2,000 people.
The announcement came nearly 1 1/2 hours after the deadline for the
Kosovo peace conference passed today with the Serbs and ethnic
Albanians entrenched in their positions despite NATO threats of
airstrikes.
The ethnic Albanian delegation signed a statement approving the
agreement in the presence of Christopher Hill, the chief U.S. mediator
and ambassador to Macedonia.
The Serb side, meanwhile, continues to reject NATO deployment in
Kosovo and raised further objections to a political agreement.
At the White House this morning, President Clinton expressed hope for
"some sort of resolution" today. There has been "a lot of progress,"
he said, including a 40-page document, but there are "still some
important disagreements."
Yugoslav deputy Prime Minister Vuk Draskovic described the talks as a
failure, blaming U.S. officials who he said "want the blood of the
Serbs."
"I am afraid the Rambouillet conference failed and we must say very
clearly who is guilty for that," Draskovic told Associated Press
Television News.
Calling U.S. officials "advocates of Albanian terrorism," Draskovic
accused them of attempts "to produce failure of the conference and
blame the Serbs."
In Pristina, capital of Kosovo, the political wing of the Kosovo
Liberation Army said it was sticking to its demands for a referendum
on independence and NATO guarantees of any accord.
Rubin said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright is "hoping that
Kosovo Albanians will seize the historic opportunity for peace that
they never had before, a historic opportunity in which they will get
something they never had before, which is autonomy, real
self-government, running their own lives, getting rid of Serbian
forces that have oppressed them, and bringing in NATO troops to
protect them."
Peace appeared as elusive as ever today in Kosovo. New fighting broke
out between Yugoslav army troops and Serb police and the ethnic
Albanian rebels amid heightened tensions over the fate of the peace
talks.
Clinton called anew today for both sides in the Kosovo conflict to
restrain themselves.
With the threat of NATO airstrikes hanging over Yugoslavia, Albright
tried this afternoon to persuade at least Kosovo Albanian side to sign
the entire agreement, which contains no mention of future
independence, or even a
referendum.

Load-Date: February 24, 1999


End of Document