KREMLIN CALLS OFF TALKS ON SUMMIT
The New York Times
April 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 1009 words
Byline: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MOSCOW, April 15
Body


The Soviet Union responded today to the American military attack on Libya by canceling a planned meeting between Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze in mid-May.
The United States Ambassador, Arthur A. Hartman, was summoned to the Foreign Ministry late in the afternoon to receive a formal protest from the Soviet Government and was informed that the meeting had been called off, Western diplomats said. [The White House criticized the Soviet Union for canceling the meeting. The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said the move cast doubt on the Kremlin's position on terrorism and on its intent to take part in a summit meeting this year. Page A16.] '86 Summit Still Possible A Soviet Government statement said Washington's ''criminal action'' had made it impossible to hold high-level discussions and warned that continued American military action against Libya would force Moscow to draw ''more far-reaching conclusions.''
Senior Western diplomats said that cancellation of the Shultz-Shevardnadze meeting would delay planning for a visit to Washington this year by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, but that it did not mean a summit meeting in the United States was out of the question in 1986.
''The Soviet response was really the minimum action they could take,'' one senior diplomat said. ''It's firm enough to give them credibility with their allies and solidarity with the Arab countries, but it does no permanent damage to relations with Washington.''
The meeting between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Shevardnadze, which had been scheduled for May 14-16 in Washington, was intended to lay the groundwork and possibly set a date for Mr. Gorbachev's visit to Washington. Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Reagan agreed in principle at their meeting last November that Mr. Gorbachev would go to Washington in 1986 and that Mr. Reagan would go to Moscow in 1987.
The cancellation of the ShultzShevardnadze meeting, diplomats said, made it unlikely that a summit meeting in Washington could be arranged in June or July, the time preferred by the White House. Administration officials have said the next possible time would be in November or early December, after the Congressional elections.
 
Accord Reached With Dobrynin
Agreement on the May meeting was reached in Washington last week when President Reagan met with the departing Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin. It was viewed as a sign that relations between Moscow and Washington were picking up after a period of renewed tension earlier this year.
The Soviet Government statement, alluding to the United States air strikes against Libyan targets Monday, said:
''The Soviet leadership has warned that such actions cannot but affect relations between the U.S.S.R. and the United States. Unfortunately, this warning was not heeded in Washington. In effect, the Administration itself has made impossible at this stage the planned meeting on the level of foreign ministers.''
A report on the attack that was broadcast on the evening television news said no Russians in Libya had been harmed.
The Soviet Union accused Washington of violating the United Nations Charter and called the attack ''a flagrant mockery of international law and human morality.''
President Reagan, in announcing the strike on Monday, said it was fully consistent with the United Nations Charter, which generally prohibits the use of military force except in cases of self-defense or in conformity with decisions of international bodies.
The Soviet statement added, ''The latest actions of the United States convince even the few in the West who still had some illusions about the true intentions of the White House that its present policy is a policy of aggression that provokes regional conflicts, a policy of perpetuating confrontation and balancing on the brink of war.''
 
Little Choice for Soviet Seen
Diplomats said Moscow had little choice but to take some diplomatic action against the United States. After American and Libyan forces clashed last month, the Soviet Union condemned American actions but did not make the incident a major issue.
The diplomats said it was unclear at what point, if any, Moscow would feel compelled to intervene more directly.
Although the Soviet Union has provided Libya with billions of dollars in arms over the last decade and has defended the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, when he was criticized by Washington, Moscow has considered the Libyan leader an unreliable partner, according to diplomats. The diplomats said it was unlikely Moscow would want to risk a major confrontation with Washington to protect an ally of questionable value.
Still, they said, Soviet leaders would have to consider the alternative risk of appearing to give ground to an increasingly assertive United States.
The Soviet Government press agency, Tass, quoted Mr. Gorbachev as having told Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson of Sweden, who was in Moscow today: ''This action, which cannot be justified by any arguments, is a link in the chain of challenging and provocative actions of the United States taken in response to the Soviet Union's peace initiatives.'' ----U.S. Criticizes Soviet Decision WASHINGTON, April 15 - Mr. Speakes, the White House spokesman, said today that the Soviet Union's decision to cancel the foreign ministers' meeting cast doubt on its attitude toward international terrorism and its intentions on participating in a summit meeting this year.
''We regret the Soviet decision and consider it a mistake,'' Mr. Speakes said. ''The Soviet decision shows where they stand on the important issue of international terrorism. It also says something about their commitment to work constructively on issues on the U.S.-Soviet agenda, including arms reductions and regional crises.''
At the State Department, Bernard Kalb, the spokesman, said: ''We regret this decision. We did the right, we did the necessary, thing in combating terrorism. We call on everyone, including the Soviet Union to join, to get aboard in what should be a global battle against terrorism.''


End of Document