Kuwaiti police capture reputed terrorism boss in deadly raid
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 1, 2005 Tuesday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A05
Length: 352 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: KUWAIT CITY 
Body


Police burst into suspected terrorist hideouts throughout a tranquil suburb Monday, arresting a reputed terrorism boss and setting off a ferocious gunbattle that killed at least four of his followers and a bystander.
The raid was the fourth in three weeks against suspected militants opposed to U.S. troops in Kuwait.
Kuwait increased security in late December around important installations, including oil sites, following terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia. Soon after, the government began conducting raids against suspected militants.
The first two, on Jan. 10 and Jan. 15, sparked clashes that killed two suspects and two police officers.
On Sunday, security forces fought with militants in a residential district of Kuwait City in violence that killed three -- a militant, a police officer, and a bystander.
In Monday's raid, police arrested six suspected militants, including alleged ringleader Amer Khlaif al-Enezi. The government said four militants and a bystander were killed, but Kuwait TV reported Monday night that one of the arrested militants, who was wounded in the fighting, had died. It was not known if any suspected insurgents escaped.
The government provided little information on al-Enezi, but a resident of the tribal city of al-Jahra told The Associated Press that he used to preach at a local mosque, exhorting young men to attack Americans, Kuwaiti security forces and even moderate Muslim clerics.
The resident, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the preacher, in his 30s, was fired more than six months ago.
The interior minister, Sheik Nawwaf Al Ahmed Al Sabah, said the suspects targeted Monday were part of "an organized terror group" but said their aims and their backers would only be revealed by investigations. 
Sheik Salem Al Ali Al Sabah, the head of Kuwait's national guard, has previously linked some local militants to al-Qaida.
Kuwait, unlike neighboring Saudi Arabia, has not suffered terrorist attacks on residential or government buildings.
Extremists operating since 2002 have targeted the U.S. military, killing one U.S. Marine and a U.S. civilian contracted to the military.

Load-Date: February 1, 2005


End of Document