L.A. AIRPORT SHOOTING: Line between hate crime, terrorism fuzzier
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 6, 2002 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 296 words
Byline: MONI BASU
Body


The FBI suggested Friday that the July Fourth shooting at the Los Angeles airport might be a hate crime rather than an act of terrorism, but the distinction between the two is becoming increasingly fuzzy, a Georgia State University scholar said.
"We are not ruling out hate crime," said FBI agent Richard Garcia.
AJC"We are not ruling out terrorism completely, and we are not ruling out other types of issues that it may be a random act of violence. That all goes to the motive."
Hate crimes are generally defined as heinous acts that are specifically directed against religious, ethnic or racial groups. Pure acts of terrorism, on the other hand, are clearly motivated by politics, said Robert Friedmann, professor of criminal justice at Georgia State University. The 1993 Iraqi assassination attempt on former President George Bush fits the terrorism bill.
But in today's world, the difference between the two is increasingly unclear, said Friedmann, citing the Sept. 11 tragedy as an example of both. The two types of crimes are almost always synonymous in the case of Israel, which exists as a Jewish homeland, he said.
"When the target is Israel or Jewish, the line between what constitutes a hate crime and terrorism is even more blurred," Friedmann said.
Israeli officials said they are treating the incident as a terror attack.
The FBI's hesitation in calling the Los Angeles attack terrorism might stem from the lack of a political connection, Friedmann said. That's why a spate of church burnings in the 1990s was labeled individually as hate crimes but not terrorism.
"Part of the reason is because they were committed by loners and not organized groups," Friedmann said. "What happened Thursday had all the signs of a terrorist act minus the declaration of responsibility."

Load-Date: July 6, 2002


End of Document