L.A. police scrap plan to map city's Muslim areas
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
November 15, 2007, Thursday


Copyright 2007 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P6D
Length: 341 words
Byline: LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


LOS ANGELES - The Los Angeles Police Department abruptly scrapped its plan to create a mapping program for the city's Muslim community, saying instead it would focus on a "community outreach'' strategy more palatable to local civil-rights activists.
The decision marks a major retreat for the department, which had said the mapping was necessary to better identify isolated Muslim communities where home-grown terrorism could breed.
Over the past week, the plan had been roundly criticized by Muslim groups and civil libertarians, and others questioned whether it was even possible to map the far-flung community.
LAPD Deputy Chief Michael P. Downing said Wednesday that, in the wake of the protests, officials would drop the mapping aspect of the plan but continue an attempt to make inroads into the Muslim community through outreach efforts.
In a document reviewed by the Los Angeles Times last week, the LAPD's counterterrorism bureau proposed using U.S. Census data and other demographic information to pinpoint various Muslim communities and then reach out to them through social-service agencies.
Originally, the LAPD planned to partner with the University of Southern California's National Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events to help build the mapping program. But after details of the effort were made public last week, USC officials said they were carefully studying whether to join the endeavor.
During testimony Oct. 30 before Congress, Downing described the program broadly as an attempt to "mitigate radicalization.'' At that time, he said law-enforcement agencies nationwide faced "a vicious, amorphous and unfamiliar adversary on our land.''
Downing and other law-enforcement officials said police agencies around the world were dealing with radical Muslim groups that were isolated from the larger community, making them potential breeding grounds for terrorism. He cited terrorism cells in Europe as well as the case of some Muslim extremists in New Jersey arrested in May for allegedly planning to bomb Fort Dix.

Load-Date: November 16, 2007


End of Document