L.A. offers $1 Million in manhunt; As trail grows cold, city officials vow to capture ex-cop with vendetta
USA TODAY
February 11, 2013 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 382 words
Byline: William M. Welch, @williammwelch, USA TODAY
Body


City officials offered a $1 million reward Sunday for information leading to the capture of a fugitive ex-cop accused of waging "domestic terrorism" on police families as the hunt for Christopher Dorner widened.
As the trail grew cold in the snow-covered San Bernardino Mountains where Dorner's burned-out truck was found Thursday, Los Angeles Police Chief Charlie Beck said his officers were searching elsewhere, too, and protecting more than 50 police families considered likely targets of the revenge rampage.
Dorner, 33, is wanted in three slayings in the past week: a Riverside police officer, the daughter of a former Los Angeles police captain and the woman's fianc. Dorner is the object of one of the region's biggest manhunts ever, and Beck said the reward was the largest ever in Southern California.
"Why so large? This is an act, and make no mistake about it, of domestic terrorism," Beck said. "This is a man who has targeted those who we entrust to protect the public. His actions cannot go unanswered.
"Every day that Dorner is loose, the likelihood of an attack on either a uniformed police officer or family of a police officer is likely."
Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, joined by other community leaders and federal law enforcement officers, vowed that Dorner will be stopped. "We will not tolerate a killer targeting our officers and their families, targeting innocent people in this city and in this region," he said.
Police were investigating a taunting phone call  made to Randal Quan, father of Monica Quan, the woman they believe Dorner killed. Two law enforcement officers speaking anonymously because of the investigation told the Associated Press they are trying to determine whether Dorner made the call days after the killing.
Monica Quan was found dead of multiple gunshots with her fianc, Keith Lawrence, in a car outside their Irvine condominium Feb. 3. Randal Quan  represented Dorner at personnel hearings that resulted in Dorner's firing.
Beck has  ordered a re-examination of that personnel case and other complaints Dorner made in a rambling online screed in which he recalled perceived injustices, racial discrimination and slurs from childhood through his brief police career as motivation for a revenge rampage.
Contributing: John Bacon; Associated Press 

Load-Date: February 11, 2013


End of Document