Label domestic terrorism properly
USA TODAY
February 24, 2010 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 313 words
Body


USA TODAY's  front-page story Friday contained a troubling title, "In Austin, a chilling echo of terrorism." The article and its title continued a baffling trend in the coverage of the domestic terrorism in Austin.  It described the incident as an "echo" of terrorism, rather than as an instance of terrorism (Cover story, News).
The word terrorist or terrorism occurred only  five times in the body of the article, and none was used to describe Joseph Stack, the alleged pilot.  One use described the "radical Islamic terrorists" on Sept. 11, 2001.  Another use  referred to  the fear of Rep. Michael McCaul that terrorists would see the damage Stack caused and imitate him.
Why did the article  miss the fact that this was a terrorist act? As an Oklahoma City native, I want to remind your readers that terrorism is not  monopolized by Islamic radicals, and to ask that  USA TODAY refrain from  insinuating that it is.
Seth Vannatta
Makanda, Ill.
Allies in terror war
Commentary writer Marc Thiessen conveniently forgets that we have allies in the "war on terror." These allies are sovereign nations, and when al-Qaeda terrorists are captured on their soil, they have first jurisdiction, unless agreed to otherwise ("Outsourcing the war on terror," The Forum, Thursday).
If Yemen, Pakistan and others are joining us in that war, isn't that a foreign policy victory for America,  one to be shared among Republicans and Democrats?
Thiessen is a known advocate of the use of "enhanced interrogation techniques"  on captured suspected terrorists and would ostensibly be happy that someone is doing that dirty work.
I also disagree with his conclusion that we do not have a program for high-value terrorists. It seems he just disagrees with that program.
What is wrong with holding the moral high ground, while capturing and interrogating or killing terrorists?
Roger Grubic
Ormond Beach, Fla. 

Load-Date: February 24, 2010


End of Document