Lack of education pushing Americans out of job market
USA TODAY
April 4, 2011 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 569 words
Body


Mitt Romney's recent USA TODAY Forum piece is interesting, and most of it I agree with. However, he appears to be afraid to tackle what many know is the real issue: We have an under-education problem, not an unemployment problem ("Romney: On jobs, where is Obama's leadership?," Thursday).
It would be interesting to know why companies in Taunton, Mass., did not show up to offer jobs during the town's recent jobs fair, as Romney stated. Perhaps they have tried citywide job fairs and are unwilling to waste resources speaking to a thousand recent high school graduates or college graduates with bachelor's degrees in the humanities, when they need experts in technology, science and math.
The front page of USA TODAY's March 30 edition included a story about the "frenzy of hiring" in the tech sector ("Hiring is hot again for tech sector").
In the 21st century, if you are not educated in genetic engineering, robotics, computer science, bioremediation or nanoscience, your outlook for employment is bleak, not only in the U.S. but worldwide.
Robert T. Chambers
Breckenridge, Minn.
Bring back factory jobs
There is an easy fix for our crippled economy: Bring our factory jobs back to the USA.
Companies that have moved jobs to other countries to save money should be heavily taxed to encourage them to keep job opportunities here. It is their fault this economy is in the toilet. When we had factories in this country we also had high employment, comparatively low housing mortgage failures and higher rates of tourism and travel. No one would complain about paying a higher price for products made in the USA if the quality was there.  Instead, we have to look to the past to see what prosperity looks like.
Elaine Wiegand
Motley, Minn.
It's the wars, stupid
Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz estimated in 2008 that we were spending approximately $16 billion a month in Iraq and Afghanistan, draining our economy at the federal and state level.
In that same month, the money could have employed 262,500 teachers, provided nearly 2 million children with day care and covered the annual health care costs for 5 million people.
It's clear that the Iraq and Afghan wars, started by the Bush administration, are directly responsible for draining the economy. Instead of reporting the same, mundane details about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the news media should be making more direct ties to spending on the wars and our poor economy.
Jim Hanson
Winter Park, Fla.
Tax wealthy, corporations
Capitalism or economic terrorism?
Hundreds of thousands of Britons recently took to the streets to protest what they called economic terrorism -- the inequity between taxes paid by the ultrawealthy and those paid by everyone else.
Many working-class Americans seem to think it's acceptable for the wealthy and their corporations to pay little, and sometimes no, taxes. Why aren't Americans in the streets protesting? Shills like Rush Limbaugh, Glenn Beck and Ann Coulter have turned politics into perverse entertainment featuring verbal abuse, hate speech and falsehoods  that keep working-class Americans divided and disenfranchised.
United, Americans are a force to be reckoned with. Divided, we will continue to live under oppressive economic terrorism. Our elected officials need to get the point: Extracting tax dollars from corporations and their ultrawealthy owners is sound economics.
Michael K. Broughton
Green Park, Mo. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Paul Sakuma, AP

Load-Date: April 4, 2011


End of Document