LANCE CPL. KENNETH ADAM MILLER
Hart County's Newspaper News-Herald (Horse Cave, Kentucky)
July 19, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 Hart County's Newspaper News-Herald


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 275 words
Byline: Hart Countys News-Herald staff
Body


GLASGOW - Lance Cpl. Kenneth Adam Miller, 20 of Glasgow died Sunday July 1, 2012 in Yucca Valley, California. He was stationed at the Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine Palms in Twentynine Palms, CA. He achieved the rank of Lance Corporal in June of 2011 and was with the Third Light Armored Reconnaissance Battalion.
Adam received two awards, the Global War on Terrorism Ser-vice Medal and the National Defense Service Medal.
He was born June 7, 1992 in Middletown, NY the son of Tammy Jo Miller of Glasgow and Timothy S. Miller of Temple Hill. He was a 2010 graduate of Barren Co. High School and had attended the Gethsemane Baptist Church in Glasgow.
In addition to his parents, he is survived by his wife Grace also stationed in California with the USMC; a brother Clyde Miller of Temple Hill; a sister Makayla Miller of Scottsville; Maternal Grandmother Lora Burd of Scottsville; Maternal Grandfather Keith Turner of Glasgow; Paternal Grandmother Marie Miller of Temple Hill; Maternal Great-Grandmothers Dorothy Burd of Scottsville and Dorothy Melvin of Canmer; his mother-in-law Elizabeth Semernezski of Bowling Green; 2 sisters-in-law Ashley and Bethany Myers of Bowling Green; an Aunt Christy (Chris) Poynter of Smiths Grove; an Uncle Mark (Betty) Miller of Temple Hill and several other aunts, uncles, cousins, friends and his Marine family.
He was preceded in death by his Paternal Grandfather Kenneth Miller, and his Maternal Great Grandfathers Burton Burd and CA. Melvin.
Funeral services were held at 1:00 PM Friday, July 13, 2012 at the A. F. Crow & Son Funeral Home. Burial with Military honors were in the Horse Cave Cemetery.

Load-Date: November 17, 2013


End of Document