Lance claims Idaho writes code for fighting terrorism
Idaho Falls Post Register (Idaho Falls, Idaho)
May 14, 1997


Copyright 1997 The Post Register
Section: News; Pg. A7
Length: 730 words
Byline: Gene Fadness
Body


Idaho's attorney general told local law enforcement officials Tuesday that the state is a leader in battling domestic terrorism and has one of the lowest crime rates in the nation.
Speaking to law enforcement officials at the Greater Idaho Falls Chamber of Commerce's Law Enforcement Appreciation Luncheon, Lance said Idaho has developed ''prototype legislation'' that other states are now copying.
In fact, Lance has been teaching anti-terrorism techniques in the first place Americans think about when they hear about domestic terrorism: Oklahoma City.
Lance was in Oklahoma City last month to explain the Idaho approach and meet with victims of the terrorist bombing of a federal court building that killed 168 people.
A bill passed this year by the Idaho Legislature imposes a maximum $1,000 fine or one year in jail against those who act as public officials or convene as a court that is not recognized by state or federal statute.
The law is aimed to discredit so-called ''common law courts'' like those formed last year by Montana's Freemen and this year among supporters of the ''Republic of Texas.''
In 1996, the Legislature passed a law that says county clerks and other officials don't have to recognize or file liens that are not provided for in state or federal statute, are not court-ordered or not part of a generally recognized business transaction. A favorite tactic of common law groups has been to place liens on the property of public officials who they think haven't done their jobs well. Under the law, property owners and public officials who have false liens placed against them can file for a civil penalty of up to $5,000
Lance's office promoted the legislation partly from the attorney general's personal experience. His staff has been charged with crimes by common law courts. A southwest Idaho common law court placed a lien against his home and summoned him to appear before their court.
The same has happened to officials in eastern Idaho. Last year, a Rexburg family sued Madison County Clerk Beth Reese and six other county officials and employees when the family's home was sold at public auction because they owed nearly $1 million in back taxes from 1987 to 1992. Robert and Iva Chapple claimed they were sovereign residents, not bound by state and federal government regulations.
Idaho is also a leader in the nation, Lance claims, in lower crime rates.  The state's crime rate is down 8.3 percent from a year ago, he said, and ranks 41st in the nation and lowest in the West.
That's due in part, Lance said, to 840 new employees added to the Department of Correction and Department of Juvenile Corrections since Lance took office in 1995. His own office has added three full-time positions in its criminal investigations division, bringing to 28 the number of attorneys who help the state's cities and counties prosecute lawbreakers.
The state also prides itself in making sure those convicted of crime serve their sentences, or at least 85 percent of them as Idaho's Truth in Sentencing law dictates, Lance said.
''Your job is to get them in jail, our job is to keep them there,'' Lance told officers from the Bonneville County Sheriff's Department, the Idaho Falls Police Department and Idaho State Patrol.
''The revolving door system in other states,'' that allows sentences to be shortened for good behavior does not work, Lance said after his speech, adding that too many end up back in prison.
The increase in spending required to add new employees in corrections, build more jails and keep prisoners incarcerated for most or all of their sentences has come under fire from those who say the state is spending too much on prisons and too little on schools.
Lance said such comparisons are ''absolute nonsense.'' The school district in which he resides, Meridian, has continued to build new schools even during a time when new prisons are being built as well.
''Education is absolutely important, but the physical safety of my kid to go to school is equally important,'' Lance said.
Lance commended officers for the risks they take each day on their jobs.  He said 47 peace officers have been killed in the line of duty since statehood, seven since 1985. Three Boise police officers have been killed in fatal shootings in recent years during what they thought would be routine traffic stops.
''Unfortunately there isn't a safe place anymore,'' Lance said.

Load-Date: May 15, 1997


End of Document