Laser warnings rise after plane incidents
USA TODAY
January 13, 2005, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: MONEY;
Length: 435 words
Byline: Dan Reed
Body

Transportation Secretary Norm Mineta said Wednesday that there will be new steps soon for warning pilots flying into areas where aircraft have recently been tagged by lasers and new measures to improve the reporting and tracking of such incidents.
Mineta appeared at the Federal Aviation Administration's research and testing facility in Oklahoma City for a demonstration of what agency researchers know about the effects of lasers on aircraft and air crews. His trip came after 31 reported incidents of lasers illuminating flying aircraft since Dec. 23.
Those incidents drew media attention, in part because the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security said in a memo in early December that there was evidence that terrorists were working on ways to use lasers as weapons.
Travelers shouldn't worry about planes being brought down by cheap laser key fobs, but Mineta said shining more powerful lasers at a plane "is not a harmless prank. It's stupid and dangerous. You are putting other people at risk," Mineta said, adding that anyone caught doing it will be prosecuted.
Given the relatively small number of incidents -- 400 since 1990 -- the government, for now, won't require aircraft and crew members to carry new equipment such as laser beam detectors and specialized protective eyewear, Mineta said.
But theoretically, aircraft can be brought down by a laser beam.
High-end laser pointers, measuring devices and testing tools used by businesspeople, scientists, technicians, construction workers and astronomers could temporarily disorient or blind pilots, causing them to lose control of their aircraft. More powerful lasers used in research and embedded in devices ranging from grocery-store checkout scanners to dentistry equipment, must be registered with the government. The sale of military-grade lasers is illegal in the USA, although the products are widely available in Third World markets.
"The lasers that have been shot at airplanes can't burn holes in things," says James Jay Carafano, a senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation and an expert on homeland defense and terrorism issues. "But any laser with enough power to reach into an airplane could do eye damage."
He says it is very unlikely that the recent incidents had anything to do with terrorism. The FBI agrees. Agents have investigated nearly a dozen incidents since Christmas and found no links to terrorism.
Carafano, who recently wrote a report on the use of directed-energy weapons, said terrorists would be more likely to use lasers as targeting or range-finding tools for firing conventional weapons.
---
Contributing: Kevin Johnson

Load-Date: January 13, 2005


End of Document