LAST DAYS OF THE JACKAL CAPTURED / CARLOS IN A FRENCH JAIL COMMUNISM COULD NO LONGER PROTECT HIM
 Philadelphia Daily News
August 16, 1994 Tuesday PM EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 03; CHRONOLOGY
Length: 912 words
Byline: Daily News Wire Services
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Carlos the Jackal, the freelance terrorist whose alleged bombings and hijackings made him one of the world's most wanted men, landed behind bars in Paris yesterday.
Sudan arrested the Venezuelan-born fugitive and turned him over to France, ending a 20-year hunt for the man whose bloody exploits mirrored the brand of thriller that gave him his nickname.
As a terrorist-for-hire, Carlos reportedly teamed up with some of the world's most notorious groups, including Germany's Red Army Faction, the Japanese Red Army, the Basque separatist movement in Spain and various Palestinian organizations.
He was most often linked to the murky world of Middle East terrorism. Intelligence reports tied him to the 1972 massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, a 1975 attack on OPEC headquarters, and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda.
Carlos, 44, looked fit and relaxed as he emerged into the glare of publicity at a Paris court today.
When anti-terrorist Judge Jean-Louis Bruguiere came out of his office to meet him, Carlos joked: "There he is, this is the judge, how are you?"
"And you?" the judge asked.
"I'm still alive, and for a long time," Carlos replied. Turning to escorting gendarmes, he said of the judge: "He's a star."
Carlos, wearing a purple jacket and white shirt, was due to be formally placed under investigation - a first step towards a trial - for a 1982 bombing near the Champs Elysees in Paris in which one person died and 63 were wounded.
He also will be charged later with the fatal shootings of two counterintelligence agents in 1975. A French court convicted him in absentia in June 1992 and sentenced him to life in prison for the slayings, but under French law he will have to be retried.
Waiting outside Bruguiere's office, he showed little sign of nervousness over the fact that he was likely to face a lifetime behind bars.
"We also had Famas (the French army-issue assault rifle) in Lebanon, they are good," he told the gendarmes in French with a slight accent.
French judicial sources said Carlos would be defended by flamboyant French lawyer Jacques Verges, who represented the late Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie.
Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, announcing the arrest, called Carlos "a true professional of terrorism" who claims to have killed 83 people around the world.
"I rejoice that one of the most dangerous terrorists in recent years is now in the hands of justice," he said.
Pasqua said Carlos was directly or indirectly responsible for killing at least 15 people on French soil and injuring 200.
Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, got his nom de guerre after British tabloids learned that a copy of Frederick Forsyth's 1971 thriller, "Day of the Jackal," was found in one of his early London safehouses. The novel tells the story of a professional killer hired to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle.
The flamboyant terrorist long worked in the foreign operations section of the feared Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. He is best known for his alleged role in the massacre at the 1972 Munich Olympics and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, which ended with an Israeli commando raid.
But Yigal Carmon, a former adviser on terrorism to Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, said Carlos had nothing to do with the Munich attack.
Carlos also is suspected in the 1974 takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague, Netherlands and the 1975 attack on the headquarters of the OPEC oil cartel in Vienna, Austria, in which three people were killed and 11 taken hostage.
Pasqua described him as a "mercenary at the disposition of the liberation movements of the world."
"He was without doubt animated by a sort of ferocious passion that turned delirious," Pasqua said on French television.
France's former intelligence chief, Pierre Marion, said that during the Cold War, Carlos moved between East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Syria "with extraordinary protections at his disposal . . . To catch him then wasn't possible."
With the fall of communism, Carlos lost his protection, Marion said.
Pasqua said French counterintelligence agents, helped by friendly countries, found Carlos early this year in Sudan, where he had gone six months ago on a false passport and was living under a false name.
"Yesterday morning, Sudanese authorities let us know they had positively identified Carlos and were ready to respond to French arrest warrants," he said.
Carlos was returned to France yesterday.
 CARLOS BLAMED
Key terrorist attacks attributed to Carlos the Jackal:
1972: Massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics.
1973: Wounding of British millionaire Edward Sieff, a Jew whose family owns Marks & Spencers stores in London.
1974: Takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague.
1975: Slaying of two French intelligence agents investigating attacks on planes of Israel's El Al airlines at Paris' Orly Airport. Also blamed for attack on OPEC headquarters in Vienna in which three people were killed and 11 taken hostage.
1976: Hijacking of an Air France jetliner to Uganda.
1982: Bombing of the Paris-Toulouse express that killed six people and wounded 15. Another bombing just off the Champs Elysees in Paris that killed a pregnant woman and wounded 63 other people.
1983: Bombings in Marseilles' main railroad terminal and on the Paris- Marseilles express that killed five people and wounded 50. Bombing of French cultural center in West Berlin, killing one and wounding 23.

Notes

LAST DAY OF THE JACKAL

Graphic

 
PHOTO;

PHOTO (2)
1-2. Ilich Ramirez Sanchez (main photo, taken last week in Sudan) was linked
to '72 Olympic massacre (ASSOCIATED PRESS) (Page 1)

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document