LATEST VIRUS ALSO IS ACT OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 20, 2001 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: BUSINESS,; COMPUTER Q&A
Length: 606 words
Body


It seems to finally have clicked. The underlying significance of virus creation and hacking: terrorism. In the past, when I made statements equating virus creators with terrorists, half the audience agreed while the other half thought my statements were too extreme. Suddenly people are concerned about the potential tie between viruses and the terrorists who attacked the World Trade Center. They're worried about whether these same extremists can wreak havoc on our systems and communications networks using viruses. Especially in light of a new worm making the rounds called Nimda.
 The Nimda worm -- actually w32.nimda -- is a new worm that spreads using multiple techniques. It is spread as an e-mail attachment in the same way the Anna Kournikova virus spread. It spreads via a security hole in Microsoft's Internet Information Server (IIS) similar to the technique used for Code Red. And it spreads by posting a surreptitious Web page goading users to infect their own systems. The multiple infection method means Nimda is a problem for both administrators and end users.
According to Symantec Security Response, Nimda does not cause a lot of damage, but it is spreading wildly, meaning we must respond -- as individual users and system administrators.
 I doubt that this worm is connected to the recent airplane hijackings. Otherwise, the worm would undoubtedly cause more damage to systems in the same way that the aerial attacks caused great damage. There is not yet any indication that Nimda is meant to cause huge damage. Nevertheless, Nimda, like other worms, viruses and hacks, is a terrorist act. No matter who the source is.
 Q: I want to use a local Internet Service Provider, but still want access to AOL content. Can I do this without paying for two Internet services?
 A: Most people access America Online by dialing directly into AOL's local bank of modems. However, America Online can be accessed through other Internet Service Providers (ISP) without paying AOL's full monthly fee. America Online calls it BYOA -- Bring Your Own Access. It doesn't advertise it or tell you about it unless you ask. New AOL users can select BYOA when you first sign up. Existing users need to change your price plan. Both types need AOL software to access AOL content from the other ISP via the Internet.
 To make it all work, open your account with your other Internet Service Provider. You'll probably need to set up your Windows Dial-up Adapter and load a browser to use the new ISP account. (Your ISP will give you specific instructions.)
 To change your AOL account to BYOA: Using your AOL software, click on (Settings), then (Billing Center). Here, change your price plan to $9.95/BYOA. You'll then have to (Sign Off) and create a new location. On the Sign On screen, select (Setup), then (Add Location). Click on "Select a location using one of these available devices." From the drop down list, choose "TCP/IP: LAN or ISP (Internet Service Provider)".
 From this point on, dial into your other ISP. Then, for AOL content, sign on to AOL using this new location from your AOL software. You'll save 59 percent from the standard $23.90 AOL unlimited monthly price plan. Caution! If you connect directly into AOL's modems instead of through the other ISP, you will be charged $2.50 per hour.
 Terrorism and the Net
How vulnerable is the Internet to terrorist attacks? I'll address this issue in future columns. I've also posted a one-hour Internet Insider radio show in which we address how the Internet and terrorism are related. The show was originally broadcast last Saturday; you can listen via streaming audio at www.InsiderRadio.com. 

Notes

David Radin is a nationally syndicated radio show host. You can comment or ask him a question by following the instructions at www.post-gazette.com/interact, where you can find an archive of his previous Q&A columns.

Load-Date: September 20, 2001


End of Document