LATEST TERRORISM ALERT RAISES VIGILANCE NATIONWIDE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 9, 2003 Sunday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A2
Length: 385 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Police stepped up security at airports, subways and hotels Saturday, a day after the nation was put on heightened terrorist alert. Law enforcement officials indicated that New York was a possible target.
City officials told residents to be vigilant, but go about their business. Many New Yorkers did just that.
"You've got to live your life," said Jonathan Marlow, 23, walking to his job at a midtown Manhattan investment banking firm.
But traffic on city streets, and particularly aboard subways, was sparse.
"This is amazing to me how empty it is," said Elizabeth Bohlen of Mystic, Conn., waiting at Times Square to board a train.
Four police officers and a bomb-sniffing dog patrolled the station Saturday. Officers were also seen guarding the Plaza Hotel and Tiffany & Co. jewelry store, among other sites.
The government raised the national terror alert from yellow to orange Friday. Attorney General John Ashcroft cited an "increased likelihood" that the al-Qaida terror network would attack Americans, noting that hotels and apartment buildings were possible targets.
Protection measures were stepped up across the country, from the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge to the NBA All-Star Game in Atlanta on Sunday. Nuclear facilities in California and Washington state and some utilities put security plans into action.
In the nation's capital, restricted airspace for private planes will expand beginning Monday, the Federal Aviation Administration announced Saturday. "Terrorists are known to favor targets in the transportation sector and to consider our civil aviation system an arsenal of improvised weapons," said James M. Loy, undersecretary of the Transportation Department and head of the Transportation Security Administration.
The new control measures establish what the FAA calls an Air Defense Identification Zone in the airspace under 18,000 feet in roughly a 30-mile radius around Washington. The previous restricted area was roughly 15 miles in radius.
In New York, Gov. George Pataki called up a special Air National Guard unit trained to handle bioterrorism and placed the state on orange alert. The city has remained on orange alert, the second-highest, since Sept. 11, 2001.
Security officials planned to enforce a rule at airports that bans p ublic parking within 300 feet of any terminal buildings.

Notes

PAGE 2

Load-Date: February 10, 2003


End of Document