Latest round of terrorism calls for introspection
Courier (Freeman, South Dakota)
April 24, 2013


Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2013 Freeman, South Dakota Courier


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 656 words
Byline: Freeman Courier staff
Body


Add 4/15/13 to the list of somber memorable dates.
The two bombs that exploded near the finish line of the Boston Marathon the afternoon of Monday, April 15 forever link that city that event and that date to terrorism in the same way as did the planes that flew into the Twin Towers in New York City on Sept. 11, 2001 and the truck bomb that destroyed the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995.
Sadly, acts of terrorism have become an inescapable part of life around the globe. And while the United States has been fortunate to see far fewer terrorist attacks than some countries have seen in recent decades, terrorism has become the new normal for all of us.
As is the case whenever a tragedy of this magnitude occurs -- particularly when it is an evil act at the hands of an individual or group -- we want answers and assurance that it won't happen again.
But answers are slow to come and the assurance is only an unrealistic hope.
What we are left with is finding a way to cope and to move on. This is a time for introspection.
While circumstances surrounding the attack in Boston last week and New York more than 11 years ago are significantly different, acts of terrorism have become part of our world for more than a decade. And excerpts from the Courier editorial the week after the 9/11/01 attacks, printed below in italics, still apply.
Near the end of the popular musical "Fiddler on the Roof," the people of the Russian Jewish village of Anatevka are informed they have three days to pack all their belongings and leave.
The outrage and anger is quick as the people learn the news. The people talk of response.
"We should defend ourselves," says one. "An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth."
"Very good," responds Tevya, the philosophical dairy farmer. "And that way the whole world will be blind and toothless."
The outrage and anger are understandable.
So are the calls for justice.
Any successful effort to combat terrorism will need to be based on more than simple vengeance and retaliation.
Rather than simply lashing out at the enemy in a response of vengeance, hate and retaliation, we must address the conditions that lead to terrorism.
Only a campaign to fight terrorism that includes efforts to break the cycle of violence at the heart of terrorism will have any chance of real success.
Otherwise the whole world will, indeed, be blind and toothless.
And then there are these comments from Jim Wallis, a theologian, who reflected on last week's events in Boston.
"As I read and watched more about the tragedy, there unfolded such a stark and brutal contrast between the explicit intent to kill, hurt, and maim others, and the actions of those who rushed toward the blast, risking their own lives to help the wounded. One act of vicious violence was aimed to destroy the common good and create a society based on fear. The others displayed the highest commitment to redeem the common good and insist that we will not become a nation based on fear, but on mutual service and support.
"When real or imagined grievances combine with rage, religious fundamentalism, political extremism, mental illness, or emotional instability we lose the common good to dangerous violence, fear, and deep distrust in the social environment. But when grievances lead to civil discourse, moral engagement, and even love and forgiveness, different outcomes are possible.
Wallis, who is best known as the founder and editor of Sojourners magazine and the founder of the Washington, D.C.-based Christian community of the same name, ends his commentary with this
"..So let me ask all our readers to start that conversation {and) sign people up in your congregations and communities to have this important conversation now. Because I am more convinced than ever now, that we have a battle ahead -- for the. common good." Amen.
Freeman Courier editorials reflect the opinion of news editor Jeremy Waltner and publisher Tim L. Waltner.

Load-Date: January 10, 2015


End of Document