Latest Adventure for Pirate: Capturing Courtroom Buzz
The New York Times
April 18, 2009 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 646 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


Over the years, New York courts have handled almost every kind of villain the world could cough up: mass murderers, mob kingpins, hell-bent terrorists, greedy politicians and Ponzi schemers.
  But it has been a long time, if ever, that a pirate has gone on trial.
  Now, with word that the United States government plans to try the Somali pirate captured in the daring Navy Seal operation that rescued an American cargo ship captain in the Indian Ocean, legal experts are abuzz about the challenges such a case would pose, as well as the opportunities.
  ''The minute I heard they were bringing him to the United States,'' said Benjamin Brafman, a defense lawyer, ''my first instinct was, 'Just what New York needs -- another show trial that is going to heighten our security concerns and consume a courtroom for however many months it will take.' ''
  But he said the government might want to ''demonstrate to the world that we take these crimes seriously, and that people who are caught are going to be given a trial, and there is going to be swift justice imposed if convicted.''
  No formal announcement about a prosecution has been made, but a senior law enforcement official said on Friday that the plan was to try the suspect in New York. The city is a logical site because the federal prosecutor's office in Manhattan has developed great expertise in trying crimes that occur outside the United States.
  Federal prosecutors had no comment.
  Just how swiftly a trial would be held is uncertain, and much would depend on the defense strategy, which almost certainly would involve an investigation into the man's background and the circumstances under which he became involved in the hostage-taking.
  The suspect has been identified in news reports as Abduhl Wal-i-Musi, and is described as being in his late teens.
  ''We don't know a thing about him,'' said Joshua L. Dratel, a lawyer who has handled terrorism cases in federal court and Guantanamo Bay. ''He may have been a conscripted child soldier. There may be a whole back story to his motivation that's very different than just criminal behavior and criminal intent.''
  The defense could also seek to have him cooperate with prosecutors in return for being placed in a protected prison program, and even later relocated in the United States, if he could provide truly useful information about how the pirate networks operate, who runs them and who pays for them. 
  Piracy law experts said a criminal trial would be historic, and a useful new approach to an age-old problem. 
  Samuel P. Menefee, a lawyer who has written and lectured on piracy law, said a trial would be significant because piracy in the waters off Somalia has become a growing concern, and the United States government has already used diplomatic and military approaches.
  ''Now the judicial system will have an opportunity to address the problem,'' he said.
  At first glance, a piracy trial would seem to resemble the international cases involving terrorism and other crimes that have ended up in New York in recent years. 
  But Gerald L. Shargel, a lawyer whose white-collar practice has included defending members of the Gotti family and others in organized crime, said a piracy trial would be different, and it should be easier for a pirate to get a fair trial.
  ''Until this rash of actual piracy,'' Mr. Shargel said, ''pirates were romanticized -- one of the most popular rides at Disney World is Pirates of the Caribbean.''
  In terrorism cases, he said, jurors are likely to be afraid, and that can influence their verdict.
  ''A terrorism trial is more chilling because a terrorist belongs to an organization that's hidden in darkness and seemingly strikes at will and is a threat to us all,'' Mr. Shargel said. ''Unless a prospective juror is planning a cruise to Somalia, I don't think that anyone in the process is going to feel threatened.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 18, 2009


End of Document