LATEST TERRORISM ALERT RAISES VIGILANCE NATIONWIDE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 9, 2003 Sunday Early Five Star Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A2
Length: 381 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Police stepped up security at airports, subways and hotels Saturday, a day after the nation was put on heightened terrorist alert. Law enforcement officials indicated that New York was a possible target.
City officials told residents to be vigilant, but go about their business. Many New Yorkers did just that.
"You've got to live your life," said Jonathan Marlow, 23, walking to his job at a midtown Manhattan investment banking firm.
But city streets, and particularly traffic aboard subways, was sparse.
"This is amazing to me how empty it is," said Elizabeth Bohlen of Mystic, Conn., waiting at Times Square to board a train.
Four uniformed police officers and a bomb-sniffing dog patrolled the station Saturday. Officers were also seen guarding the Plaza Hotel and Tiffany & Co. jewelry store, among other sites. Three large police vans were parked at the southwestern entrance to Central Park.
The government raised the national terror alert from yellow to orange Friday. Attorney General John Ashcroft cited an "increased likelihood" that the al-Qaida terror network would attack Americans, noting that hotels and apartment buildings were possible targets.
Protection measures were stepped up across the country, from the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge to the NBA All-Star Game in Atlanta on Sunday. Nuclear facilities in California and Washington state and some utilities put security plans into action.
A high-ranking law enforcement source told The Associated Press that the measures had been taken in response to intercepted communications between suspected terrorists suggesting New York as a target.
Investigators were especially concerned about the possibility of chemical, biological or radiological attacks, said the source, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Information they received raised specific concerns about attacks on hotels and subways, the source said.
Gov. George E. Pataki called up a special Air National Guard unit trained to handle bioterrorism and placed the state on orange alert. The city has remained on orange alert, the second-highest, since Sept. 11.
Security also was boosted at river crossings. At the New Jersey entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel, a heavy presence of state troopers was evident, and trucks headed into the city were stopped and inspected.

Notes

PAGE 2

Load-Date: February 10, 2003


End of Document