Latin leaders discuss plan to hit back at terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 24, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 473 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


LIMA, Peru -- Condemning the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, leaders from Latin America, Spain and Portugal began work Friday on a joint strategy to battle international terrorism.
Argentina's economic crisis and the problem of drug trafficking were also high in the agenda of the 21 leaders at the annual Ibero-American summit.
In Friday's opening session, the presidents expressed growing concern over the effects of the attacks against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on their struggling economies.
"Attacks like those, which in a recent past could only exist in somebody's imagination . . . fuel economic destabilization and growing recession," said President Mireya Moscoso of Panama.
Peruvian President Alejandro Toledo, whose nation battled two leftist rebel insurgencies over the past two decades, declared terrorism must be condemned "in the most energetic manner."
He urged his peers "to work without pause to make the first decade of this century the decade of economic growth, the decade of creation of productive jobs for our people."
Bettering living conditions for the poor will contribute to fight terrorism, he said.
"There is no peace where poverty prevails," Toledo said.
For the first time in 11 years, the two-day summit will go on without Cuban President Fidel Castro, who stayed home to help with reconstruction efforts after the devastation of Hurricane Michelle earlier this month. Cuba was represented by Vice President Carlos Lage.
Draft text for the summit's final statement calls the attacks against the United States "barbarian acts because they are tantamount to an insult to human dignity and a threat to democracy."
While the leaders were expected to support the U.S. armed campaign against terrorism, the prepared text also called for such a response be carried out within the rules of the United Nations.
"Not everything can be considered acceptable in fighting terrorism," Peruvian Foreign Minister Diego Garcia Sayan said.
Under discussion was a joint commitment by the leaders to promote legal changes at home aimed at cracking down on terrorists. That includes an agreement to make it easier for nations to extradite suspected terrorists.
The leaders were expected to sign off on the statement before the summit concludes.
Toledo earlier made an appeal to his peers to "give a hand" to financially troubled Argentina, which is struggling to recover from a lengthy recession that has aggravated a heavy debt burden.
The Peruvian leader warned that support for Argentina was necessary not only as a sign of solidarity but also because the crisis could hurt the economies across the region.
Regional leaders have warned that economic instability may also threaten democratic rule.
The summit's draft also included an appeal to developed nations and banks to allow "a more flexible treatment" of poor countries' debts.

Load-Date: November 24, 2001


End of Document