LATINS WELCOME WORD ON REAGAN BY ROCKEFELLER
The New York Times
November 11, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 559 words
Byline: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, Nov. 10
Body


Government and business leaders in several Latin American countries have been turning out in droves for the last week to listen to David Rockefeller, chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, tell them what they want to hear: The election of Ronald Reagan will likely lead to a lessening of human rights restrictions on their countries.
''In the campaign Mr. Reagan made it clear that he will deal with the world as it is,'' Mr. Rockefeller told 100 government and business leaders at a private luncheon at a yacht club here today.  ''He is not going to try to change the world in his own image.''
Chase Manhattan Bank chairman David Rockefeller tells to Latin American leaders that Reagan administration willbe less restrictive on human rights
It is a message that Mr. Rockefeller has spread while traveling from Panama to Chile, Paraguay and now Argentina and that he will carry with him to Brazil tomorrow.
Mr. Rockefeller, in Latin America to attend a meeting of the Chase board of directors, stresses that he does not speak for Mr. Reagan.  He originally supported George Bush, now the Vice President-elect, in the Republican primaries for President and later transferred his support to Mr. Reagan.
 
Favored by Business Leaders
Nonetheless, local business and government leaders and the press are eager to hear his message one week after the election of Mr.  Reagan, the heavy favorite among businessmen in military-ruled countries in the region. These countries have borne much of the brunt of Mr. Carter's human right's policies, including the cutting of military and economic aid.
The military governments in such countries as Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Brazil have in the past resorted to assassination and torture in the fight against leftist terrorism and opposition. Much of the official violence has abated, though only limited freedom of expression is allowed and security forces still use broad powers, including torture.
Mr. Rockefeller criticized Mr. Carter for basing American foreign policy too much on human rights while failing to recognize the chaos and terrorism many of the countries faced.
''I don't think anyone in this room opposes the promotion of the application of human rights,'' he told the Argentine group today.  But, he added, ''I hope that Mr. Reagan, while in no sense abandoning the objectives, will pursue a different approach.''
''I think Mr. Reagan,'' he said, ''will base his foreign policy on U.S. national interest,'' such as trade and natural resources.
 
Unions Stage Protest
Not all Argentines welcomed Mr. Rockefeller's visit. The National Labor Commission, the country's largest coalition of unions, called for a go-slow job action, though few workers appeared to respond. The Committee of 25, a competing labor coalition, declared Mr.  Rockefeller ''persona non grata.''
The unions charged that the visit by Mr. Rockefeller and the Chase board was an attempt to intervene in Argentine politics to back the military Government's economic policies drawn by Martinez de Hoz, the Minister of Economy. Mr. Martinez de Hoz has opened the economy to competition from imports, which has caused some industries to go bankrupt.
Both Mr. Rockefeller and Mr. Martinez de Hoz denied that the board's visit had a political intent. ''This Government,'' said the minister in an interview, ''does not need the open support of Chase to survive.''


End of Document