LAUNDER SYSTEM LETS IRAN BANKROLL EVIL PLANS
Daily News (New York)
March 4, 2008 Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 21; I TEAM SPECIAL INVESTIGATION
Length: 565 words
Byline: BY WILLIAM SHERMAN DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER
Body


A GOVERNMENT task force is probing how Iran launders money through the international banking system to finance terror groups buying arms ranging from mortars to weapons of mass destruction.
The probe is focusing on the millions of dollars Iranian banks funnel through mainstream banks for the groups, including Hamas, Hezbollah and the Taliban, the Daily News has learned.
Ordinary commercial transactions and trade financing for Iran are also under investigation by the task force comprising the Manhattan district attorney's office, the Treasury Department and the Justice Department.
Both kinds of transactions violate United Nations and U.S. sanctions against countries that support terrorism.
Banks asked by the task force to provide information on cash flows include Barclays and Lloyd's banks.
"Terrorists are no longer running around with satchels full of cash and haven't for some time," one law enforcement source said.
Iranian-controlled banks use wire transfers, letters of credit and bank accounts to fund terrorism, the Treasury Department has said.
Iranian banks typically hide their presence by using false names and omitting or altering special codes that reveal the origin of funds in wire transfers, the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control said.
The code is typically a nine-digit number assigned to every bank. By changing or altering the numbers, the source of the money is obscured.
The money flows from Iran's banks to accounts maintained by that country's Islamic Revolutionary Guards and a special army unit to other bank accounts maintained by terrorist groups.
The groups have accounts under false names or front organizations in numerous countries, sources familiar with the probe said.
The groups include Hezbollah and Hamas in the West Bank, Gaza and Lebanon and the Taliban in Afghanistan, Treasury Department documents show.
"Hezbollah is an organization that has killed more Americans than any terrorist network except for Al Qaeda," Deputy Treasury Secretary Robert Kimmitt said in a speech last month.
The district attorney's office declined comment on the investigation.
Last month, two multinational banks, Lloyd's and Barclays said they were asked to provide information to the district attorney and the Treasury and Justice departments on transactions involving countries under sanction. Both banks said they are cooperating with the probe.
Kimmitt said the Iran regime disguises its involvement in terrorism activities "through an array of deceptive practices." On Thursday, a Paris-based banking watchdog group warned its 32 country members of Iran's "deficiencies" in controlling money laundering.
The Iranian banks laundering money for weapons acquisition include Bank Saderat, Bank Melli and Bank Mellat, the Office of Foreign Assets Control said.
For example, from 2002 to 2006, Bank Melli was used to send $100 million to Iran's special army unit, which used that bank's branches in the Middle East and Europe to transfer funds to Hezbollah and the Taliban, documents show.
Rocket-propelled grenades, plastic explosives and defense systems are among the weaponry provided to the Taliban and bought with transfers through the international banking system.
Iranian diplomats, business executives and businesses are also named in the OFAC's documents as participating in funding of terrorism and nuclear weapons acquisition.
wsherman@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
U.S. task force is probing how Iran, under president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, launders money to finance extremist Shiite militia operations (inset). Photos by Wissam Al-Okaili/AFP/Getty Images (inset) and AP

Load-Date: March 4, 2008


End of Document