Law enforcement shifts emphasis Federal agencies focus on combating terrorism, guarding borders
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 10, 2002 Tuesday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2002 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A4
Length: 640 words
Byline: Bill Morlin Staff writer
Series: 9-11 Remembered
Body


The FBI has changed its priorities -- from investigating all bank robberies
 to a primary goal of disrupting and catching terrorists.
 The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service is cracking down on
 foreigners with illegal visas or who stay too long.
 And along the Canadian border, the number of U.S. Border Patrol agents has
 doubled. More agents and equipment are coming.
Federal law enforcement agencies in the Inland Northwest have seen big
 changes in the last year.
 "The events of last Sept. 11 are changing ways we do business," said James
 McDevitt, the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Washington. His office
 had hired three additional federal prosecutors under new terrorism funding.
 Immediately after the attacks, the attorney general ordered each U.S.
 Attorney's Office to form an anti-terrorism task force. In the state of
 Washington, the eastern and western districts formed a joint Anti-terrorism
 Task Force.
 The anti-terrorism task force is composed of federal law enforcement agency
 supervisors, the State Patrol chief, the state's attorney general, director of
 emergency management and others.
 A similar anti-terrorism task force exists in Idaho.
 The goal of the anti-terrorism task forces is to coordinate terrorism
 funding and training for law enforcement officers.
 Assistant U.S. Attorney Tom Rice coordinates the anti-terrorism task
 force's activities, which include at least two meetings a year.
 The work of actually investigating terrorism is handled by another regional
 organization, the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force.
 That regional task force, lead by the FBI, has existed since 1998 when
 authorities recognized the need for such a group because of crimes attributed
 to white supremacists and other domestic terrorists.
 But the work of the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force was
 substantially ramped up after Sept. 11.
 Detectives from the Spokane police and sheriff's departments were assigned
 to the task force, composed of FBI and ATF agents.
 Its membership is fluid, with agents from other federal agencies and local
 police and sheriff's departments in the region frequently sitting in on weekly
 meetings.
 Its work in Eastern Washington and North Idaho remains mostly shrouded in
 secrecy.
 But it's known that task force investigators spent several months tracking
 down leads in this region associated with the attacks. Most leads involved
 Middle Eastern men who are students or visiting on visas.
 Earlier this year, the task force identified and arrested four foreign
 nationals accused of fraudulently obtaining student visas to gain entry to the
 United States.
 The national case developed when authorities learned some of the Sept. 11
 terrorists gained entry to the United States through fraudulent visas.
 Two students at Washington State University and two more attending
 Community Colleges of Spokane were arrested and deported by the task force for
 having fraudulent visas.  None of the students, however, was tied to any acts
 of terrorism.
 The task force was also involved in the arrest of a Spokane Valley man
 accused of manufacturing the deadly poison ricin. That investigation was begun
 before the terrorist attacks.
 Investigators also interviewed contributors to Islamic charities that are
 suspected fronts for terrorist organizations.
 Meanwhile, along the U.S. border from the crest of the Cascades to Glacier
 National Park in Montana, the number of agents on patrol has doubled. Steve
 Garrett, assistant chief of the Spokane sector, wouldn't discuss the number of
 agents now on duty.
 The Border Patrol, which already has a fixed-wing airplane to patrol the
 Spokane sector, also is getting a helicopter, equipped with heat-seeking
 equipment.
 The agency also is purchasing a 22-foot boat to patrol four major waterways
 that straddle the international border, Garrett said.

Load-Date: September 12, 2002


End of Document