LAWMAKERS REACH COMPROMISE ON ANTI-TERRORISM BILL;
 FINAL VERSION WILL CONTAIN MONEY-LAUNDERING LANGUAGE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 19, 2001 Friday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 312 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


House negotiators have agreed to a Senate demand to include money-laundering legislation in President George W. Bush's anti-terrorism package, clearing the last major hurdle to passage, senators said Thursday.
The Senate and House probably will consider the compromise early next week after aides draft the final version over the weekend, said Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., the Senate Judiciary Committee chairman.
Negotiators agreed Wednesday to end after four years the new wiretapping, electronic surveillance and secret search portion of the legislation, the most contested provision of the package. With the agreement to include money laundering, the most difficult negotiations were over, Leahy said.
"We've just got to work out the details over the weekend," he said. Work that normally could take a day now requires more time because of the shutdown of the House and Senate office buildings for anthrax testing, Leahy said.
House and Senate members have not decided on the final version of the money-laundering plan.
The House Financial Services Committee chairman, Rep. Michael Oxley, R-Ohio, and Sen. Paul Sarbanes, D-Md., the Senate Banking Committee chairman, have been working on a compromise on the money-laundering language.
The top Republican on the Senate committee, Orrin Hatch of Utah, said the final package would include money-laundering language.
Both the House and Senate versions are intended to fight money laundering around the world, thwart the financing of terrorism and protect the U.S. banking system from illicit money.
Both the House and Senate anti-terrorism measures would expand the FBI's wiretapping authority, impose stronger penalties on those who harbor or finance terrorists and increase punishment of terrorists.
House leaders insisted on changing the Senate package so the most intrusive of the new measures would expire after a certain period.

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS; A shorter version of this story appeared in the Five Star Lift edition.

Load-Date: October 19, 2001


End of Document