Lawmakers Push Catastrophe Fund To Cut Insurance Costs
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 16, 2007 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 10
Length: 520 words
Byline: BILLY HOUSE, The Tampa Tribune
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


NATIONAL POOL WOULD PROVIDE REINSURANCE
By BILLY HOUSE
The Tampa Tribune
WASHINGTON - Lawmakers across the nation who backed a terrorism insurance program after the Sept. 11 attacks should also support a federal catastrophe fund tied to floods, hurricanes and other natural disasters, says a top House Democrat.
"It is clear that the government has to step in," said House Financial Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank on Thursday, promising to push for a government-insurance "backstop" to help combat the exploding costs of homeowners insurance in Florida and other disaster-prone areas.
"There are complex issues in the society that the market can't always deal with, and we recognized that as a Congress in the area of terrorism," said Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat, accompanied at a bipartisan news conference with lawmakers from Florida, Louisiana and New York.
Frank's committee will launch hearings in upcoming weeks geared to shaping legislation to address the issue. Two Florida freshmen on his committee - Democrats Tim Mahoney of Palm Beach and Ron Klein of Boca Raton - will help lead the effort, he said.
The Senate Banking Committee has scheduled its own hearing for April 11 on how to address the high costs of homeowners insurance in disaster-prone areas.
Florida Gov. Charlie Crist, a Republican, pushed for such a fund during a visit last month to Washington.
Few details about which of several emerging approaches will be considered by Frank's committee were discussed by the lawmakers Thursday. The bills already introduced include one from Florida Republican Reps. Ginny Brown-Waite of Brooksville and Vernon Buchanan of Longboat Key.
The general goal of such a national fund would be to provide so-called "reinsurance" to assist state insurance programs, private insurers and reinsurers with financial backup for claims that reach catastrophic proportions. The notion is that if companies knew their losses would be capped, they would be under less pressure to raise rates.
State catastrophe funds would contribute to the federal one so that federal taxpayers would not be forced to foot the whole bill. But it is also likely that states would be permitted to opt in or out of contributing to, and thus benefiting from, such a national insurance pool.
There's a clear strategy behind efforts to liken a flood and natural catastrophe fund to the terrorism insurance passed in 2002; it's a way to counter criticism that it would benefit only certain states, particularly Florida and other coastal states vulnerable to large-scale storm damage.
Another political strategy is to emphasize that catastrophes come in many forms - tornadoes, mudslides and earthquakes - and that the exploding costs of homeowners insurance is a national issue.
"It is not just a Florida problem," said Brown-Waite, during the news conference.
Said Buchanan, "This is about all of us working together not just for Florida, but for the country."
Reporter Billy House can be reached at bhouse@tampatrib.com or (202) 662-7673.
Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: March 19, 2007


End of Document