Lawmakers back to old habits after strong start
Business Insurance
August 1, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 28
Length: 755 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


The long hot summer has descended upon Washington.
Following a time-honored tradition that predates the invention of air conditioning-or the electric fan for that matter-Congress has left town for the month of August, not to return until after Labor Day. In doing so, it's left behind an awful lot of unfinished business of interest to risk managers and insurers alike.
This is the same Congress that got off to a strong start by taking up and passing with all due dispatch the Class Action Fairness Act. This piece of legislation, which previously had passed the House only to die in the Senate, is perhaps the most significant federal tort reform ever to pass.
But after the strong start, lawmakers reverted to old habits. Consider what has happened with two key issues for risk managers-asbestos liability reform and reauthorization of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act.
The current session started with Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Arlen Specter, R-Penn., saying that he wanted to move quickly on his controversial bill designed to create a new national trust fund to replace the current lawsuit-based system for compensating victims of asbestos-related diseases. In fact, he said that the bill needed to win Judiciary Committee approval by late January or early February if it were to stand any chance of enactment.
January came and February went, as did March, April and most of May. The Judiciary Committee didn't approve the bill until late May and it has yet to appear on the Senate calendar.
On the other side of Capitol Hill, the only House legislation dealing with asbestos liability specifically eschews the trust fund approach in favor of requiring claimants in asbestos injury suits to establish that they meet specific medical criteria before their cases can proceed. But that bill hasn't gone anywhere yet.
Even without taking into account the relative merits and problems of either approach, asbestos liability reform of any sort appears difficult at best to achieve this year.
The question of whether the federal government should provide a backstop for insurers facing losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks also remains to be dealt with, although this is due less to lawmakers' actions than to those of the U.S. Treasury. The original Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 required the Treasury Department to deliver a report on the terrorism insurance marketplace by June 30.
And that's exactly when the report appeared-June 30. The report held that any government role in guaranteeing terrorism insurance should be greatly scaled back. It's up to Congress to determine what the role will be.
The catch, of course, is that the current version of TRIA expires on Dec. 31. Risk managers already report that some insurers are insisting on terrorism exclusions on policies that extend into 2006. While the chairmen of both committees of jurisdiction over terrorism insurance legislation have promised to move on the issue with all due dispatch, the leadership of both Houses have also made it clear that they would like to adjourn for the year in October. That could push consideration of terrorism insurance legislation into next year, leaving risk managers with the choice of buying standalone terrorism coverage-that would no doubt be more expensive than TRIA-backed coverage-or going without.
While determining what role, if any, the federal government will play in guaranteeing terrorism insurance is the most urgent of the issues left undecided, that issue and the asbestos issues are far from the only ones left hanging fire. The House Judiciary Committee has approved several tort reform measures that remain undecided. The fate of federal medical malpractice liability reform remains unclear. Meanwhile, the issue of reforming state insurance regulation via a federal law has received relatively little notice.
When the Senate returns, its time will be devoted to the confirmation of Judge John G. Roberts, nominated to fill Sandra Day O'Connor's seat on the U.S. Supreme Court. This will not be a swift process. Meanwhile, lawmakers are already beginning to think about re-election-if some ever stop doing so.
The long hot summer is upon us, and Congress has left town. Given the amount of legislative work that remains unfinished and the likelihood that it will remain so for the foreseeable future, this long hot summer may well prove to be a prologue for a winter of discontent for risk managers and others.
Feedback from readers are welcome. Please send comments to mhofmann@businessinsurance.com.

Load-Date: August 5, 2005


End of Document