LAWMAKERS IN INDIA APPROVE BILL TO HELP AUTHORITIES FIGHT TERRORISM ;
 SOME VOICE CONCERN ABOUT CIVIL RIGHTS ABUSES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 27, 2002 Wednesday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 347 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW DELHI, INDIA
Body


Lawmakers passed an anti-terrorism bill Tuesday after a day of heated debate in a joint session of Parliament, only the third since India gained independence.
The government said the legislation was crucial after the attacks of Sept. 11 in the United States and an attack Dec. 13 on the Indian Parliament.
"We cannot score a decisive victory against terrorism unless a special law of this kind is enacted," Interior Minister Lal Krishna Advani said as he presented the bill.
Opponents denounced the bill as a Draconian curtailment of civil rights and voiced concerns that the Hindu nationalist-led government would use the law selectively against Muslims and political rivals.
The Prevention of Terrorism bill would allow police to detain suspects for questioning for three months without bringing charges against them and three more months with approval from a special court. The bill also would allow the government to try anyone who is suspected of giving money, shelter, transportation or other support to terrorists.
It would provide punishments ranging from a minimum of five years in prison to death.
After nine hours of debate Tuesday, the bill was passed 425-296, with 60 of the 781 Parliament members absent or abstaining. The figurehead president, Kocheril Narayanan, was expected to sign it within a week, the last step before it becomes law.
The government says the law will be effective against Islamic separatists in Jammu-Kashmir, India's only Muslim majority state. India blames the militants for the attack on Parliament and says they were aided by Pakistan.
Leaders of the opposition Congress party said that under the measure, people who unwittingly rent a room or car to suspected terrorists or engage in financial transactions with them could be detained for up to six months without trial and have their homes or businesses seized.
The bill would change Indian law to admit confessions made to police as evidence. Current law prohibits such confessions unless they are made voluntarily in court.
The government said it had included safeguards against abuse in the bill.

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: March 27, 2002


End of Document