Lawmakers Seek Action After Ruling On Detainees
The New York Times
July 3, 2006 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 795 words
Byline: By ROBIN TONER
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 2 
Body


Democratic leaders argued on Sunday that the Supreme Court's rebuke of the Bush administration last week underscored the costs of President Bush's ''unilateral'' approach to the fight against terrorism.
  They called for closer consultation with Congress and a broad review of the administration's use of executive power to combat terrorism.
Republican leaders, also making the rounds of the Sunday talk shows, called for a more limited response. They said Congress should pass legislation in a matter of months to comply with the court and give the president explicit authority to put detainees at the military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, on trial before military commissions. 
  The Supreme Court ruled Thursday that the military commissions the administration had planned were unauthorized by federal statute and violated international law.
  Republican leaders also expressed alarm on Sunday over the court's application of a provision of the Geneva Conventions to the detainees, which they said they would seek to counter legislatively.
  Both parties were treading carefully in a political and legislative terrain suddenly reconfigured by the Supreme Court. Most leaders on Sunday pledged bipartisan cooperation, but some fault lines were clear.
  Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, said on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC that ''this White House has felt it could just change things unilaterally.'' Mr. Schumer added, ''Had they come to Congress a few years ago on this issue, my guess is they would have gotten most of what they wanted.''
  But in light of the court ruling, Mr. Schumer called on Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales to create an independent commission to conduct ''a top-to-bottom legal review of all of the administration's ongoing antiterror measures.''
  Mr. Schumer added, ''The administration has not only largely ignored the Congress, but has also badly miscalculated how its efforts would be evaluated by the Supreme Court.'' Efforts to ''marginalize the other two branches of government threaten to undermine, rather than promote, counterterrorism efforts,'' he said.
  Republicans focused much of their fire on the court's ruling that a provision of the Geneva Conventions dealing with the treatment and trials of captured combatants applied to the Guantanamo detainees. Senator Mitch McConnell, the No. 2 Republican in the Senate, called it a ''very disturbing aspect'' of the decision that meant ''that American servicemen potentially could be accused of war crimes.''
  Mr. McConnell, appearing on ''Meet the Press,'' said Congress must quickly address that issue, along with creating military commissions. ''There's nothing more important than the war on terror,'' he said, ''and I think we will have to act on this very soon.'' 
  Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said on ''Fox News Sunday'' that he was also deeply troubled by the court's application of the Geneva Conventions.
  Mr. Graham said that terrorists should be ''humanely treated'' but that the question was whether ''Al Qaeda members who do not sign up to the Geneva Convention, who show disdain for it, who butcher our troops, be given the protections of a treaty they're not part of.'' He added, ''My opinion -- no.'' Mr. Graham said Congress had the ability to restrict the conventions' application to terrorism, ''and I think we should.''
  Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, one of the Democratic Party's point men on national security, suggested that the court ruling was a broad rebuke to the Bush administration's expansive use of executive power in the fight against terrorism. The ''most significant aspect of the case,'' Mr. Reed said, was ''the declaration by the court that the president has to seek Congressional authority.''
  He added, ''The president declared that he was operating in his own capacity as commander in chief, and I think the court reined him back, and I think it's appropriate.''
  Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican and former prisoner of war, said on ''This Week'' on ABC that he was confident that ''using the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court, we can make sure that bad guys -- and there are bad guys -- are not released, and that those who deserve to be released will be.''
  Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, also called for a measured response. ''It can't be handled on a sound bite on Sunday morning,'' Mr. Specter, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said on ''Face the Nation'' on CBS. ''We have to get the details as to what the administration thinks they can do. We've got to look at the Supreme Court decision. And we have to reconcile it. But it has to be Congress because it's our constitutional responsibility.''
  He added, ''It's not up to the president alone.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 3, 2006


End of Document