Lawmakers seek balance between security and freedom
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 30, 1995, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 755 words
Byline: MICHAEL SZNAJDERMAN; Tribune Staff Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


While authorities continue to question people in connection with the tragic bomb attack in Oklahoma City, Florida politicians are pondering how they should respond.
The fluid nature of the case, which at first appeared to have international connections and now points to people within the United States - possibly with links to domestic paramilitary groups - has left some area members of Congress hesitant to propose specific policy changes just yet.
Nevertheless, members with jurisdiction over crime, terrorism and intelligence matters say the tragedy points out the evolving threat facing Americans in the post-Cold War world, and the need to improve how we protect ourselves.
That could mean strengthening the penalties against terrorists, while beefing up security at some sites. It could also mean expanding activities, both inside and outside U.S. borders, to catch terrorists before they strike.
But these are issues lawmakers are already discussing in the wake of earlier terrorist attacks, such as the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center.
The grim reality, lawmakers and other experts concede, is that even with a concerted, comprehensive effort, a determined terrorist - domestic or international - with the right resources is very difficult to stop.
"There's a limit to how well you can secure public buildings," said U.S. Rep. Charles Canady, R-Lakeland, a member of the House Judiciary Committee, which is already examining a Clinton administration bill designed to counter terrorism at home and abroad.
The $ 1.5 billion bill, which a Senate committee began considering Thursday, would add 1,000 new law enforcement personnel to investigate, prosecute and prevent terrorist activity. It would also boost penalties for convicted terrorists and require explosives to include an ingredient that makes them easier to trace.
It would also give the FBI greater authority to obtain phone records and other documents in counterterrorism cases, although it would not change the overall guidelines FBI agents must follow in probing cases of domestic terrorism - guidelines some lawmakers say tie the FBI's hands.
U.S. Rep. Bill McCollum, R-Altamonte Springs, who heads the House crime subcommittee, said those FBI regulations may need some adjusting, especially in cases involving paramilitary groups. McCollum, who also has chaired a GOP task force on terrorism, will conduct a hearing on anti-terrorism measures this week, while postponing another hearing, on the GOP plan to repeal the assault-style weapons ban.
But others are wary about expanding domestic intelligence operations, saying the wrong changes could infringe on civil liberties.
Dan Smith, a retired Army colonel and specialist on military intelligence, said the laws governing police investigations into domestic groups are "probably as tough as we need." Smith is associate director of the Center for Defense Information, a Washington think tank.
Smith said for Congress to broaden authorities' domestic surveillance powers could threaten the rights of lawful citizens.
Instead, he said, more resources should be placed on fighting terrorism efforts abroad, where he believes lies a much greater long-term threat to Americans' security.
He noted the federal government's 1996 foreign operations budget includes just $ 15 million for anti-terrorism assistance, a pittance compared with the $ 260 billion defense budget.
U.S. Sens. Connie Mack, R-Fort Myers, and Bob Graham, D-Miami Lakes, also said the bombing highlights the need to shift more intelligence resources from Cold War military goals to combating terrorism. Both Mack and Graham sit on the Senate intelligence panel.
U.S. Rep. Porter Goss, R-Sanibel, a former CIA and military intelligence operative, agrees that the thrust of any legislative action should be toward cracking terrorist groups before they kill - although he acknowledged it's a daunting challenge.
"You're talking about an extraordinarily difficult target," said Goss, a member of the House intelligence committee and part of a bipartisan presidential panel that is reviewing U.S. intelligence operations worldwide.
As for beefing up security at public buildings, as Clinton has already ordered, Smith acknowledged, "There's only so much you can do."
So agreed state lawmakers, who have also been discussing the issue in Tallahassee.
"There's a lot of people talking about it, but it's very difficult to protect yourself from lunatics," said state Sen. Charlie Crist, R-St. Petersburg.  Tribune staff writer Phil Willon contributed to this report.

Load-Date: May 2, 1995


End of Document