Lawmakers promise full probe, warn of terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 4, 1988, Monday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A
Length: 531 words
Byline: SARA FRITZ
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON - Members of Congress pledged to conduct a full inquiry    into the destruction of an Iranian airliner by U.S. forces in the    Persian Gulf Sunday and urged the Reagan administration to brace for a    new burst of Iranian terrorism directed at Americans around the world.
 
     "They are going to demand their pound of flesh in return -    anywhere in the world, not just in the Persian Gulf," Sen. Dale    Bumpers, D-Ark., predicted. "If that had been an American airline,    we'd probably be in the process of declaring war on Iran right now."
Los Angeles Times Syndicate; Associated Press; Reuters    Assistant House Majority Leader Tony Coelho, D-Calif., said that    President Reagan should have anticipated such a disaster when he    authorized the U.S. Navy to begin escorting Kuwaiti tankers in the gulf    nearly a year ago.
 
     "The Persian Gulf operation lacks definition and reason, and this    kind of tragedy is the inevitable result," Coelho said. "If a    retaliatory act of terror is Iran's response, who will remember this    mission to protect commercial shipping or its purpose?"
 
     Both the House and Senate members called for immediate hearings -    focusing particularly on the question of how the sophisticated Aegis    missile defense system on the USS Vincennes failed to detect the    difference between an F-14 fighter and a large airliner.
 
     Sen. Alan J. Dixon, D-Ill., a member of the Armed Services    Committee, said that he does not expect the destruction of an Iranian    airliner to change the attitude in Congress toward U.S. policy. "I    believe we need to stay there, and I believe the majority of the U.S.    Senate does believe that," he said.
 
     U.S. allies in Europe expressed regret at the incident but said    U.S. forces had the right to defend themselves in the Persian Gulf.
 
     British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said the incident    "underlines the urgent need for an early end to the Iran-Iraq    conflict, including an end to all attacks on shipping."
 
     "We fully accept the right of forces engaged in such hostilities    to defend themselves," she said in a statement.
 
     In West Germany, the conservative Die Welt newspaper defended the    U.S. action, saying it resulted from the confused situation in the    war-torn Persian Gulf. "The situation in the gulf, where warships and    tankers, bombers and passenger airliners are on the move near one    another, does not exclude the possibility" that non-combatants could    accidentally become victims, the newspaper said in an editorial to    appear today.
 
        In the Netherlands, a Foreign Ministry spokesman called the    downing of the Iranian airliner "a very regrettable incident in a    complicated situation."
 
     The French government said it learned "with consternation" of the    loss of the Iranian airliner.
 
     A statement issued in Paris by the Foreign Ministry said all    possible light should be shed on "the conditions in which such a    tragic misunderstanding could have happened."
 
     Soviet television reported the incident without comment.
 
 - Information from the Associated Press and Reuters was used in this    report.
 
    

Load-Date: November 11, 1992


End of Document