LAWMAKERS PREPARE TO TACKLE BILLS THAT ADDRESS TERRORISM ;
 VETO SESSION WILL LAUNCH PROPOSALS ON SECURITY, RESPONSE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 12, 2001 Monday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. B1
Length: 526 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


The Illinois Legislature will meet for the first time since terrorists attacked America, and it will face two key issues: How to bolster domestic security and how to pay for it.
Lawmakers will convene their regular fall session Tuesday, picking up business in a very different world than the one they lived in when they adjourned last spring.
"Everything has changed," said state Sen. Vince Demuzio, D-Carlinville. "There's a great level of uncertainty. People are sort of feeling their way around."
The official purpose of the fall session is to act on vetoes by the governor. But it traditionally has been a launching pad for new legislation as well. This fall's crop of new bills has a clear theme: guarding against terrorism and responding in its aftermath.
As early as Tuesday, lawmakers will take up HB2299, which is Attorney General Jim Ryan's omnibus anti-terrorism package. The measure would increase police surveillance and search powers and would add terrorism to the list of aggravating factors that could trigger the death penalty in murder trials.
Ryan's plan has run into opposition from civil liberties groups that say it would give police too much power. And Gov. George Ryan (who isn't related to Jim Ryan) has questioned whether the proposal strays into subjects that should be under federal jurisdiction.
Even as lawmakers ponder security, they also will debate how to pay for it. The governor announced last month a $450 million state budget shortfall. He blamed it partly on diminished revenues from tourism and other sectors the terrorist attacks affected. Gov. Ryan has said the state may have to cut employees and services.
The governor also has proposed new spending for things like hazardous material teams and bioterrorism preparation. Additional budgetary hits could come from pending bills that would:
* Exempt taxes on charitable donations to terrorism victims.
* Create a tax credit for business losses that result from terrorism.
* Exempt the state income tax on unemployment insurance benefits as a means of boosting consumer spending.
Gov. Ryan is waiting to see what money and decisions come from Washington before he takes a position on most of the terrorism-related legislation, said spokesman Dennis Culloton.
"There clearly is a much different budget picture since Sept. 11," he said.
The bills Gov. Ryan vetoed this year include measures to study hemp as an agricultural crop and to restrict the practices of telemarketers.
The hemp bill is an idea that state Sen. Evelyn Bowles, D-Edwardsville, has championed. It would allow the University of Illinois to study hemp's viability as an agricultural crop for use in textiles. Ryan vetoed the bill in part because of concern from the anti-drug lobby that it would lead to legalized hemp, which is a biological cousin to marijuana.
The telemarketing bill, by state Rep. Jay Hoffman, D-Collinsville, would establish a "no-call" database to prevent people from being called by telephone solicitors.
In his veto message, Ryan said the bill had too many loopholes.
The fall session runs Tuesday through Thursday, then from Nov. 27 to Nov. 29.
The hemp bill is HB3377. The no-call bill is HB176.

Notes

Reporter Kevin McDermott:; E-mail: kmcdermott@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 217-782-4912  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color PHOTO headshot - Jim Ryan; Civil liberties groups criticize his measure

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document