Lawmakers use recess to test future litigation
Business Insurance
July 17, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 56
Length: 731 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann
Body


Not much serious legislating tends to get done on Capitol Hill during the months between the Independence Day break and Election Day in even-numbered years. While there may be some furtive lawmaking being committed in this or that dark corner, the four months-riddled as they are with recesses and holidays-don't often make the history books in terms of legislative achievement. 
But this period can still be instructive, because lawmakers, like television networks once did, often use the summer to test the next season's possible offerings. This appears likely to be the case this year in regard to several property/casualty insurance issues, the difference being that the only networks likely to carry these proceedings are C-SPAN1 and C-SPAN2.
Take insurance regulatory reform, for example.
The chairman of the House Financial Services Committee's Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises-U.S. Rep. Richard Baker, R-La.-said last month during a hearing on streamlining surplus lines and reinsurance regulation that he intends to hold additional hearings on regulatory reform this summer.
While no one expects a significant reform to be enacted this year, Rep. Baker's decision to push ahead with regulatory reform hearings is significant. Rep. Baker is one of several Republicans on the full committee mentioned as a possible successor to the committee's current chairman-Rep. Mike Oxley, R-Ohio, who is retiring from Congress at the end of this term. Rep. Baker's summer agenda underscores the perception that a Chairman Baker would be likely to continue to seek the types of reforms Chairman Oxley has sought.
On the other side of the Hill, the Senate Banking Committee last week held a hearing on a measure that would allow property/casualty and life insurers to seek an optional federal charter in place of the current state-charter-only system. The bill's sponsors-Sens. John Sununu, R-N.H., and Tim Johnson, D-S.D.-have been quite open about that the fact that they expect such a radical regulatory change to require multiple congresses to become reality.
The next Congress also will have to confront another expiration of the federal government's terrorism insurance backstop. A presidential working group must report back to Congress regarding the state of the terrorism insurance market no later than Sept. 30, giving lawmakers 15 months to act before the current backstop expires on Dec. 31, 2007.
The Treasury Department's 2005 report on terrorism insurance-delivered at the last possible minute-almost killed the backstop.
But new Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, in a previous incarnation as a Wall Street executive, wrote Congress urging the extension of the backstop, raising some hope that last year's cliffhanger extension battle will not be repeated. The tone of this year's report and Congress' reaction to it should provide a preview of whether that will happen.
Asbestos litigation reform, specifically a bipartisan plan to create a national trust fund to replace the current litigation-driven system for compensating victims of asbestos-related disease, could well prove the one major risk management issue that doesn't have to wait until next year, or beyond, for resolution.
The trust fund approach's chief author-Senate Judiciary Chairman Arlen Specter, R-Pa.-has said that if the bill doesn't get through the Senate this year, it's unlikely to reappear on the committee's agenda next year. Opponents blocked consideration of the bill through a parliamentary maneuver earlier this year. It's unclear-in fact, downright murky-whether proponents have enough votes to jar the stalled legislation loose.
Of course, nothing's a given. Party control of one or both houses of Congress could shift as a result of the November elections, with a corresponding shift in legislative emphasis. A change might not have a great impact on some issues. The federal terrorism insurance backstop, for example, has enjoyed bipartisan support. The impact on regulatory reform could be more significant, as some Democrats are deeply skeptical of the wisdom of deregulating insurance rates.
Regardless of what happens in November, some summer legislative events will find a place on the next season's lineup; others won't. For the time being, sit back and enjoy the show.
Senior Editor Mark A. Hofmann can be reached at mhofmann@businessinsurance.com.

Load-Date: July 21, 2006


End of Document