LAWMAKERS TELL GROUPS TO DISAVOW TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
November 4, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. c9
Length: 429 words
Byline: CATHERINE TSAI, Associated Press writer
Body


DENVER -- Citing the September terrorist attacks, Rep. Scott McInnis, R-Colo., on Thursday asked environmental groups to disavow the actions of two ecoterrorist groups that have claimed responsibility for dozens of acts of vandalism since 1997.
Sierra Club leaders said they have been doing that for years.
"We have been denouncing violence, including violence defended as somehow being environmental, since long before McInnis first noticed it was happening," Sierra Club executive director Carl Pope said.
McInnis sent a letter to the Sierra Club, Earthjustice, Greenpeace and other groups asking them to denounce the Earth Liberation Front and a related group, Animal Liberation Front. It asked for a response by Dec. 1.
The letter was signed by McInnis and Reps. James Hansen, R-Utah, J.D. Hayworth, R-Ariz., George Nethercutt, R-Wash., John Peterson, R-Pa., Bob Schaffer, R-Colo., and Greg Walden, R-Ore.
Earthjustice director Buck Parker said the public interest law firm believes in upholding the law, not violating it.
"This notion that they give us a deadline for responding to them is a bit ridiculous," Parker said. "I would love to give them a deadline for disavowing practices I opt not to like, either."
A Greenpeace spokeswoman could not confirm whether the group had received the letter.
The ELF and ALF have claimed responsibility for several fires, including one that caused $ 12 million damage at the Vail ski resort in 1998.
Animal Liberation Front spokesman David Barbarash said the groups' actions destroyed property, not life. He said neither planned to change.
Barbarash said animals face terrorism in laboratories, slaughterhouses and farms.
"This is a real terror that is inflicted against millions of animals every year in this continent. We agree terrorism needs to stop," he said.
Nine days after the Sept. 11 attacks, ALF said it was behind a fire at a maintenance building owned by a research laboratory that uses chimpanzees in medical studies in Alamogordo, N.M.
McInnis condemned that attack and others.
"No matter its shape, source or motivation, Americans simply cannot tolerate, either overtly or through silence, the use of violence and terror as an instrument of promoting social and political change," McInnis wrote.
Craig Rosebraugh of Portland, former spokesman for the ELF, has been subpoenaed to testify Feb. 12 before the House subcommittee on forests and forest health, chaired by McInnis.
Rosebraugh has said he supports the ELF's actions but is not a member.
ON THE WEB
For more information, visit
www.house.gov/ mcinnis
www.earth liberationfront. com

Load-Date: November 5, 2001


End of Document