LAWMAKER'S IRA TIES POSE AN AWKWARD DILEMMA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 9, 2011 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 1165 words
Byline: Scott Shane, The New York Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- For New York Republican Rep. Peter T. King, as he seizes the national spotlight this week with a hearing on the radicalization of U.S. Muslims, it is the most awkward of resume entries.
Long before he became an outspoken voice in Congress about the threat from terrorism, he was a fervent supporter of a terrorist group, the Irish Republican Army.
"We must pledge ourselves to support those brave men and women who this very moment are carrying forth the struggle against British imperialism in the streets of Belfast and Derry," Mr. King told a pro-IRA rally in 1982 on Long Island, where he was serving as Nassau County comptroller. Three years later, he declared, "If civilians are killed in an attack on a military installation, it is certainly regrettable, but I will not morally blame the IRA for it."
As Mr. King rose as a Long Island politician in the 1980s, benefiting from strong Irish-American support, the IRA was carrying out a bloody campaign of bombing and sniping, targeting the British Army, Protestant paramilitaries and sometimes pubs and other civilian gathering spots. Mr. King's statements, along with his close ties to key figures in the IRA military and political wings, drew the attention of British and U.S. authorities.
A Belfast judge threw him out of an IRA murder trial, calling him an "obvious collaborator," said Irish journalist Ed Moloney, an author of "A Secret History of the I.R.A." In 1984, Mr. King complained that the Secret Service had investigated him as a "security risk," Mr. Moloney said.
In later years, by all accounts, Mr. King became an important go-between in talks that led to peace in Northern Ireland, drawing upon his personal contacts with leaders of IRA's political wing, Sinn Fein, and winning plaudits from both then-President Bill Clinton and Tony Blair, then former Britain's prime minister.
But as Mr. King, 66, prepares to preside Thursday as House Homeland Security Committee chairman at the first of a series of hearings on Muslim radicalization, his pro-IRA past gives his many critics an obvious opening.
The congressman's assertions -- that 85 percent of leaders of U.S. mosques hold extremist views, and that Muslims do not cooperate with law enforcement -- have alarmed Muslim groups, some counterterrorism experts and even a few former allies in Irish-American causes.
Mr. King, son of a New York City police officer and grand-nephew of an IRA member, offers no apologies for his past, which he has celebrated in novels that feature an Irish-American congressman with IRA ties who bears a striking resemblance to the author.
Of comparisons between IRA terrorism and that of al-Qaida and its affiliates, Mr. King said: "I understand why people who are misinformed might see a parallel. The fact is, the IRA never attacked the United States. And my loyalty is to the United States."
He said he does not regret his past pro-IRA statements. The Irish group, he said, was "a legitimate force" battling British repression -- analogous to the African National Congress in South Africa or the Zionist Irgun paramilitary in British-ruled Palestine. "It was a dirty war on both sides," he said of IRA resistance to British rule.
As for the hearings, he noted that Obama administration counterterrorism officials have often spoken, especially after a string of largely homegrown plots since 2009, of the threat from U.S. Muslims who take on radical views. "Al-Qaida is recruiting from the Muslim community," he said. "If they were recruiting from the Irish community, I'd say we should look at that."
Mr. King's witnesses at the hearing will feature fellow House Rep. Frank Wolf, R-Va.; Rep. Keith Ellison, D-Minn., who is Muslim; M. Zuhdi Jasser, a Muslim physician and activist who has been sharply critical of some fellow Muslims; and two family members of young men who embraced extremist violence.
The committee's top Democrat, Mississippi Rep. Bennie G. Thompson, has invited Los Angeles County Sheriff Leroy Baca, who has praised Muslim assistance to law enforcement, and Rep. John D. Dingell, D-Mich., who has many Muslim constituents.
The furor over the hearing is less about the witness lineup, which does not seem especially incendiary, than about Mr. King's statements that appear to spread blame for terrorism to the entire population of American Muslims.
"This hearing is not focusing on the acts of a criminal fringe, but is broad-brushing an entire community," said policy analyst Alejandro J. Beutel of the Muslim Public Affairs Council in Washington.
Mr. Beutel, who has compiled a database of terrorist incidents since 2001, said the problem of radicalization of young Muslims is serious, and his group has helped counter it with a number of measures, including a video featuring nine imams speaking against extremism that has become a Web hit. But he said broadly accusing Muslims of complicity in terrorism will hamstring the fight to prevent extremism, which depends on tips from citizens willing and unafraid to contact authorities.
Even Mr. King's critics acknowledge a fundamental difference between the violence carried out by the IRA, which usually sought with varying success to minimize civilian casualties, and that of al-Qaida, which has done the opposite. The IRA was responsible for 1,826 of 3,528 deaths during the Northern Irish conflict between 1969 and 2001, including those of several hundred civilians, historian Malcolm Sutton said.
"King's exactly right to say there's a difference of approach between the IRA and al-Qaida," said Amnesty International counterterrorism specialist Tom Parker, a former British military intelligence officer. "But I personally consider both of them terrorist groups."
Mr. Parker was at a birthday party for a friend in London in 1990 when the IRA tossed a bomb onto the roof of the rented hall, a historic barracks. Many people, including Mr. Parker, were injured, but none died, by lucky chance of location and quick medical response, he said.
What troubles him, Mr. Parker said, is that Mr. King "understands the pull of ancestral ties. He took a great interest in a terrorist struggle overseas. He's a guy who could bring real insight to this situation." Instead, he said, "he is damaging cooperation from the greatest allies the U.S. has in counterterrorism."
Some who have been close to Mr. King agree. Niall O'Dowd, an Irish-born New York publisher and writer who worked with him on the peace process in the 1990s, broke publicly with him Monday on his website, IrishCentral.com, describing Mr. King's "strange journey from Irish radical to Muslim inquisitor."
In Northern Ireland, Mr. O'Dowd said, they saw a Catholic community "demonized" by its Protestant and British critics, and worked to bring it to the peace table.
Seeing his old friend similarly "demonize" Muslims has shocked him, he said.
"He's a very honest, working-class Irish guy from Queens who's had an amazing career. Now, I see a man turning back on himself, and I don't know why," Mr. O'Dowd said.

Load-Date: March 9, 2011


End of Document