Lawmakers toughen penalties in bill for threats of terrorism Hoaxes would be made felonies
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 24, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P4C
Length: 475 words
Byline: Phil Kabler
Body


philk@wvgazette.com  
House and Senate Judiciary committees each are working on major revisions in the administration's anti-terrorism legislation, including significantly toughening the proposed penalties for terrorist actions or threats.
Under the Wise administration bill, it would be a felony offense to use or threaten to use toxic materials to cause serious public inconvenience or harm.
It would make it illegal to manufacture, deliver or possess any toxic chemical, biological or nuclear materials with the intent of terrorist activity. Hoaxes that involve the threat of such materials would be misdemeanors.
Mike Clifford, Kanawha County prosecutor, urged the Senate Judiciary Committee Tuesday to toughen those penalties.
He said that after a series of post-Sept. 11 bomb threats that forced the evacuation of the county courthouse, the judicial annex, the federal courthouse and several adjacent businesses, he was chagrined to learn that under current state law the most serious charge he could bring would be a misdemeanor.
"I believe any threat, be it a bomb, biological hazard or nuclear weapon, [should] be treated with seriousness and made a felony," he said.
Sen. Larry Rowe, D-Kanawha, said he thought the Wise bill focuses too much on defining what constitutes weapons of terrorism, and not on defining a terrorist act. He noted that the state's malicious wounding law doesn't list all the possible weapons that could be used to inflict the injury.
Rowe said terrorism should be defined as any event, or threatened event, that causes substantial fear of death, injury or disease in order to disrupt normal activities.
Committee members voted to substantially toughen the penalties in the bill, including sentences of 10 years to life for any felony terrorism convictions.
"Sometimes we tend to overreact, knee-jerk react, to a national tragedy," said Sen. Mark Burnette, D-Greenbrier, who recommended the tougher penalties. "In this case, the penalties are way too light."
Committee members also amended the bill to raise the penalty for making a terrorist hoax, which would be misdemeanor in the governor's bill, to a felony charge with a prison term of one to three years. Under the administration bill, a terrorist hoax carries a fine of as little as $ 100.
Said Sen. Mike Ross, D-Randolph, "The bill we passed last year for taking the gallbladder out of a bear carried a stiffer penalty than this does."
Committee members also voted to have the same penalties apply to bomb threats.
The proposed legislation makes those convicted of terrorist activities liable for any financial losses that resulted from the act.
Senate Judiciary Chairman Bill Wooton, D-Raleigh, said he assumes a House-Senate conference committee will work out the differences in the two versions of the bill.
To contact staff writer Phil Kabler, use e-mail or call 348-1220.

Load-Date: October 24, 2001


End of Document