Lawmakers pony up millions of dollars for homeland security; Many symbolic moves: Sweeping bill would treat terrorism as a death-penalty offense
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 18, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a9
Length: 333 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD
Body


The attacks of Sept. 11 prompted plenty of debate about how to strengthen Illinois law on security and terrorism, but legislators dropped most of their ideas.
The most noticeable change from the spring legislative session is more spending. Lawmakers approved tens of millions of dollars to fight terrorism and prepare for disaster, even as they cut other parts of the budget.
The exact amount can't be determined because it's spread across so many agencies, officials said, such as the state police, Illinois Emergency Management Agency and departments of Public Health and Agriculture.
Lawmakers also revised an anti-terrorism bill that Gov. George Ryan had vetoed. They kept one element Ryan rejected, adding terrorism as a new death-penalty offense, so the bill's ultimate fate is unclear.
Many of the ideas lawmakers put forward are symbolic - a commemorative license plate, for example, and designating Sept. 11 a day of remembrance.
The federal government carries the heaviest burden for terrorism combat, officials said. And existing state law covers many situations, they said.
"We've had the legislation and the powers that we have needed for decades on the books here in Illinois," said Deputy Gov. Matt Bettenhausen, the state's homeland security director.
Still, lawmakers said the state needed tougher penalties for terrorists - and even for false bomb threats or ill-advised jokes. Legislators also thought consumers needed protection from price-gouging gasoline companies, but Sen. Barack Obama learned state law already covered that.
Duplication is one of the major debates over the biggest piece of anti-terrorism legislation to be approved. The sweeping measure gives officials broader powers to eavesdrop, search homes and seize property when investigating terrorism, and it punishes terrorists with death.
Ryan rejected the bill once, arguing state and federal laws already make terrorist acts subject to capital punishment. But lawmakers passed a new version that retains the death penalty.

Load-Date: June 20, 2002


End of Document