LAWMAKERS COME OUT IN DEFENSE OF SURVEILLANCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
June 10, 2013 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 736 words
Byline: Brian Knowlton, The New York Times
Body


Sen. Dianne Feinstein, the chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee and a defender of the phone and Internet surveillance programs that have come into public view in recent days, said Sunday that she would consider holding hearings about them.
"I'm open to doing a hearing every month, if that's necessary," she said on the ABC program "This Week."
But, she added, "Here's the rub: The instances where this has produced good -- has disrupted plots, prevented terrorist attacks, is all classified, that's what's so hard about this."
Ms. Feinstein's remarks came two days after President Barack Obama commented on news reports, based on leaked government documents, that revealed details about the surveillance programs run by the National Security Agency. The president said he welcomed a debate over the right balance between security and privacy.
Other lawmakers who appeared on the Sunday talk shows were largely supportive of the surveillance programs, often outspokenly so.
Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., said he was not bothered by the surveillance. He said on the CNN program "State of the Union" that the threat of terrorism was growing steadily amid turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa but that further congressional and executive review of the programs was "entirely appropriate."
But Sen. Mark Udall of Colorado, for years an outspoken critic of the government's electronic surveillance programs, said he was not convinced that a program to collect huge amounts of information about Americans' phone calls had led to the foiling of any terrorism plots. He also called for a renewed debate over the Patriot Act, which authorizes much of the data collection.
Mr. Udall, a Democrat and a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, appeared to be distinguishing the results of that program -- which uses metadata associated with phone calls, including numbers called and the duration of conversations -- from those of the newly revealed Prism program, which analyzes data collected from foreigners who use Internet services like Facebook and Skype. Several officials have said Prism has been effective.
"It's unclear to me that we've developed any intelligence through the metadata program that has led to the disruption of plots that we couldn't have developed through other data and other intelligence," Mr. Udall said on the CNN program "State of the Union."
Rep. Mike Rogers, R-Mich., chairman of the House intelligence committee, spoke with barely disguised anger about Glenn Greenwald, whose articles in The Guardian newspaper last week described the surveillance programs. He added: "The National Security Agency does not listen to Americans' phone calls, and it is not reading Americans' emails. None of these programs allow that."
Mr. Greenwald "says that he's got it all and now is an expert on the program," Mr. Rogers said on the ABC program "This Week." "He doesn't have a clue how this thing works. Neither did the person who released just enough information to literally be dangerous."
On Sunday, The Guardian identified the leaker as Edward Snowden, a 29-year-old technical assistant who has worked at the NSA for the last four years as an employee for various defense contractors. He has most recently worked for Booz Allen Hamilton, according to the newspaper, which said that Mr. Snowden asked to be identified after being cited anonymously in earlier reports.
Before Mr. Snowden was identified, Mr. Rogers said of the leaker: "I absolutely think they should be prosecuted." Ms. Feinstein, D-Calif., said she agreed.
One lawmaker, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., called the surveillance programs unconstitutional and said he would organize a class-action suit against the government among Internet and phone companies.
"If we get 10 million Americans saying we don't want our phone records looked at, then somebody will wake up and say things will change in Washington," he said on "Fox News Sunday."
Ms. Feinstein cited two declassified cases in which electronic surveillance data had been used against terrorism suspects, in one case before a plot was carried out: that of David Headley, an American who scouted targets in Mumbai, India, in preparation for a deadly attack there, and that of Najibullah Zazi, an Afghan immigrant who pleaded guilty to plotting to set off backpacks full of explosives in the New York City subway. The Mumbai attack killed more than 160 people; the subway attack was foiled.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Evan Vucci/Associated Press: President Barack Obama leaves after speaking at a news conference Friday in San Jose, Calif. The president defended his government's secret surveillance, saying Congress has repeatedly authorized the collection of Americans' phone records and Internet use.

Load-Date: June 10, 2013


End of Document