Lawmaker Plans Controversial Hearings on Islamic Threat
The Forward
January 7, 2011


Copyright 2011 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 1
Length: 2370 words
Body


New York Rep. Peter King has long railed against a wall  of political correctness blocking out his warnings about  the mass threat he sees coming from the mosques of  America. Now, as incoming chairman of the House Committee  on Homeland Security, the Long Island Republican  is poised to do something about this.
King, who has vowed to make hearings on this perceived  threat his first order of business as chairman, promises  to do all I can [to] drive the public debate on Islamic  radicalization. But some question whether a former  supporter of the Irish Republican Army, which targeted  civilians with its bombs, is the right person for this job.
For Muslim American groups, King's hearings promise a  new challenge following hard on months of often vitriolic  national debate over the Park51 Islamic cultural center  project near Ground Zero in Manhattan and over efforts  to block mosques going up elsewhere around the country.
When a hearing is designed to target a religious minority  and is headed by a person with a history of anti-Muslim  bigotry, that's when we start to worry, said Ibrahim  Hooper, spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic  Relations. He called the planned hearings a show  trial of the Muslim community. Hooper said that his  organization's main concern is with King's record of  biased statements regarding Muslim Americans. These  hearings will inevitably serve to marginalize American
Muslims, he added.
But should he choose, King can  enlist none other than Attorney  General Eric Holder in support  of his contention that the nation  faces an increased threat from  domestic Islamic terrorism. In  a recent ABC News interview,  Holder said that law enforcement  has shifted from focusing  on foreign terrorists to worrying  about people in the United  States, American citizens   raised here, born here, and  who for whatever reason, have  decided that they are going to  become radicalized and take up  arms against the nation in which  they were born.
It is King's prescriptions for  addressing this trend that cause  controversy. The hearings, still in  their formative stage, are likely  to be shaped by King's view of  Muslims as a community to be  intensively monitored and systematically  infiltrated. That is  at odds with other views, held  by some in law enforcement  and counter-terrorism, who see  American Muslims quite differently:  as willing partners, if  sensitively cultivated and understood  as individuals who want to  stop terrorism  but who bristle  at being targeted as a community  and pressured to spy on their  own congregations.
You can't do anything without  good informants, and they are  starting to dry up, warned Vincent  Cannistraro, former chief of  operations at the CIA's Counterterrorism  Center in the 1990s. In  an interview with the Forward,  Cannistraro said that King's hearings  could accelerate a process of  alienating the Muslim community  from the American mainstream  that he thinks some in  law enforcement are already  abetting.
Oliver Buck Revell, former  associate deputy director of the  FBI, holds the opposite view. Like  King, he believes that clerics in  American mosques preach radical  views and that King's hearings  can help shake up a system  that so far has refused to take on  the issue. I [hope] he can convince  [Homeland Security Secretary  Janet] Napolitano and others  in the government that it is time  to call a spade a spade, Revell  said. It's time to put an end to  the fairy tale that [terrorism] has  nothing to do with Islam.
Matthew Levitt, an expert on  terrorism with the Washington  Institute for Near East Policy,  said the key in these hearing is  to have it done right. The correct  approach for dealing with  extremism among American  Muslims must be two-pronged,  he said: addressing genuine  grievances of discrimination,  profiling and hate, and contesting  the radical ideology.
King, a 66-year-old, nine-term  member of Congress, known for  his independence and occasional  pugnacity, strikes some critics  as a dubious figure to be leading  this charge, given his past invovlement  with the IRA. From the  early 1980s up until 9/11, King,  whose family hails from Limerick  and Galway in Ireland, was  an ardent supporter of the U. S.-designated terrorist group.
The son of a New York City  police officer, King forged his  links with the Irish Republican  Army and its political wing, Sinn  Fein, during a 1980 trip to Northern  Ireland, according to a June  2005 article in the New York  Sun. On his return, he hooked  up with the Irish Northern Aid  Committee, known as Noraid,  a New York-based organization  that the American, British and  Irish governments often accused  of funneling guns and money to  the IRA.
We must pledge ourselves to  support those brave men and  women who this very moment  are carrying forth the struggle  against British imperialism in the  streets of Belfast and Derry, he  told a pro-IRA rally in Nassau  County in 1982. King refused  to denounce the IRA when one  of its mortar bombs killed nine  Northern Irish police officers.  But since President Clinton's  brokering  with King's assistance   of the so-called Good  Friday Agreement in 1998, ending  the conflict in Northern Ireland,  King has distanced himself  from a rump IRA faction that has  committed violence in an effort  to topple it.
King's representative did not  respond to several requests from  the Forward for comment.
King's determination to showcase  his concerns regarding  Muslim Americans promises to  bolster one faction in what is an  urgent and deep divide among  advocacy groups, law enforcement  authorities and counter-terrorism  experts.
According to data compiled by  the Muslim Public Affairs Council,  one-third of terror plots in  the United States linked to al-Qaeda or its affiliates since 9/11  were foiled thanks to cooperation  from members of the Muslim  community. Alejandro Beutel,  the group's government and  policy analyst, said that these  numbers were derived from  government records and press  reports tracked by the Congressional  Research Service and the  Heritage Foundation.
The number clearly shows  that there is cooperation with  law enforcement agencies, Beutel  said, terming King's claims  grossly inaccurate.
But King, and some advocates  and experts on whom he  relies, look to a different Muslim  source. In January 1999,  Sheik Hisham Kabbani, founder  and chairman of the Islamic  Supreme Council of America,  said at a State Department event  that the ideology of extremism  has been spread to 80% of the  American Muslim population.  He claimed that Muslim leaders  were sending charitable dona-to  tions from their congregations  to terrorist organizations in the  Middle East. Kabbani later qualified  his statement, explaining  that the majority of American  Muslims were moderate, but that  extremists had gained leadership  positions at 80% of the country's  mosques.
Kabbani did not respond to an  e-mail seeking his source for this  statistic.
Today, King holds to this statistic  adamantly  and hints  at likely candidates to appear  as witnesses at his hearings to  back it. I can get you the documentation  on that from experts  in the field, he told Sean Hannity  on Fox News last February.  Talk to a Steve Emerson, talk
a [Daniel] Pipes, talk to any  of those. They will tell you. It's  a real issue . I'll stand by that  number of 85%. This is an enemy  living amongst us.
Such statements give a hint of  what to expect from his committee  hearings, though a date and  witness list have yet to be published.  Emerson, founder and  executive director of the Investigative  Project on Terrorism  Foundation, has long warned  that many mainstream Muslim  organizations, such as the Islamic  Society of North America, have  documented ties to the Muslim  Brotherhood, a Middle Eastbased  group that seeks political  rule for Islam and Islamic  law. He rejects MPAC's database  documenting Muslim assistance  in terror cases as flawed and  selective.
He points, too, to a 1991 Muslim  Brotherhood document discovered  by federal investigators  during a domestic terrorism case,  in which the group defines its  mission in the United States as  a kind of grand jihad in eliminating  and destroying the Western  civilization from within and  sabotaging its miserable house   so that it is eliminated and God's  religion is made victorious over  all other religions.
It is unclear how much of this  relates to the masses of rank-and-file American Muslims. An  authoritative 2007 poll by the  Pew Research Center found that  a large majority of America's  estimated 2.35 million Muslims  were highly assimilated, with  strongly positive views of American  society. Among the poll's  other findings:
  Thirty-six percent were very  concerned about the rise of  domestic Islamic extremism, and  another 25% were somewhat  concerned, for a total of 61%  worried about domestic Muslim  extremism.
  Just 1% said that suicide  bombings against civilian targets  were often justified to defend  Islam. Seven percent said they  sometimes were. Among those  born in Arab countries, a combined  12% said they were often  or sometimes justified.
  Fifty-eight percent said their  view of Al Qaeda was very  unfavorable; 10% said somewhat  unfavorable; Only 5%  termed their view favorable.  But 27% didn't know or declined  to answer.
  There is widespread denial  among American Muslims that  groups of Arabs were responsible  for the 9/11 attacks. Just four  out of 10 said that Arabs engineered  the attacks. About one-third  expressed no opinion as to  who was behind them. Twentyeight  percent flatly disbelieved  that Arabs conducted the attacks.
King summed up his own  views about Muslim attitudes in  an interview with the Washington  publication Politico, also in  2007. Unfortunately, we have  too many mosques in this country,  he said. There's too many  people who are sympathetic  to radical Islam. We should  be looking at them more carefully.  We should be finding out  how we can infiltrate. We should  be more aggressive with law  enforcement.
Today, King can point to a  recent spate of homegrown episodes  involving Muslims as evidence  that the threat from abroad  is emerging at home. These  include:
  The murder in November  2009 of 13 soldiers at Fort Hood,  Texas. Dr. Nidal Malik Hasan, a  U. S. Army major, is charged in  the slayings, and faces court  martial.
  American-born convert  Abdulhakim Mujahid Muhammad's  June 2009 shooting attack  on a Little Rock, Ark., military  recruiting station, leaving one  dead and another seriously  injured.
  An attempt, allegedly by  Mohamed Osman Mohamud, a  19-year-old naturalized citizen  from Somalia, to explode a bomb  in the midst of a giant Christmas  tree lighting event in Portland,  Ore., the day after Thanksgiving.
  A May 2009 attempt by four  African-American converts to  Islam to explode bombs outside  two synagogues in the Riverdale  section of the Bronx.
But critics point out problems  with linking these cases to allegedly  radicalized mosques and  religious leaders here. In the case  of Hasan and Muhammad, federal  investigators say the alleged  perpetrators' radical links were  with Muslims abroad, not with  anyone in the United States. And  the Riverdale and Portland, Ore.,  cases, the critics note, involved  federal informants who proposed  and helped the men involved  implement what were actually  government-staged stings.  Defense lawyers in the Riverdale  case and in some others have  charged that federal informants  infiltrated mosques, as King  advocates, to engage in entrapment   enticing individuals into  plots they otherwise would not  have hatched. But so far, no jury  has accepted this defense.
King himself has focused on  the case of Najibullah Zazi in  explaining the need for congressional  hearings. Zazi was arrested  in 2009 and charged with  plotting to plant bombs on the  New York City subway system.  As evidence of the danger posed  by Muslim clerics, King pointed  to an imam from Queens as the  one who tipped off Zazi.
But what this case in fact demonstrates  is the delicate nature  of cooperation between law  enforcement and local Muslim  leaders.
The imam informant that King  cites, Ahmad Wais Afzali, was  an informant who had cooperated  without pay with law enforcement  prior to that case because,  he told The New York Times, he  was upset after the 9/11 attacks.  Asked in September 2009 to identify  photos of several suspects  being urgently tracked by the  New York City Police Department's  counter-terrorism unit,  Afzali named Zazi and two others  as former students whom he  had not seen for years. The police  believed that the young men  were plotting a bomb attack, and  therefore asked Afzali to find out  what they were up to, but did  not tell him why they sought this  information or how to obtain it.
When he called Zazi, the imam  essentially warned him that he  was under surveillance and   failing to grasp the significance  of what he had stumbled onto   urged him sternly to stay out of  trouble. He contacted one of the  other men, whom he also told of  the police visit, and was told the  three friends had recently been in  Pakistan to see about a possible  wedding arrangement between  the man and Zazi's cousin.
Afzali kept his police contacts  updated regularly on the information  he was getting. But in  two separate interrogations, he  subsequently lied to FBI agents  about having tipped off Zazi,  who ultimately pleaded guilty  to organizing the plot.
In a plea bargain to avoid prison,  Afzali, who came to Queens  as a young boy with his Afghan  parents, agreed to be deported  back to his native country.  At the sentencing hearing, even
the prosecutor conceded that the  defendant was almost certainly  unaware of the seriousness  of his conduct.
I'm standing in front of you as  a convicted felon, a lying imam,  which is a physical, emotional  and spiritual burden far greater  than any sentence you could  impose, Afzali told Judge Frederic  Block at the brief sentencing  hearing.
Honest to God, he added, it  was never my intention to help  those idiots for what they do in  the name of Islam.

Graphic

 
IMAGE: Inquisitor:Peter King, GOP congressman from LongIsland, once backed a different kind of terror group.; GETTY IMAGES
IMAGE: Terror Expert:Oliver'Buck' Revell, formerlyof the FBI, supportsKing's hearings.; ap photo
IMAGE: Bully Pulpit:Rep. Peter King, incoming chair of the HouseHomeland Security Committee, has promised to 'drive the publicdebate' on on radical Islam in America.; ap photo
IMAGE: courtesyOpposed:CAIR spokesmanIbrahim Hooper predicts thehearings will be a 'show trial'of American Muslims.; of Ibrahim Hooper
IMAGE: Imam:Ahmad Wais Afzali,an imam, was deported afterlying to the FBI.; reuters

Load-Date: January 13, 2011


End of Document