Lawmakers hail the killing of terrorist mastermind
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
May 3, 2011 Tuesday


Copyright 2011 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 464 words
Byline: Ken Newton, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


May 03--The United States not only administered justice in killing terrorist leader Osama bin Laden but removed a figurehead in the global jihadist movement, Missouri Sen. Roy Blunt said Monday.
A member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and that chamber's National Security Working Group, Mr. Blunt reflected on the Sunday events in Pakistan that took out the mastermind of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
"Hopefully, this creates lots of confusion and chaos and uncertainty in al-Qaida but also in the Islamic jihad wherever it is being encouraged," the Republican senator said in a morning conference call with reporters.
"Clearly, it is a big moment in our fight against terrorism, and I applaud the president's decision to go in after him and then bring his body out."
Mr. Blunt was among those in the Missouri and Kansas congressional delegations to hail the military operation. The senator, who spent time last week in Israel and Egypt, said the United States eliminated an icon of militancy.
"Having him removed as a figure to rally around, as a figure of Islamic resistance, is important, eliminating both his money and his ability to raise money," he said.
Sen. Claire McCaskill, Mr. Blunt's Missouri colleague, issued a statement thanking the military personnel and intelligence officers who sacrificed to make the operation a success.
"After a long and very bad chapter of world history, Osama Bin Laden is dead and justice delivered," the Democratic senator said.
Northwest Missouri Congressman Sam Graves said the Americans involved made good on a promise to avenge the deaths of 9/11.
"This is not the end of global terrorism," the Republican lawmaker said, "but it may mark an important turning point in our efforts to fight global terrorism."
In Kansas, Sen. Jerry Moran said the military operation sent a broad message about American resolve.
"It demonstrates to the world that we're committed toward ending terror," the Republican said in an audio statement Monday. "It also rids al-Qaida from its symbolic, spiritual (leader) and mastermind that is always plotting against the United States and its interests."
Congresswoman Lynn Jenkins, whose district includes Northeast Kansas, called Sunday's events "a significant victory" in the war against terror.
"His death marks the end of an important chapter in this war," the Republican representative said.
Ken Newton can be reached at ken.newton@newspressnow.com
To see more of the St. Joseph News-Press or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.stjoenews-press.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document