Lawsuits May Boost Banks' Anti-Laundering Burden
American Banker
April 4, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 SourceMedia LLC d/b/a Arizent. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 1; Vol. 172; No. 65
Length: 1082 words
Byline: Cheyenne Hopkins
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


A number of class actions in New York have the potential to redefine how far
banks have to go to vet customers for potential ties to terrorism around the
world. 
The plaintiffs, family members of victims of attacks in Israel, argue that
three foreign banks with U.S. branches should have known to block transactions
involving certain charities because they were on other countries' terror watch
lists.
The banks - Arab Bank of Jordan, Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC's National
Westminster Bank PLC, and Credit Agricole SA's Credit Lyonnais of France - say
that they followed all relevant U.S. laws and that, in the vast majority of the
events cited in the lawsuits, the Treasury Department had not yet identified the
alleged perpetrators as terrorists. 
Experts said rulings against the banks could have a broad impact on the
anti-laundering system.
.
"This would be a change of volcanic proportions, literally changing the
landscape for banks in their relationships with their customers, since no law,
regulation, or international standard that I am aware of requires this to be
done in order to combat the financing of terrorism," he said.
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network fined Arab Bank $24 million in 2005
for problems with its anti-laundering program, including lax controls - a fine
the bank said was unjustified. However, the new suits go further. They allege
that the bank knowingly provided services to a charity linked to terror.
Previous cases of this kind have been thrown out of court, and experts said
that they believe the New York suits are the first of their kind to move
forward, and that they could spur additional ones.
"It's a very new concept saying that the failure of a bank to comply with
AML would make them liable for domestic or international crime," said Peter
Djinis, an anti-laundering consultant and a former Federal Crimes Enforcement
Network official. "No question it could open the door to more cases."
To date, 13 suits are pending in New York, with the earliest filed in August
2004 and the most recent last month.
The plaintiffs in all the cases - two against Credit Lyonnais, two against
National Westminster, and nine against Arab Bank - allege that the banks
knowingly provided financial services to charities with links to terrorist
organizations and are therefore partly to blame for attacks from 2000 through
2003 in Israel.
They cite designations by other countries, including Israel, as proof the
banks should have known the charities had terrorist ties, since information that
cast suspicion on the charities' activities was publicly available.
Michael Elsner, a lawyer at Motley Rice LLC representing plaintiffs who are
suing Arab Bank, argued that the bank must be held accountable. "Banks are
almost always used in financing terrorism, and if the victim of a terrorist act
can't hold a bank accountable, the enforcement of terrorism does not have any
teeth."
Stephen Kroll, a former Democratic special counsel for the Senate Banking
Committee and a former Fincen official, said the cases against Arab Bank are the
most significant, because they involve people who are not U.S. citizens and are
being tried under the 1789 Alien Tort Claims Act. The law grants foreigners the
right to sue in U.S. courts for crimes "in violation of the law of nations,"
such as genocide, even for acts committed outside the United States.
The Arab Bank cases are the only suits involving foreign plaintiffs. "These
decisions really do broaden out the definition," Mr. Kroll said. "It means any
bank in the world with an office in the U.S. could be liable if found aiding and
abetting terrorism. Given the size of some banks with international clients, it
could have broad implications."
The banks say they followed proper anti-laundering procedures. Robert
Chlopak, a partner at Chlopak, Leonard, Schechter and Associates, a public
relations firm that represents Arab Bank, said it "condemns terrorism of any
kind, and the bank has not and would not do business with any person or
organization" known to be involved in terrorism.
"The plaintiff's legal theories in the cases already filed against three
banks pose a potential risk to the industry," Mr. Chlopak said. "If successful,
they could expose global banks to unprecedented legal and financial liability in
the United States for transactions executed outside this country in full
compliance with applicable national banking laws."
Credit Lyonnais said that it had no way of knowing the charities were
connected with terrorism, and that all financial activities with accused
charities occurred before they were designated as such by U.S. authorities.
Linda Harper, a Royal Bank of Scotland spokeswoman, said National
Westminster had "no knowledge of the alleged terrorist activities" of the
charities named in the complaint and disagreed with a September court decision
allowing the case to go forward.
The bank "strongly believes that the legal claims against NatWest are
unfounded," Ms. Harper said. "NatWest remains confident that its defense of the
U.S. proceedings will prevail."
Anti-laundering experts acknowledge that banks must go beyond simply
checking for U.S. designations when investigating a customer's activities. But
they also question whether a bank should be held criminally responsible if a
customer uses an account to fund terrorism.
Terrorist financing often lacks the hallmarks of traditional money
laundering and involves very small-dollar wire transfers, the experts said.
"Given the fact that most terrorists have no criminal record, are dealing in
small financial transactions, and are engaged in innocuous activities, having
the banks do this kind of enhanced due diligence will not be very effective,"
Mr. Delston said.
Chris Myers, a partner at Holland & Knight LLP and a co-chairman of its
global compliance and governance practice, said these cases are using anti-
laundering standards as public liability standards.
"You can't expect us to be out in front of the federal government," Mr.
Myers said. "We cannot be and are not equipped to be the police." 
David Caruso, the chief executive officer and managing director of Dominion
Advisory Group LLC, a Centreville, Va., anti-laundering consulting firm, said
the potential implications of these cases are severe, because they would put the
burden of finding a crime on the bank.
"These types of suits may have merit only if prosecutors ... are able to
prove these banks failed to identify criminal acts and that failure was
criminal," he said.
http://www.americanbanker.com/            http://www.sourcemedia.com/

Graphic

 
photo, Djinis

Load-Date: April 3, 2007


End of Document