Laws to fight terrorism can endanger our liberty

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
October 10, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A10
Length: 298 words
Body


Clarence Page strikes the right note in his Oct. 2 column. Look carefully at the laws we pass to combat terrorism so that we do not run roughshod over our own civil liberties.
We should take notice when civil libertarians both of the left and of the right oppose sections of the proposals put to Congress to deal with suspected terrorists or criminals.
Attorney General Ashcroft opposed many of the same laws as a senator, when the Clinton administration tried to put them through, that the Justice Department is now asking for.
Under the new laws, wiretaps of all electronic mediums may be set up without prior judicial approval, now required.
Not only the suspects, but also all of their friends, relatives, teachers or just people they have talked to would also be subject to the same unsupervised surveillance. That means any and all of us.
An insidious and often abused present law allows law enforcement to confiscate any property used in a suspected - not even proven - drug transaction, with no court oversight whatsoever. Any means any.
Some years ago The Pantagraph ran a sobering article on this topic.
Parents and grandparents of suspected dealers of drugs lost homes and automobiles with no legal redress.
Chartered airplanes from unsuspecting businesses were summarily confiscated.
Again a few years ago, the Washington Post ran an article reporting that police officers stopped young black men in the street, shaking them down for whatever cash they had in their pockets as "drug-related money."
The definition of a crime can be made by any law enforcement officer's say-so to the benefit of that individual or his or her enforcement agency.
The new proposals would extend this law to suspected terrorist operations, definition flexible.
This is a law made for abuse.
Stanley Gutzman
Normal

Load-Date: October 10, 2001


End of Document