LAWSUITS ARE CHEAPER THAN CAMPAIGNS
Yellow Sheet Report
July 17, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS
Length: 319 words
Byline: hank stephenson
Body


Outgoing Pima County Attorney Barbara LaWall is trying to get the court to throw the Second Chances initiative off the ballot. The lawsuit argues the Second Chances, Rehabilitation and Public Safety Act, which aims to reform sentencing laws and reduce recidivism, has a “misleading” 100-word summary used to get registered voters to sign the petition (the same basis that the Invest in Education Act is being challenged on.) In 2018, the Arizona Supreme Court ultimately removed Invest in Ed from the ballot based on a similar suit. 
“The summary completely fails to inform voters that the crimes it defines as ‘non-dangerous’ include many that obviously are dangerous such as sex trafficking of 15-year-olds, terrorism, home invasion assaults, aggravated DUI and even some types of attempted First Degree Murder, among many others,” the challenge reads. Three other plaintiffs signed on with LaWall to challenge the initiative: Heather Grossman, Beckie Miller and John Gillis. Gillis worked under former Maricopa County Attorney Bill Montgomery as the chief of the county attorney’s victim services division. Montgomery is now a Supreme Court Justice who may be involved in ruling on this case if it were to escalate in the appeals process. LaWall, a Democrat, previously said she was against this measure because “the victims have no voice whatsoever,” (LINK). Criminal justice reform advocates didn’t find it surprising LaWall was trying to knock Second Chances off the ballot, airing their grievances on Twitter. Progressive lobbyist Geoff Esposito tweeted, “‘LaWall v. Second Chances’ actually summarizes her career pretty well. ” Armando Nava, the Arizona Attorneys for Criminal Justice treasurer called LaWall “petty. ” “Imagine being this petty on your way out the door. Imagine lacking the empathy to want to give people a second chance,” he tweeted.
Copyright © 2020 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: July 23, 2020


End of Document