Lawyers Allege Coercion of Witnesses in Terrorism Case
The New York Times
September 26, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 921 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


Lawyers for a suspect in a terrorism case involving the bombing of two United States embassies have accused federal prosecutors of employing a "pattern of coercion and intimidation" against at least eight potential defense witnesses through improper use of the grand jury and other tactics.
The dispute, now being played out in secret in United States District Court in Manhattan, has led the defense lawyers to ask that a federal judge quash grand jury subpoenas issued to four witnesses who were friends or former business associates of the defendant, Wadih el-Hage.
"The only relief that can ensure that Mr. el-Hage receives a fair trial is simply to halt the government's abuse of the grand jury," the lawyers wrote on Sept. 13 in a letter sent to a federal judge, Barrington D. Parker Jr., who supervised the grand jury.
The lawyers said the effort to intimidate some witnesses was likely to be particularly effective, considering their "membership in a vulnerable minority community" -- that of Muslim Americans.
The dispute comes just three months before Mr. el-Hage and five co-defendants are to stand trial on allegations that they were part of a terrorist conspiracy led by Osama bin Laden. The government said the conspiracy was behind the bombings of embassies in Tanzania and Kenya in August 1998. More than 200 people died in the bombings, while thousands more were wounded.
The New York Times was given a copy of the defense lawyers' 10-page letter by someone who is not a lawyer in the bombing trial, but who knows one of the subpoenaed witnesses and said the matter should be publicized.
Mr. el-Hage's lawyers, Sam A. Schmidt and Joshua L. Dratel, said last night that "the letter speaks for itself."
A spokesman for Mary Jo White, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, refused to comment. It could not be determined whether Ms. White's office had responded to the letter.
Mr. el-Hage's lawyers contended that the grand jury subpoenas, issued so close to trial, could only intimidate and eliminate potential trial witnesses, rather than contribute to the investigation.
The testimony of all four subpoenaed witnesses, the lawyers wrote, would aid Mr. el-Hage's defense. But the lawyers also wrote that all four "have been threatened, pressured and warned that the government believes they are lying" because they differed with the government's view of Mr. el-Hage's role.
"By abusing the grand jury and its subpoena power," the letter said, the government will "haul each of the four before the grand jury, admonish each about the penalties for perjury -- with each witness knowing the consequences of testimony that deviates from the government's version of events."
The lawyers asserted that the tactics had already deprived Mr. el-Hage of the testimony of another potential witness, Moataz Al-Hallak, a friend of Mr. el-Hage and the former imam of the Islamic Society of Arlington, Tex.
Mr. Al-Hallak refused to talk with the defense team, the lawyers wrote, "a recalcitrance that is most likely due to fear of reprisals by the government."
Mr. Al-Hallak's lawyer, Stanley L. Cohen, confirmed yesterday that his client, who had testified three times before the grand jury, refused to speak with Mr. el-Hage's lawyers more than a year ago.
Mr. Cohen said Mr. Al-Hallak "felt endangered and subject to further government harassment if he cooperated" with Mr. el-Hage.
The prosecution has accused Mr. Al-Hallak in court, but never charged him, with serving "as a contact between members of the bin Laden organization," an allegation he has denied.
Mr. el-Hage's lawyers cited other examples of "heavy-handed coercive tactics" by the government. For example, they wrote, Khadar Ibrahim, a former business associate of Mr. el-Hage in Texas, was arrested and charged last April with illegally harboring his own brother, who had an asylum petition pending with the United States government. Mr. Ibrahim has denied any wrongdoing.
The lawyers said Mr. Ibrahim was told that "his wife and other family members were in jeopardy of being arrested, too."
"Removing any doubt that the arrest was effected as a means of influencing Mr. Ibrahim in connection with his possible testimony in this case," Mr. el-Hage's lawyers wrote, he "was visited only days later by the assistant United States attorney in charge of this case."
"During that meeting," they wrote, "Mr. Ibrahim was offered assistance in his own case in return for cooperation with the government against Mr. el-Hage."
Another witness, Khalil Zaidan, was arrested by federal agents earlier this year in Oregon, the lawyers wrote. Mr. Zaidan was accused of mislabeling the speed of computers he was selling, a charge he has denied.
As in Mr. Ibrahim's case, the government offered assistance in return for the witness's cooperation in their investigation of Mr. el-Hage, the letter said.
Such tactics were also having a chilling effect on witnesses overseas, the lawyers said.
In advance of a trip to Germany this year to interview a former business associate of Mr. el-Hage's, the lawyers said, they had filed a travel voucher seeking court approval for the trip. But before they arrived, the man was interrogated by German law enforcement authorities about his dealings with Mr. el-Hage, and was fired by his employer.
Two other potential defense witnesses in the Republic of Slovakia were visited and questioned about Mr. el-Hage by local law enforcement officials at about the same time his lawyers traveled there to interview them, the letter said.
      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 26, 2000


End of Document