Lawyer: Dallas student wrongly accused of 'cyber terrorism'
The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania)
January 30, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 The Citizens' Voice
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 273 words
Byline: Bob Kalinowski, The Citizens' Voice, Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Body


Jan. 30--An attorney for a Dallas High School sophomore claims the boy is being wrongly accused of a "cyber terrorism" attack that nearly crashed the school's computer server last week, according to court documents filed Thursday.
Dallas administrators suspended the teenager for 10 days, and vowed expulsion, after the school's computer server was hacked and infected with a virus on Jan. 23, the boy's attorney said in court.
The boy's attorney, Gary Michak, on Thursday afternoon filed a preliminary injunction to block the suspension, claiming the teenager is innocent and being blamed on "unsubstantiated suspicions."
Michak further alleges the student's rights were violated because he and his attorney were not allowed to attend a hearing district officials had with his parents to discuss the allegations and punishment.
Michak's filing indicates the student's parents were told he "is being investigated as a cyber-terrorist, and that the district was considering referrals to law enforcement, including federal law enforcement."
At the hearing, district officials told the parents the teen is being accused of uploading a virus after hacking into the school's computer system, but members of the school's technology department terminated the attack before the system crashed.
Luzerne County Judge David W. Lupas granted the preliminary injunction and allowed the boy to return to school until a hearing can be held on the matter. Lupas scheduled the hearing for Feb. 6 at 1:30 p.m.
___ (c)2014 The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) Visit The Citizens' Voice (Wilkes-Barre, Pa.) at citizensvoice.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: January 31, 2014


End of Document