Lawyer Who Represented Bin Laden Kin Is Sentenced in Tax Case
The New York Times
November 23, 2014 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 35
Length: 317 words
Byline: By COLIN MOYNIHAN
Body


A defense lawyer who represented a son-in-law of Osama bin Laden on terrorism charges was sentenced to 18 months in prison on Friday for impeding the Internal Revenue Service.
The sentencing of the lawyer, Stanley L. Cohen, by Judge Norman A. Mordue of Federal District Court in Syracuse, ended a case that began in 2012, when Mr. Cohen was indicted on charges that he had failed to file tax returns for six years. In April he pleaded guilty to a charge of obstructing and impeding the Internal Revenue Service. 
  In 2013, Mr. Cohen was indicted in Manhattan on additional charges of failing to report over $3 million in income. He resolved those charges by pleading guilty to two counts of failing to file tax returns, and the case was consolidated with the one in Syracuse.
  Mr. Cohen's clients have included political activists and terrorism defendants, among them Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, bin Laden's son-in-law, who was convicted in March of conspiring to kill Americans and other charges.
  Speaking by telephone on Saturday, Mr. Cohen said that it was ''lunacy'' to believe he had planned to deceive tax authorities and that it was his roster of clients that had led the government to investigate him.
  ''I have been singled out and targeted by a variety of people for political and personal reasons,'' he said, adding that he decided to plead guilty mainly to end what he described as a tiring and expensive process.
  In addition to Mr. Abu Ghaith, Mr. Cohen defended in federal court Mousa Abu Marzook, a leader of Hamas's political wing; a person accused of being a member of the hacker group Anonymous and charged with participating in a denial of service cyberattack against PayPal; and the Rev. Patrick Moloney, who was charged in connection with an Irish Republican Army-organized robbery of an armored car in New York. In the 1990s, Mr. Cohen represented squatters facing eviction in Manhattan. 

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/23/nyregion/lawyer-who-represented-bin-laden-kin-is-sentenced-in-tax-case.html

Load-Date: February 3, 2015


End of Document