Lawyers address spying, Patriot Act during Constitution Day at K-State
University Wire
September 18, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 Kansas State Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 606 words
Byline: By Adrianne Deweese, Kansas State Collegian; SOURCE: Kansas State U.
Dateline: MANHATTAN, Kan. 
Body


The Patriot Act involves a balancing of interests among United States citizens and efforts to fight terrorism threats, two Kansas State University-area attorneys said during a Constitution Day discussion Monday afternoon.
"Domestic Spying: Who is Listening?," an hour-long discussion in Forum Hall as part of Constitution Day, allowed attorneys to discuss the provisions of the Patriot Act and whether it infringes upon citizens' privacy rights.
The Patriot Act, an act of Congress that President Bush signed into law on Oct. 26, 2001, has increased law-enforcement agencies' ability to search telephone and e-mail activities, among other searches. The act expanded the authority for the purpose of fighting terrorism in the United States and other countries.
Barry Clark, a Manhattan, Kan., private-practice trial lawyer, said constitutional principles are based on human experience. Clark said the Fourth Amendment, which protects citizens from unreasonable searches and seizures, is his favorite because it forms the cornerstone of the Bill of Rights.
"The Fourth Amendment is very short, but there's lots in it," Clark said. "It's been the subject of countless legal opinions over the years."
It is often said the Fourth Amendment only protects people, not places, Clark said. This differentiation has been the subject of debates during the course of the Patriot Act, he said.
Jacqueline Butler, assistant university attorney, said citizens must remove emotion from issues surrounding the Patriot Act to determine its legality.
"A primary component of making a determination of reasonableness is a balancing of the interests involved," Butler said.
Former Kansas Gov. John Carlin moderated the discussion between Clark and Butler. As a former archivist for the National Archives and Records Administration, Carlin said the Constitution is not an "old relic."
"It's a document that impacts us -- literally, individually --everyday," said Carlin, visiting professor in political science. "We're not aware of it, but we are impacted."
Constitution Day started after Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., who carries a copy of the Constitution in his pocket every day, added an amendment to Public Law 108-447 in 2005. The amendment mandates that all schools that receive federal funds, as well as federal agencies, teach the Constitution on the actual birthday of the Constitution -- Sept. 17.
A constitution quiz also was administered at the Union Food Court Monday afternoon. Participants received booklet copies of the Constitution and "I (heart) the Constitution" buttons.
Heather Reed, assistant an of student life, said Constitution Day is important because U.S. citizens should be knowledgeable of the Constitution and have an active voice in society.
"We all need to be participants in our democratic process," Reed said.
University administrators hope to bring the Kansas Court of Appeals, which made a presentation during the 2006 Constitution Day, back to K-State next year. Constitution Day event planners also hope to partner with a university lecture series to bring in high-profile speakers who related to the Constitution, she said.
In regard to the Patriot Act, Reed said it is important to examine both sides of the act and balance the nation's security with the possibility of infringement on citizens' rights.
"With domestic spying, the Patriot Act and the steps that have been taken to protect us from threats of terrorism, you need to look at both sides of the issue," Reed said. "I thought it was interesting when they talked about the basis for the act in regard to national security and safety."
(C) 2007 Kansas State Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 18, 2007


End of Document