LAX dry ice bombs linked to prankster; Ground service employee faces serious charges.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 17, 2013 Thursday


Copyright 2013 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NATION & WORLD; Pg. A8
Length: 400 words
Byline: By Richard Winton and Kate Mather
Body


LOS ANGELES - The ground service employee arrested in connection with a string of dry ice bombs found at Los Angeles International Airport was a prankster who had no deep motive for his alleged acts, a Los Angeles police official said.
But Dicarlo Bennett, 28, is still expected to face serious charges because the devices were found in close proximity to an aircraft, said Los Angeles Police Deputy Chief Michael Downing, who oversees the department's counter-terrorism and special operations bureau.
"He was a prankster," Downing said. "He thought it was funny. There is no terrorism here. This is one man involved who made very poor choices. There is nothing funny about what he did."
Bennett, who worked for LAX ground-service provider Servisair, was arrested in Paramount, Calif., on Tuesday on suspicion of possessing and exploding a "destructive device near an aircraft," the LAPD said. He was held on $1 million bail.
The proximity of the dry ice bombs to the aircraft will likely ratchet up the charges Bennett could face, Downing said.
Downing said there was no video footage of Bennett, but said there was "plenty" of evidence linking Bennett to the dry ice bombs. Sources said information from other airport workers was among the evidence that led investigators to Bennett.
Bennett "was an employee of Servisair at the time of the incident," the company confirmed Wednesday. A Facebook account registered in Bennett's name said he was a former ramp supervisor for the company.
Servisair declined to comment further, but said in a statement that the company was "cooperating with authorities and will continue to monitor the situation closely."
Authorities said three dry ice bombs were found Sunday and Monday in areas off limits to the public, leading LAPD investigators and other officials to concentrate on airport workers-particularly those with access to the tarmac.
The first device - a 20-ounce plastic bottle filled with dry ice - was discovered about 7 p.m. Sunday after it exploded in an employee-only restroom at Terminal 2, authorities said. No injuries were reported, but operations in the terminal were suspended and some flights delayed as the LAPD bomb squad cleared the scene.
On Monday, the LAPD was again notified after an airport employee found a plastic bottle that was fizzing - but had not exploded - on the tarmac outside the Tom Bradley International Terminal, officials said.

Load-Date: October 17, 2013


End of Document