LDS leaders condemn terrorism, discrimination
The Daily Universe: Brigham Young University
January 12, 2016 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL CONFERENCE; Pg. 1
Length: 535 words
Byline: Katie Rhoton
Body


Leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are among many who are condemning violent terrorist attacks.
There had been nearly 700 violent gun incidents in the U.S. only seven days into the new year, resulting in 205 deaths and an average of 29 deaths a day, according to the Gun Violence Archive.
President Obama wipes away tears, speaking in the East Room of the White House in Washington, Tuesday, Jan. 5, 2016. He detailed his plans to increase gun control. (Carolyn Kaster)
President Barack Obama urged the American people to stand up and stop violent acts of terrorism in a recent address.
"The United States of America is not the only country on Earth with violent or dangerous people," he said. "We are not inherently more prone to violence, but we are the only advanced country on Earth that sees this kind of mass violence erupt with this kind of frequency. It doesn't happen in other advanced countries. It's not even close."
Leaders from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are joining political leaders.
Following the terrorist attack on Sept. 11, 2001, President Gordon B. Hinckley gave a speech reiterating that "we are people of peace."
"We are followers of the Christ who was and is the Prince of Peace," President Hinckley said during his address. "But there are times when we must stand up for right and decency, for freedom and civilization."
Although the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks happened 15 years ago, many church leaders continue to actively speak out against violence and terrorist activity. In a press conference held at church headquarters on Jan. 27, 2015, Elder Dallin H. Oaks spoke of the importance of protecting religious freedom.
"We call on local, state and the federal government to serve all of their people by passing legislation that protects vital religious freedoms for individuals, families, churches and other faith groups," Elder Oaks said.
President Gordon B. Hinckley smiles while holding his wife, Marjorie Pay Hinckley. (Mormon Newsroom)
In response to the recent takeover of a government building in Burns, Oregon, LDS spokesman Eric Hawkins told the Deseret News, "We are privileged to live in a nation where conflicts with government or private groups can - and should - be settled using peaceful means, according to the laws of the land."
Church leaders are also emphasizing that while these terrorist attacks are indeed savage, it does not give members a green light to stereotype or discriminant against anyone. Church leaders continue to encourage members to love their neighbors and not let the violent acts of few change people's attitudes.
"We must not judge the people of any nation or region because of the irresponsible, cowardly acts of terrorism perpetrated by a few," said Elder Ballard in a talk titled "Duties, Rewards, and Risks."
Although gun control remains a hot topic, Obama recently called for better gun control regulations and begged Congress to make it harder for terror suspects to get on planes and purchase semiautomatics.
"I ask particularly that our own people do not become a party in any way to the persecution of the innocent. Rather, let us be friendly and helpful, protective and supportive," President Hinckley said.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document