Leaders tackling nuclear terror; Obama hosting world summit on nuclear security.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 31, 2016 Thursday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A4
Length: 446 words
Byline: ByJosh Lederman
Body


Still reeling from attacks in Brussels and Paris, world leaders are wrestling with the prospect of the Islamic State group unleashing a nuclear attack.
WASHINGTON - Still reeling from attacks in Brussels and Paris, world leaders are wrestling this week with the chilling prospect of the Islamic State group or other extremists unleashing a nuclear attack on a major Western city.
Preventing terrorists from obtaining nuclear materials is the central focus as President Barack Obama hosts leaders from roughly 50 countries for a nuclear security summit starting today. Despite three previous summits and six years of Obama's prodding, security officials warn that the ingredients for a nuclear device or a "dirty bomb" are alarmingly insecure.
"We know that terrorist organizations have the desire to get access to these raw materials and to have a nuclear device," said Ben Rhodes, Obama's deputy national security adviser. Still, the White House said there was no indication of an imminent plot.
Decades after the Cold War, the threat of a nuclear war between superpowers has given way to growing concerns about attacks by extremist groups, including the Islamic State and al-Qaida offshoots operating in North Africa and in Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
The havoc such an attack could wreak in an urban area like New York or London is concerning enough that leaders scheduled a special session on the threat during the two-day summit. U.S. officials said the leaders would discuss a hypothetical scenario about a chain of events that could lead to nuclear terrorism.
Those concerns have taken on heightened significant following the March 22 attacks at a Brussels airport and subway station. Last year, authorities searching the apartment of two brothers linked to earlier attacks in Paris found video of a senior official at a Belgian nuclear waste facility. The brothers were part of the Islamic State cell that went on to strike Brussels; both died in the attacks.
Nuclear security experts say there are four potential scenarios for a nuclear-related attack by an extremist group.
The most devastating but improbable scenario involves a group stealing a fully functional bomb from a nuclear-armed country. Most nuclear experts point to Pakistan as the likeliest source, though that would require cooperation with someone on the inside of Pakistan's military.
Easier to pull off would be for the Islamic State or another group to obtain fissile material like highly enriched uranium, then turn it into a crude nuclear device delivered by truck or ship. A third possibility is that extremists could bomb an existing nuclear facility, spreading highly radioactive material over a wide area.

Load-Date: March 31, 2016


End of Document