LEADERS AT SUMMIT CHALLENGE BUSH'S CALL FOR ARAFAT'S OUSTER;
 BESIDES MIDEAST, AGENDA INCLUDES TERRORISM, ECONOMY, AID FOR AFRICA
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 27, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A5
Length: 552 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: KANANASKIS, ALBERTA
Body


In the isolation of a heavily guarded mountain retreat, world leaders challenged President George W. Bush's call for Yasser Arafat's ouster at a summit shaken by the WorldCom accounting scandal that sent markets nose-diving Wednesday.
Bush found scant outright support among Group of Eight leaders as he renewed his demand that Palestinians "make right decisions" and elect a new leader. Bush has "given up hope" on Arafat, a White House spokesman said.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair came closest to the U.S. position - "there has been an attitude toward terrorism" under Arafat - while other leaders steered far clear of denouncing Arafat as they gathered in secluded serenity at a Canadian Rockies resort.
"With regards to the head of the Palestinian Authority it is, naturally, for the Palestinian people - and them alone - to choose their representatives," French President Jacques Chirac told reporters.
The Mideast crisis consumed the leaders' one-on-one talks, and more discussions were planned at a private dinner for the eight leaders. Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien had hoped to keep the focus on African aid, the global economy and terrorism.
In a grim reminder of terrorism's threat, camouflaged soldiers, tanks and anti-aircraft missiles stood guard over the green valleys and craggy peaks encircling the resort where Bush and his counterparts met.
They released a three-page counterterrorism agreement to improve transportation security. The accord makes no immediate advances but commits the nations to work together on initiatives such as reinforced cockpit doors and travel ID documents.
The leaders sought vague agreement on African aid. And the United States won pledges from the other rich nations that they will contribute $10 billion over the next decade to match a similar amount in American spending to help dispose of Russia's nuclear stockpile.
The sluggish U.S. economy also squeezed its way into the talks after Bush said corporate scandals have weakened American markets.
"There are some concerns about the validity of the balance sheets of corporate America - and I can understand why," Bush said. "We've had too many cases of people abusing their responsibilities."
He spoke after markets shook with news that telecommunications giant WorldCom Inc. misstated its earnings by $3.8 billion.
Kept more than 60 miles from the summit site, anti-globalization protesters were less violent and turned out in smaller numbers than at past summits.
But incidents like the burning of a U.S. flag outside the U.S. Embassy in Ottawa and a standoff in which scores of protesters engaged in a brief shoving match with police in Calgary underscored tension surrounding demonstrations against capitalism and policies of the Group of Eight nations.
The Ottawa protest ranged from a dozen people dancing nude in front of Canada's Parliament to some black-clad demonstrators throwing golf balls and paint-filled balloons that damaged street lamps, police cars and a bank window.
At the summit, the leaders tinkered with an African relief plan they expect to release today. A senior German official said there was still debate over the percentage of overall foreign aid that each nation should dedicate to the continent.
Some countries want the bar set at 50 percent - a goal that others might find unrealistic.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Demonstrators occupy an intersection Wednesday in Calgary, Alberta, in an attempt to disrupt traffic during the Group of Eight summit. They turned out in smaller numbers than at past summits.; (2) Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien (left) and President George W. Bush head to the opening session of the G-8 summit Wednesday in Kananaskis, Alberta.

Load-Date: June 27, 2002


End of Document