Leaders launch peace plan; Sharon pledges to dismantle Jewish settlements and Abbas denounces terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 5, 2003 Thursday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a1
Length: 542 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: AQABA, Jordan
Body


Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas launched a groundbreaking peace plan Wednesday with President Bush's encouragement, offering once-unthinkable pledges in hopes of ending decades of Mideast bloodshed.
In statements choreographed by the United States, Sharon promised to immediately begin dismantling unauthorized Jewish outposts on the West Bank, while Abbas - speaking in Arabic - explicitly asserted that the "armed intefadeh must end," referring to the Palestinians' 32-month uprising against Israel.
"Our goal is clear and we will implement it firmly and without compromise: a complete end to violence and terrorism," Abbas promised.
Sharon and Abbas stood alongside Bush and Jordan's King Abdullah II at matching lecterns set up at the monarch's summer palace on the Gulf of Aqaba. "Good job," Bush quietly remarked as each prime minister completed his address.
The summit had as much symbolism as substance. What was important was that television audiences throughout the Mideast saw Sharon, Israel's most prominent hawk, and Abbas, the new Palestinian prime minister, shake hands and agree to plunge ahead with difficult commitments to achieve peace. And just as importantly, Bush stood before the cameras and pledged to stay involved, staking his prestige on an endeavor that has no guarantee of success.
"The failures and frustrations of the past have left many disbelievers in their wake," Abdullah said as he declared support for the peace plan. Bush told reporters later he was cautious about the outcome because other efforts have failed, most notably the collapse of an initiative by Bill Clinton at the end of his presidency.
"I'm the master of low expectations," Bush said. "We accomplished what I hoped we'd accomplish."
The summit, marking Bush's biggest step into Mideast peacemaking, revived optimism in a region seething with suspicion and skepticism aggravated by the U.S.-led war against Iraq.
Sharon's government already had accepted the peace plan in principle despite deep reservations, and Abbas already had pledged to crack down on violence.
Bush welcomed Sharon's public commitment that "we will immediately begin to remove unauthorized outposts," a painful step for the prime minister since he is an architect of Jewish settlement expansion in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The president, flying to Qatar later, told reporters, "He said he would dismantle them. We now expect him to dismantle them."
The issue of Israeli outposts and settlements is one of the most divisive points between Israel and the Palestinians. As for whether Sharon's promise went far enough, Secretary of State Colin Powell said, "It's a good start. It will show to the Palestinian people and to the world that Israel is prepared to do things that they were not prepared to do before this meeting."
Abbas spoke of the suffering of the Palestinians at the hands of Israel but went on to say, "We do not ignore the suffering of the Jews throughout history. It is time to bring all this suffering to an end."
"Some amazing things were said," Bush remarked later. "The prime minister of the Palestinian Authority talked about the suffering of the Jewish people. The prime minister of Israel talked about a Palestinian state."

Graphic

 
Demonstrators protest Wednesday in Jerusalem against Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's plan to dismantle illegal settlements.

Load-Date: June 5, 2003


End of Document