LEADERS SAY THEY'LL HELP BATTLE TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
October 7, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 437 words
Byline: MARTIN CRUTSINGER, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- The world's major industrial powers pledged Saturday to work together to boost growth in a global economy badly shaken by the Sept. 11 attacks and to intensify their efforts to choke off money flowing to terrorist organizations.
The commitments were made by the finance ministers and central bank presidents of the world's seven wealthiest nations after six hours of discussion in Washington.
"We stand united in our commitment to vigorously track down and intercept the assets of terrorists and to pursue the individuals and countries suspected of financing terrorists," the Group of Seven nations said in a joint communique.
The G-7 nations the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada said they were encouraged by the number of other countries that have agreed to join in the effort to freeze terrorist assets.
The G-7 released a one-page action plan mapping out further efforts to boost cooperation among law enforcement agencies.
The nations said the Financial Action Task Force, created more than a decade ago by industrialized countries to coordinate efforts to halt money laundering, will hold a special meeting in Washington on Oct. 29 and 30 to map out a comprehensive strategy to pursue terrorist finances.
The group also released a one-page action plan spelling out the efforts that will be made in each country to increase cooperation among nations to better track terrorist funds.
"We are well on the way to building an international coalition to disrupt terrorist fund-raising," Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill declared.
On the global economy, the finance ministers said that last month's terrorist attacks "could delay the resumption of strong growth in our economies."
But the group said, "Decisive action has already been taken to support a robust recovery" and they declared, "We are confident about our future prospects."
The communique did not specify what steps have been pursued or what additional measures might be taken to boost growth.
The European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan and other central banks joined the Federal Reserve in the week after the attacks to cut interest rates and the Bush administration has pledged to support about $ 100 billion in extra spending and tax cuts in the United States.
"Notwithstanding remaining short-term uncertainties, we are confident about our future prospects," the group said.
The G-7 ministers took the unusual step of holding a joint news conference following their closed-door discussions to show their solidarity in the fight against terrorism.
Normally, G-7 meetings end with each country holding its own news conference.

Load-Date: October 8, 2001


End of Document