LEADERS VOW TO ESCALATE REBELLION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 15, 1989, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 17A
Length: 362 words
Body


JERUSALEM (AP) - The PLO-backed leadership of the Palestinian uprising issued a leaflet Tuesday rejecting U.S. calls for an easing of tension and promising to ''continue and escalate'' the rebellion.  The underground leaders discounted U.S. criticism of Palestinian guerrillas' attempts to infiltrate Israel from Lebanon and demanded ''serious and constructive dialogue'' with President George Bush's administration.  The leaflet called for two days of general strikes and the boycott of Israeli products. It also warned Arabs working for the military government in occupied lands that ''if they don't resign, the strike forces will strike them violently.'' The leaflet praised Israel's Peace Now movement, which has engaged in a series of public discussions with Palestinians. But it signaled no flexibility toward lessening confrontations in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.  ''We will continue and escalate the intefadeh ...,'' it said. Intefadeh is the Arabic term for the uprising in the occupied territories, which began more than 15 months ago.  The statement was made a day after Isr aeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens of Israel met in Washington with Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker III.  To create a climate for negotiations, U.S. officials urged Israel and the PLO to reduce the level of conflict both in Lebanon and in the occupied territories.  But the latest underground leaflet condemned ''Zionist terrorism,'' alleging that Israeli soldiers had purposefully killed and wounded demonstrators, demolished homes and arrested thousands of Palestinians.  It termed the U.S. proposals for lessening tension ''political blackmail'' and said U.S. efforts to label Palestinian guerrilla attacks from Lebanon as terrorism represented ''a one-sided manipulation of the media that does not distinguish between terrorism and legitimate resistance.''
Israeli Maj. Gen. Yossi Peled, commander of the northern zone, said 20 Palestinian guerrillas had been killed attempting to infiltrate Israel in the last month. Israel says the United States should break off recently initiated talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization because of the attempted raids.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document