LEADERS IN TOKYO SET TO DENOUNCE ACTS OF TERRORISM
The New York Times
May 5, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 1043 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TOKYO, Monday, May 5
Body


Advisers to the heads of the leading industrial democracies produced draft statements on nuclear safety and international terrorism in an all-night session, and President Reagan was described today as ''extremely pleased'' with the efforts to address the two issues here.
Reagan Administration officials said that, barring last-minute snags, Mr. Reagan and the six other leaders were expected to approve the drafts at the first plenary session of the Tokyo summit conference later this morning. The declarations were to be issued this afternoon.
The officials said some parts of the terrorism statement were still being ironed out this afternoon. The Japanese Foreign Minister, Shintaro Abe, said at a news conference that there seemed to be ''a convergence of views'' but that some work remained on the wording.
'Significant Step Forward'
The President and his colleagues authorized the drafting of the statements after a working dinner at which they made unusually swift progress toward a consensus on the two most pressing political issues facing them during this three-day meeting.
''We believe this is a significant step forward,'' said Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman. ''The President is extremely pleased.''
Pressed as to whether Mr. Reagan was disappointed that a British statement rather than an American one was used as the foundation for the document on terrorism, Mr. Speakes added: ''The President from the outset wanted an acftive discussion and that's what he got. He's very pleased with the result of it.''
 
Nuclear Safety Issue Raised
The movement toward consensus came after the group's host, Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, raised the topic of nuclear safety at the start of the working dinner, which was the leaders' first joint meeting in the annual conference, officials said.
Earlier the leaders got a stark reminder of terrorism's reach when an unknown group fired homemade rockets at the Akasaka Palace, where welcoming ceremonies were under way. The heads of state seemed unruffled by the attack, which occurred despite extensive security precautions.
At the working dinner, aides were instructed to work through the night on drafting statements of general policy on nuclear safety and terrorism, as well as a set of unified recommendations the national leaders could approve as anti-terrorist measures. Officials among the delegations of the seven participating nations - the United States, Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Japan and West Germany - said the specific proposal on terrorism would be drawn largely from a draft submitted by Britain and would include recommendations from a far more ambitious version proposed by the United States.
In offering the British draft, officials said, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher presented a two-pronged approach in which she urged language condemning terrorism and called for specific measures.
The measures range from economic reprisals to halting arms sales to nations engaging in state-sponsored terrorism, European sources said. Some diplomatic measures being considered include the increased use of extradition and better cooperation between authorites in policing terrorism, they said.
The group reportedly considered the United States' approach, which included 14 specific proposals, too sweeping. Precisely what the United States had urged could not be determined.
Officials from several nations said the terrorism statement would not endorse the use of military force but would define other means of opposing terrorism.
It would not explicitly mention Libya, they said. But the Japanese Foreign Minister said today that it was his understanding that there would be a mention of Libya in the statement.
The statement on nuclear safety, the officials said, would express sympathy for the victims of the recent accident at the Soviet Union's nuclear plant in Chernobyl and would appeal to all nations to honor an international obligation to provide information in the event of a mishap.
 
Economic Matters in Background
With the two political issues dominating the three-hour working dinner, economic matters received little attention on the first day of the talks.
American attempts to reach an agreement on monetary reform, led by Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d, were said to be proceeding slowly. Mr. Baker was believed to be seeking a commitment from all seven nations to support a ''mechanism'' to tame the erratic behavior of the dollar and other currencies. The exact nature of the ''mechanism'' was not clear, although the West Germans in particular have expressed opposition to direct efforts to control the currencies.
The leaders' like-minded display on terrorism and nuclear safety came at an elegant dinner hosted by Prime Minister Nakasone at his official residence, after a brief reception.
 
Reagan Last to Appear
The six male leaders, all wearing dark business suits, and Mrs. Thatcher, in a vivid blue dress, arrived at five-minute intervals in heavily guarded motorcades. Mr. Nakasone was the first to appear, and President Reagan was the last.
As they arrived, Mr. Reagan and Mrs. Thatcher both said they were not disturbed by the rocket attack in the afternoon. The projectiles, which overshot their target, exploded beyond the palace grounds without harming anyone.
Mr. Reagan, when asked if he was concerned, quipped, ''No, they missed.''
Mrs. Thatcher said the incident should not be ''exaggerated,'' adding: ''They are far more on your mind than ours.''
Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said of the dinner discussions that ''the leaders were virtually unanimous in agreement'' on the subjects of terrorism and nuclear safety.
 
Boycotts Seen as Unrealistic
The Europeans said the French and British remained leery of a boycott of Libyan oil and of economic sanctions in general, which they regard as unrealistic. The Thatcher Government was said to fear that such a posture would increase domestic pressure for similar economic sanctions by Britain against South Africa.
In addition, the European officials said, the leaders discussed the need to look at Libya in a broader context than terrorism, including Libya's relationship to the overall Middle East picture.
British sources said that Britain's draft of a statement on terrorism made no direct mention of Libya.

Graphic

 
Photo of President Francois Mitterrand, Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, President Reagan,and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney (AP)


End of Document