Leaders address Maine's security;
Gov. King convenes a four-day effort to develop a security plan that guards against terrorism.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
May 6, 2002 Monday, Final Edition


Copyright 2002 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 367 words
Byline: TED COHEN Staff Writer
Body


State officials today kick off Maine's first-ever conference to plan what Gov. Angus King is calling the Maine Homeland Security Plan.
"I cannot overly stress the importance of this undertaking," King wrote last week to participants invited to the four-day session at the Air National Guard base in Bangor.
The forum will include nearly 100 officials from government and industry who will brainstorm to come up with a framework for Maine's homeland security. It will be organized by Advanced Management Catalyst Inc. of Wiscasset, a national consulting firm specializing in the formation and execution of organizational strategy.
The conference, co-sponsored by King and the Maine National Guard, is designed to formulate state policies for dealing with terrorism.
Two of the hijackers who flew planes into the World Trade Center in New York passed through the Portland International Jetport the morning of Sept. 11. Videotapes from the airport show Mohammed Atta, the apparent mastermind of the attacks, and Abdulaziz Alomari walking past the security checkpoint just moments before boarding a flight to Boston en route to New York.
As the nation mounted an anti-terrorism campaign, King assigned Maj. Gen. Joseph Tinkham II, a Cabinet member who is commissioner of the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, to be his homeland security adviser.
Next weekend, after the conclusion of the state conference, Tinkham will continue seeking ideas on improving homeland security from the Southern Maine Chapter of Retired Officers Association.
The association meets Saturday at The Woodlands country club in Falmouth. Jack Berman of South Portland, a former first lieutenant in the Army and chapter president, says members will be interested in hearing Tinkham's take on fighting terrorism.
"How do you finance it, for instance?" Berman said. "What kind of programs will there be statewide?"
In accepting the group's invitation, Tinkham said that the issue of homeland security "is tremendously broad and complex, not to mention unprecedented when combined with the possibility of weapons of mass destruction."
He said he wants to solicit ideas on fighting terrorism from the retired military officers.

Graphic

 
Gov. Angus King
"I cannot overly stress the importance of this undertaking."

Load-Date: May 6, 2002


End of Document