Leaders turn to global economy, U.S., Europe discuss terrorism, globalization
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 2, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 324 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


EVIAN, France - World leaders projected confidence today they will turn around their weak economies and pledged to cooperate on rebuilding Iraq.
President Bush and the other leaders said they saw a number of hopeful signs that the current economic troubles - including a sluggish rebound in the United States and threats of new recessions in Europe and Japan - would soon be replaced by stronger growth worldwide.
French President Jacques Chirac called the discussions on the global economy "very positive" and said the leaders expressed a "message of confidence" that their countries could achieve higher growth rates.
All leaders at the annual Group of Eight summit - composed of the world's seven wealthiest nations and Russia - asserted they were putting divisions over Iraq behind them. The rift was especially deep between Bush and Chirac, who led the opposition to the U.S.-led war.
Bush, who had a one-on-one session with Chirac today, said he wanted to seek Chirac's advice as he headed later today to the Middle East for a new round of peace negotiations.
Bush said that G-8 discussions had reinforced his belief that joint cooperation between the United States and Europe was critical to resolving global problems.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair told reporters that part of today's discussion was devoted to the efforts being made by European countries such as France and Germany to institute economic reforms that will lead to higher growth. Increased competition due to globalization was forcing all countries to accept the need to do so, he said.
The leaders also were preparing an action plan to confront fears that terrorists could use shoulder-mounted missiles to bring down commercial jetliners.
The opening day of the G-8 summit Sunday had been devoted to discussions among a much larger group of 11 of the world's major developing countries including China, Brazil, India, Mexico and Malaysia joining a number of African nations.

Load-Date: June 3, 2003


End of Document