Leaders arrive for anti-terrorism summit
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
March 13, 1996, Wednesday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 323 words
Body


SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt (AP) -- World leaders came to this resort, built by Egypt's one-time Israeli enemies, for an anti-terrorism summit that President Clinton said Tuesday would find "ways to combat those who seek to kill peace with violence."
The one-day conference today hopes to spark new momentum for peace in the region after suicide-bombings in Israel over the past three weeks left 62 people dead. Yet problems that have fostered violence seemed likely to haunt the meeting.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
The three-hour forum includes leaders from 11 Arab nations and Israel, Russian President Boris Yeltsin, President Jacques Chirac of France and British Prime Minister John Major, all hastily assembled by the Clinton administration to underscore its commitment in the Mideast.
Clinton said before leaving the White House that "the will of the people for peace is clearly greater than the forces of division. … This summit of the peacemakers can be an important step in the process for peace in the Middle East."
The leaders attending the summit are determined to come up with "ways to combat those who seek to kill peace with violence," Clinton said.
After the summit, Clinton said, he will travel to Israel "to stand with the people there in their time of grief."
"In this time of difficulty, in the battle against terror and the struggle for peace, Israel is not alone," he said.
Syria and Lebanon chose not to come. Syria, accused of fostering terrorists, said it won't attend because the meeting is merely "propaganda."
And differences in Israeli and Arab hopes for today's meeting arose even as workmen were painting the slogan "Summit of the Peacemakers" in Arabic and English on the conference headquarters.
While Israeli Foreign Minister Ehud Barak urged efforts to achieve "concrete results" in the war on terrorism, PLO leaders criticized Israel's 17-day closure of Palestinian territories as a hardship that would only provoke more violence.

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document