Leaders of Russia and NATO discuss ways to work together;
Brought closer by the war on terrorism, Moscow and
the alliance hope to seize "a moment of opportunity."
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 24, 2001 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 470 words
Byline: Judith Ingram ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


With terrorism as a common enemy, Russia's president and NATO's leader met yesterday to explore areas where the former foes could move from consultation to cooperation between equals, edging closer to a new partnership after decades of rivalry.
"There is a sense of history," NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson told reporters after his Kremlin meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin. "There is a very strong sense that this is a moment of opportunity which must be seized."
While there was no talk of Russia's joining the 19-nation military alliance, Robertson said he and Russian officials had held "exploratory discussions to establish whether there are areas where NATO and Russia could perhaps work as 20 rather than as 19 plus one."
"This would be a major, groundbreaking change if Russia was to be around the same table with the NATO countries," he said.
Relations between the Cold War foes - severely strained by NATO's steady eastward expansion and its air strikes in Yugoslavia in 1999 - have warmed since the Sept. 11 terror attacks in the United States.
Wary of U.S. motives in Asia since the 1991 Soviet collapse, Russia has emerged as a key supporter of the U.S.-led operation in Afghanistan, and Russia and NATO see each other as partners in the war against terrorism.
But Russia is dissatisfied with its ties to NATO, offended that the U.S.-led alliance does not treat it as an equal. Putin repeatedly has said the threat of terrorism - thrust to the fore Sept. 11 - demands closer cooperation between Russia and the West.
Russia's contacts with NATO currently are limited to dialogue in a body called the Permanent Joint Council, and Russian officials have complained of being informed of key NATO decisions only after the fact.
Russia's ties with NATO soured significantly in 1999 when the alliance bombed Yugoslavia, its traditional Slavic ally in the Balkans, and Russia remains firmly opposed to NATO's eastward push.
Two years ago, the alliance brought in Russia's former Warsaw Pact allies Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary, and NATO is expected to soon embrace the former Soviet republics in the Baltic region - Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Closer ties with Russia are unlikely to alter those plans, but a more substantial Russian role could make NATO expansion more palatable - particularly to Russian political and military leaders who fiercely oppose NATO membership for the Baltic states.
Robertson said yesterday that Putin was calling for "bold" and "revolutionary" changes in the NATO-Russia relationship but that "he also made it clear that this is not some backdoor mechanism for Russia to join NATO."
Among the areas under discussion for an equal Russian role are counterterrorism, preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and peacekeeping in the Balkans, Robertson said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Associated Press
NATO chief Lord Robertson (left) with Russian President Vladimir V. Putin.

Load-Date: November 26, 2001


End of Document