Leader says terrorism near end Karzai says remaining terrorists will be caught, tried

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 26, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 416 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


KABUL, Afghanistan - Less than three months after the U.S.-led coalition began military strikes, Afghanistan's interim prime minister said today that terrorism has been largely beaten in his war-torn country.
Hamid Karzai met with his Cabinet for the second time since the interim government's inauguration Saturday, as the defense and interior ministers and the security chief reported on the security situation in the capital, Kabul, and elsewhere.
Karzai has said one of his priorities is establishing security and creating a national army for Afghanistan, where numerous armed militias hold sway in many areas.
At the same time, U.S.-led forces are hunting for the remnants of Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terror network and the former ruling Taliban militia. Bin Laden - accused in the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the United States - and Mullah Mohammed Omar, the supreme Taliban leader, are still at large.
Karzai said Wednesday that terrorists sheltered by the Taliban during their five-year rule were mostly eliminated.
"Some may be still here, but I don't think they are in large numbers. I think that terrorism is largely defeated in Afghanistan," Hamid Karzai told The Associated Press.
"There are remnants in the form of individuals or small groups. Those should be looked for and arrested and put to trial," Karzai said.
"With regards to Osama bin Laden, I don't know where he is," Karzai said. "We receive reports now and then that he may be here or there, and if we get a detailed report about his whereabouts, we will certainly go after him and arrest him."
Pakistan said today it had arrested 43 Afghans with suspected ties to bin Laden and Omar near the port city of Karachi. They were seized by the coast guard and are being interrogated, said Maj. Mohammad Akram.
Still, Karzai said, there was still a need for U.S.-led coalition troops in Afghanistan and airstrikes on suspected mountain hideouts.
"They need to fight terrorism right now physically inside Afghanistan, to bring them out of their hideouts and to deliver them to justice, to international justice and to Afghan justice," he said.
Although he couldn't say where Omar was hiding, Karzai said he believed the Taliban leader was still in Afghanistan. Karzai receives regular reports from southwest Afghanistan that Omar is in the area. He has asked his loyalists to fan out across that area to hunt him down and arrest him.
There have been reports that Omar is hiding in the snowy peaks of Helmand province, northwest of Kandahar.

Load-Date: December 28, 2001


End of Document