LEADERS' WAR ON TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
March 14, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  8
Length: 560 words
Byline: By BILL BELL in Egypt and JERE HESTER in New York
Body


Israel and its former Arab enemies capped a historic, unprecedented peace summit yesterday with a declaration of war on terrorism, as President Clinton warned militants, "Your day has passed."
In a dramatic show of unity, leaders from 28 countries vowed to promote peace by tracking down the sponsors of Mideast bloodshed and severing the purse strings of death.
But the five-hour emergency meeting yielded few specifics, as the parties agreed in a two-page document to "politically and economically" support peace negotiations and "enhance" security efforts.
"From all around the world, we have come to deliver one simple, unified message: Peace will prevail," Clinton told the "Summit of Peacemakers."
The hastily assembled gathering, which brought sheiks, kings, presidents and prime ministers to Egypt's Sharm el Sheikh resort, was sparked by a recent spate of suicide bombings that killed some 60 in Israel.
Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres said he watched with an "unbelieving eye" as leaders of 13 Arab countries declared their commitment to ending the carnage.
"There is news in the Middle East: It will be a new Middle East," he said. But Peres later restated his pledge to halt the final stages of peace talks with the Palestinians if attacks continue.
Clinton said the leaders had "sowed the seeds of cooperation" in combating the spiraling cycle of violence: "We must not let terror reverse history."
In a direct blast at Islamic fanatics, Clinton said, "Peace survives. . . . Your day has passed."
While details were murky, Clinton outlined a plan that states:
The leaders will work to bring terrorists to justice, stymie recruitment and identify and cut off funding sources.
The leaders will form a working group that will make recommendations on fighting terror within 30 days.
The leaders will support the peace process and issued a "strong condemnation" of Mideast violence.
Sources said the participants, who gathered at the remote Sinai peninsula resort, also agreed to help Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat foot the bill for rooting out terrorists hiding in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Though Peres accused Iran which didn't participate of spearheading terrorism against Israel, he failed to gain widespread support for uniting against the Islamic nation.
Some of the leaders including Clinton downplayed the significance of Syria's absence from the summit. Israel scrapped peace talks with Syria earlier this month after the bombings.
Arafat, whose 1993 peace pact with Israel has been jeopardized by the bombings, vowed to "stand against terrorism. Our dreams of self-determination could never come true in a sea of blood and tears," he said.
Arafat, though, renewed demands that Israel lift a blockade of Palestinian towns that had hurt his people "to the extent of famine."
Yesterday, Israel eased its blockade of Gaza to allow a one-day delivery of food, but Peres vowed to keep the borders closed until those responsible for terror attacks are jailed.
Palestinian officials said yesterday cops seized hundreds of pounds of explosives as well as weapons and ammunition in an overnight raid on Hamas hideouts in Gaza. More activists also were arrested.
While the message of the summit was peace, heavy security surrounded the leaders, among them Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, Russian President Boris Yeltsin and British Prime Minister John Major.

Graphic

 
HARRY HAMBURG DAILY NEWS PEACEMAKERS: From left: Shimon Peres, Bill Clinton, Hosni Mubarak, Boris Yeltsin and Yasser Arafat in victory pose after summit.

Load-Date: March 15, 1996


End of Document