Leadership Institute to feature rabbi, Wendy Davis
Odessa American (Texas)
March 27, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Odessa American
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 295 words
Byline: Odessa American, Texas
Body


March 27--The John Ben Shepperd Public Leadership Institute will host a JBS Leadership Roundup featuring Peter Tarlow, director of the Center for Latino-Jewish Relations and president and founder of Tourism & More, at 6 p.m. April 23 in room LL001 of the Library Lecture Hall at the University of Texas of the Permian Basin.
Tarlow, a rabbi, is a world-renowned speaker and expert in areas such as the impact of crime and terrorism on the tourism industry, event and tourism risk management and economic development, according to the Tourism & More website. His topic is "Terrorism: How Will it Affect Your Future?" according to   the JBS website.
He earned his doctorate in sociology from Texas A&M University and holds degrees in history, Spanish and Hebrew literature and psychotherapy. Since 1990, he has been teaching courses on tourism, crime and terrorism to police forces, security and tourism professionals worldwide, the JBS website said.
Bob Brescia, executive director of the John Ben Shepperd Public Leadership Institute, will likely be the moderator.
In a separate event, recent Texas gubernatorial nominee Wendy Davis will be the guest speaker for a special JBS Distinguished Lecture. That event is scheduled for 7 p.m. April 21 at the Wagner Noel Performing Arts Center, 1310 N. Farm to Market Road 1788.
Brescia and Pat Canty, publisher of the Odessa American, will co-moderate the Davis event, which is titled "Educating Texas: Complex Challenges -- New Perspectives."
​Follow Odessa American on twitter @OdessaAmerican, like us on Facebook at Odessa American or call 432-333-7714 for the main newsroom line.
___ (c)2015 the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) Visit the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) at www.oaoa.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC

Load-Date: March 27, 2015


End of Document