Leaked Report Reveals Danger Of ‘Staying The Course’
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 1, 2006 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 4
Length: 831 words
Byline: RAY MCGOVERN, Special to The Tampa Tribune
Body


By RAY MCGOVERN
Special to The Tampa Tribune
Our nation needs to recognize the real problems that exist in the war on terrorism. These problems are neither Democrat nor Republican; they are American, and they are getting worse.
"A large body of all-source reporting indicates that activists identifying themselves as jidhadists ... are increasing in both number and geographic distribution. If this continues, threats to U.S. interests at home and abroad will become more diverse, leading to increasing attacks worldwide."
So proclaims the "key judgment" from the recently leaked National Intelligence Estimate. The impetus for the increased threat, the authors say, is "the Iraq conflict, [which] has become the 'cause celebre' for jihadists, breeding a deep resentment of U.S. involvement in the Muslim world and cultivating support for the global jihadist movement."
This particular NIE was formally signed by John Negroponte, national intelligence director, and published in April 2006. The compiled work of 16 U.S. intelligence agencies concludes straightforwardly that the invasion and occupation of Iraq have fueled terrorism.
President Bush's reluctance to release key parts of the NIE is entirely understandable. Its official conclusions do not support President Bush's repeated claims that the invasion of Iraq has made us "safer."
Sometimes the truth hurts.
Shortly after launching the war in Iraq, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld wondered aloud whether the United States was creating or recruiting more terrorists than it was killing. Now, thanks to a patriotic truth-teller, one whom the present government would likely brand a "leaker," Americans know the war is not reducing terrorist threats to our country.
Press reports last week also indicate that America's intelligence agencies have prepared a similarly dismal NIE that formally assesses the current and future prospects for the war in Iraq. The draft is finished, but Jane Harman, a ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee, says it awaits publication until after the midterm election.
Independent research groups have long reached the same conclusion. The Council on Global Terrorism, for example, has asserted that "there is every sign that radicalization in the Muslim world is spreading rather than shrinking." The council even gave the Bush administration's efforts to combat Islamic terrorism a mark of "D plus," by all indications a charitable grade.
On Tuesday, President Bush protested that critics who claim that the war in Iraq has increased the number of terrorists are "naïve." The president offered his alternative judgment: "If we weren't in Iraq, they'd find some other excuse, because they have ambitions." Acknowledging that Iraq has been a "recruitment tool" for the terrorists, he said this is because "they understand the stakes."
Presidential spokesman Tony Snow attempted to clean up after the president, stressing that since the U.S. invasion, "Iraq has become, for the terrorists, the battleground. If they lose, they lose their bragging rights."
Bragging rights? I beg your pardon. A war that has already taken 2,700 U.S. soldiers' lives has to be about more than that. One cannot escape the conclusion that the president is treating our troops like toy soldiers that a rich kid got for Christmas.
President Bush and his advisers calculate that our nation's troops should be able to "stay the course" in Iraq for the next two years, after which it will be left to his successor to try to extricate them from the quicksand that has become our war effort there. He seems content to have the children of our farms and inner cities, where jobs are so scarce, "stay the course" for us in Iraq, with the forlorn hope that maybe we'll get lucky.
Instead of getting "lucky," the Bush administration should heed objective intelligence-gathering and analysis, and it should also do all it can to cultivate bipartisan solutions moving forward. For starters, it should not wait until the midterm election passes to present the NIE report on the Iraq war prospects to Congress.
(CHART) VIPs FOR SANITY
Ray McGovern also co-founded a group called Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity, which encourages "unauthorized truth-telling" by intelligence officers - that is, leaking classified information that they believe reveals lies by federal officials.
Ray McGovern, a retired intelligence analyst, began his 27 years of service with the CIA with the Kennedy administration in 1963.
Photo credit: The Associated Press
Photo: Ray McGovern, left, approaches the White House on Sept. 13 bearing the "verdict" - guilty - of a group calling itself the International Commission of Inquiry On Crimes Against Humanity Committed by the Bush Administration. McGovern made similar accusations of war crimes earlier this year when he interrupted Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld during a speech in Atlanta.
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO CHART
.

Load-Date: October 3, 2006


End of Document