Leaner Pentagon Needed for War on Terrorism
Federal Times
May 13, 2002 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2002 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 513
Length: 656 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE KORB
Body


Despite the understandable   temptation in the midst of a   war to rubber stamp any proposal for a Pentagon budget increase,   Congress owes it to American taxpayers to carefully scrutinize President Bush's proposal for the largest   Pentagon budget hike since the   height of the Vietnam War.
Members of Congress should press   the administration to identify specific   threats that justify the need for the   $45 billion increase that follows a $33   billion increase last year.
They also should determine   whether existing programs in the   Pentagon budget have become outmoded and can be trimmed or eliminated. That would be the highest   form of patriotism.
With respect to threats, Bush has   cited terrorist organizations with   global reach along with the so-called   "axis-of-evil" nations: Iran, Iraq and   North Korea. Even under the most   pessimistic assumptions, none of   these threats, either alone or combined, justify adding tens of billions   of dollars to the defense budget.
The combined annual military   spending of Iran, Iraq and North   Korea is about $10 billion, compared   with the current U.S. defense budget   of more than $340 billion.
The administration's proposed   increase alone is greater than the   economic output of more than two- thirds of the nations in the world.
But dollars aside, no credible   defense analyst from either side of   the aisle would assert that America   lacks overwhelming military superiority over these nations and any   other nation or group that threaten   us now or in the foreseeable future.
This highlights the problem we   face. Our military does not need to   be bigger and more cumbersome. It   needs to be smarter and more agile,   not only to fight rogue nations but   terrorist organizations as well.
This will require increased spending for more precision-guided bombs   and missiles, more unpiloted aircraft   such as the Predator drone, better   communications and reconnaissance   equipment, and more.
But these military upgrades for the   war on terrorism will cost only a   fraction of the amount our nation   would save by trimming weapon systems and military programs that   would be useful only if the Soviet   Union was still intact.
The Pentagon should re-evaluate   plans to develop a new generation of   fighter jets, submarines, helicopters   and other weapons that have no use   against any foreseeable threat.
Tens of thousands of American   troops in Europe and Asia have no   military significance and should be   brought home.
The Bush administration should   scale back plans to rapidly deploy a   national missile defense system.   Even if such a system were to work   successfully, the intelligence community argues a missile launch is the   least likely way an enemy would   attack with a weapon of mass   destruction.
These military trims could save   tens of billions of dollars, enough   money to cover the Pentagon's new   requirements as well as broader   national security upgrades, such as   increased foreign aid, border   enforcement and intelligence gathering.
It is ironic that America can fight   and win the war on terrorism while   decreasing the Pentagon budget. But   serious reforms are long overdue.
Nonetheless, despite its eye-popping size, the Pentagon increase likely will pass with little if any   opposition, according to congressional leaders.
This would be a mistake.
It is essential that members of    Congress ensure that America's   budget priorities reflect America's   post-Sept. 11 national security needs,   which cannot be met by throwing   ever larger amounts of money at the   Pentagon.
The American people, with a new   interest in foreign affairs, should be   receptive to the patriotism of congressional leaders who are willing to   raise questions about the role of   America's military in the broad war   on terrorism and about the tools and   funding the Pentagon needs - and   does not need - to get the job done.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document