Learn to live as a humanity
Daily Collegian: Pennsylvania State University
July 26, 2011 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARCHIVED NEWS | DAILY COLLEGIAN; Pg. 1
Length: 508 words
Byline: Kathleen Loughran
Body


There's a particular passage in "Gone with the Wind" that I hold especially dear to my heart, for it candidly-yet not dishearteningly-reveals the truth about the world.
It reads: "It is your choice how you view the world. If you choose to see the ugliness, there's plenty out there, but if you choose to look for the beauty, the happiness and the laughter, the world abounded with so much good will direct your focus and shape your viewpoint."
But at times like these, when the people of Norway are suffering from the deadliest assault on their country since World War II, it is beyond difficult to stay in the frame of mind told by Margaret Mitchell. And I'm not even in Oslo.
With 93 deaths declared and over 90 people reported injured, it saddens me to think that a man, suspect Anders Breivik, thought staging a mass murder was the appropriate vehicle to exploit his harsh, horrid sentiments toward multiculturalism and Muslim immigration in Norway.
The New York Times published that Breivik's lawyer said Breivik believed the only way to change society's structure was to "force through a revolution." In his manifesto-in which he proposes a Christian war, alarmingly predicting for the injury of a million people, to end Muslim ascendancy-Breivik wrote, "The time for dialogue is over. We gave peace a chance. The time for armed resistance has come."
And for acting on his extremist beliefs the worst repercussion Breivik can receive is 21 years in jail, as outlined in Norwegian law.
Though that time frame is longer than my own life, I honestly believe it is not enough time in jail for someone who killed so many innocent lives, some of whom did not even have the chance to reach the ripe age of 21. This man took it upon himself to commence the clearly inexcusable "armed resistance" in a country known for peace, and for that, he should pay.
Perhaps, a short time in jail will teach him the value, and in his case, the necessity of acceptance. But if not, it's a frightening thought to know that even if he receives the harshest sentence, he won't be behind bars forever. Because as of present, he obviously thought it fit to let the world suffer yet another terrorism attack; thereby, solidifying that people with different extremist beliefs are capable of utilizing radical acts of terror-an important fact to acknowledge.
Though the face of a terrorist has been colored by the 9/11 attacks and the succeeding War on Terror, recent events exemplify that it is vital not to label one religion as holding the origins of terrorism.
We, as people who collectively populate Earth, should better attempt to give peace a chance, to not live in fear and to accept a multicultural world. No matter our beliefs, we all deserve to live.
Maybe I'm preaching to the choir, but regardless, I know I am not the only one who believes it's a significant message upon which to reflect. As reported in the Times, a minister at the Lutheran cathedral in Oslo told those who came on Sunday to pay their respects and mourn the tragic loss, "hate cannot triumph over love."

Load-Date: January 23, 2019


End of Document