Learning from foiled bomb plot; 
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
November 3, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Lincoln Journal Star All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. B7
Length: 447 words
Body


OUR VIEW (Lincoln Journal Star Editorial)
There are multiple lessons to be drawn from the discovery last week of al-Qaida bombs on airplanes. The first is that al-Qaida remains a legitimate threat to American security. One of the bombs was wired to a cell phone sim card. Experts say it could have been detonated in the sky over Chicago, where the package was to be delivered.
The explosives and their triggering mechanisms were built into a printer, with the explosive hidden in the toner cartridge. Experts said the explosive would have had the power of five sticks of dynamite, sufficient to bring down the plane. The device was not detected either by X-rays or trained sniffer dogs.
Too often the threat is minimized. Joking references to the "underpants bomber" in the attempted Christmas Day attack last year give the impression of bumbling incompetence.
路 The al-Qaida branch in Yemen is believed to include some Americans or people who have lived in America. "These are people with both access to explosives and knowledge of how the United States works," Princeton Professor Bernard Haykel, a Near East specialist, told The New York Times.
路 Intelligence is key.Authorities suspect that plotters in the recent attempt may have made a dry run in September with innocuous packages that could be tracked on shippers'websites,revealing information on routes and timing.
Authorities intercepted the packages, inspected them and allowed shipment to continue when they were determined to be harmless.
The importance of good intelligence is magnified by the practical challenges of screening every piece of cargo that enters the United States. Even after British authorities were alerted to the bomb on the Qatar Airways plane, it still took them hours to find the right package.
路 The Saudis are valuable allies. Al-Qaida wants to wrest control from the Saudi family, and the family has taken tough countermeasures since Sept. 11, 2001. Many Americans think of Saudi Arabia as a source of terrorism, since many of the hijackers came from there. But al-Qaida and other jihadists also have launched attacks in Saudi Arabia.
路 Things are not always as they seem. It looked for a time as though the United States had made a mistake when it released Jabir al-Fayfi from Guantanamo. It appeared that the one-time detainee had rejoined al-Qaida. Now, however, it turns out that al-Fayfi was a double agent who supplied the tip that the two bombs had been planted on planes.
The $150 million that the United States has invested in anti-terrorism efforts in Yemen is money well spent. With the latest evidence that al-Qaida is using the country as a base, those efforts should be given higher priority.

Load-Date: November 3, 2010


End of Document