Learning from bin Laden Our view • Al-Qaida's founder frightened the world but died a failure. OPINION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 3, 2011 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A16
Length: 619 words
Dateline: 0 
Body


The world that Osama bin Laden left so suddenly early Monday morning in Abbottabad, Pakistan, is a far different place than it was when he and his movement entered the broad public consciousness on Sept. 11, 2001.
But for all the fear and loathing bin Laden engendered, he and his al-Qaida band had very little to do with those changes. He had hoped to spark jihad against the forces of progressivism in the Arab world. But despite the radicalization of some young Arabs, this year's uprisings in the Middle East have been against repression and toward progressivism.
He had hoped to cripple the United States with fear, saying a month after the 9/11 attacks, "There is America, full of fear from its north to its south, from its west to its east. Thank God for that."
But America adjusted. It gutted al-Qaida's financial assets and drove al-Qaida "central" into hiding. Even during the long and costly distraction in Iraq - a distraction for which bin Laden was an excuse, not a cause - CIA and Special Forces operators kept bin Laden and his top agents on the run.
Al-Qaida never regrouped. It lent its name to dozens of terror groups, but direct linkages were few. Command-and-control was rendered difficult by financial controls and electronic intercepts. The Pew Research Center reported that in the weeks before his death, bin Laden's "confidence rating" in six Muslim nations had plummeted.
Osama bin Laden died a failure. Megalomaniacs are not given to introspection, but perhaps there was time, between when he first heard the helicopters landing in the yard of his compound and when the bullet hit him the head, for him to realize that.
America is different today than it was on 9/11 despite bin Laden, not because of him. Our biggest wounds have been self-inflicted - pointless wars, economic chaos, vicious partisanship. Terrorism remains a threat, but our response to it too often has been misdirected.
The Bush administration declared "a global war on terrorism," which led to abundant abuses, from the war in Iraq to Guantanamo to a vast and redundant multi-billion security industry that presumes that 854,000 people need "top secret" security clearances. In most ways, President Barack Obama has left this infrastructure, and the flawed rationale for it, in place.
In announcing bin Laden's death Sunday night, Mr. Obama dialed "war on terror" back to "war against al-Qaida." It is instructive, however, that bin Laden's whereabouts were obtained by old-fashioned (and all-too-scarce) human intelligence.
Spies, in other words. Snitches. Police work.
The greatest successes in the "war on terrorism," including the killing of bin Laden, have resulted from nothing more nor less than superb police work, with the Navy's SEAL Team 6 acting as the SWAT team to close the deal.
The FBI was onto bin Laden as far back as the 1998 attack on the U.S.S. Cole. Had those leads been pursued with our allies, quietly and relentlessly, 9/11 might still be an ordinary date.
Which brings us to our loyal allies in Pakistan. In 2001, the United States needed Pakistan to stage its war on Afghanistan's Taliban government for giving harbor to bin Laden. The United States has sent more than $10 billion in military aid to Pakistan since 2001 and been taken for a ride.
It defies belief that no one in Pakistan's military or security services - for which Abbottabad is something of a garrison town - didn't know who was living in that million-dollar compound.
Bin Laden's death offers a chance to review this special relationship. It offers a chance to review the way various wars (on terror, on al-Qaida, in Afghanistan) are being conducted. The long manhunt is over. Let's hope we learned something from it about fear itself.

Graphic

 
 AP Photo -  Osama bin Laden in 1998. 

Load-Date: May 4, 2011


End of Document