Leavitt targets terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 5, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL;
Length: 966 words
Byline: By Zack Van EyckDeseret News columnist
Body


As America positions itself for an offensive in the war against terrorism, Utah and its upcoming 2002 Winter Games could pose a tempting target for retaliation by terrorists.
No one is more aware of that possibility than Gov. Mike Leavitt, who spent two days this week in Washington, D.C., meeting privately with President Bush and the nation's top security advisers.
And no one is more confident than Leavitt that Utah and Olympic organizers will be thoroughly prepared, equipped and coordinated to prevent or abort any terrorist plot that could surface before, during or after the Games.
In a 10-minute televised address Thursday night and a longer briefing with the media that followed, Leavitt said the chance of Utah residents being victimized directly by terrorism "is very low." But, he said, Utahns must realize that the war against terrorism will be "prolonged, will include casualties and, likely, will motivate retaliation."
Leavitt said the recent attacks on New York and Washington have left America's homeland vulnerable, and prompted "an historic change" in the way the country defines national defense.
"(It) can no longer be viewed simply as the military protecting our borders with soldiers, missiles and jets," he said. "Homeland security and national defense now need to be uttered as companion phrases. . . . It will place, by necessity, new law-enforcement imperatives on state and local governments."
But while the state and its citizens must be more aware of potential harm, Leavitt said the threat should not prevent Utahns from going about their daily lives. And it will not stop Utah from hosting what he hopes will serve as "a global milestone of healing" and a "worldwide marker of triumph for good" next Feb. 8-24.
"The Olympic Games is one of the most protectable events held because it is a specific event held at a specific time at a specific place," Leavitt said during his press conference. "Terrorists depend on surprise and complacency, and neither of those will be present during the Olympic Games.
"The Secret Service would not be bringing the president of the United States and the vice president of the United States if they did not believe that this was among the most secure places in the world. We are resolved to assure that this is true."
To provide that assurance, Leavitt said he "anticipates" he will activate an additional 2,000 Utah National Guard troops to assist with security during the Games.
"The lesson of Sept. 11th is a very simple one: watch and prepare," he said. "Olympic security has always been a top priority. We have a plan developed over four years by the best security authorities in the world. It was an excellent plan prior to Sept. 11th. It will be even better now."
The governor announced several other steps his administration is taking to lessen the likelihood of terrorist activity in Utah:
The transformation and eventual renaming of the Division of Comprehensive Emergency Management into a more proactive agency that also will be in charge of homeland security. Until now, the division has concerned itself primarily with preparedness and response for catastrophic events like floods and earthquakes.
"I am asking them to proactively serve in our broader security interests . . . to move forward in assuring we are safe," the governor said.
Local law enforcement agencies have been asked to "inventory, assess and enhance protection" for the state's infrastructure, including freeways and bridges, railroads, public utilities, water supplies, chemical plants and schools.
All pilots and aircraft engaged in crop dusting already have been inventoried and all are accounted for, Leavitt said. That list will be used to help ensure those planes are not stolen or misused. Leavitt also has asked law enforcement officials to provide 24-hour security at the state's many small general aviation airports.
The governor has requested that no-fly zones be enlarged from tens of miles to hundreds of miles during the opening and closing ceremonies, and that the air corridors in general be "highly restricted" during the Games. Flyover protection by military aircraft, already enacted for NFL games and other major events, will be in place during the Games.
Leavitt's information staff will promote a strategy of communication and coordination between local, state and federal law enforcement agencies.
A sheriff's deputy or state trooper could learn vital information during a routine traffic stop that could lead to the prevention of a terrorist act, Leavitt told reporters. What is needed, he said, is a detailed, coordinated system for passing that information along from the local to the state and national level with timeliness and accuracy.
The state will undertake efforts to secure its computer systems, with an emphasis on preventing and detecting possible intrusions.
Leavitt was vague about some of his new homeland security plans -- in part because that strategy still is in the works and in part out of concern for divulging sensitive information.
But he was clear in his belief that while they must be cautious and alert, Utahns -- like all Americans -- need to "go forward with our heads held high."
"Let us also be confident and strong," Leavitt said in closing his televised talk. "Let us meet this new challenge of homeland security and resolve to maintain and sustain this renewed patriotism that we all feel and to regain our economic stride."
The televised address was a rarity for the governor. While he does appear each month on two public television stations and on commercial stations each year for his "state of the state address," a prime-time pep talk such as Thursday's address is out of the ordinary. But as the governor stressed, these are no longer ordinary times for Americans or for Utahns.
E-MAIL: zman@desnews.com  

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document