LEBANON CONDUCTS MOCK TERRORISM DRILL;
Event a test of communications <
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 26, 2003 Thursday WARREN COUNTY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBORS; Pg. Z3-2
Length: 313 words
Byline: Carol Scott cscott@DaytonDailyNews.com  
Body


LEBANON - When it was over, Warren County officials heaved a sigh of relief.
Then they went right back to work.
Warren County's June 14 terrorism drill highlighted the need for multiple methods of communication in emergency situations, said Frank Young, director of emergency services for the county.
"Communication is the biggest single problem you will have at any large operation," said Young, who suggested a possible solution: send emergency messages both by voice and handheld e-mail devices.
The drill mimicked a possible real-life scenario: Two mock terrorists entered the Procter & Gamble Health Care Research Facility in Mason. Police and fire officials from the county had to restrain the terrorists as well as protect a hostage.
A successful response must include police and firefighters working together, which can sometimes be problematic, Young said.
"Police always try to keep the crime scene clear, but you can't do that if you have a hundred firemen running around," he said.
"Allowing these people to learn how to work with each other to accomplish their goals is why we did the drill."
Emergency responders were not given the details of the drill beforehand.
"We try to keep it as real as possible," said Jerry Lautz, who is the southwest Ohio regional coordinator for Terrorism Preparedness and served as a controller for the event. "That way you get a true response to it."
Lautz has been involved in about a dozen similar drills.
The drill tested the existing emergency procedures as well as the flexibility of the emergency workers.
Lautz, who has been involved in about a dozen drills, said the drills are encouraging.
"(Responders) usually remember the emergency responses very well," he said.
Similar drills have been run in Hamilton and Butler counties, said Young, who said he thought the simulation was successful.
"A well-oiled machine operates better," Young said.

Load-Date: July 12, 2003


End of Document