LEBANON: THE IRANIAN PRESENCE
The New York Times
February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 6; Page 34, Column 3; Magazine Desk
Length: 852 words
Body


Thomas L. Friedman is The Times's bureau chief in Beirut, Lebanon.  By Thomas L. Friedman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 HE REGIME OF AYATOLlah Khomeini clearly sees in Lebanon a unique mixture of political and human elements that make it an ideal place to begin proving its thesis that the Islamic Revolution can and will be spread to other countries in the Middle East. The Iranians also seem to view Lebanon, with its large contingents of American and Israeli troops, as the natural sequel to their own revolution - the next place where the United States and its allies can be driven out of town.
''Lebanon provides the best hope for exporting the Islamic Revolution,'' Hojatislam Fakhr Rouhani, Iran's first Ambassador to Lebanon, recently told a Teheran newspaper, ''because the conditions in that country are similar to those that existed in Iran before the triumph of the Iranian Revolution in 1979.''
Article by Thomas L Friedman examines Iranian presence in Lebanon; holds regime of Ayatollah Khomeini clearly sees in Lebanon a unique mixture of political and human elements that makes it ideal place to begin proving its thesis that Islamic Revolution can and will be spread to other countries in Middle East (M)
Well, not exactly. But Lebanon clearly does provide the Iranians with several very tempting advantages, probably the most important of which is that much of the country is under Syrian control, particularly the predominantly Shiite Moslem Bekaa Valley. The Syrians, who are closely allied with Teheran against Iraq and other regional foes, have allowed the Iranians to operate with a certain degree of freedom in Lebanon, which they never would have enjoyed had the Lebanese Government been in full control. Lebanese security sources estimate that roughly 2,000 to 3,000 Iranian Revolutionary Guards are camped just inside the Syrian border, in the village of Zebdani. The Syrians permit several hundred of these Iranian militants to shuttle back and forth into Lebanon each week. Operating from buildings in and around the town of Baalbek in the Bekaa Valley, these Iranians preach the wisdom of the Islamic revolution and provide military training for Lebanese Shiite activists prepared to attack American and Israeli targets elsewhere in the country.
These Revolutionary Guards work closely with a loose-knit group of pro-Iranian Lebanese Shiite clerics known as Hizbullah, or the Party of God, which provides a religious cover for their activities. They are also known to have links with the Lebanese branch of Al- Da'awa, an Iraqi-based underground Shiite organization, and Islamic Amal - a splinter group of the mainstream Lebanese Shiite Amal organization - whose leader is suspected of involvement in the recent attacks against the multinational force in Beirut.
The Syrians allow these tiny pro-Iranian groups to operate because they are useful in carrying out attacks the Syrians approve of but cannot afford politically or militarily to be publicly associated with. The Syrians can also use such radical groups to control the more moderate and popular Lebanese Shiite organizations, which would prefer to remain somewhat autonomous from Damascus. All of these pro-Iranian groups share the stated goal of seeking to have Lebanon absorbed into a Middle East-wide Islamic republic.
Another advantage for the Iranians has been the presence of over one million Shiite Moslems in Lebanon, who make up the country's largest single religious community - practically as big as the ruling Maronite Christian and Sunni Moslem communities combined. The Shiites' numerical superiority, however, has never been translated into political power or widespread prosperity.
The Iranians have found this disinherited community somewhat fertile territory in which to recruit activists and people ready to seek their political solutions through religion. However, the majority of Lebanon's Shiites reject the notion of establishing an Islamic republic in their country. Represented by the Amal Party and militia, most want to see their nation's multireligious system preserved, but reformed in a way that will give them their rightful share of wealth and power.
''We look at Khomeini as a man who must be respected in matters of religion, but not politics,'' remarked Hussein al-Husseini, a conservative Shiite member of Parliament from Baalbek. ''The only thing the Lebanese Shiites want is to be as modern and up to date as any other Lebanese community.''
Reading the headlines about the spectacular acts of terrorism allegedly committed by pro-Iranian groups against American and other Western targets in Lebanon, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that such operations are condemned by the vast majority of Shiites here. Lebanese political analysts view the terrorism of the pro-Iranian minority Shiite groups as a reflection of their frustration at being unable to attract any mass following by conventional means - even with all the advantages Lebanon offers them.
Despite their high hopes, the Iranians are finding that in Lebanon - as elsewhere in the Middle East - their revolution is not as exportable as they might think.


End of Document