Lebanese Man Is Arrested in Thailand After Terrorism Alert
The New York Times
January 14, 2012 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 757 words
Byline: By J. DAVID GOODMAN; Reporting was contributed by Poypiti Amatatham from Bangkok, Jo Becker from New York, Ethan Bronner from Jerusalem and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
Body


Amid public warnings from the United States and Israel of a possible terrorist attack, Thai officials said Friday that they had arrested a Lebanese man believed to be a member of Hezbollah in connection with a plot to strike tourists in Bangkok.
Thailand's deputy prime minister, Chalerm Yubamrung, said that the arrest came after weeks of coordination with Israel. In an interview with Thai television, he said the Israeli government had told Thai officials that ''a group of people who appear to be from the Lebanese group Hezbollah'' were planning to strike tourist sites in Bangkok in mid-January. The United States and Israel regard Hezbollah, a militant Shiite group with strong ties to Iran and significant political power in Lebanon, as a terrorist organization.
The concerns over a possible attack come at a time of intensifying strains between Iran and both Israel and the United States.
In Beirut, a Hezbollah official, Ghaleb Abu Zeinab, rejected the Thai account, telling LBC television that the arrested man ''is not one of Hezbollah's members.''
American officials in Washington confirmed the Thai statements regarding a suspected Hezbollah connection but did not offer further details.
American government officials said Friday that they believed that Bangkok was a major hub for the Hezbollah-controlled cocaine money-laundering network that United States law enforcement agencies have been investigating. That investigation led to the closing of a major bank in Lebanon, which was said to have laundered hundreds of millions of dollars in illicit funds in a scheme that the American government says benefited Hezbollah.
The country's defense minister, Gen. Yuthasak Sasiprapha, said the plot may have involved using car bombs at tourist sites, synagogues and the Israeli Embassy. He said Israel intelligence agents first informed the authorities in Thailand on Dec. 22 that two or three men were suspected of plotting an attack in Bangkok, the Thai capital.
On Sunday, the agents again warned of an attack, possibly set to occur the next weekend at a site popular with Western tourists, like Khao San Road, where many backpackers and other visitors congregate, General Yuthasak said in an interview with the Thai newspaper Naewna.
He said that security agencies from Thailand and Israel cooperated in tracking the men, and that one had been arrested and was being questioned. ''Apart from this, U.S. officials have asked Thai officials to track down the terrorists,'' he said, adding that some Israelis in Thailand also have American citizenship.
Earlier Friday, the American Embassy in Bangkok issued an emergency message on its Web site, warning of a possible attack by ''foreign terrorists'' against Americans in Thailand.
The Israeli government's counterterrorism bureau soon followed suit, issuing an unusually stern warning to Israeli citizens to avoid visiting Bangkok in the near future. It urged Israelis already there to avoid places where they usually congregate and to reject packages from unknown people.
An Israeli official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that while he could not officially confirm what the Thai deputy prime minister said about cooperation between the two countries' security services, it was clear from the warning that there had been communication and coordination. He added that the danger was far from over.
Thai officials, however, tried to calm nerves in the capital. ''I would like to tell the Thai people and foreigners that you can be free of worries from what the U.S. Embassy has warned because Thai authorities have known about this before New Year's Day,'' said Mr. Chalerm, the deputy prime minister. ''Thailand is a polite country. Terrorism can happen anywhere else, but in Thailand? No, we will not allow you to do so.''
The embassy alert, addressed to American citizens, warned that ''foreign terrorists may be currently looking to conduct attacks against tourist areas in Bangkok in the near future'' and urged ''caution when visiting public areas where large groups of Western tourists gather.''
Tourism is one of Thailand's major industries, and millions of foreigners visit the capital each year, according to Thai government statistics.
Mr. Chalerm told The Associated Press that the authorities had been tracking at least two men but had arrested only one, in connection with possible immigration violations. ''Technically, the two men have not committed any crimes under the Thai law, so we could only use the immigration law to keep this one suspect in custody,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 14, 2012


End of Document