Lecture Previews
The Tartan: Carnegie Mellon University
January 21, 2013 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 463 words
Byline: Brent Heard
Body


Martin Luther King Jr. Day Keynote Address
Monday at 5 p.m.
McConomy Auditorium
Political adviser, humanitarian, corporate attorney, and World Economic Forum Global Leader Binta Niambi Brown will deliver the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day keynote address.
As a legal professional, Brown represented corporate clients in cases connected with over $66.5 billion in litigation, and also advised the management officials of Fortune 100 companies with respect to corporate governance and social responsibility. Brown's pro bono work includes economic development initiatives assisting women, advocating for human trafficking victims, and working with New York City public schools.
Tepper School of Business W.L. Mellon Speaker Series: James E. Rohr
Tuesday at 12:30 p.m.
Mellon Auditorium
Chairman and CEO of the PNC Financial Services Group, James Rohr, will speak as part of the W.L. Mellon Speaker Series, discussing business leadership, strategy, and world affairs.
Rohr joined PNC in 1972, eventually rising to become PNC's president in 1992 and its chief operating officer in 1998. In 2000, he was named the PNC CEO, and later its chairman in 2001. Rohr is currently a director of many organizations, including the RAND Board of Trustees and the International Monetary Conference, and is a member of the Federal Advisory Council of the Federal Reserve System. He was also director of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. In 2007, Rohr was named American Banker's "Banker of the Year." He is also on Carnegie Mellon's board of trustees.
Terrorism and the Media
Wednesday at 4:45 p.m.
Steinberg Auditorium, Baker Hall A53
Cristina Archetti, a senior lecturer in politics and media at the University of Salford in the United Kingdom, will give a talk titled "Terrorism and the Media: Explaining Radicalization and Political Violence in the Age of Interconnectedness." It will be presented by the Center for International Relations and Politics.
Archetti's talk will focus on the role that communication technologies have in influencing politics and society, specifically regarding terrorist activity. Archetti claims to approach the issue from the perspective of a "guerilla researcher," believing that big budgets are not necessary to produce sound research.
Film Screening and Discussion: To Be Heard
Friday at 6 p.m.
McConomy Auditorium
A screening of To Be Heard, followed by a discussion with the film's director and producer Edwin Martinez, will be presented by the University Lecture Series.
The film follows the story of three friends who met in a high school poetry class in the Bronx, and deals with their responses to life's adversities.
Martinez is a filmmaker from the Bronx. To Be Heard has won awards at the DOC NYC, San Diego Latino, and Sarasota film festivals.
Compiled by
Brent Heard

Load-Date: January 20, 2015


End of Document