Lee Hamilton: Al-Qaida likely to attempt revenge for bin Laden's death
Herald-Times (Bloomington, Indiana)
May 11, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Herald-Times
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 508 words
Byline: Bob Zaltsberg, Herald-Times, Bloomington, Ind.
Body


May 11--Lee Hamilton believes Osama bin Laden's place in U.S. history would be hard to overstate.
"I would be hard pressed to name many people, even some presidents, who have had more of an impact on America," he said Tuesday in a speech to the Bloomington Rotary Club. The evidence is clear and ample, said the 34-year member of Congress vice-chairman of what's informally called the 9/11 Commission: thousands of deaths, threats of terrorism, huge federal budget increases, new laws, ramped-up security checks on individuals, the transformation of the military and law enforcement, changes in foreign policy and an altered image of the U.S. in the world.
"Nothing can ever compensate for the grief and heartache he brought to so many families, to all of us, really," he said.
Though he once had many followers, in the end, the man Hamilton called the "mastermind behind 9/11" was a lonely, frustrated man "who was a hero to very, very few people."
Still, the organization he headed, al-Qaida, will almost certainly try to avenge his death, Hamilton said. The organization is more of a network than hierarchy, making it seem unlikely bin Laden's death will change much within al-Qaida.
"We should feel some satisfaction with his death, but not exultation," he said. "Men die, but symbols live on."
Hamilton called the action that killed bin Laden "the most significant achievement" the U.S. has had since the war on terrorism began. He said the raid was impressive for its "sheer audacity." President Obama had been given accurate, relevant and timely intelligence by military and intelligence communities that have improved communication and cooperation immensely since 9/11, he said.
Besides praising Obama for using that information wisely, he also said former President George W. Bush deserves credit for his diligent pursuit of bin Laden.
As for what's next in Pakistan, where bin Laden was found and killed on May 1, Hamilton said the future is difficult to see.
"The U.S.-Pakistan relationship is a tough one," he said. "We provide an enormous amount of aid for terrorist intelligence. ... Pakistan has been less than a full partner in our fight against terrorism.
"It is not a relationship that can be solved, it has to be managed."
He also said the U.S. government can't get too caught up in isolated, specific disappointments with the Pakistani government. "We have to be focused on what's in the long-term interests of the United States," he said, "not in the short-term frustrations."
The nation's economic problems could affect U.S. relationships in Pakistan and everywhere else in the world, he said.
"If we don't get our economic house in order we can no longer be a world leader," he said.
To see more of the Herald-Times or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.heraldtimesonline.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, Herald-Times, Bloomington, Ind. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 11, 2011


End of Document