Leftist leader joins Egypt election race; Popular army chief has yet to declare candidacy
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 9, 2014 Sunday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 28
Length: 483 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: CAIRO  
Body


A leading left-wing Egyptian politician announced Saturday that he will contest upcoming presidential elections, set to be a tough battle for anyone squaring off against the country's powerful army chief who is expected to win a sweeping victory.
Hamdeen Sabahi's decision heats up an election slated for this spring and opens a window of hope to the country's largely disenchanted youth, who rose up against two presidents in the past three years - first against longtime autocrat Hosni Mubarak, then the Islamist Mohammed Morsi. 
I have taken this personal decision to enter the presidential battle, Sabahi roared among his supporters. The revolution must reach power democratically and stand as one line against terrorism.
Sabahi, who finished an impressive third in the June 2012 presidential election, appeals to a range of liberal, leftist and secular-minded Egyptians who reject both military and Islamist rule. He is seen as a political rookie, however. 
The announcement comes as nationalist fervor grips the country, largely in support of Defense Minister Abdel-Fatah el-Sissi. Critics of the military face intimidation. 
El-Sissi led the military coup that deposed Morsi last July after millions marched to demand his resignation. He has yet to publicly declare his intentions but the military has backed him.
In previous TV appearances, Sabahi said he was holding off on his decision until el-Sissi decided whether he would run. But Saturday he said he would be a candidate in response to demands from the youth. 
The bid comes amid a military-led offensive against Islamic militants in the Sinai Peninsula and continued clashes between police and Morsi supporters, who hold scattered demonstrations that frequently deteriorate into violence. 
On Saturday, Egypt's military said it had killed 16 suspected Islamic militants in a series of airstrikes on hideouts in the northern Sinai Peninsula a day earlier. Military spokesman Col. Ahmed Mohammed Ali also alleged that the fighters had ties to Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood.
The military has been waging a wide offensive against militant groups in Sinai, where they have solidified their position since the country's 2011 uprising.
Militancy has spread to central Cairo and Nile Delta cities over the past months in retaliation for Morsi's ouster.
Col. Ahmed Mohammed Ali said on his official Facebook page that the airstrikes targeted hideouts of terrorist, extremely dangerous takfiri militants late Friday in the eastern border town of Sheikh Zuweyid. Takfiri is an Arabic term referring to Islamic radicals.
He described the targeted militants as affiliated with the terrorist Brotherhood group. The group denies links to terrorism, but the military-backed government has branded it a terrorist organization amid wave of heavy-handed crackdowns on its leadership, members and supporters. Hundreds have been killed and thousands are in detention. 

Load-Date: February 9, 2014


End of Document