Legal attack on terrorism may have unintended effects
University Wire
August 20, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 The Daily Vidette via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 406 words
Byline: By Jason Enemark, The Daily Vidette
Dateline: Normal, Ill.
Body


Sometimes lawsuits get a little out of hand, but rarely do they jeopardize the country's international reputation.
A lawsuit filed by 600 families involved with Sept. 11 seeks $ 100 trillion from select Saudi banks and charities allegedly involved in financing the terrorist attacks.
The lawsuit will stay within the country because the charities hold money in the United States, but the effects of the lawsuit could be far-reaching.
Illinois State U.
Additionally, $ 100 trillion is an unthinkable amount of money. According to the online CIA factbook, the Gross Domestic Product of Saudi Arabia is $ 232 billion - somewhere around $ 97 trillion less than the amount sought. Granted, the families in question are after organizations and banks, not countries. But the amount is unreasonable from any perspective.
If the suit goes to court, the dollar amount will likely be shaved down, but the damage will have been done.
First, the families are entering the lawsuit against groups with no substantial evidence, and the Saudi defendants have already denied any involvement in Sept. 11.
An Associated Press article quotes family members as saying: "It's not the money. We want to do something to get at these people."
Families of the victims understandably feel the need to avenge the Sept. 11 deaths, but they cannot let their emotions dominate logic. Bringing such a lawsuit will presumably strain the United States' ties with Saudi Arabia. The Saudi government has yet to comment, but members of the royal family are listed in the lawsuit, including the defense minister.
The United States depends on Saudi Arabia for much of its oil. In addition, U.S. military forces dealing with the touchy Middle East issues call Saudi Arabia their temporary home. If Saudi Arabia gets too upset with the United States, gas prices may rise, and U.S. troops may be looking for a new base of operations to carry out Bush's war on terrorism.
$ 100 trillion split between 600 families leaves them with about $ 167 billion apiece -- which gets close to the Saudi GDP.
The families need to leave the prosecution to the president, who is currently maintaining a "delicate diplomatic balancing act with Saudi Arabia," according to the article.
The families involved are justified in their emotions, not their logic.
"There's nothing else we can do," one surviving family member said.
This lawsuit is included.
(C) 2002 The Daily Vidette via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 20, 2002


End of Document