LEGISLATURE WILL TAKE UP TERRORISM MEASURE;
 RYAN VETOED PART OF BILL MAKING THE CRIME A CAPITAL OFFENSE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 17, 2002 Sunday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO ; Pg. C1
Length: 821 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


State lawmakers will return to Springfield -- and a very different political landscape -- this week to ponder the death penalty, terrorism protection and a budget crisis.
The Legislature convenes in veto session Tuesday -- its first meeting since the election that determined that Democrats will take over almost all the levers of state government next year.
Republicans aren't expected to do anything drastic on their way out of power. Instead, officials in both parties seem content to hand Democratic Gov.-elect Rod Blagojevich the reins when he is inaugurated on Jan. 13 and see how he handles them.
"The elections sent a message to Springfield to change the way we do business," said state Rep. Jay Hoffman, D-Collinsville. "I don't think you'll see . . . (any) 'dead-of-night' stuff."
The Legislature generally meets during the first half of the year, then convenes again for a few weeks in fall to act on vetoes that the governor has made.
This year, the body is scheduled to meet this week and the first week of December. Unless a special session is called, legislators won't return until January, shortly before the swearing-in of the newly elected members.
The major veto lawmakers might deal with this year is anti-terrorism legislation that passed last spring. It would broaden police authority to investigate potential terrorism plots, including increased wiretapping powers.
The measure also would have made those convicted of terrorist-related murders eligible for the death penalty. But Gov. George Ryan struck that provision from the bill in August.
Ryan has long expressed concern about flaws in the state's death penalty system, and he suspended all executions in Illinois in 2000, after it became clear that 13 inmates were wrongly sent to death row.
In Illinois, the governor can alter specific provisions of a bill instead of signing it into law. The Legislature can either approve his changes by a simple-majority vote and make the bill law. Or it can override the governor's veto by a three-fifths majority and make the original version into law. If lawmakers do neither, the measure dies.
The terrorism bill's main sponsor, state Rep. Tom Johnson, R-West Chicago, was out of the country and unavailable for comment last week. Sources said Johnson hadn't decided whether to ask his colleagues to accept Ryan's changed version or to try to override it.
State Rep. Mike Bost, R-Murphysboro, a co-sponsor of the original bill, said, "I think it's pretty important (to keep the death penalty provision). I do believe there are certain things that should receive the death penalty . . . (including) terrorism.
"That said," Bost added, "do we sacrifice the whole bill for the death penalty provision?"
But even more worrisome to lawmakers will be the continuing budget problems that already have closed hospitals and state facilities.
Ryan, a Republican, already has pushed through millions of dollars in budget cuts in an attempt to balance the current year's budget. He announced this month that he is seeking more - a 2 percent across-the-board cut from state agencies - before he leaves office.
Regardless of what Ryan does with the current budget, analysts say the shortfall could hit $2.5 billion in the next fiscal year. The gap is caused by increasing education and social-service costs, coupled with stagnant tax and fee income.
Although the new fiscal year doesn't start until July 1, both parties already are blaming each other for the expected deficit.
The Ryan administration has blamed the shortfalls on a combination of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11 and the economic recession.
Democrats counter that many of the costs the state is struggling with stem from long-term infrastructure expenses taken on by Ryan - expenses that the Blagojevich administration will have to shoulder.
Republicans say they expect Blagojevich to blame Ryan for the economic problems he'll face. They note that he made campaign promises of major new initiatives on education and economic development - while also promising not to raise taxes.
They say they're content this week to handle routine business and leave bigger budget problems for Blagojevich to reconcile with his campaign pledges.
Blagojevich "has made some very strong campaign promises that I don't think anyone wants to let him wiggle out of . . . He can go to the cupboard, but the cupboard is bare," said Gregg Durham, spokesman for Hou se Republican leader Rep. Lee Daniels. "You can blame George (Ryan) for anything right now - bad weather, ingrown toenails - but that only works once."
In addition to budget matters, lawmakers also might consider sweeping recommendations for changes to the state's death penalty system.
The recommendations made earlier this year by a panel appointed by Ryan include requiring higher standards of evidence, better attorney training and making fewer categories of murders eligible for the death penalty.
The terrorism measure is HB2058.

Notes

Reporter Kevin McDermott:; E-mail: kmcdermott@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 217-782-4912  

Load-Date: November 17, 2002


End of Document