Legislators to take on terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 04, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: HERNANDO TIMES; AMERICA RESPONDS; Pg. 1
Length: 920 words
Byline: JEFFREY S. SOLOCHEK
Body


State Sen. Ginny Brown-Waite juggled the Florida Department of Law Enforcement commissioner on one phone line and the staff director of her Select Committee on Public Security and Crisis Management on the other.
An inches-thick confidential briefing book on terrorism and safety issues sat ready for reading in the middle of her desk, next to the FDLE's hot-off-the-presses assessment of the state's antiterrorism capabilities.
From her downtown Brooksville office, the select committee chairwoman stood ready to lead the state legislative fight against terrorism. Generally a foe of big government, she suggested a reluctant willingness to clip some freedoms in order to make Florida safer.
HGINNY04
It's what Americans seem to want after attacks against the World Trade Center and the Pentagon caught the nation off-guard Sept. 11, she said.
"My goal would be to have the least invasive security that still protects," said Brown-Waite, R-Brooksville. "It is a very delicate balancing act."
She held up the FDLE report, which advocates 26 security steps ranging from the noncontroversial creation of regional antiterrorism task forces to the potentially more explosive addition of exemptions to the state Sunshine Law.
"We're certainly using this as a guideline," she said, adding quickly that not everything will get past the Legislature. "I don't want to create a police state. Make no mistake about it."
The chairman of the House Select Committee on Security, Rep. Dudley Goodlette, R-Naples, wholeheartedly agreed.
Some minor changes in the Sunshine Law might be necessary to prevent the release of information such as the emergency plans of a nuclear power plant, Goodlette said. In the wrong hands, he noted, such documents could cause more harm than good.
But any limits on open government laws must be modest and measured, he said.
"I don't see any wholesale changes in those freedoms that Americans cherish," Goodlette said. "I think citizens of the state of Florida will be comforted by the actions we take, not threatened by the actions we take."
Hernando County's state representative, Republican David Russell of Brooksville, was even more cautious. He said he would not back the amending of civil liberties without significant justification that national security demands would be met.
"While public safety and security are paramount, I believe it's critical that we balance vigilance with personal freedom," Russell said. "We are a free people. Unfortunately, that's one of the things that makes us vulnerable to some degree. But I do not believe people in America and Florida want to give up their freedoms."
Proposals involve more than just the Sunshine Law.
Less restrictive wiretapping laws are up for debate. Legislators might take a closer look at state universities and the role they might play in terrorism, too, Brown-Waite suggested.
She spoke specifically about the University of South Florida, although she quickly noted that there would be no effort to single out one school or to engage in a witch hunt.
"But it seems to be the place where there is a lot of anti-American activism," Brown-Waite said of USF, where a few high-profile professors with possible ties to the Islamic Jihad have worked. "Taxpayers have a right to be concerned."
She focused on a $ 6-million bio-terrorism study grant USF recently received. Brown-Waite said she urged university president Judy Genshaft to require thorough background checks on anyone who works on the project, including graduate students.
"I want to be sure we're not funding terrorism at the university," she said. "What a hoax on the taxpayer to use millions of tax dollars to study terrorism, only to have it used against us."
Also on the horizon could be face-scanning and identification software, like the program used in Ybor City, at airports and other public buildings, Brown-Waite said. She called it a scary idea, but one that a growing number of people are coming to accept as necessary now.
"I think what they're doing in Ybor City is terrible," she said. "But I think people's thought patterns have changed since Sept. 11."
Other ideas on the table include giving FDLE officers permission to infiltrate terrorist groups, setting stricter standards and background checks for people with licenses to haul hazardous materials, and creating tougher regulation of flight schools.
Goodlette did not want to talk about specifics. He said his committee needs to get its feet wet first with some initial meetings.
But like Brown-Waite, he also spoke about a "new reality" that has sunk in since terrorists attacked. People might not like the idea of tighter security, Goodlette said, but they are coming to accept the need.
"The goal must be to protect the freedoms that exist," he said. "However, in view of the new reality of terrorism, we have to also present security and confidence to the American people."
The House and Senate committees plan to have several joint sessions, starting next week, to ensure they have cooperation as they draft legislation. Meetings will take place at the Capitol and around the state, Brown-Waite said.
Some bills could be ready by the end of the month, perhaps for a special session on terrorism issues, she said. Those will involve "no-brainers" such as ensuring the compatibility of law enforcement communication systems and creating regional task forces, she said.
Others could take much longer, Brown-Waite said.
"I think we're going to continue to perfect it," she said. "There will be other things discovered because of our studies."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Sen. Ginny Brown-Waite, R-Brooksville.

Load-Date: October 4, 2001


End of Document