Legislator may fight terrorism bill veto
Chicago Daily Herald
August 27, 2002, Tuesday Lake,DuPage


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 512 words
Byline: John Patterson Daily Herald State Government Editor
Body


SPRINGFIELD - The suburban lawmaker who sponsored Illinois' proposed anti-terrorism law says he likely will try to override the governor's recent veto of the plan.  
"I'm leaning to make a motion to override," said state Rep. Thomas Johnson, a West Chicago Republican and main sponsor of the anti-terrorism law.  
Gov. George Ryan vetoed the proposal last week because it included the death penalty for terrorists. Ryan has gained worldwide acclaim from death penalty opponents for stopping executions in Illinois because of the number of inmates exonerated and freed.  
But at the same time, Ryan said he's willing to sign the terrorism plan - with the death penalty -into law if lawmakers include nearly 20 of the 85 reforms to the death penalty process he proposed.  
The reforms include videotaping interrogations of murder suspects, banning the execution of mentally disabled killers and prohibiting prosecutors from seeking a death sentence if the conviction is based on only one eyewitness, one accomplice or one "jailhouse snitch."  
Although Johnson supports most of the reforms Ryan recommended, he said it's "inappropriate" to hold up the anti-terrorism plan in an effort to get them included. Johnson also said some of Ryan's recommendations need "tweaking" but the way Ryan added them prevents changes from being made. Lawmakers must vote them up or down, if they vote at all.  
"It's either all or nothing," Johnson said.  
When lawmakers return to the Capitol for their fall session, they can either override the governor's veto and enact the anti- terrorism law in its original form, approve the exact changes Ryan made or do nothing, in which case nothing ends up on the law books and everyone starts over.  
The fall session is scheduled for Nov. 19-21 and Dec. 3-5. By then voters will have chosen a new governor and several new House and Senate members. However, they do not take office until January, leaving the fall session as an opportunity for lame duck politicians to take action before leaving office.  
Johnson said in addition to the override, he likely would propose a new law encompassing the changes to the death penalty system Ryan wants.  
The anti-terrorism plan easily passed both the House and Senate this past spring, and if the votes stay the same, the veto would easily be overridden. At least 60 percent of lawmakers must vote to override a veto.  
This is the second time Ryan has rejected an anti-terrorism plan because of the death penalty provision. But in the spring he convinced his allies in the General Assembly not to override his veto. House Republican Leader Lee A. Daniels of Elmhurst was that plan's sponsor. He and Ryan are close friends and the governor personally asked Daniels not to override the veto.  
While that was happening, Johnson went ahead with his own anti- terrorism plan that was ultimately approved. Because Johnson is the main sponsor, the decision to override is up to him. Taking on the governor's veto could be one of Johnson's last actions. He is not seeking re-election after serving 10 years in the House.

Graphic

 
Thomas Johnson; George Ryan

Load-Date: August 29, 2002


End of Document