Legislator urges tougher penalties for eco-terrorism;
State House: Vandalism of Plum Creek Timber Co. prompts a lawmaker to revive the failed measure.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 23, 2005 Wednesday, Final Edition


Copyright 2005 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. B2
Length: 432 words
Byline: JOHN RICHARDSON Staff Writer
Body


A central Maine lawmaker wants to create tougher penalties for environmental terrorism in the wake of the Halloween vandalism spree aimed at Plum Creek Timber Co. and its employees and contractors.
Sen. John Nutting, D-Leeds, is appealing to leaders of the Legislature to bring forward an eco-terrorism bill that failed in 2001. Nutting said he plans to make a formal presentation on behalf of the bill Monday.
If accepted by legislative leaders and then passed by the full Legislature, the bill would make environmental terrorism a felony, punishable by jail time. Such crimes are now typically prosecuted as criminal mischief, a misdemeanor that is punishable by fines.
Bills in the upcoming emergency session have to be cleared by top lawmakers from both major parties; those lawmakers rejected the bill when it was proposed earlier this fall. But that was before vandals struck Plum Creek Timber on Halloween night and in the early morning hours of Nov. 1.
Nutting said the attacks were so bold and well-organized that there is far more support now for the state to send a message and stiffen penalties. "This was the work of an organization," he said.
Vandals started targeting Plum Creek's offices after the company announced plans last spring to develop thousands of acres around Moosehead Lake.
The attacks reached a new level on Halloween, when vandals damaged three private homes and three office buildings in five Maine communities. They splattered orange paint and spray-painted "scum creek" and other messages on some of the buildings.
The vandals also poured a foul-smelling chemical and left parts of a raccoon carcass and animal feces at some targets. And they threw rocks through the windows of the home where Plum Creek's top Maine official lives with his family.
Maine State Police, the FBI and local police agencies from Greenville to Augusta continue to investigate the vandalism spree.
The attacks were far worse than the tree spiking and sabotage of logging equipment that prompted the bill's introduction in 2001, Nutting said. He said the latest vandalism was a clear attempt to terrorize people connected with the company.
The bill is sure to face strong opposition again, however. Some opponents argued four years ago that such a law could threaten the right to free speech on environmental issues, even when there is no attempt to frighten people or damage property. Others said it would have no impact on the most radical environmentalists, and might even encourage more vandalism.
Staff Writer John Richardson can be contacted at 791 - 6324 or at:
jrichardson@pressherald.com  

Load-Date: November 23, 2005


End of Document