Legislation that helps victims of terrorism heads to Senate
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
March 10, 2000, Friday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 374 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- Legislation to help former hostages and other victims of state-sponsored terrorism to collect court judgments is headed for Senate action after a unanimous endorsement by the Senate Judiciary Committee.
The measure, by Sens. Connie Mack, R-Fla., and Frank Lautenberg, D-N.J., would set up a process for successful U.S. plaintiffs to recover from countries that are on the State Department's list of countries that sponsor or support terrorism.
The Clinton administration opposes the bill, saying it could result in retaliation against U.S. diplomatic properties abroad. However, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright told Congress last month that she was willing to work with former terrorism victims and their families to find a way to help them collect.
Among those who might benefit from the legislation are the families of four Americans killed when their small plane was shot down by Cuban fighter jets in 1996, former American hostages who were held in Lebanon in the 1980s, the family of Alisa Flatow, an American college student killed in Israel by Islamic terrorists, and the families of victims of Pan Am flight 103.
But, even though some of these individuals have been awarded hundreds of millions in judgments under a 1996 law allowing them to sue in U.S. courts, not a cent has yet been collected.
The Clinton administration in the past has gone to court to block these plaintiffs from collecting, even though Clinton initially requested the 1996 legislation.
"The President pledged to fight terrorism, made promises to victims families, encouraged them to seek justice and signed several laws supporting the rights of victims to take terrorists to court," Mack said after Thursday's committee vote. "But ultimately he has chosen to protect terrorists assets over the rights of American citizens seeking justice."
"This brings us one step closer to deterring terrorist attacks against Americans abroad and to obtaining compensation for the Flatow family and other victims of terrorism here at home," said Lautenberg.
The Justice for Victims of Terrorism Act would free frozen assets to satisfy U.S. court judgments in terrorism cases. However, it gives the president authority to protect diplomatic properties from seizure.

Load-Date: March 10, 2000


End of Document