Lessons we remember from 9/11 Lessons we remember from 9/11
The Creightonian: Creighton University - The Creightonian
September 21, 2017 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 516 words
Byline: Tom Seline Opinion Writer
Body


Sixteen years after 9/11, we need to remember the lessons that we learned from that tragic day. On Sept. 11, 2001, al-Qaida terrorists flew two commercial airliners into the World Trade Center towers. Both towers would eventually collapse and kill almost 3,000 people. That same group of terrorists flew another commercial airliner into the Pentagon and were prevented from flying a fourth airliner into the Capitol by brave passengers who forced the plane to crash in a field in Pennsylvania. 
For a brief moment, Americans were united against a common enemy and the United States responded with brute force. We immediately took down the Taliban, which was harboring al-Qaida in Afghanistan, and would eventually move into Iraq and take down the Saddam Hussein regime. Airport security was drastically increased and so was military spending. Whether people thought all of this was necessary, everyone knew one thing - the U.S. wouldn't allow an event like this to happen again. 
It's important to remember some lessons that have been forgotten 16 years later. 
1. As the world's leading superpower, we have a big bull's-eye on our back. Terror groups like al-Qaida, the Islamic State or the Taliban will always have a special distaste for us because we don't operate the way they want us too. They want the U.S. to be more like Afghanistan, Iraq or Saudi Arabia. Those countries are much less free than us and are governed by Islamic law. Not to mention we have to deal with threats from rogue nations such as Iran and North Korea. Terrorism is a much longer-term opponent than any nation-state, however. World Wars I and II lasted only a few years; the Korean War wasn't very long; Vietnam was longer but eventually ended. The fight against terrorism, on the other hand, won't be ending anytime soon. 
2. We can't only be willing to attack after a large-scale attack on us. After al-Qaida bombed the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, the U.S. did virtually nothing; al-Qaida saw the U.S. as a paper tiger and that emboldened them to do something major.  
3. We need to vet immigrants heavily. This is why I welcome President Donald Trump's efforts to heavily vet them, especially if they're coming from nations where terrorists have a strong presence. All 19 of the hijackers arrived on visas, either as students, tourists, or businessmen.
4. You don't always get to pick your enemy or when to fight them. Sometimes the enemy will pick you. After multiple attacks by al-Qaida, both on American soil and overseas, we had to respond and go to war even though nobody wanted to go to war. 
5. Even the best military in the world can have a hard time beating a small, ideologically driven army. They won't always play by the rules. 
6. The U.S. must recognize its role in the world. When the U.S. retreats, chaos ensues. The Taliban gained back lost territory. The Islamic State formed and wreaked havoc all across Iraq and Syria. Al-Qaida gained power in Syria and Yemen. The U.S., with the most powerful military on earth, must always be ready and willing to lead the fight against terrorism.

Load-Date: September 21, 2017


End of Document