Lessons in geography of terrorism - Correction Appended
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: TRAVEL; Pg. 1E
Length: 2016 words
Byline: ROBERT N. JENKINS
Body


Prompted by current events, Dave Wetzel and Ruth Abrams of South Pasadena  called the Times last week with a brief question. To answer it required only  predicting the future.
"We're going to Turkey for 19 days in November," Wetzel said. "Is it  safe to go?"
On the minds of Wetzel and Abrams were the images of bomb craters and  bodies on stretchers - in Ireland, in Kenya, in Tanzania, in Afghanistan, in  Sudan.
TRAVEL SAFET
But the fallout from a horrendous two weeks of explosions this month has  been minimal, according to tourism executives around the nation.
These tour operators offer a variety of reasons, some contradictory, for  the vacation-as-usual attitude, ranging from how well-read to how blase the  travelers are.
"If there is one thing that the Persian Gulf War did in '91, it made the  world a lot smaller," says Eileen Braun, a vice president for Gate One, a  tour operator handling about 40,000 travelers a year. "It gave people an  understanding of geography."
Not so, says Dave Herbert, head of African Travel and chairman of the  respected U.S. Tour Operators Association.
"The impact of the Gulf War was incredible - it ruined the summer for a  lot of vacationers and tour operators. And Egypt, which had been an ally in  the war, was dropped off the face of the Earth because it was perceived to be  closer to the Gulf" than it is and therefore closer to danger.
Herbert sees such misperceptions as a continuing problem for Americans:  "Africa is a big continent, with about 50 nations . . . but geography is not  a (mandatory) high school subject; there's just a tremendous fog out there.'"
However, he adds, that's not the case for the 1,000 or so monthly clients  of his "luxury end" tour company in Glendale, Calif. They "are more mature  and informed." Consequently, after the bombings of the U.S. embassies in  Nairobi and Dar es Salaam this month, "We had about 30 cancellations, but  within a week, five of them had re-booked, and I would expect another 10 of  them to come back, too."
Even fewer cancellations were reported at Grand Circle Travel, a  Boston-based company specializing in sending seniors on extended-stay trips:
"We had 80 people planning to travel to Africa throughout the rest of '98,  and we got no cancellations," even after the U.S. retaliatory strikes in  Afghanistan and Sudan, said communications director Priscilla O'Reilly.  "Frankly, we were surprised."
With its Overseas Adventure Travel subsidiary, Grand Circle handles about  77,000 travelers a year.
Overseas Adventure actually had clients in Tanzania during the embassy  bombings, "and no one wanted to come home," O'Reilly said.
Meanwhile, the day after the U.S. cruise missile retaliations, "We did  $ 300,000 in bookings - 93 passengers."
Comments from clients who called Grand Circle tended to "We've seen it  before," she said. "They wanted to ask instead about hotel reservations."
Such subdued reactions may be because "Travelers with organized groups or  tours feel more secure, with tour-company personnel on the scene," says David  Anderson, in the African safari business 18 years. "No one on our tour said  they wanted to come home, and we had a group leave for Africa the day of the  bombings - and they all went."
While tourists are seldom the intended targets of terrorism or civil war,  traveling in bunches may not be the best camouflage, according to security  expert Eleni Jakub. Nor should we relax, thinking that this month's explosions  marked the beginning and end of an isolated event.
"We are in for a protracted struggle; the bombings on both sides were an  opening salvo," said Jakub, senior operations consultant for Control Risks  Group. That McLean, Va., company sells security analyses on 124 nations,  mainly to business travelers.
"This is the period of the highest tension and risk to Americans since the  Gulf War. . . . Perhaps for six months, travelers need to be much more aware  of their surroundings. You must know before you go: Is this place safe, have  changes been made in a tour itinerary because of crime or violence?"
Jakub added: "It's better not going as a member of a big,  American-flag-waving tour group. If you are a business executive, don't stage  press conferences to announce your presence.
"Ordinarily, travelers are not in the high-risk category, but they can be  in the wrong place at the wrong time - because the government has been  improving security, extremists may seek "softer' targets" including U.S.  cultural installations or U.S.-owned businesses.
A good example, though the perpetrators and reasons are not yet confirmed,  probably was the bombing last week of the high-profile, American-owned Planet  Hollywood in Capetown, South Africa, noted longtime counterintelligence  analyst Frank L. Johns.
Managing director of the Pinkerton Global Intelligence Services, Johns told  the Times that generally, "Highly skilled terrorist groups take too much time  to bother aiming an attack at tourists; attacks require careful planning and  reconnaisance. (And) they try to avoid hurting the tourism community in their  countries, because that hurts the guy in the street" dependent on foreigners'  spending needed hard currency.
Americans should understand, Johns added, that there is not one, monolithic  terrorism group but rather "an amorphous collection, with different M.O.s  (methods of operation), some using a handgun to kill a lone victim, some  aiming rockets at an American Express office, some apt to do suicide bombings  as a way to get more quickly into their idea of Heaven.
"The embassy bombings probably did include suicide, but Osama bin Laden  didn't make any friends in Kenya with that bomb," because it killed too many  Nairobi residents. Nonetheless, he publicity "has made bin Laden the Babe Ruth  of the radical Muslim world: everybody knows who he is and wants to be like  him."
Analysts Johns and Jakub agree on standard precautions for travelers, more  importantly, gathering information before setting off. "Americans," said  Johns with a tone of frustration, "tend to go from the office to the airport  and fly to someplace like Athens, but they don't know what they're doing once  they arrive."
Despite the recent spate of violence, Johns believes that there is probably  more business travel internationally than before the Gulf War. "Even a  smaller business can be global, even if it's bringing in flowers from Latin  America."
As for doing business by e-mail and fax, "The printed word is always less  strong than if you call me," said Johns. And for Pinkerton's clients, "We  get a lot stonger in our language than does the State Department, because  they're a diplomatic service, and we're not."
The cheapest source of up-to-date safety information is the State  Department; it's free.
The State Department had closed the embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan, in 1989  and this past July had posted a warning against Americans traveling to that  nation, due to civil war, "politically and criminally motivated attacks" and  an estimated 10-million unexploded land mines. A warning was posted in May  1996 against travel to the Sudan, citing civil war, "banditry and acts of  terrorism."
Department warnings were posted the day of the embassy bombings for  Tanzania and Kenya, largely because damage to the buildings themselves badly  disrupted the infrastructure and ability to help Americans in those countries.  Those warnings were lifted Aug. 13 but a general travel advisory was issued  Aug. 20, the dy of the cruise missile retaliatory attacks.
There are also a handful of private firms selling advice. For instance  Jakub's company, Control Risks Group, is a 23-year-old firm with offices in 12  nations. It sells "a daily analysis of worldwide events"; travelers can  subscribe to the online report for a single country, for $ 500, or for all the  nations covered, for $ 10,000.
Johns' Pinkerton Global Intelligence Services charges as much as $ 6,000 for  e-mail or online reports on the previous 24 hours' events, a weekly analysis,  individual country profiles of two-four pages each, and a searchable database  back to 1992. But a cheaper, briefer, version of the online information is  being developed, and Pinkerton also sells a "World Status Map" that is  updated every couple of months and details the specific dangers travelers face  (kidnapping, bombing, violent street crime, etc.) in 232 nations. A year's  subscription is $ 48; a single copy is $ 6.95.
Even without this kind of analysis, St. Petersburg resident Arthur G.  Snyder canceled his plans to make a return visit to Africa. He had toured part  of the continent more than 30 years ago, finding it "spectacular, wild,  primitive."
He "thought it would be fun to see the changes," so he had contacted  motorcycle buddies to join a two-week cycling trip from South Africa up to  Kenya and Tanzania next year. His plans are canceled, Snyder said.
"These kinds of things (violence against foreigners) stay around for  years," he said. "You don't realize how powerless you are in another country  . . . there is no limit to how bad things can get."
Even before the August violence, U.S. tourism to the region was slight - an  estimated 200,000 Americans visited all African nations in 1997. Four times  that many visited the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland last year, when the  cease-fire in sectarian violence seemed to be solid.
"Tourism has been going through the roof, a 75 percent growth in the past  four years," said Orla Carey, public relations director for the Irish Tourist  Board. With the cease-fire and more easily crossed borders, "We've been  promoting both north and south jointly as "the Island of Ireland' since  January 1997."
Carey said that after the horrendous bombing in Omagh, a few phone calls  had come to the New York office "asking us to help review their  itineraries," as to safety, but "there was no one calling to say they had  decided to cancel" a trip.
Similarly, "We had a lot of people calling, perhaps 20 the day after the  bombing, wanting reassurance, asking if the border was closed," said Paul  McDonaugh, travel trade manager for the Northern Ireland Tourist Board. "We  had some travel agents calling, saying their clients were maybe thinking  twice."
Unlike in some other nations, including Egypt, tourists have never been a  target in Ireland's decades of "The Troubles," and the blast in Omagh killed  the first foreigner in all the years of violence, a Spaniard who was visiting  with other college students.
But what of the concerns about touring Turkey that Dave Wetzel and Ruth  Abrams have?
It depends upon whom you ask. Sammy Orcun, director of the Turkish Tourism  Office in Washington, said: "We don't encourage travel to the eastern part of  the country, but the western part is all safe." That would include the most  popular destinations: Istanbul, Izmir, Ephesus, Antalya and sailing along the  Turquoise Coast.
But security analyst Jakub noted last week that Turkey's dominant religion  is Muslim and that while "Most of the world's 1-billion Muslims are moderate,  responsible citizens of their countries, there are small slivers in Egypt,  Turkey and Yemen whose outlook is diametrically opposed to the Western way of  life, and the two cannot be reconciled."
Nonetheless, Jakub says, she's still considering for her vacation a cruise  down the Nile. 
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION 
 
To contact the State Departent and companies mentioned here: 
 
The State Department warnings to travelers can be accessed by phone (202  647-5225 or 5226), fax (202 649-3000) or the World Wide Web  (http://travel.state.gov/travelwarnings.html) 
 
Control Risks Group can be reached at 1749 Old Meadow Road, Suite 120, McLean,  VA 22102; call (703) 893-0083.  
 
Pinkerton Global Intelligence Service's website is www.pinkerton.com/pgis; the  address is 200 N Glebe Road, Suite 1011, Arlington, VA 22203. Also, the  1,800-member National Business Travel Association, of Alexandria, Va., is  offering a 14-page list of travel precautions and security tips. To get a  faxed copy, call (703) 716-3487 and request document 2,000.
Correction

Omagh, the site of the terrorist explosion last month that killed 29 and wounded 330, is in Northern Ireland. An article in the Aug. 30 section incorrectly stated the location.
Correction-Date: September 13, 1998

Load-Date: September 11, 1998


End of Document