Lessons from the streets of Stockholm and the West Bank
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
March 10, 1986, Monday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Ideas; PERSPECTIVES; Column; Pg. 27
Length: 854 words
Byline: RUSHWORTH M. KIDDER
Body


The city of Nablus, in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, and the city of Stockholm, on a Baltic archipelago, are separated by thousands of geographical and cultural miles. In the last week, however, they have shared a common sadness: Each is mourning the death by assassination of a political leader.
In fact, the slayings of Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme and of the Israeli-appointed mayor of Nablus, Zafer Masri, have a sinister similarity:
* Each was a representative of moderation - Mr. Palme of Sweden's famous ''Middle Way,'' Mr. Masri of a nonextremist effort to balance political pressures from Israel, Jordan, and the Palestinians.
* At the time of the killing, each was walking not far from home in a familiar area, and neither had any bodyguards present.
* Each was shot at close range from behind, by a single assailant who fled on foot through nearby crowds and who appeared to be highly professional.
Both societies deserve great compassion. But because these incidents chalk up two more statistics in the world's battle with international terrorism, they are more than local in their implications. They touch all of us - and demand that, even in our compassion, we address three tough issues:
First, nothing suggests that these acts were carried out by a single group, or by groups acting in concert. So they may point to a well-documented characteristic of terrorism in the age of international media - the so-called copycat effect. Is it possible that Palme's killing at midnight on Friday, Feb. 28, could have helped in any way to precipitate an almost identical incident in Nablus less than 36 hours later? Does that point to a need to clarify the role of the media as they unwittingly amplify and perhaps spread terrorism's contagion?
Second, however much political leaders yearn to lead normal lives - walking to work in Nablus, or strolling away from a movie theater in Stockholm - they need protection. The more international their stature, the more that is true - especially since terrorist groups often carry out attacks in one country to extract concessions from another.
Palme, in fact, had received his share of death threats. Yet on the morning of his assassination he had dismissed his bodyguards: Even the police did not know his whereabouts that evening. His courage and his desire to mingle with his constituents is praiseworthy. But did he fully recognize his status as one of the Western world's most valuable public resources - and the responsibility he had to protect that resource?
Third, the danger behind such incidents is that nations will be lured into trying to fight terror with terror. Especially in America, frustration is building over how to handle terrorism - despite the quiet reasonableness of the Bush commission report on terrorism issued last week. In the heat of concern over last December's terrorist shootings at the Rome and Vienna airports, for example, Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio suggested that Libya's Col. Muammar Qaddafi ought to be assassinated. Others are beginning to ask whether the flat-out ban on assassinations by US employees, first promulgated by President Ford in a 1976 executive order and still in force, should be rethought.
Yet if these incidents contain any lessons, surely they should reconfirm the Western world's rejection of assassination in any form. However strong the temptation to eliminate some of the known ''bad actors'' who seem to pull the puppet-strings of so much of the world's terrorism - especially Colonel Qaddafi, Syria's Hafez Assad, and Iran's Ruhollah Khomeini - there are three solid reasons for not doing so:
* We aren't very good at assassination, either physically or mentally. Fortunately, we haven't had much practice, we have too many qualms, and we live in a society where such activities tend eventually to come to light. In contrast, there are a number of terrorist training camps, especially in the Middle East, that make assassination a subject of careful study. To try to fight the enemy on his own terms only opens the Western world to an increasing spiral of violence.
* More important, the use of assassination assumes that it is personalities rather than ideas that shape societies. But the world is not driven merely by the cult of personality: Leaders often lead because they tap widespread feelings. The notion that changing a leader changes everything is a dangerous oversimplification.
* Most important, however, assassination is morally reprehensible. Western society, founded squarely on Judeo-Christian principles that outlaw murder, has flourished in direct proportion as violence and vigilantism have been brought under the rule of law. To preach the importance of human rights on the one hand and to promote assassination on the other would be to compromise the very ideas that make Western democracy such an attractive a form of government.
The task for Western democracies just now is to freeze any momentum that Stockholm and Nablus may have given to the idea of assassination.  We can best do that by stopping point-blank any thought that such an ugly tool can serve any worthy purpose.
A Monday column


End of Document