LESSONS FROM WAR ON TERRORISM;
   UW-MADISON PROFESSORS PROVIDE THEIR THOUGHTS AND CONCERNS AT A CAMPUS FORUM.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
January 25, 2002 Friday, SECOND Edition


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. B3
Length: 396 words
Byline: Anita Clark Wisconsin State Journal
Body


It's been four months and two weeks since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11. What have we learned?
Four UW-Madison professors addressed that question Thursday in an effort to provide some answers -- or at least some educated thoughts. About 150 people attended a two-hour public forum in the Humanities Building called "The War on Terrorism: Lessons Learned? Challenges Ahead."
A similar version of the story appeared in the first edition on page B1. The headline was: Professors raise concern at war on terror forum.
First of all, public concern has ebbed, said Hemant Shah, an associate professor of journalism and mass communication and ethnic studies. He blames the media.
"The average American news consumer has been fairly ill-served by most of the mainstream news coverage of the war on terrorism," Shah said.
Coverage has created "a zone of legitimate controversy" for some issues while ignoring others, he said, and relies too heavily on official sources while simplifying information without context.
The good news, he said, is that U.S. news organizations may re-energize their international reporting.
Joseph Elder, who just returned from a month in South Asia, said public sentiment has shifted in India and Pakistan.
"There's been a gradual but steady erosion of sympathy for the United States," he said. "There's also widespread sympathy for innocent victims of the bombing in Afghanistan." Elder is a professor of sociology and director of the Center for South Asia at UW-Madison.
The terrorist attacks and the U.S. military response have aggravated long-standing tension in the volatile region, he said.
An assistant law professor, Bernard Trujillo, listed significant legal developments: President Bush's order that non-citizen terrorist suspects would be tried in military tribunals, the detention of more than 1,000 young men across the country, government interviews of Arabs on campuses and the Patriot Act.
People may say that terrorists don't deserve the privileges of American courts, he said.
"Are we going to accept or allow a cheapening of the legal system so we can achieve a particular result, regardless of the cost?" he asked. "It's not what do terrorists deserve. It's what does justice demand."
Law professor Kathryn Hendley offered a gloomy answer to whether a legal system can emerge from the chaos in Afghanistan: "To be frank, I see little reason to hope."

Load-Date: January 26, 2002


End of Document