Lest We Forget the Deeds of Oliver North
The New York Times
June 25, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 24; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Column 5;; Letter
Length: 337 words
Body


To the Editor:
In a speech to a convention of Southern Baptists, Oliver L. North elicited much sympathy recounting the terrorist threats he says have been directed against him and his family (news item, June 4). Mr. North's self-promotion as an implacable foe, and sometime target, of terrorism must be seen in light of the death and real suffering his collusion with terrorists has caused innocent thousands. Some examples:
* Mr. North's tireless support for the Nicaraguan contras, despite their well-documented terrorist methods -- attacking civilian populations and health posts, assassinating noncombatant government employees. His contra effort included working with and supporting Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, whose repression of Panamanians and involvement in several murders were well known to United States intelligence (and were later used to justify the United States invasion of Panama).
* Mr. North's tireless efforts to ship arms to the terrorist state of Iran (even after he learned that Iran was responsible for killing 241 fellow marines in the 1983 Beirut truck bombing) despite evidence that thousands of Iranians were being murdered by the Khomeini regime.
* Mr. North helped channel millions of dollars into a Swiss bank account controlled by an Islamic group known to support terrorism.
* His intentional exposure (according to Drug Enforcement Agency officials) of Barry Seal, a drug pilot who had become a D.E.A. informant inside the Medellin cartel. The cartel is responsible for assassinating hundreds of Colombians, bombing civilian airliners and public places, and murdering top government officials, police and judges. (Barry Seal was subsequently murdered by a Colombian hit team in New Orleans.)
Mr. North's assertions of deep religious faith should lead him to a self-imposed tithing -- to help all those families who have suffered -- and repentance for the violence his actions have brought down upon them. There is no immunized testimony on Judgment Day.
 
GARRY EMMONS
Cambridge, Mass., June 6, 1991

Load-Date: June 25, 1991


End of Document