Let's be real about terrorism and Islam.
The Michigan Review: University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
January 17, 2015 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 963 words
Body


It has become trendy in the past few years for Muslims in Western countries to claim that they are not responsible for condemning terror, and to blame the media for propagandizing Muslims as terrorists. Personalities like Jon Stewart have jumped on this bandwagon. One article even satiri- cally suggested creating an 'iCondemn' app for Muslims.
Muslims are not responsible for condemning terrorist acts by other Muslims, although that is beside the point. No sane person is demanding that Muslims condemn Islamist terrorism just because they are Muslim. However, there is a serious illness within Islam today, and those who deny it are wishful thinkers. Muslims would do well to accept this, because acceptance is a necessary first step toward healing.
Islam struggles to cope with post- modernism and Westernization, because it hasn't had time to accustom itself to it. Christianity went through the Dark Ages, the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, colonialism... Islam is still in its Middle Ages, and is suddenly thrust into this modern world, where the world has changed more in the past 20 years than in the past 2,000. Muslim children are often raised in anti- Semitic, anti-Western environments. They are taught that the Day of Judgement is coming, and that Muslims will have victory at the end of Time. Literalism and pseudo-conservatism plague fundamentalist Muslim thought.
This struggle that Islam is going through as it negotiates modernization has bred mass confusion and often hysteria in the Muslim world, and in the Middle East we see its products in the Arab Spring, surges of atheism, nationalism, and general instability, as well as the rise of terrorist groups who have avenged themselves against 'the West'. It used to be that Islamic civilization fostered arts and culture and science and great feats of history. But now, the culture clash in the Muslim world is often conducive to terrorism. That is an inescapable reality, and we must acknowledge it to overcome it.
We often hear Muslims defending Islam by citing feats of Islamic civilization, for instance that "Muslims invented algebra." This is problematic for a number of reasons. First of all, almost every single 'Arab' mathematician in this 'Golden Age of Islam' was a Persian working in Baghdad. Al-Khawarizmy, to whose name we owe the word algebra, actually translated a book called "The Book of the Calculations and Numbers of India" from Sanskrit into Arabic. This is how a lot of knowledge was transmitted back then, and yet Muslims will desperately ascribe Indian inventions, like the decimal system and algebra, to Muslims in general. But isn't that the opposite of what we are taught to do when a Muslim guns down cartoonists? If we can appropriate the work of a single Persian man working on Vedic mathematics to claim that Islam and Muslims are responsible for algebra, then why do we object to the claim that a terrorist represents all Muslims?
As a Muslim, I profess that we have to stop being so sensitive. When people say that Muslims are committing acts of terror, they are not generalizing any more than when they say that Muslims invent- ed modern medicine. Anyone who isn't living under a rock will understand that generalization is problematic, and that if 1.5 billion Muslims were really violent or supported violence, then we'd have catastrophes on a global scale far greater than these sporadic incidents.
The natural question that we might then ask is what these sporadic incidents say about Islam itself. Islamic teachings, within the confines of a 7th century-Arabian framing, clash with the post-modern world. ISIS has developed out of this fundamental mistake - in the past, nation-states were built upon war, and boundaries were determined by military presence. Islam is not a pacifist religion, and there are certainly problematic things in the Quran and the ahadith. Most Muslims would be aghast to learn certain things about their prophet.
Islam, like any ancient religion, must get with the times. I myself have escaped from the shackles of fundamentalist reasoning to learn this lesson. In a short span, for instance, my opinion on gay marriage has become more measured.
Of course, we must be careful not to blaspheme Islam unfairly. Christianity was also often spread by the sword. We usually evoke the Inquisition to make this argument, but we should just ask Native Americans. The Conquest of the Americas was the devastation of millions of people and the death of so many languages, civilizations, and peoples, often explicitly in the name of the Virgin. I very much respect Catholics and the Catholic Church. I am proud to be going on ASB with the student parish on campus. But to deny that the Catholic Church has engaged in some of the most terrible violence in world history is ignorant.
Islam, too, has often spread by the sword. Religion has resulted in countless death throughout our history. But that does not mean that religion is evil or necessarily violent. There is no world history without religion, so there is no way of knowing how much death and violence there would have been without it. In any case, Marxism motivated the deaths of millions as an explicitly atheist philosophy.
To have faith is to know that their is a higher purpose to life, and that is more valuable than all the heavens and the earth and all that is in them. As we move forward in this post-modern era, we reach a fork in the road as to whether religion should be abandoned, whether God has died, and whether we ought to move on without Him. And in His cause, we need to band together as believers and recognize that we all worship Him, though there may be so many ways to Him.
Our understanding of religion must evolve so that religion can survive, and so that God not be forgotten.

Load-Date: January 18, 2015


End of Document