Let's talk terrorism
University Wire
January 9, 2004, Friday


Copyright 2004 The Crimson White via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 514 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Crimson White
Dateline: Tuscaloosa, Ala.
Body


After the horrible events of Sept. 11, 2001, America was deeply hurt. In the blink of an eye, we lost nearly 3,000 of our countrymen and women in a senseless act of inhumanity. It was an unprovoked attack on our populace unlike anything we had ever seen.
U. Alabama
Something had to be done. The blood etched into the wind as the World Trade Center tumbled to the ground cried out for justice.
It was for that clear-cut reason that the United States entered into armed combat with Afghanistan, for it was that country that harbored Osama bin Laden and his Taliban cohorts in oppression and hatred. At least in the beginning, the military had a clear purpose and vision in Afghanistan: Get bin Laden and depose the Taliban. Simple enough, right?
The Taliban soon fell, yet bin Laden escaped our grasps. Still, the military looked for him and battled remnants of enemy forces as civilian administrators tried to set up an effective government. In short order, we set up a limited government, confined bin Laden to the off-limit mountains of Pakistan, and promptly pulled most of our forces out of the country.
Flash forward to 2003. Instead of having Afghanistan in our cross hairs, our government set its sights on Iraq and the despotic Saddam Hussein. This time, however, the motivations were a little shakier.
While claims of the now-cliched weapons of mass destruction were made, the evidence has so far fallen to pieces under the intense scrutiny of numerous investigations. The Iraqi connection to 9/11 the Bush administration also tried to make thus far seems far-fetched at best.
We think the real motivation for the war was simple: Revenge. We had unfinished business with Saddam, and our county's leaders decided it was time to dispose of his regime once and for all.
We're really not arguing against that motivation for Gulf War, part deux. Saddam was a murderer, pure and simple. While we're wary of the United States becoming the world's policeman, in this case, we think we can make an exception.
At this point, the cause for war is irrelevant. Be it right or wrong, America's job is to now finish the task at hand. We cannot afford to leave Iraq before a sensible, credible and effective government is in place. Anything less would be a disservice to the Iraqi people and to the servicemen and women who continue to fight and die in the struggle to liberate Iraq.
However, there is still unfinished business in Afghanistan. The official government has little power outside of Kabul, and the Taliban is regrouping in the rugged mountains on the Pakistani border. Yet the American force in Afghanistan has continually shrunk since the official end of the war against the Taliban.
While we may never capture bin Laden (we think he's liable to punch his own ticket, unlike the meekly surrendering Saddam), U.S. forces can insure a prosperous and peaceful future for the Afghan people. As in Iraq, the United States needs to finish the job to finalize victory.
And in the future, we should finish one war before starting another.
(C) 2003 The Crimson White via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 9, 2004


End of Document