Let's talk nukes & not sanctions - Iran
Daily News (New York)
February 17, 2012 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 20
Length: 290 words
Byline: By Helen Kennedy
Body


FACING RENEWED sanctions, Iran is offering to resume talks over its nuclear program.
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad sent a letter to the European Union offering to restart discussions on "fundamental steps for sustained cooperation."
"The Iranians may be changing their mind," Director of National Intelligence James Clapper told the Senate, saying he believes sanctions may be affecting Iran's internal politics by causing popular unrest.
"If the regime then feels threatened in terms of its stability and tenure, the thought is that that could change their policy," he said.
The Obama administration slapped new sanctions on Iran on Thursday, accusing Tehran of supporting terrorism, abusing human rights and fueling the Syrian government's crackdown on dissent.
The new sanctions bar officials with Iran's Ministry of Intelligence and Security from traveling to America and bars U.S. companies from dealing with the ministry.
Iran's offer for new talks came a day after a defiant Ahmadinejad announced Iran had a "new generation" of centrifuges capable of rapidly enriching uranium - a claim some nonproliferation experts dismissed as bluster.
It also came as Israel sent a letter to the United Nations officially accusing Iran of launching the attacks on its diplomats in India, Georgia and Thailand this week.
In testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Clapper and Defense Intelligence Agency chief Lt. Gen. Ronald Burgess painted a picture of global tension in limbo.
They said they believed Iran has not yet decided to build a nuclear weapon, and Israel has not yet decided whether to strike Iran to stop any weapons-building.
Clapper said Iran is unlikely to start a conflict because Ayatollah Ali Khamenei would not risk it.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: February 17, 2012


End of Document