Letter: On Human Rights Chile Doesn't Deserve U.S. Military Aid
The New York Times
November 16, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 359 words
Body


To the Editor:
In your editorial, ''Amber Light on Foreign Aid'' (Nov. 2), you referred to the important conditions which we in the Senate placed on any security assistance or arms sales to Chile. These conditions require that Chile must make ''significant progress'' in human rights and neither aid nor abet international terrorism before it can be eligible for any such support.
In addition, the Senate unanimously agreed that ''all legal means available in the United States or Chile'' should be pursued to bring to justice those indicted by a U.S. grand jury in connection with the murders on the streets of Washington of former Foreign Minister Orlando Letelier and his American associate, Ronni Karpen Moffett.  The
US Senator Edward Kennedy letter discusses November 2 editorial, "Amber Light on Foreign Aid"
Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Percy, promised to consult me on ''any steps that might be contemplated'' in changing our assistance policy toward Chile. He further agreed to hold full committee hearings ''on any certification received from the President regarding Chile.''
These conditions and understandings are an absolute minimum given the Pinochet Government's continuing human rights abuses - including torture and serious violations of Chilean constitutional rights and press, trade union and other freedoms.
Only this year a legal resident of the United States was arrested and tortured after having been given permission to visit his aging and sick parents. Beyond these considerations, the Pinochet Government has sponsored acts of terrorism in the United States and other countries. Most recently, demonstrating its continued refusal to bring to justice those who committed such acts, that Government expelled the lawyer who was handling the appeal of the victims.
That is why I strongly believe that Chile should not receive any arms or security assistance from the United States, and why it should not be eligible for such military support even under the changes made in the prohibitions that I introduced and the Congress enacted in 1976.
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, U.S. Senator, Massachusetts, Washington, Nov. 2, 1981


End of Document