Letters to the Editor: How Can We Determine Whether the War on Terrorism Is Just?
The Chronicle of Higher Education
March 22, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: THE CHRONICLE REVIEW; Pg. 4
Length: 1531 words
Body


To the Editor:
The claim made by the "prominent American scholars" that the September 11 attacks were an attack on "who we are" raises a question relevant to discussion of the "justice" of this war: Who is the "we" of this document ("Celebrated Scholars Release a Letter Supporting War on Terrorism," February 22)?
Regarding the "founding ideals" cited by the authors, the Declaration of Independence says that all "men" are endowed by their Creator with "Rights," then lists some (not all) of them. Shifting the language to "dignity" is an interesting move (assuming that it is not simply a sloppy one), and I would have been grateful if the authors had more clearly articulated what they intended by it. …
The founding document assumes a transcendent Creator. … And it is the relationship of God with humankind (as Creator to creature) that gives human beings both dignity and rights. Many of us -- even many of us who balk at theistic language -- would argue that this is a stronger foundation for human dignity than the one claimed by the authors of the letter. Our dignity and our rights derive from our relationship to the source of the universe, not from some essential transcendence that places us above it. …
Am I to take it that some disagreements do not call for civility, openness, and reasonable argument? Which ones? How do we determine which ones? I sense here that the authors are already trying to lay the foundation for embracing the incivility of war. But I suspect that every one of the September 11 hijackers would have told us that the time for civility had passed. If the authors of this letter are in fundamental agreement with the hijackers on this, then the only question is who has the biggest guns (or, perhaps, the greatest endurance). …
In the discussion of "just war," the authors assert that this is a time when waging war is morally necessary -- then criticize those who make war "a realm of self-interest and necessity." This is at best confusing and at worst contradictory. If the war is necessary, the moral argument isn't. If the war is not necessary, then it is incumbent upon those who advocate it to construct a persuasive argument in support of it. The authors of this letter want to have it both ways. …
For the authors of this letter, it seems sufficient that those deploying military force be unable to imagine nonviolent solutions -- a … criterion that could allow the use of force before nonviolent means have even been attempted.
Even as stated in this document, however, the just-war criteria pose serious problems for this war. Are the actions being undertaken by the United States in Afghanistan defensive? Is the Bush administration's posturing toward Iran, Iraq, and North Korea defensive? Are these actions protecting the innocent (a particularly troubling question as civilian casualties mount)? Does an undeclared war satisfy the requirement of being conducted by a legitimate authority? Given the controversy over the status of prisoners being held at Guantanamo Bay, is this war being conducted against combatants -- and if everyone on the other side is potentially a combatant, what does that say about the military status of the targets chosen for the September 11 attacks? …
Rather than doing the hard work of joining the international community in constructing a viable criminal-justice system capable of responding to mass murder, … George W. Bush has defined a shadowy war against a diffuse enemy that threatens to turn into a war of us against everybody else. We have been there before, and people have suffered as a result. It is bad enough to live under a government that has such a policy, worse still to see the policy and the government that perpetrates it cloaked with academic respectability.
Steven Schroeder
Visiting Associate Professor of Philosophy
Roosevelt University
Chicago
***
To the Editor:
Recent polls of Ivy League academics have demonstrated how hopelessly out of touch they are with the rest of American society. The reaction among academics to the attacks of September 11 have, likewise, demonstrated that more education does not necessarily make one smarter.
Most academics do not understand that in the real world, we can not always sit down and reason with other people. Why? Because those other people very often desire only to kill us (Americans, Europeans, Westerners, etc.) and will not listen to reason.
In addition, the notion being spread among the academic community that poverty is somehow both a cause and an excuse for terrorism is utterly false. In fact, most of the terrorists involved in the September 11 attacks were middle- or upper-class men. …
If American academics continue to espouse such specious logic, they will continue to find themselves marginalized in society. Also, those working at state-sponsored colleges and universities will find increased public pressure to regulate hiring and eliminate tenure -- thereby curtailing academic freedom. While I do not want to see academic freedom curtailed, I can certainly understand the frustration of working-class Americans who see their tax dollars going to pay the salaries of people who hold America and Western culture in such utter contempt.
A.M.J. Bielakowski
Assistant Professor of History and Political Science
University of Findlay
Findlay, Ohio
***
To the Editor:
I would not sign the statement from these leading intellectuals. Here are a few reasons … :
* They state: "We are united in our conviction -- and are confident that all people of good will in the world will agree -- that no appeal to the merits or demerits of specific foreign policies can ever justify, or even purport to make sense of, the mass slaughter of innocent persons." … The United States has used nuclear weapons twice (at Hiroshima and Nagasaki) in a mass slaughter of innocent persons, and -- according to U.S. policy -- would do so again if deemed necessary. I wonder if the signers should be so confident about agreement with this sentence, since the very government they entrust with waging a "just war" does not. …
* They state that "the killing [on September 11] was done for its own sake." Yet in the very next sentence, they say "the leader of Al Qaeda described the 'blessed strikes' … as blows against America, 'the head of world infidelity.'" I wonder how it can be "for its own sake" and yet also have a rationale that goes beyond killing for its own sake. They briefly refer tothe "complex political, social, and demographic dimensions" that likely have something to do with the eruption of this form of terrorism, yet they seem to fail to recognize that war in and of itself does nothing to address these and may in fact make them worse. …
* The just-war tradition, as they rightly point out, is rooted in St. Augustine, who drew at least some of the principles of just war from Roman philosophy. At least from the standpoint of Christians, it should be significant that the just war has no basisin the life and teachings of Jesus. A careful consideration of his life and teachings would in fact reveal that he rejected both the Roman Empire's way of making peace (which is parallel with the United States' way) and the way of terrorism, and instead offered a nonviolent way of resistance to evil. … I wonder why it is so easy to keep saying that God wants peace and yet … violate that will of God for peace. Perhaps it has something to do with a human propensity to rationalize sin.
Peter Gathje
Chair
Department of Religion and Philosophy
Associate Professor of Religion
Christian Brothers University
Memphis, Tenn.
***
To the Editor:
The distinguished signatories seem totally off-base and counterfactual. …
One crucial issue of the just war that they seem unwilling or unable to address is whether there is any hope of victory.
… As our leaders seem to indirectly admit, this is a war without a terminal point. Until the Ku Klux Klan is rooted out of our American souls, until homophobia is driven from the consciousness of our youngsters, until wealth no longer buys government favors, terrorism in this countrywill be alive and well. The bombs we drop anywhere do not touch terrorism in the least.
Just war demands a proportion between the damage and the results. There is no such proportion here. …
When bombs (or denial of funds) begin to fall on the former School of the Americas, I might start considering the claim that this is a war against terrorism.
Clyde Ebenreck
Professor of Philosophy
Prince George's Community College
Largo, Md.
***
To the Editor:
The principle of not killing civilians is at the heart of … how a just war is to be fought. Because of their methods, neither the September 11 terrorists nor the U.S. response in Afghanistan honored that principle.
Both sides could argue that the killing of innocent people was a secondary effect. Both were aware that their actions would kill civilians, and that awareness made the action unacceptable to Islamic or Christian morality, as well as to international law.
There are consequentialist reasons for such a prohibition. Violence, however motivated, almost always breeds more violence.
Ken Brown
Director
Peace Studies Institute
Professor of Religion and Philosophy
Manchester College
North Manchester, Ind.

Load-Date: April 22, 2002


End of Document