Letters;
Who is going to stop Iran from exporting terrorism?
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
May 7, 1996, Tuesday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 21A
Length: 875 words
Byline: RICHARD M. BOOZER; Cumming
Body


The Editors: Iran has been selling arms to Bosnia. Surprised and outraged Republicans have demanded a complete investigation. Terrorists sponsored by Iran have just sabotaged the Mideast peace plan. The timing of these two events is no accident. The only problem with Republican posturing over Bosnia is that the entire free world has been aware of the flood of Iranian arms into Bosnia from the outset.
President Clinton decided to lie about an obvious situation. He insisted on support for the arms embargo while secretly permitting the sale of weapons to Bosnia. He allowed the sale of arms from Iran, our sworn enemy and the headquarters for worldwide terrorism.
Clinton has put the United States in an absurd position. We are spending billions of tax dollars and risking the lives of 20,000 troops to defend Bosnia while Iranian terrorists are busy setting up shop all over the place. We have handed Iran a base of operations in Europe, an extremely dangerous situation.
With news cameras rolling, Clinton and his spin doctors will bob and weave around the edge of the issue. Self-righteous Republicans will extract every possible ounce of political advantage. Expensive congressional investigations will have no conclusive findings. Soon our attention will turn to some other scandal. Who is going to do something about the Iranians, who will now use Bosnia as a base for more international terrorist attacks?
 
Let sanity prevail
PAUL SAMUELSON, Atlanta
The Editors: How on earth does Israel achieve a stable and just peace with its neighbors if it keeps on attacking civilians, their water and food supplies and the shaky economy in the ever-expanding definition of security? If the Lebanese could expel Hezbollah guerrillas, it surely could have also expelled the Israelis occupying south Lebanon and the Syrians stationed in Beirut.
Indiscriminately killing civilians, like collective punishment of suspected sympathizers who could be innocent, only creates more guerrillas and provides them with the justification to fight back. It is time to let sanity prevail and develop policies that are conducive to peace.
Let us Jews not forget that the unqualified U.S. support for every Israeli action cannot be taken for granted forever, and we, ourselves, have always resented our collective treatment throughout history.
 
The Lego era
DAVID HAMMOND, Athens
The Editors: Visual arts critic Catherine Fox was certainly very diplomatic in her remarks about the architecture of the new performing arts complex at the University of Georgia.
These institutional-flavored architectonica knockoffs are a bad "Miami Vice" nightmare. The University of Georgia, like the Atlanta skyline, has had the rotten luck to hit a growth spurt during what can charitably be called the playschool or Lego era of architecture. The embarrassment of these buildings will last a long time.
 
Nothing to do
BRYNDA L. HILLER, Decatur
The Editors: As a native New Yorker, I know there are few cities on Earth that can come close to it. As one who has traveled and lived all over this country and Europe, I know all too well what travel writer Arthur Frommer is talking about.
My only complaint since I migrated here in the winter of 1994 is the same complaint as Frommer's, of having literally nothing to do. Every other town I've lived in has had some form of downtown nightlife. I expected the same thing when I got the relocation packet that touted Atlanta as the New York of the South. I thought Atlanta at least would live up to Tampa or Baltimore.
Atlanta must realize that it is and always will be a small Southern city with Southern ways and conservatism. Growth spurts have only brought the masses and problems of big cities. With these newcomers comes a list of demands for things they left behind.
The weather here, for the most part, is the greatest asset, matched by some of the nicest people I've ever met.
 
Porno lawsuits?
RALPH E. BRUCE, Marietta
The Editors: The federal standard of evaluating pornography is that it must fail to meet community standards. This terminology is hopelessly vague and is open to a variety of interpretations in liberal courts. V- chips and self-regulation by rating systems are doomed to failure by the self-interests of those doing the rating and are incompatible with a free society.
There needs to be an effective method for each community to establish its own standard. We could use the punitive power of the civil court system against the purveyors of pornography. Just as the civil courts, through a citizen jury, determine who is injured, liability and damages, so, too, should civil suits establish community standards.
A punitive award for damages against all involved would take the profit out of producing offensive material. The purpose of the First Amendment is to guarantee political free speech, not profit at the expense of society.
 
Character issue
HENRY T. CLOSE, Atlanta
The Editors: I object to labeling every barbarian who kills people as having a "history of mental illness." This maligns those who suffer from mental illness, implying that they are unusually prone to violence. The opposite is true. Mental patients are generally less violent than the general public. Violence is the result of character problems, not mental problems.

Load-Date: July 17, 1996


End of Document