Letters to the Editor; Liberals' hate destroying America
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 27, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. a4
Length: 293 words
Byline: MICHAEL WADDICK
Body


13153 Terrell Ridge
Liberal extremists, who embrace communism and coddle the destructive behavior of abortionists, degenerates, criminals and terrorists, are consumed with hatred for President Bush and contempt for national unity, patriotism and traditional family values.
They lie or distort facts to drive opinion polls, influence elections and rile an undiscerning public against their enemy, American Christians and conservatives.
Unfortunately, civility and national security mean nothing to partisan liberals, who scheme for power and control and the destruction of Bush in a ridiculous "get-even" plan to impeach him after the elections.
Meanwhile, the world and this nation are increasingly threatened by the evil of terrorism and nuclear destruction threatens our very existence. But Democrats' only solution is to downplay terrorism, undermine our military, malign our president and distract the country with unbelievable pettiness.
Liberals sow division, rebellion and strife and demand we surrender to terrorists who are emboldened by their defeatist rhetoric. Islamic fascists repeat their treasonous propaganda to escalate the war, recruit more terrorists and hasten America's annihilation while laughing at our emasculation.
Chronically unhappy liberals rage against Bush despite our security, tremendous national economy, declining federal deficit and lowest unemployment in decades, all unreported by the never "fair and balanced" liberal media.
This deception provokes hate in blind adherents, who inconceivably want to assassinate Bush and oust the less corrupt in favor of worse politicians. Trusting instead liberals, who offer no hope, no direction and no core values, but know how to defame rivals and plunder supporters with heavier tax burdens.

Load-Date: October 27, 2006


End of Document