LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 27, 2014 Saturday


Copyright 2014 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 827 words
Byline: Staff Writer
Body


Nuclear terrorism column was on mark
EDITOR, TIMES-DISPATCH:
 I noted with great interest the recent Op/Ed column, 'Business leaders must join the fight against nuclear terrorism,' by Buford Scott, Bob Burrus and Al Broaddus. Their lucid, thoughtful analysis was exactly on target and spotlights what many experts and President Obama think is the biggest security threat facing the country. Publication was especially timely given the just-released report by the Government Accountability Office that underscores that the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other government agencies are not prepared for a nuclear or radiological terrorist attack in the United States. Especially given the nuclear assets in Virginia, this should motivate business leaders in the commonwealth to take action.
 I say that from the vantage point of having co-authored the book, 'The Four Faces of Nuclear Terrorism in 2005,' and my continued work as the president of the Federation of American Scientists on preventing nuclear terrorism, as well as having served in the U.S. nuclear Navy as an officer during the end of the Cold War.
 Charles D. Ferguson,
 President,
 Federation of American Scientists.
 Washington.
 Second Amendment doesn't apply to gun sales
 EDITOR, TIMES-DISPATCH:
 Regarding Barton Hinkle's Commentary column, 'McAuliffe's misinformed trigger warning': I am not in favor of all of Gov. Terry McAuliffe's proposals, but most do not violate constitutional rights. As a gun owner, I am a firm supporter of the Second Amendment's recognition of an unqualified personal right to keep and bear arms. However, Hinkle's embrace of the National Rifle Association's warped expansion of gun rights is wrong.
 Hinkle enumerates proposals by McAuliffe that deal only with gun commerce and concealed-weapons permits. The Second Amendment protects one's right to keep and bear arms that are already owned, but it does not protect any right to buy or sell arms nor to carry them concealed.
 There is no intrastate commercial activity that is not subject to control by state governments. Commerce has been a particular justification for governmental regulation down through the ages. It is ludicrous to suggest that governments in the U.S. may regulate most any aspect of commerce other than arms.
 The one exception cited by Hinkle has to do with banning arms possession by those under protective orders. That makes very good sense, but I question the constitutionality of such a general ban. I would agree that such a ban could be imposed by a court as a condition of release on bond or after a conviction for any violent crime, but that would be a case-by-case judicial application, not a blanket ban.
 Governments are obliged to adopt and enforce their laws pursuant to the right of 'equal protection' under the 14th Amendment, but other than that, they are free to regulate by law commerce and concealed-carry anyway desired. The Second Amendment is silent as to commercial transactions. The NRA has done a terrible disservice by willfully confusing the matter.
 H. W. Ellerson.
 Hadensville.
 Take action to prevent further tragedy
 EDITOR, TIMES-DISPATCH:
 We were saddened to learn of the incident involving 2-year-old Christopher Henderson, who died after a 32-inch box television and the dresser on which it was placed fell over onto him at his home in Richmond. We wish we could say this was an isolated incident but unfortunately, deaths and life-altering injuries from furniture and television tip-overs are all too common. Every 15 minutes in the U.S. a person goes to the emergency room from a tip-over incident. Tragically, the majority of the victims are young children.
 It is our hope at the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) that, through improved safety standards and education, we can save lives and prevent injuries. Here is what parents and caregivers need to know:
 • Existing furniture can be anchored with inexpensive anti-tip brackets, available at most hardware and baby stores. These brackets often have a quick-release feature to allow furniture to be moved for cleaning;
 • New furniture, such as dressers, is sold with anti-tip devices. Install them right away;
 • Televisions should only be placed on furniture designed to hold a television, such as television stands or media centers;
 • Televisions that are not wall-mounted should be anchored to the wall;
 • If anchoring is not an option, place the television on a low and sturdy base and push it as far back on the stand as possible. Place the stand close to the wall and remove any items that might be attractive to a child.
 Our thoughts are with Christopher's family. There is little we can say to comfort this grieving family. Instead, we must take action. CPSC's new 'Anchor It'campaign is a call to action. If we can prevent one more news story like this one, it will be worth it.
 Marietta S. Robinson,
 Joseph Mohorovic, Commissioners, U.S. Consumer Product Satety Commission.
 Washington.

Load-Date: December 27, 2014


End of Document