Letters;
LEFEVER'S WITHDRAWAL CHANGES NOTHING
The New York Times
June 14, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 357 words
Body


To the Editor:
Your June 7 editorial ''Second Chance for Human Rights'' and earlier comments on the Lefever hearings miss the basic significance of the issues at stake. The withdrawal of Mr. Lefever's candidacy for the post of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights merely means that the messenger who brought the news was shot. The news remains unchanged.
David Heaps letter responds to June 7 editorial on withdrawal of Ernest Lefever's candidacy for human rights post; discusses US foreign policy
Mr. Lefever was correct in subsequently characterizing his proposed job as ''low-level.'' He was nominated to carry out a policy fully endorsed by the President, the Secretary of State, the Ambassador to the United Nations and key White House advisers. His task was not to make human-rights policy but to implement an approach already established as an integral component of the new foreign policy.
Whether a more cosmetically acceptable replacement is now nominated or the office is left to wither on the State Department vine, the result will remain the same. It is idle to ask now for ''a more considered policy.'' The present policy has been fully considered, and firmly accepted.
The Administration is in favor of a two-tiered policy for human rights, which seeks to classify and grade national tyrannies. It asserts that a distinction must be made between ''revolutionary totalitarianism'' and ''traditional authoritarianism'' in the application of U.S. overseas policies.
The Reagan ideologues have in fact posed a false political equation. The choice for the United States abroad is not between semantical gradations of tyranny. It is to recognize the countenance of oppression and terrorism whatever its label, to perceive domestic aggression wherever it occurs and to support the commitment to decency and civility whenever it can be found.
Anything less will be counterproductive and self-defeating to this country's national interest and to the Administration's intention of restoring a viable and credible foreign policy.
DAVID HEAPS, Princeton, June 7, 1981
The writer is a former Ford Foundation consultant on human-rights programs.


End of Document