Letter to the Editor: Rodney Davis shouldn't support Trump's terrorism policies
Daily Illini: University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign
March 7, 2017 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 314 words
Body


Alex Goodlad
March 7, 2017
Filed under Opinions, Your Opinions
Dear Representative Rodney Davis,
As spring approaches, I write this letter to tell you beware the Ides of March. President Trump and his cabinet are a threat to American democracy, who neither follow nor respect the Constitution.
It is your responsibility to those in your district to make responsible decisions - not just partisan ones. You may say that you don't "agree with everything Trump is doing," but that doesn't reflect in what you've said or done.
I read your statements in the News-Gazette. I know you have your reasons, and they'd be understandable if they were true.
Terrorism has been a statistical nonissue from refugees in those seven countries, a vetting process was already in place, the intentions were not noble if they exempted countries with Trump's conflict of interest ties and finally, the ban did not affect "less than a couple hundred individuals."
The travel ban actually affected tens of thousands who were not terrorists. There were many students in your congressional district whose semesters were in jeopardy.
As representative, it's your duty to research the facts and not believe "alternative facts." You think it's dangerous that this ban got labeled a "Muslim ban"? It's dangerous that this ban is in fact an unconstitutionally discriminatory ban on the people of these countries (whether they are Muslim or not).
You might get a different impression about our motives from Tom Kacich's article "Davis in Democrats' sights for 2018," but there's well over a year before re-election is of any immediate concern to both you and us.
Right now we're trying to work with you - not against you - by voicing our concerns so you can do the right thing. I genuinely wish you the best, hoping you make the right choices during this crucial time.
Alex Goodlad is a University student in LAS.
[email protected]

Load-Date: March 8, 2017


End of Document