Letters
Crain's Cleveland Business
June 18, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: LETTERS; Pg. 10
Length: 1054 words
Body


Case law dean is doing just fine, thank you
* I write as part of the overwhelming majority of the Case Western Reserve University law faculty that believes the law school is very much on course and that welcomes the leadership which Dean Gary Simson has provided.
Crain's wrote on Page One of its June 11 issue that some law school alumni and other friends of the school are concerned about the direction of the school.
Certainly, people will differ about what interests them, and certainly donors are entitled to specify the purpose of a gift. It is Roe Green's and David Shall's prerogative to withhold their largesse or take it elsewhere if they believe that their interests in the legal response to terrorism, in biotechnology, or in whatever subject intrigues them are not well served at the law school, though I am confident that over the coming years a number of my colleagues will continue to address those issues thoughtfully and creatively in their teaching and scholarship.
I am agog, however, at the suggestion that social justice is some sort of quaint relic that has become passe, or, in the words of another critic, that it is ``just history.'' To be sure, the concept of justice is old, dating at least back to the Bible. Deuteronomy instructs us, ``Justice, justice shall you pursue,'' and, in one of Dr. Martin Luther King's favorite scriptural passages, the prophet Amos envisions a time when ``Justice shall flow like water, and righteousness like a mighty stream.''
Having not yet fulfilled Amos' vision, however, it hardly seems time to dismiss a social justice center as a turning back to ``age-old issues'' or as hopelessly 20th century, and therefore not fit for a law school. We are located in a city that was recently pronounced the poorest city in the United States, as well as the third most segregated. Its schools struggle all too unsuccessfully to provide hope and an opportunity to its children. Many of those children will find their futures entail prison, not college and careers, as a consequence of our ``war on drugs.''
Looking beyond Cleveland, to our nation and the world, the issues of social justice seem no more passe. One of the mandates of the social justice center is to address local and national problems, through teaching, research, and the creation of opportunities for our students to work during law school and in their subsequent careers for social justice.
Nor are commitments to teaching and scholarship relating to social justice and to terrorism and biotechnology mutually exclusive. Indeed, any discussion of such ``today'' issues as terrorism, biotechnology and international law that ignores notions of justice is likely to be limited and narrow.
Certainly, in my own work related to terrorism, an article on torture and extraordinary rendition, I sought to merge consideration of contemporary problems with the demands of justice, as did the law school's symposium on ``torture and the war on terrorism'' for which I wrote the article.
A commitment of resources to social and racial justice, in lieu of, or in addition to more au courant topics has not impaired the top 10 rankings of the law schools at Harvard, Columbia, NYU, Berkeley and Virginia, all of which have academic centers or institutes focused on social or racial justice. I dread the day when, unlike these excellent law schools, Case decides that social justice is not relevant to the study of law.
Robert N. Strassfeld
Professor of Law
Case Western Reserve University
School of Law
Social justice focus needed
* I write to rebut the assertions and implications in your June 11 Page One story about Gary Simson, dean of the Case Western Reserve University Law School.
For too long, those who support Dean Simson have remained silent in the hope that the unpleasant and unwarranted attacks on the dean might remain in house. However, his detractors apparently have managed to use Crain's Cleveland Business as a mouthpiece to promulgate their self-interested propaganda, so it is time for the truth of the matter to be heard by Cleveland's legal and business community.
Your article reports questions and criticism of the dean's plan to create a Center for Social Justice because it would ``force the curriculum to take a step back into time,'' and you quote an entertainment law specialist in defense of this argument. That really says it all right there, doesn't it?
Here we have a dean who wishes to shape our law school around the principles that used to represent America at its finest, principles which are now in danger of being replaced by shallow aspirations based on monetary and individual gain. Instead, a focus on terrorism law is encouraged, which to my mind could follow the dangerous and reactive stance that has taken our country away from its position as a guiding light for the world and positioned it as an aggressive bully power.
As for the Institute for Global Security, which you imply is now in disarray, your readers should be reminded that Michael Scharf, the professor currently running the institute, is a Nobel Peace Prize nominee. Donor Roe Green complains that Dean Simson did not attend the one seminar that was held on global terrorism due to his busy schedule. In fact, the dean did not attend because he was not invited.
I am convinced that Ms. Green received her misimpression from those who are determined to evict Dean Simson from the position he has served so diligently and professionally.
In fact, Dean Simson, who has been at his post in an unfamiliar city for less than a year, does have a busy schedule and it has been difficult for him to schedule face-to-face interaction with potential donors, let alone the distinguished practitioner of sports law whom you also quote extensively. The main reason for this situation is that his malefactors have stirred up so much trouble, provoked so many meetings and confrontations, that the dean has been forced to allocate an enormous amount of time to defending himself against baseless charges.
This selfish and detrimental undermining of the dean must stop now. Those responsible, and they know who they are, must put the reputation and future of the CWRU Law School above their own aspirations for the good of our students, our city, and indeed our country.
Henry T. King Jr.
Professor of Law
Case Western Reserve University
School of Law

Load-Date: June 21, 2007


End of Document