Letters:
The Philadelphia Inquirer
August 8, 2010 Sunday
CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: CURRENTS; Inq Currents; Pg. C04
Length: 868 words
Body


Link with tea party will backfire for GOP As I watch some of the few Republicans whom I always respected roast on the spit and be skewered by the tea party for a more radical opponent to win their seat, I see a different November in 2010. By embracing this irreconcilable fringe group, the GOP is either going to sink or swim with them.
No matter the results, the Republicans will suffer a Pyrrhic victory. If they win, they must pay homage to the tea party, whose views are just evolving and will become even more radical.
They may get the House back, but they won't see the Oval Office for a while. Voters, I hope, will see the duplicity.
Anthony J. Frascino
Swedesboro
artgardenr@aol.com
U.S. must improve its public transit As a user of public transportation in the United States - and in Japan, where I often travel on business - I know that we can do better in this area.
Each year, America's rail and bus systems reduce oil consumption by 3.4 billion gallons, save Americans 540 million hours of traffic delays, and avoid 26 million tons of global-warming emissions. However, rail and other forms of public transportation remain severely underfunded in Pennsylvania.
In 2007, Pennsylvania's elected officials passed Act 44, which focused our transportation priorities in a smarter way. Unfortunately, these transportation principles are now in jeopardy. The state is currently facing a budget crisis, and our legislature either needs to come up with additional funding for our transportation budget, or it will need to make significant cuts to public transportation and road and bridge repair projects.
Gov. Rendell, State Sen. Anthony Hardy Williams, and State Rep. James R. Roebuck should support increasing funding for transportation in our state.
Frank L. Chance
President, Friends of Clark Park
Philadelphia
chancefl@gmail.com
To repeat: CAIR condemns terrorism Islam does not justify terrorism; I as a Muslim have not justified terrorism; and if I knew of any terrorist plans - being planned by anyone of any religion - I would be the first to call the FBI.
When 9/11 occurred, I along with millions of other Americans were praying that my relatives living in New York City were safe. The lives of people of all faiths were at risk. Some have even forgotten that many Muslims died on that day.
Unfortunately, I have to write this statement for those who believe in guilt by association, and for others who insist on accusing the Council for American-Islamic Relations, a successful mainstream Muslim organization, of not condemning Hamas, Hezbollah, or any other terrorist organization.
CAIR has consistently condemned terrorism and the killing of innocent civilians. That includes all acts of terrorism, and individuals, groups, or countries that are involved in terrorist activities.
In 2003 and 2005, CAIR launched an ad and a public-service-announcement campaign that contained antiterror messages. In 2004, CAIR launched an online petition, "Not in the Name of Islam." This petition declares that terrorists are "betraying the values of the faith that they claim to represent." Nearly 700,000 individuals and organizations endorsed the petition by August 2006. 
Rugiatu Conteh
Outreach director
CAIR-PA
Philadelphia
Know to whom you donate clothing Each year, Goodwill recycles more than 12 million pounds of gently used clothing plus scores of other items. Last year, through the sale of these items in Goodwill's stores, we helped more than 1,200 local individuals with disabilities gain the job skills needed to become employed. 
All Goodwill locations are staffed by courteous representatives who are there to help donors unload items and issue receipts for tax purposes. 
But not all charities are what they seem. Unattended donation bins can be found throughout the region in parking lots at strip centers, grocery stores, and gas stations. Many people assume they belong to Goodwill because of our strong presence in the donated-goods industry. They do not. Many bins feature a charity's name but are really operated by for-profit entities that give the charity a mere 4 to 6 percent of the proceeds. 
Goodwill urges donors to give to charities they know and trust. Research the charity to see how it ranks against others, or call the state's charity registration office. You should be just as careful about where you donate clothing as you do your money. I applaud the State of New Jersey for passing a law that regulates the use of clothing donation bins and gives municipalities tighter governance over them. 
Mark B. Boyd
President and CEO
Goodwill Industries
of Southern NJ/Philadelphia
Maple Shade
Questioning motives of givers Millionaires are giving away large sums to charity ("Lenfest makes giving pledge," Thursday). Great! All of those people are donating substantial amounts of their wealth to foundations. All of which then pay big salaries to administrators. 
What will be the actual benefit to organizations that actually pass on money and service to the needy? How much will be lost in income taxes these individuals would have paid? What of the deductions these individuals can take for charitable contributions to further reduce the amount they will pay in taxes?
Syvilla C. Fry
Lansdale
syfry@comcast.net

Load-Date: August 8, 2010


End of Document