Letters: What about all that OTHER terror, foreign & domestic?
The Philadelphia Daily News
March 15, 2011 Tuesday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL OPINION; P-com Opinion; Pg. 14
Length: 279 words
Body


CHRISTINE Flowers (op-ed, March 11) and Rep. Peter King have a tunnel-vision problem about terrorism. 
All they see is Muslim terrorism. They've apparently already forgotten about Yugoslav terrorism, Russian terrorism and Chinese terrorism abroad.
They have apparently refused in the usual way to think of frontier military actions against Native Americans as terrorism. Of more recent note, they have apparently come to think of "pro-life" doctor-killers, or gun-toting medical insurance town-hall participants, as patriotic free-speech advocates, Timothy ("Oklahoma bomber") McVeigh as an anti-federalist demonstrator and recently increased skinhead intimidation and assaults against Jews as white Christian pride.
King is right to explore the mechanisms that create new terrorists. He is just wrong to concentrate solely on eccentric Muslims. There are plenty of eccentrics to go around.
Ben Burrows, Elkins Park
This is my problem with Ms. Flowers' spiel: 
To claim that Islamic terrorists are, in indirectly quoting Peter King, the only distinct group responsible for terror is just wrong.
I have a problem with this pro-American baloney that we are way better than all of these other corrupt countries. Didn't we fund the Taliban years ago? Didn't the government fund contras with profits from the government-issue crack-cocaine trade? (I'm sorry for those uninformed, but poor black folk were not responsible for putting these rocks out in the streets. Ask Reagan's cronies.)
Wasn't the KKK one of the original terror groups of the last century and a half? How can we worry about outside threats with such gusto when we Americans are our own worst enemy? 
Damon Evans, Philadelphia

Load-Date: March 15, 2011


End of Document