Letters | Letters
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 20, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10
Length: 777 words
Body


Widen public job pool
With about six million people living within easy commuting distance, why do we restrict ourselves to only the 1.4 million who live in the city for many public jobs?
Surely allowing applications from four times as many people as live in Philadelphia creates a better pool of skills. Sadly, the issue seems to be being won by those who support patronage, local voters and our standard lackluster and debilitating ward-based politics. But the rest of us Philadelphians, endlessly hoping for the best for our city, miss out on the better skills, a regional outlook, new ideas and a greater loyalty from our neighbors by still being a city that undermines itself with such a provincial attitude toward hiring.
Gardner A. Cadwalader
Philadelphia
A tolerated threat
As I read the editorial "Letting fear prevail" (June 8), I found the content ironic in the greater context of the war on terror. When I open the newspaper, I am bombarded by updates and campaigns that are dictated by fear politics. These aim to make me believe that it is imperative to abolish international terror and to protect American democracy and liberty. These newspapers and campaigns, however, often neglect to focus on a more immediate threat to our liberty: domestic terrorism.
Domestic terrorism is perhaps a more immediate threat to American security than international terrorism because domestic terrorists such as gang members are tolerated, and little is done to undermine their infrastructure. This inaction is a fundamental flaw because Americans should not have to tolerate gang violence.
I absolutely agree with the editorial; [Bristol Township senior Tyrone] Lewis had every right to march with his class, especially since the police had an entire week to formulate a solution to the gang threat. It is ironic that we live in a time in which gang violence is normal and tolerated, and in which model students are kept from speaking at their graduation, when the war on terrorism is a popular topic of conversation at most dinner tables.
Sarah Barenbaum
Philadelphia
Identity theft in Pa.
Re: "Soldiers in laptop limbo," June 10:
The editorial in favor of federal legislation to protect victims of identity theft was on point, but readers from Pennsylvania that follow the advice to freeze their credit reports will be disappointed. Unlike New Jersey, Pennsylvania does not yet allow consumers to take this common-sense step that would prevent identity thieves from opening fraudulent lines of credit. And credit bureaus have refused to honor consumers' requests to freeze their credit reports unless state law forces them.
Fortunately, State Sen. Jake Corman (R., Centre) introduced SB 180 last year, which would give Pennsylvanians the same right consumers have in New Jersey and other states: to freeze their credit report. PennPIRG has been urging the state legislature to adopt legislation of this kind for years, but the bill has not yet moved from committee. Readers should contact their state senator and urge him or her to call for swift passage of SB 180.
Beth A. McConnellDirectorPennPIRG and PennPIRG Education Fund
Philadelphiamcconnell@pennpirg.org
Feeling Iraqis' grief
Last week, the number of U.S. soldiers killed in Iraq topped 2,500. A conservative estimate of civilian deaths in Iraq is 38,300. The previous week saw the suicides of three prisoners in Guantanamo, as well as the death of al-Qaeda's leader in Iraq, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. While his death may provide a small degree of comfort to some, I'm not so easily pacified.
Before the ink dried on al-Zarqawi's death certificate, a replacement was announced. It has been reported that five others were killed in the bombing, including two women and a young girl. While I cannot imagine the pain that the families of the 2,500 dead U.S. soldiers feel, I am also helpless in imagining the pain of Iraqis who've lost loved ones.
What will be the result of the grief-filled reflections of the friends and family of the little girl? Will the cycle of violence end there? You kill one so-called terrorist and create hundreds more. I guess this is one way to keep the Defense Department in business. Would not the trillions spent making war be better utilized by feeding, clothing and sheltering them, thus eliminating the root cause of terrorism? Violence begets violence. Wise words from long ago. It's a shame that human beings refuse to learn that vital lesson. We ignore such teachings at our own peril.
Robert Daniels II
Bethlehem
'English-only' tutors
If the customers at Geno's lining up to support the "English-only" policy would sign up to be English tutors, everyone's goals would be met.
Karen Eubank
Haddonfield

Load-Date: June 20, 2006


End of Document