LETTERS FROM THE PEOPLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 1, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2C; LETTERS
Length: 1492 words
Body


Fighting Terrorism With Terrorism I read with great interest the June 27 story about the advantages of the Tomahawk missiles. I was especially struck by the "psychological potency" of the devices. They are alleged to carry the message: "The United States can bomb you at will, and you're powerless to do anything about it." Unless I'm mistaken, this is precisely the message of a terrorist. The difference between terrorism, as practiced by small impoverished nations, and the terrorism of the United States is that American terrorism is less personal.  Another advantage of the Tomahawk missile is that it can be launched from a ship located in international waters, at some distance from land. So the United States can bomb without the consent of any other nation.  This assures that the people launching the missiles will never have any contact with the people they are bombing. All they see or hear is the military equivalent of a Nintendo game. They get confirmation of the kill over a video terminal. There are no weeping women or bleeding children on this video, just a neat graph.  Soldiers on a field of war don't have much opportunity to get to know their enemies as people. This is discouraged to keep the edge on the troops. But moral dilemmas arise out of the intimacy of relationships.  The tremendous dilemmas we now face, relations with the Mideast, abortion, euthanasia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, poverty and racism, to name but a few, become tangible and real to us to the extent we know people who struggle with these issues, or struggle with them ourselves.
Moral dilemmas are unsettling. They can disturb our sleep or our lives, but to resolve them we have to grapple with them intimately. Bombing people or buildings with a high-tech weapon does not simplify the dilemma. It simply fools us into thinking there is no dilemma, that the problem is simple: You just select your target and take it out.  Humans are visceral creatures; we have to know things in our guts to deal with them. The problems in the world today may seem far away, but we have a moral responsibility not to let them stay there.  I wish I had some good advice to give President Bill Clinton about how to deal in a moral way with someone like Saddam Hussein. But I can't advise him what to do. What I can tell him is not to allow a bully to determine the level of discourse. We face the risk of learning to be terrorists from an expert.  Phoebe A. Cirio University City In the United States, under civil law, if a person came into my house to rob or destroy my home, and I shot them, it would be self-defense. But if I shot this citizen in the back as he ran across my lawn to get away, or if I hunted him down and shot him in his own home after the fact, I would be a murderer.  Has not the U.S. government just gone against the basic laws that it says all U.S. citizens should follow?  Something should have been done to teach Saddam Hussein a lesson, but to launch cruise missiles now for an attempted plot that not only failed, but occurred months ago, will only lead to escalating violence and terrorism in America.  William G. Dayton Florissant Jobs, Jobs, Jobs Millions of Americans are concerned about finding or retaining jobs.  Everyone has a right to share in the common wealth.  In a capitalistic economy, this means that everyone has a right to make a proportionate contribution to the common good and to get resources adequate to make a decent human life possible.  We talk about "creating" jobs. But every industry is trying to reduce its required manpower by increasing the skill and productivity of its work force or, better still, by substituting machines for human laborers. When Northwestern Bell laid off 1,000 operators, it didn't really lay them off; it destroyed their jobs by the use of robots and computers. This is compounded by new waves of immigrants and the reduction in military forces.  Even with a high level of prosperity, how many decent jobs will we have and how many job seekers will there be? We have not done much research on this problem. We seem to think that job training and creation of new jobs will take care of matters.  I suspect that we will soon be able to handle unemployment only by shortening the work week while keeping salaries and benefits adequate. At one time, our work week was 60 hours. If that were our current standard, unemployment might be 50 percent.  R.J. Henle, S.J.  St. Louis It took the Russians more than half a century to learn that socialism doesn't work. Now we are stupidly following in their footsteps. This thought was triggered by the June 24 editorial, "Wanted: 3,600 Summer Jobs." Why should we look to Washington to provide jobs? The editorial says that the Labor Department is appealing to the private sector. Such an appeal wouldn't be necessary if we hadn't for decades become ever more dependent on the federal cornucopia.  Frankly, I'm discouraged. Will we never learn?  Leo J. Reid Jr.  Shrewsbury Dear Brother We have been very disturbed by recent criticism about a member of our family. Our brother, Charles Koehler, is a very productive, responsible and respected member of our society. (He and his life partner, Dennis Hostetler, took part in a mass service of marriage and were featured in an April 25 article.) He holds an MBA degree, has been an exemplary employee of the same organization for 16 years, has held leadership roles in professional organizations, has volunteered hundreds of hours of community service and has been in a monogamous relationship for nine years. He is a wonderful, trusted uncle to our children and a loving brother.  Our brother also happens to be gay. He did not choose to be gay; this is the way he was born.  We are proud of him because of who he is, what he has accomplished and because he is an outstanding person. Like the vast majority of gay men who are responsible, law-abiding, taxpaying citizens, he does not wear dresses, spread diseases or expect any so-called special rights. What he wants is to live his life without harassment or discrimination.  Knowing him, we realize that if he had a choice, he would have chosen to be heterosexual because the problems of discrimination against gays are extremely burdensome and dangerous. Our brother can be denied his civil rights in employment, housing, child custody and care, inheritance and other basic rights that most people take for granted.  His life can be threatened because gay people have been subjected to hatred and lies that have been perpetuated through stereotypes created by homophobic people. These stereotypes depict gay men as predatory, child molesting, sexually promiscuous, disease carrying and irresponsible moral lepers. The March on Washington on April 25 was about education and awareness of these inequities and injustices, which are perpetuated by the willful ignorance of far too many.  We applaud the leadership of Mayor Freeman Bosley Jr., and St. Louis County Executive George "Buzz" Westfall in issuing proclamations recognizing June 26 and 27 as Gay and Lesbian Pride Days.  We challenge everyone to become fully informed of the real injustices facing good people who just happened to have been born gay.  Stephen C. Koehler St. Louis Linda Koehler-Deckert Chesterfield Well Said Bravo to Amy Adams Squire Strongheart and her June 23 Commentary article, "Sharing The Lesson Of Stonewall." She expressed so well what the gay-lesbian-bisexual movement is all about!  Remember Plato's words in "Symposium": "Whatever . . . it has been established that it is shameful to be involved in homosexual relationships, this is due to evil on the part of the legislators, to despotism on the part of the rulers and to cowardice on the part of the governed." R.C. Wilson St. Louis Gifted Writer Reporter Christine Bertelson's words, phrases and sentences are a treat for our minds. What a truly gifted writer she is! Thanks for placing her good news story about the toddler from Ukraine and Dr. William Selezinka on the front page June 24 ("Doctor Fights To Let Boy See"). Reading this story first was a delightful way to start the day.  Doris Mills Webster Groves Romantic Gesture In her June 24 Commentary article, "Smoking Is Not Fashionable," Jenni Bergal ascribes to Bette Davis the act of lighting two cigarettes in her mouth, then handing one to Paul Henreid in "Now, Voyager," stating that "moviegoers thought it was incredibly chic." I would imagine Bergal has never seen the movie.  Actually, it was Paul Henreid who managed to make that almost impossible gesture appear romantic, not chic. All of us who saw that movie more than 50 years ago (and many times since) were unaware that smoking was hazardous to our health. We thought it was sophisticated. Young people today, who are better informed than we were, should be too wise to become addicted.  I hasten to add that I agree wholeheartedly with the rest of Bergal's article.  Esther I. Schaefer St. Louis

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document