LETTER TO THE EDITOR: The 'Unreasonable Right' Targets Cornell
Cornell Daily Sun: Cornell University
April 14, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 664 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re: "GUEST?ROOM:?A Call for Productive Dialogue," Opinion, April 10
As Andrew Lord reported in the Sun on April 7, assemblymen Chris Friend and Brian Kolb are arguing in the N.Y. State Assembly that Cornell should lose federal funding and face investigation as a result of the recently disseminated Project Veritas video featuring an interview with Cornell assistant dean of student activities, Joseph Scaffido. Using questions and quotations out of context, or mere conversational chicanery, the interviewer and his employer, the infamous James O'Keefe, frame Scaffido's comments to sound like support for terrorist groups. If you need more context, watch the video, overlaid with creepy voice-overs and scary images of terrorists with big guns. People who understand Cornell's values would obviously dismiss these allegations as ludicrous, and any direct question about terrorism would have been met with quick dismissal. But some politicians, eager for any opportunity to attack a "liberal institution," have taken this stunt seriously.
This type of behavior marks assemblymen Friend and Kolb as members of what we might call the unreasonable right, an apparently growing subsection of the GOP. They are the type of politicians so intoxicated with zealotry that they appear to forget their duties to the people and instead indulge in sensationalist pseudo-news; we can only hope that constituents recognize the absurdity of conflating true journalism with Project Veritas' veritably asinine puerility.
Friend and Kolb are opposed to the use of federal or state funds by Cornell University, which stands against their political ideology of smaller government and other Republican tenets. Still, the two politicians' allegations are serious and dangerous. A difference of political opinion can be settled by debate among our legislative representatives, and institutions should not be slandered by officials for political gain.
Terrorism, and the funding of terrorism, must be taken seriously. Terrorism is real and heinous. From the genocide of minorities in Iraq and Syria, to the merciless murder of university students in Kenya, to the gruesome attacks on the World Trade Centers in New York City (unfortunately the list is too long to even skim the surface here), the world has witnessed the dangers of violent extremism in utter horror. Claims of supporting terrorism should not be used to further political motives. This is a line that cannot be crossed. Assemblymen Friend and Kolb are treading the treacherous ground broken by Joseph McCarthy over fifty years ago, with ISIS as an analogous bogeyman to the USSR.
Disgusted with our political representatives, we called the office of assemblyman Chris Friend, and had an argumentative, but not impolite, conversation with a staff member who happened to be a Cornell alumnus, though he asked to be left anonymous. Despite his firsthand knowledge of Cornell, this staffer still supported Friend's claim that Cornell should face a federal investigation into the possibility that they may be funding Islamic terrorism. According to the staff member, during his studies at Cornell, the University hosted workshops for environmental activism against fracking, so it would not be unnatural for the University to willingly fund similar "extremist" workshops for terrorists. When questioned again, he acknowledged that the activism was merely civil disobedience, not violence against property or people, but insisted that there is a spectrum of subversive activities. Apparently, it's a small step between mere environmental activism and the true atrocities of terrorism.
N.Y. assemblywoman Barbara Lifton was quoted in the piece by Andrew Lord on April 7 stating that the action by assemblymen Friend and Kolb was "just plain wrong." To register your revulsion alongside Lifton's, feel free to (respectfully) call up Friend (607-301-0302) and Kolb (315-781-2030) and give them a piece of your mind.
John Zeiger '14
Seth Inman '14

Load-Date: April 14, 2015


End of Document