LETTERS
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 27, 2015 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2015 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: B; Pg. 011
Length: 851 words
Body


'ASSAULT WEAPONS' RARELY USED
 A new study by the Congressional Research Service, "Mass Murder with Firearms: Incidents and Victims, 1999-2013," confirms that mass shootings continue to be rare in the United States. Noted Northeastern University criminologist James Alan Fox, whose extensive analysis of mass shootings is discussed in the CRS study, said the evidence shows "there is no solid trend" in the number of such crimes and "No matter how you cut it, there's no epidemic!"
Anti-gun groups and their news media allies portray mass shootings as common events that place the public at extreme risk. However, between 1999 and 2013, mass shootings covered by the CRS study accounted for a microscopic 0.004 percent of all deaths, about 0.66 percent of all murder victims, and less than one-fifth the number of non-firearm murder victims in the U.S. The chance of a person being killed in a mass shooting in any given year between 1999 and 2013 would be only 1 in 3 million.
 As to anti-gun group claims mass shootings are most often committed with "assault weapons,"the study found that between 1999 and 2013, less than 10 percent were committed with a firearm capable of using a detachable magazine holding more than 10 rounds.
TOM STANTON
DEER PARK
AID AS IMPORTANT AS WEAPONS
 Would we react any differently than Middle Eastern people if on the receiving end of 13 years of continuous military assault? A Taiwanese China Post commentary suggested a "tipping point" during President George W. Bush's unilateral actions, after which U.S. military forays have created more new terrorists than they've eliminated by inevitably empowering terrorist recruitment, particularly when innocent civilians and children are killed.
 Recently, other countries, notably Germany and France, have increased activity against the Islamic State (ISIS), not only in accepting many refugees, but also militarily. Having been in the background of the long-term military action, they may be better received by moderate Arabs and Muslims. These countries also have an advantage because they have been much more even-handed toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Our bias favoring Israel has long created anti-U.S. feelings among Arabs and Muslims.
 At this stage, U.S. military action should take a low profile compared to our humanitarian activities. For example, longtime U.S. Ambassador Ryan Crocker assures us that our "vetting system is strong," and advises accepting 100,000 Syrians (Wall Street Journal, Nov. 17).
 Hopefully, our country will not lose its soul and play into ISIS' hands by succumbing to hate, fear and impulsive irrational actions.
NORM LUTHER
SPOKANE
TERRORISTS, POLITICIANS USE FEAR
 This holiday season started with trepidation caused by terrorism in Paris, which was then capitalized on by cheap politicians, even though it can be argued with undeniable force that the yearly 10,000 dead of mass murders, right-wing terrorism and death at the hands of our own countrymen has produced far more carnage than foreign terrorism.
 Furthermore, in double-speak, murders by zealot Christians are called crimes while killing by Muslims are denoted as terrorism. I submit that when you are on the other side of the barrel of a weapon, it is all terrorism, including war.
 Still, there is not a focus on national problems because the strategy in this election year is to make others look less presidential, particularly women, whom they can dismiss as weak. In addition, propagating fear benefits both sides of this equation as the terrorists get the notoriety they crave and politicians seek strength, contending foreigners and humankind are essentially wicked and need to be suppressed by curtailing the rule of law, and supporting a stronger authoritarian government which they will lead.
JON RUGGLES
WALLACE
KRAUTHAMMER COLUMN ALL GAS
 After reading Charles Krauthammer's Dec. 19 column, I wondered if he realizes that in the last four years the cost of natural gas has dropped precipitously due to an oversupply. It is wrong to suggest that President Obama has gutted the coal industry. The capitalist market has gutted the coal industry because it is less expensive to use natural gas. It is often Krauthammer's goal to deride Obama and when doing so, he never lets facts get in the way. 
JANE MARK
NEWMAN LAKE
PREDATORS WOULD CONTROL DEER
 In my opinion, it seems a bit hasty to be thinking about contraceptive choices for controlling the overabundance of deer in the Dalton Gardens area of Idaho.
 After all, it's us, trying to be good stewards to our furry friends through the winter months, who entice them into sticking around.
 If we would stop killing wolves, cougars, coyotes or other predators because of the inconvenience to us, the deer populations would even out. It's called Mother Nature taking care of her own.
 God created a perfect world where every living being has its place in the cycle of life, and it's only when man enters the picture to fix circumstances that aren't broken that problems go awry.
 Something to keep in our minds and hearts this Christmas season.
JEANIE SMITH
NINE MILE FALLS
TYPE: Letters

Load-Date: April 21, 2021


End of Document