Letter: Overturning Obamacare; Trump and his cronies prefer perverse logic to reality, denying factual data - and professional advice.
Alaska Dispatch News
June 2, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 Alaska Dispatch Publishing, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Letters to the Editor
Length: 245 words
Body


A recent Bloomberg article states that President Donald Trump's Attorney General William Barr has decided to invalidate Obamacare during the most disastrous pandemic in a century. Like Vladimir Putin, Recip Erdogan, Mohammad Bin Salman, Jair Bolsonaro and other dictator-led regimes, Trump and his cronies prefer perverse logic to reality, denying factual data - and professional advice. Further, AG Barr says the "stakeholders in the administration" have been discussing it. Administrative stakeholders? Aren't all Americans stakeholders? Barr and Trump say we shouldn't worry about pre-existing coverage; they support it. Great! Along with the promise to replace the Affordable Care Act with a better health care system. Really? Whew! That should give great comfort to all Americans.After all, the most corrupt and dishonest presidential administration in American history, run by a sociopathic dictator and his incompetents, are telling us they're taking care of things. With the COVID-19 epidemic death toll in America at 100,000 and counting, I guess myself and all American's now have no choice but to bet our lives on it. What a country!
- Wayne JonesPalmerHave something on your mind? Send toletters@adn.comor clickhereto submit via any web browser. Letters under 200 words have the best chance of being published. Writers should disclose any personal or professional connections with the subjects of their letters. Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length.

Graphic

 
See image link
FILE- In this March 23, 2020 file photo, President Donald Trump talks during a briefing about the coronavirus in the James Brady Briefing Room, Monday, March 23, 2020, in Washington, as Attorney General William Barr looks on. Legislation to extend surveillance authorities that the FBI sees as vital in fighting terrorism was thrown in doubt Wednesday as President Donald Trump, the Justice Department and congressional Republicans all came out in opposition. (AP Photo/Alex Brandon)

Load-Date: June 2, 2020


End of Document