Letter: On Hijacking;
To Stop Terrorism, Look to Its Cause
The New York Times
October 17, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 504 words
Body


To the Editor:
The editorial ''Jubilant Justice'' (Oct. 12) justifies the American skyjacking of the Egyptian plane and the apprehension of the four Palestinian accused murderers on the ground that extraordinary circumstances justify extraordinary measures.
We beg to disagree. The circumstances do not justify America's engaging in skyjacking, becoming therefore as guilty as the Palestinian seajackers. There are several major objections to the American action. The intercept is an act of air piracy that violates international law. Secondly, the action violates American commitment to the rule of law and respect for the due process of law. Accordingly, this renders the arrest of the accused killers illegal, and if the arrest is illegal, the trial will be illegal. Briefly, the skyjacking has made it impossible to hold a legal trial for the four Palestinian accused terrorists.
Then, the American sky piracy has established a most dangerous precedent. Tomorrow, country A may hijack a Pan Am flight on the ground that accused terrorists and alleged killers are on that flight, following the American precedent. And country B will hijack a Swissair flight on the same ground. The U.S. sky piracy can lead to international aviation anarchy.
Indeed, American condemnation of the Palestinian hijackings and terrorism lacks moral foundation. When Israeli terrorists kill and wound hundreds of Palestinians, Tunisians and other Arabs, the American President justifies that aggression as self-defense, a ''self'' that stretches over 1,500 miles! U.S. condemnation of the Palestinians will be morally sound only if America condemns Israeli terrorism as well as Arab terrorism. The double-standard U.S. policy renders American moral indignation against the Palestinians a case of prejudice.
Finally, if the purpose of the American hijacking of the Egyptian plane and the Palestinian seajackers of the Italian boat was to stop terrorism, that goal will not be fulfilled. Indeed terrorism will increase rather than decrease. The assertion that America should act to stop terrorism is based on simplistic thinking. Terrorism will not be stopped by damning it or even killing a few terrorists. We must examine the ''cause'' of terrorism and ''why'' it takes place.
Accordingly, even if the four Palestinian hijackers of the Achille Lauro are punished, that will be dealing with the ''symptom'' of the problem, not its cause. The cause of the Palestinian hijackings is to be found in the fact that the whole country of Palestine has been hijacked by the Zionists. The Zionist Jews of Europe, America and elsewhere are in, two million Palestinians are out. Palestinian hijackings will stop only when the Palestinians' human right to return to their land is recognized.
The murder of Leon Klinghoffer should make Americans examine the cause of their problems in the Middle East. If they do that, then something good will come out of the recent horrible experiences. M.T. MEHDI President American-Arab Relations Committee New York, Oct. 12, 1985


End of Document