LETTERS: COUNTER TERRORISM WITH NONVIOLENCE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 25, 2002 Monday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2002 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPED; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. 7A; LETTERS <
Length: 958 words
Body


The headline for Tom Teepen's March 6 column, 'Questioning war on terrorism is healthy,' is encouraging in these times of war propaganda by the present U.S. administration and its threats to our American civil liberties and values. Teepen's article includes the statement that '. . . the means, purpose and reach of U.S. policy and its execution can best be shaped by the nation's traditional and open political debate.' I feel like standing up and cheering.
We need to strengthen our liberties at home, not diminish them. That is the best way to eliminate terrorism and protect children, grandchildren and us. We need to non-violently enable the people of other countries in their drive and desire for political and economic self-determination.
I believe we must help create conditions that support healthy life. Thus terrorist organizations will be unable to attract recruits.
Some of the people who lost a family member or loved one in the horrible attack on the World Trade Towers have just completed a pilgrimage from Washington, D.C., to New York City to urge that our response must be motivated by a love for humanity.  They carried a sign that declared, 'Our grief is not a cry for war.'
We are all grieving.  With those families, I urge that we stop doing what terrorists expect (a response of massive terror and killing by our military instead of bringing the perpetrators to justice) and, through dialogue, open discourse and international cooperation, energetically address the root causes of the discontent and hate.
Ellen N. Duell Dayton
Attack Iraq with humanitarian aid
President George W. Bush has been very successful in his campaign against al-Qaida and the Taliban.
I fear he may be tempted to extend this success in unwise directions. Specifically, we should avoid an attack on Iraq.
Iraq was not involved in 9/11. War against Iraq will lose whatever friends we have left in the Arab world, and create more recruits for terrorism.
However, we cannot ignore Iraq. Let us try a new approach. The sanctions have caused great harm to the people, and increased the hold Saddam Hussein has over the country. I propose that we lift the sanctions now - then undertake a massive humanitarian campaign to feed the hungry and rebuild the infrastructure.
If Saddam Hussein will not let us do this, the onus is on him. If we do it, we will have generated much-needed good will in the Arab world.
Carl D. Hyde Yellow Springs
 
There's nothing evil about fighting evil
In Mary McCarty's March 17 column, 'Doomsday may be closer,' she wrote: 'Orwellian double-talk that would be ripe for satire. . . .'
What a lovely phrase. The problem is that used in the context of the argument she put forward, it makes one wonder whether she has read any Orwell, or whether her reading of it was tutored by the moral relativist-type that dominates on today's college campus.
McCarty's ignorance of history rendered her unable to distinguish between the terror inherent in the 100 million lives lost to the wars of aggression and to political oppression in the 20th century and the development of a plan for the more precise and thereby more humane use of a weapon that the United States has in its arsenal.
The threats to humanity in the 21st century differ from the past only in their tactics. A thread that runs through all of human history is that evil exists, it resides in every one of us and it seeks power over others. McCarty seems to think that the development of tactics to defeat evil is evil.
A problem with a lovely phrase is that it can imbue the writer with a sense of authority and power. Fortunately, the most powerful weapons in the arsenal of democracy are its free people, and there are still enough of us around who know the nature of the threat to innocent children that there is hope.
Keith P. Davis Kettering
Don't overlook girls' role in school bullying
Re 'Sticks and stones not enough to battle schoolyard bullying,' March 17: It seems every time someone writes about bullies, they are always boys.
How about the girls? It starts in the third grade with girls. They can be so very cruel . . . untrue gossip, weight, clothes, jealousy, money and athletic activities.
Some young girls at a very early age would rather quit school than go every day and be made fun of. The teachers turn their head most of the time. The parents who are on playground duty spend most of their time talking socially, and never see or hear anything until someone is physically hurt. Counselors don't know what to do with this age girl.
This is probably a difficult situation to study, as most people feel this only happens in the inner city. The surrounding areas are doing the same.
Sajona Weaver Bellbrook
 
Service dictates amount of tipping
I wanted to comment on the March 16 letter 'Tips for tippers': I agree totally about being generous with tipping, but I believe the real problem lies with the fact that service is a thing of the past in most places. Tips are expected by most servers, and the service ranges from poor to nonexistent. I don't believe that a patron should be expected to supplement someone's wages.
Many of us who work in service industries where tipping isn't considered also know what it is like to work for low wages, and through hard work and long hours have been able to make ends meet.
Richard A. Williams Washington Twp.
WE WELCOME YOUR LETTERS
All letters, including those sent by e-mail, must include the writer's full name, home address and daytime phone number for verification. Letters of fewer than 200 words are preferred; all are subject to editing.
Because of volume, unpublished letters to the editor cannot be acknowledged. LETTERS ADDRESS Dayton Daily News, P.O. Box 1287, Dayton, Ohio 45401-1287. Fax 225-7302. E-mail: edletter@coxohio.com  

Load-Date: March 27, 2002


End of Document