Letter: The university should review policies after terrorism
Independent Collegian: University of Toledo
January 14, 2015 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 283 words
Byline: Douglas Oliver
Body


Filed under Letters, Opinion
Many in USA and Europe are mourning the deaths of the French cartoonists who were assassinated by radical Isalmists. The cartoonist's offenses were creating cartoons that offended the assassin's Islamic sensibilities.
Both American and French citizens and institutions reacted by affirming the necessity of freedom of expression. In the United States, the right of freedom of expression has been protected via the 1st Amendment to the Constitution which bars governmental agencies, such as UT, from prohibiting speech that others may find offensive.
Yet, if those French cartoonists had been UT students or employees, they would have been in danger of expulsion or being fired. UT policies authorize university officials to punish UT's students, faculty and employees who make "offensive statements, insults, epithets, or jokes" regarding religion. (UT Policy 3364-50-01 - Sexual Harassment and Other Form of Harassment policy). Thus, UT students and faculty are prohibited from displaying, perhaps even discussing, the very cartoons at issue. Further, UT's policy applies to all UT faculty, staff, and students off campus, which spreads the speech-chilling effect.
This policy has created an environment where students are being deprived of a robust education as some UT faculty have refused to cover important, yet controversial, topics out of fear of accusations of violating UT's overly broad and vague harassment policies. UT's policy is so restrictive that it has earned a "red light" from the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (thefire.org). It is time to abolish UT's repressive and unconstitutional harassment policy.
- Douglas Oliver, Associate Professor

Load-Date: February 5, 2015


End of Document