Letter: On International Law;
The Right to Snatch Terrorists
The New York Times
February 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 416 words
Body


To the Editor:
''Snatching Terrorists Abroad'' (editorial, Jan. 25) correctly concludes that the U.S. should dispatch its agents abroad to capture terrorists for trial in the United States. Yet ignored completely is one of the strongest arguments supporting this bold but necessary action: international law.
Among the pillars of international law is the doctrine of ''state responsibility.'' In a (theoretical) system of the sovereign equality of states, international law can function only when states fulfill their international obligations.
When a state, such as Libya, harbors a known international terrorist, like Abu Nidal, it violates the minimum standards of state responsibility. When another state, like the U.S., is directly injured by this violation, it may take limited action.
There are three parts to a state's obligation under minimum standards of state responsibility as it applies to terrorism: to refrain from encouraging or financing such activities; to prevent or suppress preparations within its territory; to avoid becoming an accessory after the fact by trying or extraditing the alleged offender.
International law permits the United States, once injured, to seize terrorists if the haven state refuses to honor its international duty. Thus, the U.S. may perform for the haven state the obligations the haven state owes to the international community.
There is a long history of state practice and international arbitral decisions supporting such self-help. Perhaps the most memorable example is Israel's 1976 rescue at Entebbe of the (mostly Jewish) hostages of a hijacked Air France jet. Once it became clear that Uganda was aiding the P.L.O. hijackers, Israel performed for Uganda the duty Uganda owed to the international community.
Such unilateral action is clearly no substitute for international cooperation to stem terrorism. As a limited policy, however, the U.S. should exercise its legal right to engage in self-help.
The United States should welcome the protest of a humiliated haven state from whose midst a cold-blooded murderer is snatched. Under such circumstances, the U.S. has a solid international legal position it could ably defend. A debate concerning the relevant international law would highlight the con-tinuing violations by a handful of states supporting international terrorism. BRADLEY R. LARSCHAN Washington, Jan. 26, 1986 The writer, a lawyer specializing in international trade, is a doctoral candidate at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.


End of Document