Letters, Faxes & E-mail: Ex-nominee has dismal record on terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 2, 1999, Monday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Editorial; Pg. 8A
Length: 409 words
Byline: SHERRY FRANK, For the Journal-Constitution
Body

The American Jewish Committee's opposition to Salam Al-Marayati's appointment to the National Commission on Terrorism was based solely on our intimate knowledge of his work and his organization, the Muslim Public Affairs Council, and not on his religious or ethnic identity ("Arab-American unfairly excluded," Editorial, July 22). It is his public record that disqualified Al-Marayati from this sensitive and important position. Indeed, the American Jewish Committee would have opposed any candidate who held similar views.Constitution
Let's be clear. Al-Marayati's definition of terrorism is in sharp conflict with the U.S. government's definition. Traditionally, Americans and U.S. interests, not just Israelis, have been and remain high-profile targets of Middle East-based terror organizations, and victims of terrorism have even included Muslims.
Earlier this decade, the American Jewish Committee maintained a working relationship with MPAC and the Islamic Center of Southern California. During that time we agreed there were certain issues, especially the Israeli- Palestinian conflict, on which we would disagree. But we were able to find opportunities for cooperation. In those years, we viewed MPAC and the Islamic Center as moderate groups within the Arab-American and Muslim communities. They appeared open to a Middle East solution that did not require the destruction of Israel, a goal advocated by more radical Islamic groups. Our relationship, however, changed after the signing of the 1993 Oslo Accords.
To our dismay, the outpouring of support for this breakthrough as expressed by many Americans of all faiths was not matched by MPAC. The tone of Minaret, an Islamic Center publication, became more anti-Israel, and even more disturbing, its editorial content and cartoons reflected the traditional ugly stereotypes and caricatures of Jews as evil, blood-thirsty and controlling. Al-Marayati serves on Minaret's editorial board, but he never disassociated himself from the publication's positions. In time, it became clear that he agreed with them.
While Al-Marayati has carefully sought to cultivate a moderate image, a careful analysis of his statements and those of MPAC reveal that he not only holds sympathies for groups like Hamas and Hezbollah, which the United States has identified as terrorist organizations, but that he defends their violent actions.
SHERRY FRANK
Frank is the Southeast area Director of the American Jewish Committee.

Load-Date: August 2, 1999


End of Document