Letters to the editor (3/23/11)
Anchorage Daily News  (Alaska)
March 23, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Anchorage Daily News  (Alaska) All Rights Reserved
Length: 550 words
Body


Palin strangely silent on ACES
While former Gov. Palin has not been shy about commenting on issues like the Tucson shooting, the health care law, the Middle East situation and President Obama, why doesn't she have anything to say on the effort to rewrite ACES? Does she agree that ACES was a mistake, or will she defend it? Instead, former Gov. Palin has gone silent. Not a peep, not a tweet.
-- Christopher Cook
Anchorage
East needs an Assembly change
East Anchorage needs someone who will represent all the people. The last time Mike Gutierrez was running for his current seat, I called him to determine his position on problems facing the city. During this conversation I asked why he didn't contact the voters. His reply was he didn't call me because I was a registered Republican.
He was also one of the Assembly members who wanted Dan Sullivan to raise taxes to the tax cap so our property taxes would go up. It's time for a change. Elect Adam Trombley for the Assembly.
-- Kathryn Burger
Anchorage
TSA is pushing superstition
Believing that something prevents something or causes it without substantiating proof is a definition of "superstition." Example: A rabbit's foot around your neck will bring you good luck, or prevent bad luck. By this definition, belief that TSA and Homeland Security measures protect Americans from terrorism is superstition.
Successful prosecution of alleged terrorists for terrorism (not immigration violations) was about the same before Sept. 11 as it has been since. All the lurid advertisements the U.S. government does for al-Qaida via our sensationalist media (particularly trumpeting speculation of al-Qaida links to every "two-headed cow" incident) doesn't show successful anti-terrorism but just the opposite. TSA has not caught one terrorist despite all the billions spent on its slave master-like control of American bodies and possessions.
Moreover, more people died last year alone from acts of God than from the last 40 years of terrorist attacks worldwide combined. Per U.S. anti-terrorist law, such religiously alleged "punishment for immorality" makes God a terrorist. Is He?
Superstition. It's ruling national affairs too much.
-- Stuart Thompson
Wasilla
Forget sharia; deal with issues
Reps. Carl Gatto and Bob Lynn. Your proposed legislation "guarding against state courts from honoring foreign law that violates Alaska or U.S. constitutional rights" is certifiably the worst idea to ever come out of Juneau. There has been no recorded instance in the United States where sharia has taken precedence over constitutional law. Enough with this intolerant, fear-mongering, reactionary, prejudiced rhetoric. Alaska is No. 1 in the nation regarding rape, domestic violence and child abuse. Our DUI laws are some of the most lax in the nation. Our gun laws are the third least restrictive in the nation. We have far too many people hurt by drunks with fists, cars and guns. Instead of feeding the flames of intolerance and hatred that are rampantly consuming this nation, wouldn't fixing the real problems affecting Alaskans be a better use of your time?
As a voter in District 31, I certainly think there are more pressing issues facing Alaskans than the baseless, unfounded, superfluous fears regarding (Islamic) foreign law and our court system.
-- Cyndy Brandon
Anchorage

Load-Date: March 23, 2011


End of Document