LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Insurers not at fault for terrorism cover woes
Business Insurance
March 31, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 8
Length: 1014 words
Body


To the editor: With all due respect, the American Insurance Assn. takes issue with New York Insurance Superintendent Greg Serio's characterization of why problems remain in the terrorism insurance marketplace. The Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack fundamentally altered the way commercial insurers and risk managers look at risk-specifically, risk associated with man-made catastrophes.
As a core component of his efforts to secure the U.S. economy after 9/11, President Bush signed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) of 2002 into law last November. TRIA was designed to draw underwriters back into the marketplace by creating a public-private risk sharing arrangement, and it has done so. Terrorism insurance is available to commercial policyholders in every state.
However, while the legislation is workable and working, there are problems. For example, TRIA does nothing to address the issue of pricing; actuaries still have just the one, horrifically unique data point to work with. Insurers are left trying to price a product that, in the current environment, remains an unwritable risk.
The level of individual insurance company retentions (deductibles) is too high, and they increase with each year of the program. Insurers consistently, energetically argued against such high retention levels, because they leave active underwriters extremely vulnerable to staggering losses. These high retention levels and still-sparse reinsurance, particularly for nuclear-biological-chemical events, mean underwriters are still faced with unmanageable exposures, especially on trophy properties in high-risk areas. Unfortunately, New York is widely perceived as being among the places with greatest potential exposure, due to the combination of politically attractive terrorist targets and hundreds of billions of dollars of high-value properties.
State regulators, including Mr. Serio, rightly focus their oversight and enforcement efforts on making certain that insurers remain financially strong, so that the companies can fulfill their commitments to pay claims when disaster strikes and continue to provide a stable market for the rest of their customers. Insurers took our promises to the victims of 9/11 very seriously. We take our promises to potential victims of future terrorist acts just as seriously. We are anxious to make TRIA work so we can be there for victims if another attack occurs.
Leigh Ann Pusey
Senior Vp, Federal Affairs
American Insurance Assn.
Washington
TRIA must be taken to the next level
To the editor: I must say that I was as mystified by your Feb. 24, 2003, editorial, ''TRIA Already a Success,'' as I was by the self-congratulatory form letter dated Jan. 3, 2003, which I received from RIMS, signed by its president, Christopher Mandel, implying that the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act is the solution to the terrorism issue.
Both overlook the reality that TRIA, as currently enacted, is neither a real nor a long-term solution.
In this relatively small space, I cannot go into all of the shortcomings of TRIA, which are numerous and material.
I would rather focus on the fact that TRIA must be taken to the next level in order to make a difference should future terrorist acts occur.
An important part of this remodeling of TRIA must include the realization by the federal government that the commercial insurance marketplace is incapable of equitably applying or even properly administering insurance coverage related to the act's operation.
I say this given my 24 plus years in the insurance industry. During this tenure, at least three things have been consistent: the industry, especially in hard market cycles, has been rife with opportunism, which has gone largely unchecked by state regulators; the industry has been incapable of properly interpreting, applying or managing matters much simpler than TRIA; and the industry has done little to police itself- insurers, reinsurers and brokers alike.
I suggest that when TRIA is remodeled, an insurance mechanism be put into place such as that used for nuclear liability insurance and financial protection when the Price Anderson Act became law at the start of the United States' use of nuclear energy to produce electricity.
Out of that 1957 act, a comprehensive, noncompetitive liability insurance pool was created which has effectively dealt with the nuclear liability insurance issue for more than four decades, including the catastrophe known as Three Mile Island.
This solution is absent of any insurance marketplace manipulation or administrative inability. This type of solution cannot exist, though, unless TRIA is remodeled into a comprehensive, workable and long-term platform.
I strongly encourage insurance buyers, risk managers and organizations that represent their interests to stop basking in self-congratulations or being complacent and instead focus on moving Washington toward such a solution.
I fear that this undertaking will now be especially difficult, though, given Congress' incorrect belief that TRIA is the solution. It is, however, extremely important that Congress be convinced otherwise.
Stephen N. Raimondi, ARM
Torrington, Conn.
Election year may explain comments from Serio
To the editor: I wanted to briefly comment on the New York Superintendent of Insurance Gregory V. Serio and his recent statement (BI, March 24). The nit-picking he refers to is the difference between being able to pay the next catastrophic loss or having an industrywide failure to perform. The law does have some Swiss cheese-sized holes and vagaries in it, and these must be cleaned up before the next event occurs. Why the regulator fails to understand this is probably answered in his department's context.
His department has ruthlessly repressed the rate level charged by the largest domestic insurer offering medical malpractice coverage in the state. A.M. Best Co. has lowered its rating as a direct result of this unlawful and immoral rate suppression. His department has been quoted as saying not to even consider a rate increase in an election year. Perhaps this explains his remarks.
Bill Ford
Birmingham, Ala.

Load-Date: April 2, 2003


End of Document