Letter: Deceptive ads; It takes far more than boating skills and shooting bears to protect Alaska's interests as a U.S. Senator.
Alaska Dispatch News
October 22, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Alaska Dispatch Publishing, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Letters to the Editor
Length: 307 words
Body


Al Gross is running some deceptive and grossly misleading advertisements attacking Sen. Dan Sullivan on his stance on the Pebble Project. I would like to clear the air.I was Sen. 
Sullivan's deputy commissioner during his time as the commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources. I recently finished a 30-year career at the Department, where I served under 17 different commissioners. Dan was one of the best. He was not beholden to any special interests, and he based all of his decisions on what was best for the people of Alaska. We are fortunate to have him as our U.S. senator, and we must elect him again. It takes far more than boating skills and shooting bears to protect Alaska's interests as a U.S. Senator.In one of his ads, Mr. Gross implies that Dan "permitted" the Pebble Mine. Well, I have news for you. There is no Pebble Mine. If you don't believe me, go out and take a look for yourself. It is not there. Pebble did not submit any mine permit applications while Dan was at the Department and, in fact, has not submitted any mine permit applications to the Department to this day.Sen. Sullivan is a man of the utmost integrity, and he has strong base of experience that is hard to match. Not only was he a DNR commissioner, but he was our attorney general, a U.S. Assistant Secretary of State, and has had an impressive military career, including the serving as the commanding officer of the Delta Company Anti-Terrorism Unit. If I were a bear, Dan would be the last person I would mess with.Ed FogelsAnchorageHave something on your mind? Send toletters@adn.comor clickhereto submit via any web browser. Letters under 200 words have the best chance of being published. Writers should disclose any personal or professional connections with the subjects of their letters. Letters are edited for accuracy, clarity and length.

Graphic

 
See image link
FILE - In this May 7, 2020 file photo, Sen. Dan Sullivan, R-Alaska, testifies during a hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington. Sen. Al Gross, an independent running with Democratic support, is challenging Sullivan in Alaska, a state that has long been a GOP stronghold. Across the country, Republicans are nervous about Senate seats like Sullivan's they once thought safe as Democrats hope to capitalize on President Donald Trump's unpopularity to retake the chamber. (Al Drago/Pool via AP, File)

Load-Date: October 23, 2020


End of Document