LETTERS FROM THE GULF
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 13, 1991, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 1259 words
Body


The strong U.N. efforts to establish economic sanctions offered hope for devising a means to resolve international conflicts short of war, so the decision to adopt the rigid Jan. 15 deadline was distressing.  But that is history, and we must move on. As a relative by marriage of a navigator in the gulf, I strongly support the men and women who are bearing the brunt of combat. Because of that support, I believe we must do everything possible to end the war.  We must not let the war get out of control and degenerate into indiscriminate attacks on civilians. We should reduce the rhetoric that calls for unconditional surrender and speculates about the length of the war or the use of nuclear weapons. That only makes peace negotiations more difficult.  I have strongly supported U.S. policy regarding Israel, but I believe that the time has come to press publicly for a resolution of the Palestinian issue along with Arab acceptance of Israel. I also believe we must confront the energy question and renew our search for a sensible energy policy that reduces our dependence on oil.  Do not rush into an all-out ground war. Above all, open as many doors to a peaceful settlement as possible.  Peter W. Salsich Jr.  Glendale The American people need to be reminded that muzzling the press during wartime does not usually keep the truth from our ''enemies'' (who are well aware of the losses they are taking); it keeps the truth from us.
Truth might erode support for the war; therefore governments seek to control it.  In a democracy, freedoms of the press, of speech, of the right to assemble and to petition for redress are means to put a brake on the government's tendency to accumulate power and commit aggression. Without free information, democracy cannot function and, in wartime, democracy is always in peril.  For years, the American people have professed astonishment at how we are hated by so many around the world, when we give out so much foreign aid. We have turned a blind eye to the fact that foreign aid was often used to bankroll brutal dictatorships, Saddam Hussein being only one among many.  We'd prefer not to know the truth, because the truth can hurt. But lies and willful ignorance will not just hurt us, they may destroy us. Tragedy unfolds around us; we are as blind as Oedipus.  Joy Martin Festus A Feb. 4 News Analysis article by Margaret Freivogel compared family life and world affairs. I respect the analogy, but we must understand that, as parents, we represent the final authority and the children have to submit or suffer the consequences.  Though Freivogel clearly establishes the difference between ''seizing a cookie and seizing Kuwait,'' we must establish a family affair of the same severity as the seizing of Kuwait.  Imagine an older teen-age boy stealing his younger sister's possessions, then raping and beating her. Would Freivogel, who for sure has done everything possible to correct the situation by now, stand by while her daughter is abused?  Though it would grieve my heart beyond hope, my son would be responsible for his actions and pay the consequences.  Saddam and his supporters are reaping what they have sown.  Ed Hansen Florissant I am writing to protest the policies of the Federal Bureau of Investigation on ''voluntary'' interviews of Americans of Arab and Iraqi descent. The bureau's stated objective - to nip terrorism in the bud - seems unassailable.  I question, therefore, not the ends sought but the means used. I believe the bureau's policy to be a counterproductive overreaction to a speculative problem.  The threat of terrorism in the United States is minimal. The U.S. domestic climate simply does not favor terrorism.  Since Saddam's invasion of Kuwait, I know of no terrorist actions in the United States resulting from its policies in the gulf. In this same time, I am aware of several hate crimes committed against Arab-Americans. Such crimes are intolerable. If they are permitted to continue unchecked, if they receive tacit police acceptance, they will poison the domestic political atmosphere with hate. This hate will lead to further racist attacks. This is the real terrorism we must be concerned with - not by Arab-Americans but against Arab-Americans.  Unfortunately both the FBI and the United States have a history of reacting to the threat of domestic terrorism with suppression of racial minorities.  Even assuming that the FBI is acting completely in good faith, the policy of ''voluntary'' interviews is misguided. If the FBI came into your home asking about terrorism, would you feel free to tell them to leave? And if you did, would you not feel that you would then become a target of greater suspicion? Not only is the FBI's action extremely invasive of individual privacy and directed against a speculative threat, but its actions are directed to the wrong audience. Half our allies are Arabs. Further, Iraqi immigrants to this country, like most of our immigrants, come here as political dissidents and economic refugees. These are the people most likely to be loyal.  It is all too easy to sacrifice civil liberty to the god of ''national security,'' a term of vague meaning and uncertain definition. I support the war. I oppose the policies of the FBI.  Eric Engle St. Louis The media have been giving a stellar performance at the military briefings.  The spectacle of the military gently allowing the media to make complete ignoramuses of themselves is a revealing event whose time has come.  The public may be finally convinced that all the whining the media have been doing is just related to their need to have their egos and their careers enhanced by attempting to catch the military in a semantic contradiction or a statistical discrepancy.  Wouldn't it be wonderful if the media could approach the degree of perfection that they demand of the military? Journalists who attempt to explain weapons, arsenals and possible warfare scenarios are more often than not attempting to explain something with which they are not familiar. As a result, they seldom get facts right. They are all too anxious to parrot ''experts'' with negative views or with axes to grind. Most of the experts fit the description: Ex, ''a has been''; spurt, ''a drip under pressure.'' Robert C. Wynne Ballwin Thank you for publishing Arthur Bertelson's Jan. 5 column, ''Thoughts On Media And War In The Gulf.'' It was one of the best he has written. He had something import ant to say, and he said it succinctly. I agreed with him on all counts. I hope that he will continue with comments on the news.  His column is a vocabulary education for me, too. At least once each column I have to look up the meaning of a word.  Kurt Landberg St. Louis It seemed to me that Arthur Bertelson spoke for the silent majority in his Feb. 5 column. At last, a little sanity appeared in a sea of media flotsam and jetsam. It is indeed difficult to see what is accomplished by the exploitation of children in the present grave situation.  I cannot imagine what parents and teachers are thinking of when they allow TV reporters to use their youngsters to fill up empty time on the tube.  Children should be nurtured carefully, not thoughtlessly used in any way.  Dorothy B. Kane Ladue I want to thank the Post-Dispatch and Bill McClellan for his columns on the war. I have hated this war from the minute it started, and reading McClellan's column has helped me understand exactly what is going on.  I feel like his stories should be printed in every paper in this country.  Patricia Wafzig Salem, Ill.

Graphic

 
Graphic; LOGO … GULF WAR

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document