Letters to Editor
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 12, 2000, Saturday


Copyright 2000, Telegraph-Herald
Section: Opinion; Pg. a 4
Length: 406 words
Byline: Jim Earles
Body


Recycled items cause cancer scare
Got Cancer? Since this pithy ad scheme borrowed from the dairy industry has been making the rounds in various incarnations, I would like to suggest my version to the U.S. Department of Energy.
The DOE, along with the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the nuclear power and weapons industries in general, have come up with the brilliant idea of recycling radioactive scrap metals into consumer goods. Not surprisingly, these goods have no warning labels or consumer safety information of any kind.
According to research done by Public Citizen (www.citizen.org), thousands of tons of radioactive metals already have been recycled, and hundreds of thousands of tons more are waiting to be incorporated into anything from eyeglasses to baby strollers to frying pans.
Should you not be "fortunate" enough to acquire one of these recycled items, never fear - the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission plans to bring radioactive waste right through your town. (Once again, see the Public Citizen Web site for details.)
Yucca Mountain in Nevada is the only site under consideration by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission as a permanent repository of high-level radioactive material. However, bringing all of it to Yucca Mountain will require transporting it through 43 states over a 25-year period. The planned transport routes will roll through 100 cities with populations of more than 100,000 people, potentially exposing 50 million Americans to toxic radiation. To top it off, rather than conducting safety tests on the actual casks that will be used to hold the material, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission prefers to rely on computer-simulated data generated more than a decade ago.
In light of such colossal acts of recklessness with nuclear technology - unfortunately not limited to these two examples - I find it extremely interesting to listen to political rhetoric about terrorism or the need for a strong military. We all are conditioned to tremble at the very thought of terrorism in this supposedly hostile world we live in, with the idea of nuclear terrorism being the worst nightmare of all.
Isn't it ironic that the greatest nuclear threat we will probably ever face is that presented to us by our own stewards of nuclear power? Thank God that they are protecting us from dangerous alternatives like solar and wind power. Got Cancer?
Jim Earles
815 Rose St.

Load-Date: February 15, 2000


End of Document