LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; DOCTOR'S MURDER WAS DOMESTIC TERRORISM
The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
June 3, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 The New Mexican
Section: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A-5
Length: 596 words
Body


It is interesting that coverage of terrorism is dependent upon the particular cause being promulgated. Anti-abortion terrorists, such as the alleged murderer of Dr. George Tiller, receive a lot of coverage regarding their motivation.
Other terrorist organizations, such as al-Qaida, are known simply as "terrorists." Coverage is limited simply to the violence inflicted, and we are kept totally ignorant, or are even misinformed, about what they are fighting for.
Stephen E. Silver
Santa Fe
Often people pretend there is an abortion war in this country. War implies there are two sides fighting. When has a pro-choice advocate firebombed, vandalized, stolen, maimed or shot in cold blood a right-to-life person?
Dr. George Tiller was a kind, compassionate man dedicated to helping women. Let's call this what it is -- an act of domestic terrorism; a vicious killing of a courageous civil rights leader. The civil rights in question are women's rights. This horrific terrorism must be exposed for what it is, and stopped.
Shelley Oram
Glorieta
On Sunday morning, my old friend and colleague, Dr. George Tiller, was killed in his church in Wichita, Kan. He was one of the few doctors in the country to provide late-term abortions. His patients were women whose stories would break your heart. He provided kindness, caring and medical excellence even under the most extreme harassment, having already been shot once and firebombed and vilified for years.
This is truly the murder of a civil rights leader. Allegedly, Dr. Tiller is the eighth person murdered by a movement that insists on the ironic title: Right to Life.
There has been much recent discussion in the media of middle ground. How's this for middle ground: No one is forced to do anything that's not according to his or her conscience, and no shooting, firebombing, kidnapping, stalking.
Hey, that's already the pro-choice movement!
Charlotte Taft
Glorieta
'Park' at your peril
Prairie dogs are not the only dangerous pests that threaten children in Franklin Miles Park. Trees and flowers growing in parks provide havens for birds, which can carry viruses, and bees, which can cause serious allergic reactions. Open areas also expose children to dangerous radiation from the sun.
Now that the Railyard City Supercenter has rid downtown of dangerous prairie dogs, it's time to pave over the remaining parks and open spaces in Santa Fe. With the help of his colleagues in the New Mexico Department of Transportation, City Councilor Ron Trujillo should be able to come up with a plan to extend Camino Carlos Rey to provide a connection from Cerrillos Road to the new St. Michael's Freeway.
Marc Bedner
Santa Fe
I recently visited the new Railyard Park with my 3-year-old son. He fell from atop the circular concrete climbing steps adjacent to the children's play area and suffered a concussion. A fall from about 10 feet, straight down steep concrete steps, could cause a much more serious head injury.
I would like to propose that the City of Santa Fe display a sign warning parents that this play area is not intended for children below a certain age. This may not keep small children from playing on the steps, but it may make parents think twice. Even if it saves one child from a potential life-threatening head injury, it will have served its purpose.
Melissa Moore
Santa Fe
Correction
William Geoghegan , whose letter, "Honor all soldiers" appeared on May 27, is a Vietnam-era veteran who comes from a family with proud military service to the United States. A letter on yesterday's Opinions page, "Crossing the bar," suggested otherwise.

Graphic

 
See pdf's for exact rendition, caption, graphics and photographer info.

Load-Date: June 4, 2009


End of Document