Letters: Letter: Task force targets straw gun sales
The Philadelphia Daily News
October 23, 2012 Tuesday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2012 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL OPINION; P-com Opinion; Pg. 10
Length: 881 words
Body


I READ WITH INTEREST the article by Shira Goodman of CeaseFirePA (Daily News op-ed, Oct. 22). I would like to respond to her comments on taking straw purchasing seriously in Pennsylvania. 
 In 2006, the Office of the Attorney General, the District Attorney's Office and the Philadelphia Police Department came together to form the Gun Violence Task Force, composed of ex-Philadelphia detectives and officers who are now employees of the Attorney General's Office. The mandate of the GVTF is to search out and arrest straw purchasers in Philadelphia, and the task force has expanded almost by necessity to the surrounding counties. 
 Although it doesn't seem to get the publicity it once did, the GVTF through the efforts of its agents has arrested 781 persons in Philadelphia for straw purchasing and related gun charges over the past six years. It has also recovered almost 1,700 handguns, assault weapons, rifles and shotguns from the streets of Philadelphia over that same period. The assistant D.A.s assigned to the task force have prosecuted these cases with a 90 percent success rate. The cooperation of the Philadelphia Police Department, especially the Detective Bureau, has been unprecedented. This has been a union of the three departments that actually works. 
 I agree that lots more can be done around the state, but folks writing about gun trafficking in Philadelphia should be aware that there is a unit working diligently to address the straw-purchase problem in Philadelphia. 
 William Danks
 Senior supervising agent
 Gun Violence Task Force 
 Who's dangerous?
 Stu Bykofsky's childishly simplistic article (Daily News, Oct. 15) contains flaws and dangerous innuendos. Mr. Bykofsky quotes an Islamophobic poll alleging that 5 to 7 percent of U.S. Muslims are "potentially dangerous."
 Really? How many non-Muslim Americans are potentially dangerous? How many non-Muslim Americans are actually dangerous? 
 How many non-Muslims have shot up schools, movie theaters, college campuses, work sites, bars, parties and nursing homes? How many non-Muslims have blown up federal buildings in America? I challenge Mr. Bykofsky to look at the most heinous crimes committed in America and see if they are committed by "dangerous" Muslims.
 Mr. Bykofsky states that terrorism committed by Muslims is more common than terrorism committed against Muslims. This is a topic for another time because the word "terrorism" is a loaded code word designed to fan the flames of hatred against a particular people. But if you look here in America, you will find that violent attacks against Muslims are on the rise and far outnumber any attacks by Muslims. Many of these anti-Muslim attacks are fueled by hateful, irresponsible and dangerous news columnists like Stu Bykofsky.
 Imam Isa Mateen, chairman
 The Majlis Ash Shura Justice
 and Integrity Division (MASJID)
 They shouldn't shut up
 Christine Flowers' column ("Some women just don't know how good they have it," Oct. 19) is perhaps the most ridiculous thing I have ever read in your paper. First of all, the idea that women in this country should be happy with what rights they have obtained up to now and just shut up, because women in Pakistan have it much worse, is a horrific premise. Should Jews not fight anti-Semitism here because at least no one is suicide-bombing their home? Should blacks not fight bigotry here because at least there is not widespread starvation like in Africa? Should gays not argue for equal rights because at least here they are not thrown in jail?
 Secondly, people in the media like Christine need to stop calling out Sandra Fluke for demanding "free birth control" and expecting the government to pay for it. She simply asked that her Georgetown University health insurance, which she pays for, cover her birth-control prescription. It would not be a "simpering demand" if I asked my health insurance to cover my diabetes meds. Sandra expects that birth-control pills are no different: a prescription written by a doctor for a medication. But according to Christine, young ladies here cannot ask for equality or fairness, because they already have it better than the women in third-world countries. 
 Chuck Bonfig
 Havertown
 An extreme view
 What a cop-out (editorial, Oct. 22). For every one of your deranged examples from a two-parent household, how many murderers come from a fatherless, government-incentivized home? Your examples make national headlines because of their extreme nature. The ongoing killings and muggings taking place every day in the "inner cities" do not. The fact that you would editorialize negatively on something most Americans would find common sensical exposes your lack of seriousness in addressing city crime and its genesis, and that you would rather feather-dust the feelings and sensitivities of the perceived maligned single moms.
 Mike Pupis
 Newtown Square 
 Third-party exclusion
 Since the corporate-controlled broadcast media collaborate with the two major political parties to prevent the inclusion of third-party candidates in the debates, the electorate is given the choice of electing sycophants of big business or puppets of special interest. Under these auspices, rather than choosing the lesser of two evils, we are subjected to the evil of two lessers.
 Gerald Bundy
 Philadelphia

Load-Date: October 23, 2012


End of Document