LETTERS TO THE EDITOR : A DISTORTED VIEW OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 8, 2001 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. C18; LETTERS
Length: 456 words
Body


In her Nov. 4 letter, Angie O' Gorman asserted that "one picks one's terrorism." I don't believe that those 5,000 souls who lost their lives on Sept. 11 were in a position to "pick" anything. They were ambushed. That's what terrorism is.
In response, U.S. military action -- announced publicly and targeted toward armies, weapons and munitions camps -- is not terrorism. Nor are the men and women serving in our armed forces terrorists.
O'Gorman also asserts that hunger breeds terrorism. That may be so. However, I have a hard time believing that the 19 men who had been living in the United States, taking full advantage of our way of life, our freedoms and our natural resources, were in need of three squares. Hatred and ignorance -- not necessarily hunger -- breed terrorism.
No matter how naive or flawed O'Gorman believes the United States' foreign policies to be, absolutely nothing we may or may not have done throughout the world justifies what happened to our citizens on Sept. 11.
Our associations and alliances throughout the world are complex and certainly not without flaws. But to say that we must "look inward" to discover the cause of our problems is to give credibility to those who try to achieve their goals through intimidation and terror. In my opinion, Osama bin Laden cashed in his credibility card long ago.
Finally, if either O'Gorman or I were to try to publish these letters in Afghanistan, we would most likely be executed. That is, assuming that we, as women, would have had the education to be able to know how to write and that we could find a free press in which to publish them.
The United States may be flawed, but I choose to support my country, not belittle it in the midst of this trying time.
Jerie Messer
Chesterfield
===
I have read numerous letters since Sept. 11 expressing concern that limiting our civil liberties will not guarantee our safety from terrorism. The fact is that more than 40 years of left-wing liberalism and, more recently, political correctness are the true cause of our vulnerability as a nation to terrorism.
The ability of our military, intelligence services and law enforcement agencies to serve and protect us has been constrained by well-meaning, naive academics and other elites, who are determined to protect rights that our founding fathers had no intention of granting when they framed our Constitution.
I lived through the Vietnam era as well as the more recent Clinton era. During these times our ability to trust our leaders was sorely tested. I believe that now we have an administration that is made up of honorable men and women. I trust and believe that they will use good judgment in taking the steps necessary to protect my family and neighbors.
D.W. Wilber
St. Charles

Load-Date: November 8, 2001


End of Document