Letter to the editor: Islam is Religion of Peace
University Press: Lamar University
December 1, 2016 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 588 words
Body


Editor,
Numerous people in today's time believe that Islam promotes violence. Islam is a religion of peace. In the Holy Quran it states, "If anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder, or (and) to spread mischief in the land - it would be as if he killed all mankind, and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind." This verse proves that Islam does not promote violence. Every Muslim should not be judged by the action of one person. One bad apple does not spoil the whole bunch.
Islam, the world's fastest growing and most misinterpreted religion, began in Arabia and was revealed to people by (pbuh) Prophet Muhammad. People who follow Islam are called Muslims. Muslims believe that there is only one god and that is Allah. The word Islam literally means "surrender," it means peace. Islam does not want war. It is not terrorism. It is not violence. It is not what Muslims need to do. Islam is what Muslims are supposed to do. In short, Islam is peace.
Terrorism has no religion. Terrorist attacks have occurred in the United States since 1837 and the majority were committed by non-Muslims, but still Muslims are blamed for terrorism. People should not attack religion. Religions need to be understood before people start jumping to conclusions. The answer to violence is not more violence. The problem in this world is everyone is blaming religions for acts of terrorism. Every religion has extremists. Therefore, it is not right to blame the religion as a whole.
In today's society Muslims face a lot of troubles because of discrimination. They are discriminated against for demonstrating their own faith. Muslims have unfairly been labeled as terrorists and Islam has been labeled as promoting terrorism. For example, nowadays some Muslim girls are judged for wearing hijab. People automatically assume, "Terrorist." Some Muslims are afraid to walk around in their religious clothes because of what others would say. Wearing religious and cultural symbols is part of the right of freedom of expression. These rights should be enjoyed by all faiths equally, not judged by people.  Many kids are made fun of for being Muslim. For example, in high school when teachers talk about religion, Muslim kids just sit in the back listening to everyone talk bad about Islam. Many argue against it, but at the same time you cannot change the way people think in today's society. Muslims are not the only people who face this problem; many people from different races also encounter the same problem.
The world needs to change its thinking. Do not blame everyone for the mistake of one person. Everyone is not the same; we are all different. We need to come together as a whole and bring a change in this world. All of us need to put religion aside and look at each other from the inside -  how good of person someone is. Do not judge a book by its cover. Do not judge Muslims, Latinos, Blacks and many more races. At the end of the day, we are all the same; no one is different, we are all humans. Let us stop labeling each other by race.
Instead let us put forth a hand of friendship to each other. A never-ending chain of friendship should be started. This will bring a change in many people. Muslim lives matter, but so do black lives, white lives, gay lives, Hispanic lives, and many other lives. Every single individual life matters.
We should not fear anyone because of race. We are all humans, so do not let race define someone as a person.
Sahar Shahzad
Kountze freshmanShare this article ....00

Load-Date: December 1, 2016


End of Document