LETTER OF THE DAY: 'I am from Tampa'
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 17, 2011 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: VIEWS & NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 904 words
Body


Ivy League failures
I can't understand how two of the "brightest minds" in America, as has long been said of Barack Obama and Timothy Geithner, could go through those high-powered institutions in Boston yet can't figure out how to plan for a day that comes to most every person, either in private or in business. At some point anyone can hit their credit limit, and the folly of asking for more credit hits them like a ton of bricks. I guess either Harvard does not teach people how to focus their minds when this reality hits them, or these guys have never seen reality.
The average American knows if they hit their max on all of their credit cards, they need to slow down spending, not seek a new, higher credit limit, especially when your current interest payments are growing faster than you can ever expect your revenue to grow. In the case of our federal debt, it is so much worse because they are not risking their own money; they are risking the financial security of every U.S. citizen.
I suggest that a smaller, land-grant school, from a Southern or Midwestern state, as a gesture of good faith and some free advertising, set up emergency training for U.S. executive leaders, especially all of the Cabinet secretaries, and explain to them how to prioritize spending. They can learn to ensure interest on U.S. debts is paid first, and funds set aside for Social Security and Medicare are held sacred for those purposes. After those are paid, they will have to balance all other spending, authorized by Congress or not, to avoid writing bad checks. I suggest paying the military and laying off bureaucrats in Washington, and then eliminate programs we don't need. I am sure the professors who teach this "Cash-Flow Basics and Budgeting 101" class would help our elected leaders through all that. Brainstorming, prioritizing, planning and all that real-life stuff could be covered.
I did not attend an Ivy League school, but I am certain I learned more practical things than they did. I got my money's worth.
Dan Puhr
Tampa
Sharing the money
Economic growth, to me, means an increase in consumer spending. I know that middle- and lower-class consumers are by far the majority in the United States. They have to spend more money for companies, large and small, to see their profits increase. This leads to more jobs and economic growth.
Making the wealthy more wealthy is never going to trickle down to the less fortunate. These wealthy individuals did not get wealthy by chance, in most cases. Greed is the first rule for becoming wealthy. You can call it many other names, such as ambition. It is not necessarily a bad thing. It is also one of the driving forces of the "American Way."
It's time for the wealthy to step up and "eat their peas." They've lived and prospered by the sweat, pain and sometimes death of the less fortunate middle and lower classes. We, the less fortunate, have been eating our peas for centuries. We have nothing more to give.
David Blackburn
Plant City
Mainstream Muslims
Floridians should welcome the opinion piece by CAIR Florida Executive Director Hassan Shibly ("Islam has no room for terrorism," Other Views, July 7).
It is refreshing to recognize the stance of a group representing the moderate majority of U.S. Muslims.
Most non-Muslim U.S. citizens have been of the opinion that most Muslims do not speak out against terrorist acts due to fear of retaliation by extremists. However, Shibly correctly notes that prominent members of the Islamic community have frequently spoken out against terrorism, especially acts conducted by persons claiming to be acting in the name of Islam.
Nevertheless, a careful reading of the CAIR website reveals that the overwhelming majority of condemnations were made in the six months following the 9/11 attacks. There were several published terrorist condemnations following the March 2004 train bombing in Spain and the London bombing of July 2005, but such Muslim statements were disseminated mainly in the European media.
In recent years, there have been fewer U.S. anti-Islamic terrorist condemnations, and groups such as CAIR are encouraged to redouble their efforts to fight terrorism and promote peaceful interfaith.
Well-placed articles such as Shibly's do much to allay the fears of moderate Muslims and further the goal of bringing mainstream Muslims into mainstream America.
Kenneth Hansen
Treasure Island
'Stealth jihad'
Once again CAIR is speaking honey-filled words about Islam and the teachings of Muhammad. Hassan Shibly says "there is no room for terrorism in Islam," but the Quran (sura 9:29) commands Muslims to "fight against those who do not believe in Allah or the judgment day, who permit what Allah and his messenger (Muhammad) have forbidden, and who refuse allegiance to the true faith (Islam)."
"Fight and kill the disbelievers wherever you find them" (Quran 9:5).
Organizations like CAIR and the Muslim Brotherhood must try to convince non-Muslims that Islam is a religion of peace so they can continue their program of "stealth jihad." Anyone who questions or criticizes Islam will be labeled an Islamophobe.
This is America. We have the right and duty to question and criticize political and religious (in Islam the two can't be separated) teachings and ideals that are the antithesis of our constitutional rights.
Sheila L. Switzer
Tampa
Copyright © 2011, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

Your Views

Load-Date: July 18, 2011


End of Document