Letters: In My Opinion: More heinous act of terrorism
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 19, 2001 Tuesday,
Final Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Editorial;; Letters
Length: 334 words
Byline: BOB MILES
Body


I understand and agree that Americans should have been alarmed by the Oklahoma City bombing that claimed the lives of 168 people. I do not agree, however, with the media that this was the greatest loss of life as a result of bombing to occur in America. Perhaps it is called the worst bombing because the fatalities included so many white Americans.
For the Journal-Constitution
Again, it appears that history affecting black Americans has been lost, stolen or strayed. According to data compiled by Ron Wallace and Jay Wilson titled "A black Holocaust in America," Tulsa, Okla., was the scene of the deadliest bombing in the United Sates.
It was 80 years ago in Tulsa, on June 1, 1921, that a 36-square block business district called Greenwood and dubbed "Black Wall Street" was burned to the ground by white terrorist mobs in what has become known as the Tulsa Race Riot. In about 12 hours, the entire community of businesses and homes was destroyed. Included were restaurants, grocery stores, theaters, a bank, post office, schools, law offices, a bus system, hospital, 21 churches, pawn shops, brothels and a half-dozen private airplanes. It is noteworthy that in 1921, there were only two airports in the entire state of Oklahoma. Yet, six blacks in this community owned airplanes.
Although some Internet sites and others claim that 3,000 black Americans were killed during the bomb-and-burn massacre, officials put the death toll between 75 and 300. The higher number obviously surpasses the toll in Oklahoma City. This was white America's terrorism at its worst.
The media's proclamation that the Oklahoma City bombing was the worst in United States history is a deliberate act in ignorance, and not from ignorance. The Tulsa bombing did happen.
 
BOB MILES, Atlanta Bob Miles, originally from Savannah, is retired from the U.S. Army and the state of Georgia.
 
Submissions to this readers' column should run 300-350 words and include a recent photo of yourself, brief biography and a daytime phone number.

Graphic

 
Photo:
Bob Miles

Load-Date: June 19, 2001


End of Document