Letters to the Editor; Letters to the Editor, Sept. 22, 2020
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 22, 2020 Tuesday
2 Edition


Copyright 2020 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MAIN; Pg. 14A
Length: 1059 words
Body


Where's the logic in
VCU's recent decision?
 Editor, Times Dispatch:
 The Board of Visitors at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) certainly is within its rights to decide which historical symbols should remain on campus and which should go. A recent story in the Richmond Times-Dispatch reports that the board has chosen to remove 16 symbols honoring those who supported the Confederacy. Well and good. But what I found interesting is the lack of logic in the remarks of those explaining the university's decision.
 Take, for instance, a quote by VCU President Michael Rao. "We must be dedicated to the truth." Whatever one's opinion of the Confederacy might be, the truth is it existed. Why hide it? In the news story, Rao says the process to get rid of Confederate symbols "... allows the community to see a more complete view of its history." More complete? Really?
 According to the article, for three years, VCU's officials had been trying to decide how best to address traces of the school's connection with former Confederates, including business leaders who saved the Medical College from financial ruin. The tragic death of George Floyd prompted the committee charged with looking for a solution to act. They quickly recommended "that all references to Confederate supporters be removed." Never mind that the investigation into Floyd's tragic death has yet to be completed or its details revealed. And what part did James Dooley, Hunter McGuire, Lewis Ginter and Matthew Fontaine Maury play in that unfortunate police action, anyway? Where's the logic?
 Patricia Parsons.
 Richmond.
 Do contentious times erode freedom of speech?
 Editor, Times-Dispatch:
 I always have loved being able to speak my mind and share my opinions with the editors of the Richmond Times-Dispatch. Since February, however, I have not been comfortable sending my opinion letters. I am intimidated by the possibility that I might be ostracized - or worse - by those who disagree with my opinion.
 Do we really have freedom of speech in America today? I feel it is being eroded by the reactions of those few who have escalated disagreement into hate. I find this scary and crazy. I see the progression to violence everywhere in the paper and on television. In this heated climate, I have to ask myself: At what point could my life be in danger or my property at risk?
 I now am willing to take a risk and send this letter. Perhaps there are others who have been reluctant to share their opinions and will follow my lead and take a chance, too.
 I hope the day returns when I once again can feel free to share my views with others.
 W. Baxter Perkinson Jr.
 Richmond.
 Before acting, consider possible consequences
 Editor, Times-Dispatch:
 I try to teach my grandchildren that every action has a consequence. For instance, when they talk to me about solar energy, I tell them that we need to consider whether the use of fertile farmland for a solar farm is an appropriate use. One day, will we run out of viable farmland to grow our food?
 Adults need to consider the consequences before their actions as well. Did the Hanover County School Board consider the consequences of removing the names of Lee-Davis High School and Stonewall Jackson Middle School before they took such action? Now the seniors who are trying to apply for colleges and scholarships are paying the consequences for the school board's actions before a replacement plan was in place.
 Did Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney consider the consequences of supporting defunding the police? After protesters showed up at his apartment building, he found that he needed the police for his own security force.
 Do protesters who want rent forgiveness and stoppage of evictions understand that rent is the landlord's income and there will be consequences when the landlord can't pay taxes, or make mortgage payments or repairs?
 Sometimes there is no good choice, but there always are consequences for our actions and our inaction. Something to keep in mind as the 2020 voting process begins.
 Linda C. Tibbs.
 Rockville.
 Silent majority must
 speak up and vote
 Editor, Times-Dispatch:
 With the current state of political and social affairs, and the fact that we have a president who lost the popular vote, it's time for a new voice - that of the silent majority, those of us out there quietly complaining to friends and wringing our hands about the approaching Armageddon. I believe that this silent majority is moderate and wants to work together to make our country better. It's now time for them to stand up and make some noise. The silent majority needs to be heard, now more than ever. Complacency is not an option. Let your voice be heard and vote.
 Frederick Roscher.
 Richmond.
 Domestic terrorism
 is threatening nation
 Editor, Times-Dispatch:
 The upcoming election will determine what kind of country we deserve. Do we want to live in a society dominated by anarchy and mob violence or one of law and order?
 Those who riot, loot, burn, destroy private property and threaten respectable citizens should be arrested and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law, resulting in a meaningful period of incarceration. Nothing less will make irresponsible people responsible citizens. We are at war. The enemy is domestic terrorism. It must be defeated and the end justifies the means.
 Abraham Lincoln once said, "There is no grievance that is a fit object of redress by mob law."
 Paul Schoenbaum.
 Henrico.
 Trump tapes reveal
 lack of leadership skills
 Editor, Times-Dispatch:
 Bob Woodward's interviews with President Donald Trump reveal the absolute lack of leadership skills in our president. When the president states that he downplayed the reality of the severity of the coronavirus, he claims that he did not want to create "panic" among the American people. Instead, he greatly minimized and politicized the issue, calling it a hoax, saying that it would "go away in the spring." A true leader would have spoken the truth to the country and appealed to the nation to take the steps necessary to minimize the risks of this deadly disease. Speaking truth does not have to be done in such a way that leads to panic. Trump wants us to believe that he only had two options: minimize and withhold the truth or create panic by providing accurate information. He missed the third option: provide sound leadership.
 Brendan Hayes.
 Henrico.

Load-Date: September 22, 2020


End of Document