LETTER FROM MOSCOW;
 Bombings' fallout: For usually placid Russians, terrorism striking home is something new and ominous.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
September 26, 1999, Sunday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Perspective; Pg. 1C
Length: 1017 words
Byline: Charles W. Holmes, Staff Correspondent
Body

Beware of the watermelons. Keep your eyes on those stray dogs.
Nothing is above suspicion in Moscow these days. Rattled by a string of devastating bombings this month that has left nearly 300 dead, Russians are on edge. They are wary of their own neighbors and fearful that their apartment building could be the next target.
AJC
Perhaps not since the dismantling of the Soviet Union in 1991 have Russians felt so strongly, and vocally, about anything.
Reports of rampant corruption bring a shrug and a yawn. Russians have become all too accustomed to expecting the worst of their officials, from the ubiquitous street-corner cop who demands bribes from passing motorists to the bandit capitalists who have pumped billions of dollars out of Russia and into Western banks.
Last year's economic crisis wiped out personal savings and jobs, but elicited surprisingly little in the way of public outrage. Been there, done that --- Russia and its struggling post-Soviet economy have teetered on the brink of disaster several times in this decade.
Terrorism striking home is something new and ominous. Two apartment-block blasts in Moscow, and two in southern Russia --- all of which followed an Aug.  31 bombing in a shopping mall near the Kremlin --- have given the entire nation nights of fitful sleep. Russians share the same unanswered questions: Who is responsible for the bombings, and who is to blame for not preventing them?

Political football
The public dismay comes as Russia prepares for important parliamentary elections in December and next summer's vote to choose a new president.
The men who want to replace President Boris Yeltsin --- particularly his handpicked prime minister, Vladimir Putin, and his chief rival, Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov --- are scrambling to look tough and blame the other for failing to protect Russians.
It has been a losing game for both.
''People feel they have no influence over what goes on in the country,'' and they do not trust their leaders, said pollster Yuri Levada. The result is cynicism and conspiracy theories, he said.
Fearful Muscovites are seeing the bogeyman everywhere. One rumor swept the city that people should be on the lookout for watermelons, allegedly used as a means of concealing and transporting explosives. (Not true, said a police spokesman). Another rumor reported in a local newspaper suggested that stray- looking dogs could instead be highly trained canine couriers used to carry bombs into buildings.
Anything that goes bump in the night is suspect, as is anyone with a dark complexion who may come from the mountainous Caucasus region on Russia's southern border.
Russian authorities widely blame Islamic guerrillas from the breakaway republic of Chechnya for supporting the bombing campaign in Russia. Chechen rebel leaders named by Moscow deny complicity in the bombings.
Moscow police and special Interior Ministry troops have swept the streets looking for suspects, a mobilization of force dubbed ''Operation Whirlwind,'' in which dark-skinned people from Chechnya and other states in the Caucasus region have been targeted. More than 11,000 ''suspects'' were taken into custody last week, though police conceded that only about 30 were under serious questioning as possible terrorists.
There has been little public debate about human rights and the rule of law. Terrorism now tops the agenda and the public apathy about affairs of state has ended. People are scared, and they want something done about the bombs --- now.
''Why are there no resignations of people responsible for our security? They should be ashamed to look into the eyes of the people,'' said Slava, a shopkeeper in my neighborhood in southern Moscow, just a short drive from the apartment buildings destroyed by bombs on Sept. 9 and Sept. 13.

Pointing fingers
Many others do not trust their government and believe the Kremlin itself, or forces aligned with it, could be responsible for the terror. For months Yeltsin's political rivals have warned that the Kremlin is planning to declare a state of emergency as a way to cancel the elections and extend Yeltsin's term in office.
There is a lack of hard evidence of Chechen involvement --- or, at least, evidence that has been made public --- and no plausible claims of responsibility have been made for the bombings.
The result has been a proliferation of conspiracy theories and supposed motives, often contradictory --- the Kremlin may have ordered it, maybe the mob, maybe the state security services acting on their own, Yeltsin wants to stay in power or Yeltsin will resign early.
Even the respected English-language daily, the Moscow Times, got in on the act. In an editorial last week, it questioned why the rubble from the two buildings destroyed in Moscow had been carted away so soon. Why hadn't investigators taken their time sifting for forensic evidence, the paper asked.
''The Chechen theory has proved both viable and convenient for federal authorities; investigators clearly think they've got a lock on their suspects.  Are they playing it safe (by trucking away the ruins) and making sure no other options turn up?''
Paranoia and politics reign in Moscow today in the fallout of the bombs. It is not a healthy combination in a country that has struggled toward democracy and is better known for is disreputable government and corrupt system.
If there is one hopeful sign, it is that Russians, at last, are mad as hell.  But will they do anything about it in the upcoming elections?
In Soviet times, the regime directed the terror campaigns.
Now, this highly charged political current has been reversed. Terrorism, and the fear it has wrought in Moscow and across Russia, could be the undoing of the powerful in post-Soviet Russia.
''There are rare moments in life when millions of people think in the same way,'' said an editorial last week in the daily Nezavisimaya Gazeta. ''There is such a moment now when millions of people who live in apartment blocks think the same thing when they go to bed: whether they will be alive in the morning or not.''
Charles W. Holmes is the Moscow-based correspondent for Cox News Service.

Graphic

 
Photo
Aftermath: After the bombings (clockwise, from above left), a riot police officer with a dog inspects a car at a checkpoint on the outskirts of Moscow. / MIKHAIL METZEL / Associated Press
Photo
A man cries at the site of a blast that ripped through a Moscow apartment building. / IVAN SEKRETAREV / Associated Press
Photo
Rescuers search the ruins of a building destroyed by an explosion./ IVAN SEKRETAREV / Associated Press
 Photo
Police escort vendors who were detained at an outdoor market during a security sweep. / MIKHAIL METZEL / Associated Press

Load-Date: September 26, 1999


End of Document