LETTERS: PETERS' CARTOON BIASED, ERRONEOUS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 18, 2004 Friday LENGTH 68 lines CITY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPED; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A13; LETTERS
Length: 457 words
Body


Just when i thought Mike Peters' cartoons could get no worse, I was proven wrong.
The June 13 cartoon showing President George W. Bush during former President Ronald Reagan's funeral was totally out of order and erroneous.
Only the proceedings at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, where the bodies of service personnel are flown, have been off-limits.
Bush has not, nor could he, stop coverage of funerals of America's fighting men and women.
It is clear that Peters would not let accuracy get in the way of his bias.
Last week's events were to honor the passing of a president. The ceremonies honor the office, as well as the man. Peters does not seem to comprehend that, but is that surprising?
Dick Bieser Centerville
Funeral was respectful occasion
Mike Peters' cartoon in the June 13 Dayton Daily News was not only biased, but it was completely wrong in its depiction.
The funeral of former President Ronald Reagan was a very solemn and respectful time for the Republican Party, especially President George W. Bush. As far as I have seen, not one Republican has used this occasion as a photo-op or as an opportunity to push an agenda.
Peters is biased, and his cartoons about Bush and other Republican leaders have shown the low level he operates from.
Clinton Iker Beavercreek
Foreign policy must change
Our foreign policy is full of flaws that perpetuate terrorism against the United States, other peace-loving nations and countless numbers of innocent individuals.
The Bush administration's arrogant, aggressive and pre-emptive policies in the war against terrorism are short-term solutions that will only destroy our credibility, respectability and mission of spreading the ideals of liberty throughout the world.
There is no simple solution for winning the war against terrorism. However, three things should be done:
First, we need to stop supporting nations that support or initiate terrorism. We need to stop blindly supporting Israel and Saudi Arabia.
We need to become less dependent on oil and begin to develop other energy resources. We are being held hostage by our need for oil from Saudi Arabia.
Finally, we cannot force the Iraqis to embrace democracy in the name of an industrial-imperialistic-puppet government, set up for U.S. aggrandizement for cheap oil. This policy will backfire, as we create more terrorism and resentment for the United States.
Jeffrey L. Wellbaum Kettering
Where is value for life?
The May 29 story about the 13-year-old boy who killed his dog ('Teenagers linked to animal cruelty') sickened me. Are we coming to the point that life isn't valued at all, be it human or animal?
Our animals trust and love us unconditionally. They do not expect to be led to slaughter just for the fun of it.
Kathryn T. Lowman Centerville

Load-Date: June 19, 2004


End of Document