Liberal philosophy does not imply terrorism
University Wire
October 1, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 848 words
Byline: By Greg Pivarnik, Daily Targum; SOURCE: Rutgers
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J. 
Body


I have recently found myself defending the so-called "liberal" viewpoints of my columns about U.S. foreign policy, especially with regard to terrorism and Iraq. The more energetic discussions have taken place when I am confronted by someone who considers themself a conservative. Most of the replies are regurgetated analyisis of standard conservative ideology. Unfortunately, many of these ideas are supported by a great number of American citizens, despite their underlying flaws. It seems to me that the popular conservatives base their policies on emotion, makeshift patriotism and a general disdain for critical thought.
Most of the conservative punditry involves name-calling and emotional stances -- liberals support terror, protect terrorists, encourage terrorism and therefore liberals are unpatriotic and just as bad as terrorists. Conservative pundits such as Bill O'Reilly, Ann Coulter and David Horowitz do everything in their power to continue to perpetuate these ideas. The First Amendment protects their right to say what they please, but nonetheless their words do nothing but stifle American progress and halt all discussion whatsoever. These people encourage Americans to justify archaic ideas and principles even though the may be wrong. There is an overriding conservative appeal to the gut and emotion, facts be damned -- the same tactic that Stephen Colbert ingeniously satirizes nightly on his show.
Through my observation of political rhetoric and discussions I have had on the subject, it seems there is a general disdain for a peaceful foreign policy. Violence is needed to combat violence, even potential threats of violence that may never even be justified -- see the Iraq war. American politicians currently inherit foreign policy agendas of violence, scare tactics and policing that serve no other purpose than to give citizens the illusion they are safer.
Unfortunately, I feel like I have to spend some time defending the columns concerning U.S. abuse of power abroad. It is my belief that these policies make the United States less safe and more vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Disregarding these moral concerns, these policies have had no affect on the growing number of Muslim extremists. Every foreign policy decision made after Sept. 11 has backfired. The retaliation in Afghanistan was grossly mishandled and didn't even result in the capture of bin Laden. The Iraq war has turned into a debauched mess. The civil rights of American citizens have slowly been infringed upon more each year in the name of security.
However, when people like me challenge these popular beliefs, I suddenly get labeled as un-American. Yet challenging governmental abuses is one of the most patriotic actions one can partake in. Thorough analyses of current events yields the conclusion that the people in power have been wrong every step of the way. Constantly berating and attacking an economically vulnerable Muslim population only yields more extremists. The fact is nobody knows whether legitimate diplomacy yields beneficial results because the United States refuses to partake in it. When was the last time country such as Switzerland, which is entirely neutral, ever suffered from a terrorist attack? I find it very hypocritical that those who forward the war machine are the same people who claim to be devout Christians to elicit votes. Jesus, in his prime, expressed love for all people, including those who nailed him to the cross. He advocated a policy of turning the other cheek, but it is the United States that often strikes with the first blow.
The last other extremely important idea that the recent responses to my columns demonstrate is that the public at large refuses to or the lacks the know how to engage in critical thought. The poison of name-calling from such political pundits such as Coulter and O'Reilly has unfortunately permeated through American society. Instead of discussing important issues, opposing viewpoints are labeled wrong and stupid. No thought other than emotional appeal seems dominant in conservative agenda ­-- from gay marriage to terrorism.
I have never liked the two party system because it pigeon-holes thinking into either two categories -- right or left. I don't like to label myself with either adjective and consider myself an independent. If I am liberal, it because I have sat down and thought about the issues and have reached my own conclusions. I refuse to ascribe to any party, Democrat or Republican.
However, I find it interesting that the name-calling thrown around by conservatives often comes from ill-formed opinions. There is a reason why many intelligent people tend to be towards the liberal edge of the spectrum, such as college professors all around the country. The reason being is they actually have the capacity to use their brains for critical thought -- and often critical thought does not involve prejudices inherit in emotional lobbying. Though I do have a general disdain for name-calling, I do find ignorance, prejudice and stupidity to be purely conservative traits.
(C) 2007 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 1, 2007


End of Document