Liberal Overreach Endangers Us All
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
June 14, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 15
Length: 551 words
Byline: Editorial
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Our nation's most vocal opponents of the detention of suspected terrorists at Guantanamo Bay have gotten themselves into a lather this week.
First up was Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing for the 5-4 majority in Boumediene vs. Bush.
The laws and Constitution are designed to survive, and remain in force, in extraordinary times.
Then came The New York Times and The Washington Post.
The Times put this headline on its Thursday editorial about the ruling released Wednesday: On Guantanamo: Justice 5, Brutality 4.
And the Post chimed in with this: It's time that Congress absorb the lesson that the Supreme Court has repeatedly imparted: The war on terrorism cannot invalidate the rule of law.
Those are some high-and-mighty pronouncements, coming from the court's and the nation's left wings.
And, as always in such cases, one should remain on guard.
Watching or reading the news coverage of the ruling, one gets the impression that Kennedy and the court's other good guys (and gal) - Justices John Paul Stevens, Stephen Breyer, David Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg - ruled for the rights of man against a minority quaking in its boots over terrorism.
And the reporting wasn't inaccurate.
Justice Antonin Scalia did break from his usual habit by talking about the real-world impact of this particular ruling.
The game of bait-and-switch that today's opinion plays upon the Nation's Commander in Chief will make the war harder on us. It will almost certainly cause more Americans to be killed, he said.
But the point of Scalia's dissent was that the majority's ruling flouted both precedent and the Constitution by extending the court's authority to foreign territory.
And both dissents in the case - Scalia's and Chief Justice John Roberts' - also made the case that, despite its high-minded rhetoric, Wednesday's ruling would likely do little to protect detainees and would turn their cases over to courts less qualified to make judgments as to whether there is adequate justification to continue holding detainees suspected of terrorism.
Scalia and Roberts joined one another's dissents, and Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito joined both.
Both dissents see a signal danger in the majority ruling: In seeking to assert the authority of civilian courts to determine the legality of holding terrorist suspects often caught on the battlefield, it seems two things are not suited to the cases at hand.
First is the possibility that a civilian court will hold captures made in the heat of battle to the same standards as civilian cases.
And the second is the assumption that a civilian court is competent to make such judgments regarding cases involving so many military aspects.
Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a former Air Force lawyer, summed it up well.
The court has conferred upon civilian judges the right to make military decisions. he said. These judges have virtually no training in military matters. Yet civilian judges, in some of the most liberal district courts in the country, will have an opportunity to determine who is a threat to the United States.
That's what Justice Scalia was so worried about.
And, even more than most over-reaches in constitutional law, this one could involve the safety of all Americans.
Those are some high-and-mighty pronouncements, coming from the court's and the nation's left wings.

Load-Date: June 14, 2008


End of Document