Liberty suffered in 2013
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
December 29, 2013 Sunday


Copyright 2013 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 517 words
Byline: By John Stossel
Body


This wasn't a great year for liberty. A few disasters that government caused: 
&quote;¢ ObamaCare. It was supposed to &quote;bend the cost curve&quote; downward. The central planners had lots of time to perfect their scheme. For a generation, the brightest left-wing wonks focused on health care policy. The result? Soviet-style consumer service comes to America. 
&quote;¢ Government shutdown. The real disaster was the unnecessary panic over it. Zoos would shut down and baby pandas would starve. The media made it sound like America might not survive even slightly limited government. They were happy to echo the politicians' claim that there's no wasteful or stupid spending to cut. 
&quote;The cupboard is bare,&quote; said Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif. &quote;There's no more cuts to make.&quote; 
Nothing to cut? Government spends $3.8 trillion a year! Many Republicans are almost as eager to spend as Democrats, despite the difference in rhetoric between the two parties. About the only spending reduction Republicans accomplished in the past few years was the so-called sequester &quote;” which really happened by legal default because the two parties couldn't reach an agreement. The sequester instituted cuts of about $85 billion a year, a mere sliver of that $3.8 trillion budget and a still smaller sliver of our $17 trillion debt. 
&quote;¢ This also was the year we found out just how much the federal government spies on its own citizens. I annoyed my fellow libertarians by saying the privacy I lose to data mining seems a small price to pay for surveillance against terrorism. I posted a list of a hundred other things government does that upset me more. Some people responded by calling me a &quote;traitor&quote; and &quote;LINO&quote; (libertarian in name only). 
Look, libertarians, I'm constantly angry at my government for lots of things, but I just can't get worked up about data mining. My emails fly through the air. For all I know, my political enemies already read them. 
It is upsetting, though, that the National Security Agency snooping goes far beyond what the government first claimed. President Barack Obama assured us the NSA does not read our emails or listen to our phone calls. But it turns out it sometimes does. 
It says it only looks for terrorists and it won't use the records to harass and punish its critics. But why would we trust that the same big government that spends $3.8 trillion a year, raids our homes looking for drugs and regulates almost every part of our lives won't use its snooping powers to look into things other than terrorism? 
Given the truth of Thomas Jefferson's warning &quote;” &quote;The natural progress of things is for liberty to yield, and government to gain ground&quote; &quote;” I fear next year will be still worse for liberty. 
To make it a better year, we can't trust such a powerful government to restrain itself. We should cut back its duties to reduce its power. 
John Stossel is host of &quote;Stossel&quote; on the Fox Business Network and the author of &quote;No They Can't! Why Government Fails, but Individuals Succeed.&quote; 

Load-Date: December 30, 2013


End of Document