Libyan attack labeled as terrorism; Weapons used by protesters suggest there was planning
USA TODAY
September 21, 2012 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 623 words
Byline: Oren Dorell, @OrenDorell, USA TODAY
Body


After saying for days the Sept. 11 attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, was the result of a spontaneous demonstration over an offensive video, the Obama administration now says a U.S. ambassador and three Americans were killed in a terrorist attack.
But the White House still would not backtrack on its claim that the attack was a spontaneous reaction to an anti-Islam video used hours before by Muslim clerics for a protest against the U.S. Embassy in Cairo.
"It is, I think, self-evident that what happened in Benghazi was a terrorist attack," White House spokesman Jay Carney said Thursday.
Carney had previously refused to label the attack as terrorism, blaming instead the filmmaker of an obscure video for the unrest throughout the region. And U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice said Sunday that the attack was "spontaneous -- not a premeditated -- response to what had transpired in Cairo."
Carney's statement Thursday came a day after Matthew Olsen, director of the National Counterterrorism Center, told the Senate Homeland Security Committee under questioning that it was terrorists who executed an attack on the consulate and then chased down fleeing staff to an embassy safe house. But he said he knew of no evidence that  it was planned ahead of time.
Sen. Susan Collins, a Republican from Maine, who has had private briefings on the incident, reacted to Olsen with incredulity.
"Based on the briefings that I have had, I come to the opposite conclusion," Collins said. "I just don't think people come to protests equipped with RPGs (rocket-propelled grenades) and other heavy weapons."
Participants in the attack appear to include members of several extremist Islamic groups, including al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a North African affiliate of the Islamic terror group, Olsen said.
Mohammed el-Megarif, head of the Libyan National Congress, has said the attack was pre-planned and timed for the anniversary of the 9/11  attacks, which killed nearly 3,000 Americans.
Sen. Joe Lieberman, I-Conn., who chairs the committee, said Arab leaders may be placating anti-American radicals because they believe the United States "has begun to redirect its attention to the Asia Pacific and is less willing to be involved in matters in the Middle East."
Collins and Lieberman asked the State Department's inspector general to launch an independent probe into the incident and  security at U.S. embassies. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said she was forming a panel to investigate the attack.
Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney had said the outbreak of violence last week is the result of a lack of American leadership in the region to support U.S. values and interests.
He also criticized the White House for apologizing for the film that angered protesters, which Romney said is free speech protected by the Constitution.
"The attacks in Libya and Egypt underscore that the world remains a dangerous place and that American leadership is still sorely needed," Romney said. "American leadership is necessary to ensure that events in the region don't spin out of control."
Marina Ottaway, director of the Middle East Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, says she can't make sense of the administration claim that the Benghazi attack, which included rocket propelled grenades, was a terrorist attack that may not have been planned.
"I don't understand why they say it was not premeditated," Ottaway says. "People don't walk around with heavy weapons in their pocket. So if that's true, this attack was premeditated."
The violence is "part of the risk of doing business" in an Middle East that is in flux and where new governments are much weaker than the ones they replaced, she says. 

Load-Date: September 21, 2012


End of Document