Libya says it will cooperate with U.N.
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 23, 1992, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WORLD DIGEST; Pg. 13A; DIGEST
Length: 583 words
Dateline: NICOSIA, Cyprus; POTI, Georgia; MEXICO CITY; BRAZZAVILLE, Congo; BEIJING; SOFIE, Bulgaria; TOKYO; LONDON
Body


Libya said Wednesday it would cooperate with the United Nations in the dispute over the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am plane, the Libyan news agency JANA said. A U.N. Security Council resolution passed Tuesday ordered Libya to surrender two agents accused of bombing the U.S. airliner over the Scottish village of Lockerbie; 270 people were killed. JANA, monitored in Cyprus, quoted a foreign ministry statement that also said Libya "reiterates its unwavering position of denouncing all kinds of terrorism including state terrorism." Libya has denied involvement in the bombing.
Loyalist stronghold attacked in Georgia
 POTI, Georgia Georgian government troops attacked the Black Sea port of Poti Wednesday night, breaking a cease-fire concluded with supporters of ousted President Zviad Gamsakhurdia. A Reuters correspondent said troops loyal to the Military Council now ruling Georgia opened fire shortly after the expiration of a deadline for Poti to surrender. Poti is one of the few remaining towns controlled by Gamsakhurdia's supporters in west Georgia, his home region, where he has launched an attempt to regain power from the military alliance that drove him from the capital of Tbilisi three weeks ago.
 Salvadoran military, rebels mull amnesty
 MEXICO CITY Leftist rebels and Salvadoran military faced off Wednesday on what kind of amnesty to grant guerrilla leaders who want to return home. The two groups, meeting with representatives of political parties in the Salvadoran Peace Commission (Copaz), have until today to thrash out a compromise to keep to the timetable of the Jan. 16 peace accord. An amnesty would allow the rebel leaders-in-exile to return to El Salvador after Feb. 1, when a formal cease-fire goes into effect in the 12-year civil war. But while the rebels are pushing for a restricted amnesty, the military and the government want a more general pardon that could cover army personnel as well.
 Compromise said near in Congo
 BRAZZAVILLE, Congo Thousands of democracy supporters braved clouds of tear gas Wednesday to escort Prime Minister Andre Milongo six miles into the capital for a meeting with other leaders of the interim government. Mutinous soldiers seeking to oust Milongo fired tear gas in a vain attempt to disperse more than 10,000 marchers who surrounded the leader. No injuries were reported. Milongo has been urged to work out a deal with troops angered by his shakeup of the army leadership. Sources said late Wednesday a compromise appeared close that would end the week-old rebellion and allow Milongo to keep his post.
 Elsewhere. . .
 BEIJING: The Shanghai newspaper Wen Hui Bao reported Wednesday that 105 people were crushed to death and 108 were injured in a stampede at a lantern festival last September as huge crowds flocked to view traditional paper lanterns at a park in Tai Yuan, the capital of China's northern Shanxi province.
 SOFIA, Bulgaria: Bulgaria's President Zhelyu Zhelev was sworn in Wednesday after being returned to office as the country's first democratically elected head of state.
 TOKYO: The Liberal Democratic Party, Japan's ruling party has been rocked almost daily by fresh scandal revelations and is considering calling a general election as early as July to win a new mandate from voters, party officials and analysts say.
 LONDON: A gang smuggled more than 4 tons of gold worth nearly $ 60-million into Britain over a four-year period to avoid paying tax, a prosecutor said Wednesday. The gold was hidden  behind the bumpers of cars.

Load-Date: November 4, 1992


End of Document