LIBYA MAKES OFFER TO STEM TERRORISM
The New York Times
January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 916 words
Byline: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, Jan. 28
Body


Prime Minister Bettino Craxi said today that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had offered to help halt Arab terrorist operations in Europe if the United States promised not to attack Libya.
The Italian Government said it received the Libyan leader's proposal this morning in a message from the Maltese Prime Minister, Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici, who has been trying to serve as an intermediary between Libya and Italy after apparently coordinated attacks on the airports here and in Vienna on Dec. 27. A total of 20 people died as a result of the attacks, 5 of them Americans, and more than 100 people were wounded.
A top aide to Mr. Craxi said the Italian Government was still evaluating Colonel Qaddafi's message to determine ''whether there is any substance behind his words.''
But the aide, Antonio Badini, a foreign policy adviser, added, ''We hope this indicates a change of heart.''
Mr. Badini said the message today might mean that Colonel Qaddafi was ''trying to open channels to the U.S. and Italy in the hopes of ending the confrontation.'' There was no immediate indication why Colonel Qaddafi would choose to issue such an offer through a second party rather than making an announcement himself. [The official Libyan press agency appeared to deny Mr. Craxi's statement, The Associated Press reported. The Libyan agency said Colonel Qaddafi ''did not send a letter to Craxi in which there is the guarantee of a supposed effort toward Arab states and Palestinians so that Libya does not suffer American military attacks.'' It added, ''This denies the news spread by some.''] Libya and Syria Are Warned Mr. Craxi, who announced the Libyan leader's offer at a news conference, warned that continued Libyan and Syrian support for the Abu Nidal terrorist group could jeopardize peace in the Mediterranean. The United States has said it believes the Abu Nidal group carried out the airport attacks with support from Libya.
Referring to the attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports, Mr. Craxi said, ''There can be no doubt that repetition of terrorist actions would create situations and reactions difficult to control.''
The Libyan leader's message today was in sharp contrast to threats directed against Italy in recent contacts through Mr. Mifsud Bonnici. Last week Colonel Qaddafi said he might retaliate against an American attack on Libya by striking at North Atlantic Treaty Organization bases in Italy.
Mr. Craxi said today that Italy had increased its military defenses on its southern flank and had tightened security around the bases.
In the message received from Malta this morning, Mr. Craxi said that Mr. Mifsud Bonnici described ''new contacts with the Libyan Government'' in which Colonel Qaddafi expressed his availability to urge Arabs in general and Palestinians in particular not to carry out terrorist actions in Europe.
The message from Malta went on to explain that ''the request from Libya was that it not be the target of a military attack by the United States,'' Mr. Craxi said.
 
Italy in a 'State of Alert'
Speaking in a frescoed room near his offices in the Palazzo Chigi, Mr. Craxi said Italy remained in a ''state of alert'' as it evaluated ''worrisome news that indicates that not just Italy but also numerous other European countries continue to be threatened by terrorist action.''
These attacks could come from several terrorist orgaizations, Mr. Craxi said, but he directed particular attention on the Palestinian group said to be led by Abu Nidal, who was the subject of an international arrest warrant issued in Italy last week.
Mr. Craxi said that Italian investigators had developed ''reliable proof'' that the ''point of departure'' for the terrorists who conducted the airport attacks last month was Damascus.
He added that there was also evidence that the Abu Nidal group had offices in Damascus and Tripoli, the Libyan capital, and maintained a base in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa region in eastern Lebanon.
Mr. Craxi said that both Libya and Syria had been asked to clarify their policies on support for terrorists.
While an investigation into the airport attack continues under judicial secrecy, Mr. Craxi said that the facts uncovered so far pointed to a ''relationship of collaboration'' between Libya and the terrorists, but that he was as yet unwilling to accuse any government of ''direct complicity.''
Asked what he would do if Colonel Qaddafi was implicated in a future terrorsist attack in Italy, Mr. Craxi responded, ''I certainly will not send him a bunch of flowers.''
Mr. Craxi stressed that United States Navy manuevers under way off the Libyan coast were ''entirely legitimate'' because they were being conducted in international waters, and he said, ''They are not a prelude to war operations.'' He also praised what he said was the Reagan Administration's ''wise decision'' not to undertake military action against Libya. ----U.S. Is Unimpressed WASHINGTON, Jan. 28 - The State Department reacted with little enthusiasm to the report of a Libyan offer. But Bernard Kalb, the department spokesman, said the United States felt that ''when Libya abandons a policy of terrorism, the evidence, one would trust, would be there to see.''
A senior Administration official said the United States would make no bargain with Colonel Qaddafi, ''because there is no one here who would trust his word.'' The official speculated that the message was sent to the Italians because Italy was Libya's main trading partner and Colonel Qaddafi might fear economic sanctions from Italy.

Graphic

 
photo of Bettino Craxi (AP)


End of Document