Libya Unyielding Despite U.N. Demand
The New York Times
January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 988 words
Byline: By PAUL LEWIS,

By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 21
Body


The Security Council voted unanimously today to demand that Libya turn over for trial the agents accused of blowing up two civilian passenger aircraft and killing 440 people, but Libya indicated no willingness to comply.
The Council's resolution in effect tells Libya to cooperate with the investigation that Britain, France and the United States are conducting into the two bombings by surrendering two Libyans indicted for these acts. Pan Am flight 103 was blown up over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988 and U.T.A. flight 772 over Niger, in Africa, a year later.
 
'Satisfaction' Among Families
This is the first time the Security Council has ever demanded the extradition of citizens of one country to stand trial in another or implicitly accused a member government of involvement in terrorism.
Representatives of the families of passengers killed on the Pan Am flight reacted with satisfaction to the vote.
Aphrodite Thevos Tsairis, chairwoman of the Victims of Pan Am Flight 103, who lost her daughter in the crash, spoke of "a tremendous feeling of satisfaction," saying this was the first time a state had been "indicted for state-sponsored terrorism."
But she also described today's resolution as only "the first stepping stone" toward a much stronger resolution imposing economic sanctions on Libya.
If Libya does not comply with the resolution, the United States, Britain and France have said, they will ask the Council to impose mandatory economic sanctions, most probably by cutting off civilian air links and banning the sale of aircraft and spare parts.
 
'False Premises,' Libyan Says
 Addressing the Council before it voted, Libya's Minister for Strategic Industries, Jadallah Azouz el-Talhy, a former Foreign Minister, said the indicted Libyan officials were guiltless because the accusations against them were based on "false premises and assumptions."
Since Britain, France and the United States have asked Libya for information about the bomb attacks but have refused to share the results of their investigations with Libya, Mr. Talhy argued, they lack evidence to support their charges.
Nevertheless, Libya has said that it will investigate and try the officials itself. But Mr. Talhy said Libya's investigation "has not made any progress" because the three countries refuse to share their evidence with Libya.
"How can you condemn Libya for its failure to cooperate after Libya has taken all these actions to cooperate," he asked the Council.
 
A Call for Arbitration
 The Libyan Minister said the Security Council had no right to tell it to extradite its own nationals, adding that the dispute was essentially over interpretation of the 1971 Montreal Convention on terrorism against civilian aircraft and should be resolved by international arbitration. In the past Libya has also offered to send indicted officials for trial by the World Court or some other international tribunal.
The United States, Britain and France all rejected the Libyan Minister's contentions. Speaking for Britain, Sir David Hannay, this month's Council President, said the two officials indicted in the Pan Am 103 disaster should be tried "in Scotland or the United States" since the plane was American but crashed in Scotland.
He reassured countries that ban the extradition of their nationals that the new resolution did not "establish any precedent that would cast doubt on the legitimacy" of such rules. But there could be no confidence in the impartiality of Libyan courts, he said, and no international tribunal has jurisdiction over criminal acts.
 
'Evade Its Responsibilities'
 The United States representative, Thomas R. Pickering, said Libya had "sought to evade its responsibilities." If further action is needed, "we are convinced the Council is ready on a continuing basis to face up to its responsibilities," he said.
France's deputy representative, Jean-Marc de la Sabliere, said Libya still had not replied satisfactorily to the three countries' demands, but he hoped it would now do so after hearing this "unanimous reaction of the international community."
At the insistence of the Council's six developing world members, the resolution also asks the new United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Ghali of Egypt, to try to persuade the Libyan Government to comply with the new resolution.
What the Secretary General will do remains unclear. But Western diplomats say the Council will now have to give him a reasonable amount of time to intervene with the Libyan authorities before considering sanctions.
 
What Might Happen Next
 At present the United States, Britain and France say that cutting aviation links with Libya appears the most acceptable sanction.
While Libya's principal export is oil, an buyers' embargo is considered unlikely because -- on top of the embargo against Iraq -- it would further disrupt supplies to Western Europe. Germany, Italy and Spain, for example, rely on Libya for between 8 per cent and 15 percent of their supplies.
The unanimous vote on today's resolution was widely seen as a diplomatic triumph for the United States and its allies as well as a further sign of the Council's increasing willingness to intervene in the domestic affairs of countries in the name of promoting democracy, human rights and disarmament.
Several countries, including China and India, usually staunch upholders of the belief the United Nations should not intervene in members' internal affairs, voted for the resolution.
China's representative, Li Daoyu, said his Government condemned all acts of terrorism but still hoped for a negotiated settlement to the dispute.
India's representative, Chinmaya Gharekhan, recalled that India had been the victim of terrorism, including the blowing up of an Air India passenger airliner on its way back from Canada with the loss of some 400 lives.
But he also stressed the importance of respecting national sovereignty, which he said "is widely perceived to have come under some strain recently."

Graphic

 
Photos: United Nations Security Council members voting unanimously yesterday in support of a resolution that instructs Libya to cooperate with an investigation into two bombings, Pam Am flight 103 and U.T.A. flight 772, by surrendering two Libyans indicted for these acts; Jadallah Azouz el-Talhy, Libyan Minister for Strategic Industries, listening to speeches yesterday at the Security Council meeting. Mr. Talhy said the council had no right to tell it to extradite its own nationals. (Photographs by Agence France-Presse)

Load-Date: January 22, 1992


End of Document