Libya Case Shows Need for Terrorism Court;
Binding Resolutions
The New York Times
April 24, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 34; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Column 5;; Letter
Length: 397 words
Body


To the Editor:
The reactivation of the United Nations after the cold war has made the role of the Secretary General particularly important to world peace. As a human rights activist, I am concerned at remarks by the new Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, at his first news conference March 19.
Questioned about Security Council resolutions on the Palestinian and Kashmir issues, Mr. Boutros-Ghali said that these resolutions were not "binding." This is not the place to discuss the merits of these issues, what adjustments should be made, how negotiations should be held or how the spirit of the United Nations resolutions should be fulfilled. The authority and the binding nature of Security Council resolutions, however, transcend these issues and are a matter of principle of utmost importance to the United Nations system.
It seems to me that Mr. Boutros-Ghali is mistaken on two points:
(1) He seems to have overlooked the difference between binding resolutions -- which under the United Nations Charter are all resolutions of the Security Council -- and enforceable resolutions -- which are those taken under Article 7 of the Charter.
(2) He has confused resolutions of the Security Council (which are binding) with those of the General Assembly (which are recommendations).
Confusion on these points is dangerous and could undermine the efforts of the United Nations to bring about peaceful settlement of disputes. It is disappointing that a person with the reputation of a legal expert should propound doctrines that are contrary to the United Nations Charter.
The United States has recently been at great pains to impress upon United Nations members the binding character of United Nations resolutions. In the cases of Iraq and Libya, the United States has pressed for some of the most extreme measures ever taken by the United Nations to enforce its decisions.
Some weeks earlier, one of Mr. Boutros-Ghali's more responsible assistants stated that in some situations the Secretary General might send peace-keeping forces without the consent of both parties to a dispute. Now Mr. Boutros-Ghali has taken the opposite position that the United Nations can do nothing unless both parties to a dispute agree. He has thus transferred the veto power vested in the five permanent members of the Security Council to every intransigent state.
 
EDWARD HASBROUCK
San Francisco, April 4, 1992

Load-Date: April 24, 1992


End of Document