LIBYA EXPELS 36 AT EMBASSIES OF 7 WEST EUROPEAN NATIONS
The New York Times
May 13, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 572 words
Byline: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: CAIRO, May 12
Body


Libya today ordered 36 staff members of seven Western European embassies expelled in what it called a retaliation for ''oppressive'' Western measures.
Several Western countries recently expelled Libyan diplomats as part of a campaign against terrorism.
Libya said diplomats from the Italian, West German, Belgian, Spanish, French, Dutch and Danish embassies had been given a week to 10 days to leave. The move was announced by JANA, the Libyan press agency.
Libya's announcement today said the remaining Western European diplomats would not be allowed to travel outside of Tripoli.
The statement said the action was ''in retaliation for the oppressive measures taken by European countries, under pressure from the United States.''
In Brussels, the Belgian Foreign Minister, Leo Tindemans, said the European Community would discuss possible reactions at a meeting of Foreign Ministry representatives Wednesday and Thursday in The Hague.
 
Tokyo Declaration Recalled
Among those ordered expelled today was a Belgian diplomat in charge of representing American interests in Libya. The United States has had no diplomatic relations with the Libyans since early 1980, and its interests are being represented by Belgium.
At the economic summit meeting in Tokyo last month, the leaders of the United States, Britain, Canada, West Germany, Italy and Japan announced measures against countries sponsoring terrorism and named Libya.
They acted after a United States bombing raid on Libya in retaliation for the purported involvement of Libya in terrorism. Since then, European Community countries have expelled Libyan diplomats and restricted the movements of those remaining.
Libya has declared the summit conference statement tantamount to a declaration of war.
The Libyan order today followed the expulsion last month of more than 100 Britons, Spaniards and Italians in response to the deportation of Libyans.
The latest Western European expulsions came Friday when Spain ordered the Libyan consul general out of the country, accusing him of having links with a right-wing Spanish Army colonel in a plot to destabilize Spain. Libya has been supporting the Basque separatist movement in Spain.
Libyan-Spanish relations were further strained when two suspects, captured as they attempted to plant a bomb at a Bank of America branch in Madrid, were reported to have told the police that they received money and orders from Libyan officials to attack American businesses.
The two, along with eight other arrested suspects, were reported to be members of a Lebanese-based anti-Zionist group called the Cell of Jesus Christ.
The Libyan order today called for the expulsion of 25 Italians, 4 West Germans, 2 each from Spain and Belgium, and 1 each from France, the Netherlands and Denmark, according to the JANA press agency.
The Italian Foreign Ministry said that six of its nationals had been specifically designated for expulsion, but that it could choose the 19 others to be removed from its embassy, its two consulates in Tripoli and Benghazi, or Italian cultural institutions in Libya.
As the former colonial power in Libya, Italy still maintains a large presence. The staffs of its various offices were said to total 70 to 80 people.
''This measure does not take us entirely by surprise,'' an Italian Foreign Ministry spokesman said. On April 26, Italy had ordered Libya to reduce its diplomatic staff by 10 and put the remaining 36 under travel restrictions.


End of Document