Libya Case Shows Need for Terrorism Court
The New York Times
April 24, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 34; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Column 4;; Letter
Length: 542 words
Body


To the Editor:
It is heartening to see the Bush Administration working through the United Nations to bring to justice those accused in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, as you report in "Security Council Votes to Prohibit Arms Exports and Flights to Libya" (front page, April 1). Yet, while the United States forges a multinational response in this case, it rejects a promising approach to the general problem of international criminality.
The United Nations is studying establishment of an international criminal court with jurisdiction over individuals who commit such transnational crimes as terrorism, drug trafficking and aggression. This would provide an impartial forum for the litigation of the Libyan case or similar cases, bound to arise in the future, and make it more difficult for a country harboring alleged international criminals to resist pressure to hand them over for trial.
Unfortunately, the United States Government refuses to support creation of an international tribunal, stating in a report to Congress last October that it has "become increasingly skeptical about whether achieving consensus on the numerous issues associated with the establishment of such a court would ever be possible."
What this ignores is that nations as diverse as Germany, Israel, Venezuela and Zimbabwe have recently backed efforts to create an international criminal court. If the United States were to engage these countries in constructive dialogue, consensus might not seem so elusive.
When Morocco's King Hassan II, offering an alternative to sanctions against Libya, suggested an international court for terrorism cases, you quoted a Western official, stating that such a trial would have "no precedent in international law and no credibility in the U.S." (news article, March 2). This is wrong on both counts.
The Nuremberg and Tokyo war crimes trials established individual liability to the world community for certain heinous crimes. As for credibility in the United States: a permanent international criminal court, with jurisdiction in specific crimes, has been supported by the American Bar Association since 1978. One of the crimes specified is violence aboard international aircraft (as defined in the 1971 Montreal Convention).
Many eminent legal scholars in this country favor creation of an international criminal court. And in 1990 Congress passed legislation requiring the United States to explore the need for an international criminal tribunal and requiring a report from President Bush on the matter (eliciting the negative response quoted above).
Establishing an international criminal court would be without question a complicated juridical process, involving difficult negotiation on many issues, such as codification of crimes and implementation of judgments. But that does not diminish the desirability of making the effort. There is nothing to be lost in doing so -- and, potentially, much to be gained in the fight against international crime.
It would be an appropriate initiative for the Administration that introduced the idea of a new world order to play a constructive role in this direction.
 
ROBERT M. DICKSON
Coordinator, Intl. Law Program
Parliamentarians for Global Action
New York, April 10, 1992

Graphic

 
Drawing.

Load-Date: April 24, 1992


End of Document