Life and Liberty
The New York Times
April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 33;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 656 words
Byline: By Charles E. Schumer; 

Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, introduced President Clinton's Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995 in the House.

By Charles E. Schumer;   Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, introduced President Clinton's Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995 in the House.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In the aftermath of the Oklahoma City and World Trade Center bombings, Americans ask whether the Government can do more to prevent terrorism while preserving our civil liberties unabridged.
The answer is yes, it can. The changes needed to crack down on international and domestic terrorism can be made without impinging on basic liberties. The main instrument is President Clinton's Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995. It figured into the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearing on terrorism held yesterday. The House Judiciary Committee will hold hearings on terrorism on Wednesday.
The act would allow the Government to deport aliens who lay the groundwork for domestic terrorism, as some arguably have been doing for five years. Just as the Cayman Islands' laws have made the islands a haven for ill-gotten money, the United States' broad freedoms and relatively open borders make it easy for international terrorist groups to immigrate, organize, recruit, raise money and buy explosives and arms here.
People on both sides of the political spectrum disagree on the need for, and potential scope of, the bill, which will surely be expanded to deal more fully with home-grown terrorism. Some on the left say that existing law is adequate and that any change would erode liberty. Some on the right would cater to their anti-immigrant agenda by using the bill to close our borders.
The bill really occupies middle ground. It should satisfy liberals and conservatives. It can produce the bipartisanship necessary for passage.
The most hotly debated provision would create special deportation proceedings for aliens who are suspected terrorists. It is a fair and balanced approach. The alien would be given a lawyer. All of the evidence would be on the record, except for sensitive classified material. When such information is used, an independent Federal judge would review it, edit it and give the alien a summary of it.
This form of judicial review has brought criticism from the American Civil Liberties Union, which maintains that an individual has the right to know the evidence being used against him. The A.C.L.U.'s opposition is overblown, because this power would be used against aliens who do not -- and should not -- have the same constitutional rights as citizens, and because deportation proceedings would be civil, not criminal.
In Canada, which certainly is not ruled by an authoritarian regime, an alien can be deported on the signatures of two cabinet ministers, with no independent review or proceedings.
Domestic terrorism is comparatively easy to thwart, for there are no foreign governments to put up roadblocks by sheltering and aiding terrorists and their organizations.
Aside from broadening the reach of the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act, only modest changes are needed in existing guidelines to help the F.B.I. Many in the F.B.I. think that the rules are unduly restrictive because they forbid the F.B.I. to investigate domestic groups unless there is concrete evidence of criminal action. This, they say, puts them into a Catch-22 situation: They cannot monitor groups unless criminal activity occurs, and they are blamed for not stopping crimes before they happen. Others, however, claim that the the F.B.I. interprets Department of Justice guidelines too restrictively.
The guidelines should be clarified so that the F.B.I. knows the extent of its investigative authority. If that authority is truly insufficient, the threshold for monitoring potential terrorist groups should be lowered. If they are lowered, a Federal judge should review any request to monitor a domestic organization. This would protect against abuses of the McCarthy era and the 1970's, when F.B.I. agents would investigate a group that did not "smell right." This new approach is similar to the one used in Federal wiretapping cases.
In the wake of Oklahoma City, the nation can responsibly protect against terrorism, without eroding basic liberties.

Graphic

 
Drawing.

Load-Date: April 28, 1995


End of Document