Like Yar'Adua, Jonathan, Buhari Attends Islamic Summit In Saudi Arabia
The Will (Nigeria)
May 30, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 The Will Newspaper All Rights Reserved
Length: 565 words
Body


President Muhammadu Buhari. BEVERLY HILLS, May 29, (THEWILL)  President Muhammadu Buhari will depart Abuja Thursday to attend the Summit of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in Makkah, Saudi Arabia just like his predecessors, Late Umaru Yar'Adua and Dr.
 Goodluck Jonathan, did during their reign. The 14th session of the Summit Conference of the OIC, scheduled to hold on Friday, May 31, will be hosted by King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud and attended by Heads of State and Governments of Member States.
 According to the OIC secretariat, the summit to be convened under the theme, "Makkah al-Mukarramah Summit: Hand in Hand toward the Future,"seeks to develop a unified stance on events in the Islamic world. President Buhari, according to a statement by Garba Shehu, his spokesman, is expected to address the forumand underscore the need for member countries to unite and work together to combat common challenges such as terrorism and violent extremism.
 "The President will also push forward themes that have been at the forefront of his domestic and international priorities, including reviving the Lake Chad Basin, investing in Nigeria to create jobs and financing for development. "On the margins of the summit, the Nigerian leader will hold bilateral meetings with world leaders to promote increased cooperation and collaboration on issues of mutual concern.
" The statement said, President Buhari, who is expected to return to the country on June 2nd, will be accompanied by Governors Mohammed Badaru Abubakar of Jigawa State, Gboyega Oyetola of Osun State and Abubakar Sani Bello of Niger State. Also on the delegation are the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Mustapha Suleiman Director-General, National Intelligence Agency, Ambassador Ahmed Rufa'i Abubakar Director-General, National Information Technology Development Agency (NITDA), Dr.
 Isa Ali Pantami and the Chairman, National Hajj Commission of Nigeria (NAHCON), Abdullahi Mukthar. Ahead of the Summit, was a preparatory meeting in Jeddah meant to adopt the draft agenda and work programme for the Summit, the statement said.
 "On the agenda were the question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict combating terrorism and violent extremism the humanitarian situation in the Muslim world promotion of scientific cooperation, among others. QUICK FACTS ACCORDING TO THE PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT Nigeria joined the OIC in 1986 and has held various positions in the Organisation, including Independent Permanent Human Rights Commission (IPHRC) Commissioner, Amb.
 M.L.
 Sulaiman, elected in 2017 In 2009, Ambassador Opeloyeru Hameed was elected Assistant Secretary General for Economic Affairs and later re-elected The OIC funded the project for training and guidelines on Sukuk issuance in 2018  In 2018, the IDB through the Presidential Committee for the North East Initiative provided relief materials to IDPs in Borno, Yobe and Adamawa States  Nigeria continues to benefit from scholarships from OIC member countries  In August 2016, the Islamic Development Bank Group (IDBG)formally opened its Nigeria Country Gateway Office in Abuja with a mission to focus its services on health, agriculture, infrastructure, small and medium-scale enterprises and regional integration  Dr Mansur Mukhtar, former Minister of Finance is now serving as the Vice President of the Islamic Development Bank. 

Load-Date: May 30, 2019


End of Document