LIKE IT OR NOT, SOME PEOPLE JUST HATE US
 Philadelphia Daily News
OCTOBER 13, 2000 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 04
Length: 333 words
Byline: Regina Medina, Daily News Staff Writer
Body


Like it or not, the United States represents a prime target for many terrorists, a U.S. terrorism expert said yesterday.
"There are a lot of people who don't like having a single superpower," said Ambassador L. Paul Bremer, the former chairman of the National Commission on Terrorism at a talk in Center City last night. "There are people in the world, particularly these terrorists, who all don't like us for what we are."
Bremer spoke to an audience of 75 people at The Union League on the same day that a U.S. Navy ship in port in Yemen was struck by a small boat that exploded. At least six Americans were killed, 11 are missing and 35 more were injured in the attack.
"We are the best target for those people who are against what the United States stands for," said Bremer. In June, the national commission submitted recommendations to President Clinton and Dennis Hastert, speaker of the House of Representatives, regarding U.S. counter-terrorism policies.
"We're seeing here the unfortunate fact that terrorism is a fact of life for all of us, all Americans and that there are people out there who really hate us," Bremer said. "These guys whoever they were who did this attack, obviously hate Americans enough to kill."
The commission concluded in its report "that we can't assume we won't see these attacks starting to come to the United States as it becomes easier for people to travel."
"We have basically open borders despite efforts by people to close" them, said Bremer, who has worked overseas in Afghanistan, Malawi and Norway.
"You can move around freely here. That's one of the glories of the American system, but it does mean it's harder to stop attacks against the United States," said Bremer.
But Americans don't have to head for the hills.
"We don't want to give in to the terrorism by changing the way we live. We have to be cautious," he said.
"If the State Department says it's not safe to travel one place, you probably shouldn't travel there."
Send e-mail to medinar@phillynews.com  

Notes

SCARED?

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Traders in the crude oil pit at the N.Y. Merchantile Exchange yesterday, where oilt prices soared after the terrorist attack on the USS Cole. (ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Load-Date: January 29, 2002


End of Document