Limo Company Owner in Crash Revealed as F.B.I. Informant, Recruiter of Terrorists, Fraudster
The New York Times 
October 9, 2018 Tuesday 13:22 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 1242 words
Byline: Andy Newman, Benjamin Weiser and William K. Rashbaum
Highlight: Shahed Hussain, the owner of the firm in the deadly limo crash, once arranged illegal driver’s licenses and posed as a jihadist.
Body


[The son of the limo company owner at the center of the investigation  was arrested.]
In 2001, a 45-year-old gas-station owner from Pakistan named Shahed Hussain walked into the Department of Motor Vehicles in Albany and obtained a driver’s license using fake documents for a would-be taxi driver who paid him $1,000.
Mr. Hussain was caught, faced federal charges and, to avoid deportation, began a secret career that led him to pose as a recruiter of terrorists.
He continued to run a series of businesses with his family, despite bankruptcy and legal issues — including, eventually, a limousine service that repeatedly ran afoul of state inspectors.
Now, Mr. Hussain’s improbable journey — from asylum-seeking immigrant to petty criminal to trusted ally of government prosecutors, has taken yet another turn. His complicated past is central to the investigation of the nation’s deadliest crash in years.
On Saturday, a stretch limo operated by Mr. Hussain’s company, Prestige Limousine, ran a stop sign on a rural highway in Schoharie, an hour west of Albany, plowed into another car and left 20 people dead.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said the limo had failed inspections for problems with its brakes, suspension and chassis last month, and was being driven by a man lacking the proper license to operate a commercial vehicle. The car was also not certified to carry the 18 people riding in it when it crashed.
“There is a ton of information that’s got to be processed — forensic information, witness statements and other materials,” a law enforcement official said of the investigation into the crash.
State Police have made clear that they would like to interview Mr. Hussain, 62.
Lee Kindlon, a lawyer for Mr. Hussain and Prestige, said he spoke on Tuesday with Mr. Hussain, who he said has been in Pakistan for some time dealing with health issues.
“He has indicated he is willing to come back if the investigation requires,” Mr. Kindlon said.
Citing the pending investigations, he declined further comment, saying, “I think it’s best right now to let the process take place.”
[The victims were friends and relatives — including four sisters from one family and newlyweds — on their way to celebrate a 30th birthday.]
Prestige issued a statement on Monday expressing condolences to the relatives of those killed. “We are performing a detailed internal investigation to determine the cause of the accident,” the statement said, adding that the company had voluntarily taken its vehicles off the road.
An examination of Mr. Hussain’s history, based on court records and interviews with those who dealt with him, shows a man who has spent the better part of two decades crossing back and forth from one side of the law to the other.
His work helped convict two leaders of an Albany mosque in a 2004 plot to import a missile and assassinate a Pakistani diplomat, and four other men in            a 2009 conspiracy to bomb synagogues in the Bronx. In both cases, the attacks never took place because they were part of a sting operation.
In one of those terrorism trials, Mr. Hussain described five years of solid work for the F.B.I.
“We did about 21 cases, including money laundering, human trafficking, drug trafficking, credit card fraud, stolen identity and D.M.V. officials — corrupt D.M.V. officials,” he said.
But a federal defender who represented one of the men whom Mr. Hussain helped lure into the terror plot in 2009 offered a darker assessment of Mr. Hussain’s character.
“If Wikipedia did a definition of fraudster, they could put his picture in,” the lawyer, Susanne Brody, said on Tuesday. “He lies about everything.”
Still, federal prosecutors during the two trials portrayed him as a trustworthy witness. In the bomb-plot case, for example, the prosecutors said his testimony was corroborated by other evidence.
“Despite trying to turn over every single rock in this man’s life in a desperate attempt to find a worm, they were never able to call into question his basic account of what happened in this case,” a prosecutor, Jason P.W. Halperin, told the jury.
Mr. Hussain arrived in the United States in about 1995 with considerable legal and extralegal adventures already behind him.
He testified in the 2009 terrorism trial that in Pakistan, he had been active in an opposition political party, arrested and tortured and charged with murder in the 1990s, freed after his father bribed the police, had fled to Moscow, Mexico and finally Texas on a fake passport and was granted asylum in Albany.
While working in and later owning gas stations, he developed a sideline helping people get driver’s licenses. He worked for a company that provided interpreters for people taking driver’s license tests at the D.M.V. and would give his customers the correct answers while ostensibly translating the questions to them.
In 2003, he used his illegal expertise in driver’s licenses in his first terrorism sting.
Under the alias “Malik,” he met with the Bangladeshi owner of an Albany pizzeria who said his brother needed a learner’s permit. For $100, no problem, Mr. Hussain said.
The men discussed religion, politics and jihad. Over time, Mr. Hussain, acting on orders from the F.B.I., convinced the pizzeria owner and another man that he was helping plan an attack on a Pakistani diplomat in New York and would be importing a surface-to-air missile from China for the purpose.
They joined the plot, were arrested and, ultimately, convicted, despite their lawyers’ complaints that Mr. Hussain entrapped them.
Also in 2003, Mr. Hussain filed for bankruptcy, claiming debts of $177,000. He continued his various ventures, sometimes in partnership with family members. They bought a hotel, now called the Crest Inn Suites and Cottages, in Gansevoort, north of Albany.
In 2008, his family started Prestige Limousine. That same year, according to court documents, some hotel guests sued him for taking reservations for cabins that had not even been built yet.
It was in 2008 that Mr. Hussain, posing as a wealthy jihadist named Maqsood and driving a series of luxury cars provided to him by the F.B.I., recruited four men for what he said was a plot to bomb synagogues in the Bronx.
Mr. Hussain drove with the men to a synagogue in Riverdale, where one of them put what he believed were bombs outside. They were fake. The four men were arrested and convicted.
But after the trial, the judge, Colleen McMahon, took the extraordinary step of writing to federal prosecutors in Albany, saying that Mr. Hussain’s trial testimony suggested he may have “perpetrated a fraud” during his earlier bankruptcy proceedings.
She noted Mr. Hussain testified about receiving “substantial sums of money” during his bankruptcy case from a family trust in Pakistan, which he did not disclose to the court or his creditors.
“A fraud on a court mocks our laws and compromises our system of justice,” the judge wrote in a letter obtained by The New York Times at its request from a court spokesman. She formally referred the case for investigation.
Mr. Hussain was never charged with any such fraud.
Jesse McKinley, Luis Ferré-Sadurní and Patrick McGeehan contributed reporting. Susan C. Beachy contributed research. 
PHOTO: Maria Lopez, of Amsterdam, N.Y., joined hundreds of mourners Monday night at a candlelight vigil for 20 people killed in a limousine crash. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Kyle Adams for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
20 Killed in Limo Crash in New York; Deadliest U.S. Accident in 9 Years

Load-Date: October 11, 2018


End of Document