Lindh, other Muslim inmates are defiant, official testifies WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 30, 2012 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 343 words
Byline: BY CHARLES WILSON • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


INDIANAPOLIS - American Taliban fighter John Walker Lindh and other Muslims housed at a special federal prison unit in Indiana have used the guise of religion to show defiance toward their captors, a prison security official testified Wednesday.
Lindh, who is suing to overturn a policy preventing him and the other Muslims he's housed with from performing their five daily prayers as a group, once delivered an incendiary sermon in Arabic at the Terre Haute prison's Communication Management Unit despite a requirement that inmates speak English except for ritual prayers, security official Tim Coleman testified.
Lindh, who is serving a 20-year sentence for aiding the Taliban during the 2001 U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan, is suing to overturn a policy that prevents him and the other Muslim detainees from conducting their five daily prayers as a group. Lindh says that group prayer is required under the school of Islam to which he adheres, and that the prison policy violates a 1993 law barring the government from curtailing religious speech without showing a compelling interest.
An official testified Monday - the first day of the trial - that the federal prison system barred unsupervised group prayer by inmates after a 2004 government report that raised concerns about the radicalization of Muslim inmates after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The official said there weren't enough Muslim chaplains to allow for supervised group prayer at the more than 100 federal prisons.
Coleman testified Wednesday that he believes allowing group prayers at the Indiana prison unit would pose a security threat. Inmate-led prayers place one inmate in a leadership position from which he can incite others to defy prison authorities, he said. He said Lindh had a history of acting defiantly toward prison officials.
"He's not recognizing our authority and is trying to put religion over our authority," Coleman said.
Coleman also claimed that Muslims, who form the majority of the inmates in the unit, grouped together to intimidate other inmates and staff.

Load-Date: August 31, 2012


End of Document