Linked: National security, war and terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 19, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A47
Length: 1626 words
Body


Extremists exploit Western vulnerability
As the civilized world comes to grips with another foiled terrorist plot, the Post-Dispatch tells us we must "strike at the poverty, injustice, fanaticism, isolation, and intolerance that brew [terrorist] rage" ("Mother of Satan," Aug. 13). In other words, the terrorists are not to blame. They simply are victims of society.
But these latest extremists were born in the Western world and raised in mostly middle-class families. In fact, some are non-Arabic Muslim converts. All of them lived ordinary lives.
In fact, even before Sept. 11, 2001, spread the current fear and distrust, other extremists were living better-than-average lives around the world. Some were even brought here before 9/11, at U.S. government expense, to spend a few months experiencing our culture and to show that we are human.
But whether visitor, immigrant or native to Western society, these extremists use their experience to exploit our vulnerabilities and to plot their next attack. Despite our foreign policies and despite the lame excuses for their plight in life, they hate us because we do not believe exactly as they do.
The only way to appease terrorists is to convert to their extremist form of Islam. That is why they kill other extremists, as well as moderate Muslims, Christians, Jews and others. We cannot rationalize with irrational people. And there is no excuse for their atrocities.
Nancy Touchette | Creve Coeur
Delusional thinking
It is a serious mistake to underestimate one's enemy. And if the Bush administration's pronouncements are taken seriously, that's precisely what it is doing. The administration insists that if a date were set for the end of the U.S. occupation of Iraq, the forces causing all the trouble in Iraq would go into hibernation until that date, reemerging when the foreign troops had departed.
Such a scenario assumes that our departure is at the top of our enemies' agenda and, moreover, that they are too stupid to realize that they could send us on our way now by merely lying low. But stupid they are not. Hence, it is more likely that their intent is to keep us in Iraq as long as possible. Substantial benefits accrue to them as long as we are there. Iraq continues to be a powerful propaganda device, drawing recruits and money to their cause in unprecedented numbers and amounts. Our ability to influence events in other trouble spots is greatly reduced, and the hands of Iran and Syria are strengthened immeasurably. Indeed, the war in Iraq is doing to us what Afghanistan did to the Soviets. Our military is being degraded, and legions of potential terrorists are being trained. The sense of solidarity with us that millions around the world expressed after Sept. 11, 2001, has been transformed into hatred. The cause of Muslim extremism that was faltering, damaged by Osama bin Laden's action, has been resurrected by the occupation.
Would our antagonists attempt to - make hay out of our withdrawal? - Of course. They would attempt to save anything they could from whatever happens. But they know (and we should know) that what they could salvage from the end of the occupation is considerably less than what they now reap.
To think that our enemies are unaware of these facts and to deny that those with whom we battle do not welcome our continued presence in Iraq is to cling to a delusion shaped by wishful thinking and rigid ideological commitments. It is the stuff of which tragedy and national decline have so often been fashioned.
Thomas W. Allen | St. Louis
Without security, no liberty
Earlier this year there was a lot of vocal opposition from liberal Democrats and the media toward President George W. Bush's National Security Agency wiretapping program, stating that it was unconstitutional. Considering that a very similar program was used to catch the terrorists that were plotting to blow up 10 passenger jets bound for the United States from England, do you suppose that these same liberals and the media should push Mr. Bush to demand that England release the people because such means were used to catch them?
It is amazing that in a world full of people determined to kill people from our country in large quantities that liberal Democrats and their allies - the media - would rather play politics. We should be very concerned when people like this are one step away from taking a seat in the U.S. Congress.
Benjamin Franklin said: "Those who would give up essential liberty, to purchase a little temporary safety, deserve neither liberty nor safety." As wise as he was, one cannot truly be free if he doesn't feel secure. We have a right to be able to board planes and live our lives and not have to worry about being blown up. Until the liberal sector of the Democratic Party and the media make the general population feel secure with their policies, we should be concerned. Attacking the president's policies as the only offering doesn't make me feel secure.
Richard Dierker | Imperial
What happened to national security?
For years after Sept. 11, 2001, I have listened as the Bush administration complained about how the American public never heard about the many successes in the war on terror, but only heard about the its failures. This was, the administration said, to protect the operational aspects of its counter-terrorism operations.
Then came the discovery of the plot to bomb American-bound airliners. From the start of the day the plot was revealed, everything anyone ever wanted to know about the operation - who found the alleged terrorists, how, the ingredients of the liquid explosive being used - was in the media, in print and especially in the 24-hour cable news networks. What happened to national security? Why was this terrorist operation and how it was shut down so much in the public eye?
Could it have been the U.S. primary elections two days before? Could it have been the political analysis of those elections that depicted Americans' views against the current policies in Iraq and in general on the current handling of the war on terror? Was it the upcoming November elections and the need of the current administration to have something to win voters in that election?
"Flip-flop" was used by the Republicans against contenders in the 2004 election, yet this mad rush to report on and give official authorization about the latest attack on U.S. interests appears the quintessential "flip-flop" on something that previously was blanketed under the secrecy of national security.
Does this move to a more open style of governing or politically based actions threaten our national security?
Noel Meyer | St. Louis
Ticket to chaos
Pundits say Democratic leaders are reluctant to criticize President George W. Bush on Iraq and other foreign policy issues because they don't want to face the apparently difficult question of what needs to be changed. I would change the notion that talking with our adversaries is "rewarding" bad behavior.
With this policy, we reinforce our differences. By making no effort to know our enemies, we justify fear and resort to fear-based action such as pre-emptive war. By the same notion, our adversaries know us no deeper than the letters on the side of the missile heading for them. This ensures that the walls of fear, suspicion and separation will grow higher and thicker. As this happens, more are drawn to take sides. This is a one-way ticket to chaos.
Chaos always ensues when any group of people totally disengages from the very real "sameness" we share on the human level. True "humanness" sees the ridiculousness of war. It can harbor serious disagreement without violence because both sides respect each other, at the very least, as fellow humans. Yet we can never reach this rudimentary step if we refuse to talk with anyone with whom we disagree.
I'm amazed as I watch this administration fumble and bumble in so many things, yet state that sitting with it is a privilege, as if it is the "omnipotent seat of all wisdom."
This immature arrogance is getting us nowhere fast. There is no harm in sitting down and talking with anyone. Who knows? We might just find some ground on which to build. At the very least, it would then be more difficult to accept the other sides' innocent dead as "collateral damage."
John Zinselmeier | St. Louis
Military might - or might not
Regarding Michael Barone's column "The left refuses to re-cognize real danger" (Aug. 17): I feel endangered, Mr. Barone. Who would bother with any other strategy if military might alone could keep us safe? (As for the lesson of Neville Chamberlain and World War II, is that logic or emotion? Because military might was an appropriate and necessary response to one threat, does that prove it to be the sole appropriate response to all threats?)
Meanwhile, according to news reports on last week's terror plot in London, it was someone within the conspirators' community who put security officials on the case. That made me feel safe. Or, at least, a tiny bit more hopeful against what you call "the evil of the enemy that faces us."
Carole Christie | St. Louis County
Tenuous attachment
As the Bush administration tries desperately to attach itself, however tenuously, to actual British successes against terrorists, it cannot free itself from its own glaring failures, number one of which is the failure to capture Osama bin Laden.
Because of the delusional Bush administration's misconceived policies, bin Laden is still in business, the Taliban is making a comeback in Afghanistan, thousands of Americans and God only knows how many innocent Iraqis have been killed or wounded, tens of thousands of new terrorists have been recruited, millions of people now hate us and billions of dollars have been squandered.
And all we get is spin.
Bill Mahiger | St. Louis

Notes

 LETTERS FROM READERS YOUR VIEWS  

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC
 GRAPHIC - (Cartoon on terrorist level alerts.) 

Load-Date: August 19, 2006


End of Document