Listen to ‘The Daily’: A Terrorism Suspect and a Visa Lottery; The Daily
The New York Times 
November 2, 2017 Thursday 17:55 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: PODCASTS; the-daily
Length: 486 words
Byline: Michael Barbaro
Highlight: The man charged over the New York truck attack entered the United States through a lottery program for diversity. President Trump has pushed to cancel it.
Body


Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Via Apple Podcasts | Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher
The man charged over the deadly truck attack in Manhattan on Tuesday entered the United States seven years ago through a lottery program intended to diversify the country.
President Trump has pressed Congress to cancel the program. “Sounds nice,” he said. “It is not nice. It is not good.”
On today’s episode:
Michael Schwirtz, an investigative reporter for The New York Times, talks about the suspect, Sayfullo Saipov.
Peter Baker, The Times’s chief White House correspondent, discusses President Trump’s response.
Background reading:
Sayfullo Saipov left Uzbekistan in 2010 as a moderate Muslim with dreams of making it in the United States. But a life of disappointments awakened “monsters inside.”
 The attack in New York has brought scrutiny to a program that admits as many as 50,000 foreigners a year without requiring them to show family ties to the United States or special skills.
 President Trump has sought to turn the attack into a political talking point for his agenda on immigration and national security.
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
How do I listen?
If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.
From your mobile device:
You can listen and subscribe to “The Daily” from any podcast player. If you’re reading this from an iPhone or other Apple mobile device, tap this link to listen in Apple Podcasts. If you’re on an Android device, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.
Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)
From a desktop or laptop:
Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:
Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
On Google Home:
You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
Michael Schwirtz and Peter Baker contributed reporting. 
PHOTO: Sayfullo Saipov’s image was displayed as Gov. Andrew Cuomo, Mayor Bill de Blasio, Police Commissioner James O’Neill and other officials addressed reporters on in New York on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Sam Hodgson for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
How to Join Our Podcast Club

Load-Date: July 15, 2021


End of Document