Listen to Webb
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 14, 2009 Saturday
Final Edition


Copyright 2009 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 308 words
Body


 The Obama administration intends to try terror suspects in civilian courts. Yesterday Sen. Jim Webb said:
 "I have never disputed the constitutional authority of the president to convene Article III courts in cases of international terrorism. However, I remain very concerned about the wisdom of doing so. Those who have committed acts of international terrorism are enemy combatants, just as certainly as the Japanese pilots who killed thousands of Americans at Pearl Harbor. It will be disruptive, costly, and potentially counterproductive to try them as criminals in our civilian courts.
 "The precedent set by this decision deserves careful scrutiny as we consider proper venues for trying those now held at Guantanamo who were apprehended outside of this country for acts that occurred outside of the country. And we must be especially careful with any decisions to bring onto American soil any of those prisoners who remain a threat to our country but whose cases have been adjudged as inappropriate for trial at all. They do not belong in our country, they do not belong in our courts, and they do not belong in our prisons.
 "I have consistently argued that military commissions, with the additional procedural rules added by Congress and enacted by President Obama, are the most appropriate venue for trying individuals adjudged to be enemy combatants."
 Although we disagree with Webb regarding the housing of terrorists and suspected terrorists in domestic prisons, we fully agree with him that civilian courts are not the proper vehicles for prosecuting enemy combatants - which is what jihadist terrorists are. Why does the Obama administration find that simple fact so difficult to understand? The U.S. needs terror courts to deal with enemies who are not fighting in foreign armies but on behalf of extra-national terrorist organizations.

Load-Date: February 27, 2010


End of Document