Living in the shadow of terrorism Legacy • Sept. 11, 2001 marked a day that a younger generation had to start to grow up.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 12, 2011 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A17
Length: 856 words
Byline: By Nick Fandos Nick Fandos of Kirkwood is the editor in chief of The Prep News, the St. Louis University High School student newspaper, which also published this column.
Dateline: 0 
Body


There has been much talk of Osama bin Laden's death. And, appropriately, much talk of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Several of my high school classes were postponed or altered last week so that we could talk and share - remember, like good Americans, just what happened 10 years ago in September.
It's a conversation and a question that seem strange to me. I was 8 when bin Laden's men hijacked the planes. Most of my schoolmates were even younger. There is, quite truthfully, very little we can remember about the context or reaction to that day outside of our own small world views - at least very little relative to our teachers and parents who guided us through that time. Yet, somehow, I know that day changed everything, for me, too.
Teacher after teacher asked us if we remembered 9/11. Most of my classmates responded with small, piecemeal details of their own days, with things they remember their parents saying - basically, with affirmation that, no we didn't really remember that day. In fact, we couldn't. It wasn't until my third period discussing bin Laden that a friend courageously asserted what we all could not: It bothers me, he said, that adults think we have no connection to the day. The images and violence - the burning buildings we saw - how could they not have affected us?
After all the jokes and superficial celebrations, after all the phony remembrances and fabricated details, isn't that exactly right? For a generation - for my generation - 9/11 was a day when we had to start growing up. For many of us, the images of death and destruction were impossibly new. We were faced with, for the first time, the realization that the world is not always beautiful or just as we thought. In one morning, we were forced to grow up.
Like most things, this growth happens at different times for different people; for a lucky few, it never happens at all. But, inevitably there comes a time when playing war in the back yard with a couple of kids from down the street no longer seems as important as that Great War they are telling us about in social studies class. A time when hurt feelings are not just limited to a temper tantrum or good pout.
There comes a time when everything we have taken for granted suddenly is not so certain. Namely, for those of us brought up in organized religion, a point at which we realize, for better or for worse, that it no longer feels like God is watching out for us in the immediate sense we always knew. Sometimes it is hard to see him there at all. Maybe, too, people are not all happy. Our parents and friends of parents have problems; the world is not all as white, pious, male-female relational, tolerant, and orderly as we thought.
To enter this new and fallen world is to grow up. For each, this movement comes at a different time and place and probably not all at once.
I just finished reading Colum McCann's "Let the Great World Spin," a novel that is, in part, an allegory for 9/11. The story is centered on Philippe Petit's 1974 tightrope walk between the twin towers of the World Trade Center and weaves together a dozen or so narratives of New Yorkers connected in tragedy. The question at the center of the novel, it seems to me, is how we go on living hopefully in a world marred by death and violence. How do we, like Petit, toe that tightrope, balancing darkness and light?
It was the question before New Yorkers a decade ago. How could they honor the past and still let life go on? In a less immediate sense, though, it is the question we all face, especially as children and now adolescents butting up against it for the first time. Our worlds after 9/11 were different. In tangible ways, the larger world was different, too. Ramped-up airport security bemoaned by weary travelers. War in Afghanistan and then Iraq: thousands of young men and women dying in what often looked like a lost cause. Economic recession. These were and are, some of the tangible realities of the last 10 years. But to 8-year-olds, these things mattered little.
Instead, our worlds changed in a more intangible way. The most significant change for us was inside. What does real fear and insecurity feel like? What is uncertainly? What thing could make all those people die? Why?
What happened on 9/11 will never be finished. Particularly for those of us who came of age in this last decade of terror, there is no going back. No way to quietly return to our happy, innocent selves of Sept. 10, 2001. We will spend our lives trying to find that happiness, trying to put all the pieces back together. There is no magic solution; there is no benchmark to be reached called happiness. There is, in other words, no easy or permanent means to find joy.
Instead we face what we've always faced. How do we learn to walk in world where terrorism will always exist? Where justice means very little? Where thousands of people can die because of the actions a few? A world where relationships are muddled and answers are never as clear as we once thought?
Yet, the world is still spinning. We must toe the tightrope. Walk the walk, so to speak. There is beauty to be found - hope, too. All of us know it.

Load-Date: May 12, 2011


End of Document