Lloyd's sues Saudi Arabia, others to recover money paid in 9/11 claims
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 9, 2011 Friday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 617 words
Byline: Brian Bowling
Body


Saudi Arabia and several Saudi organizations and banks should cover  the $215 million a group of insurers paid out in claims related to the  9/11 terrorist attacks, according to a federal lawsuit the group filed  on Thursday in Johnstown. 
Lloyd's Syndicate 3500, part of the company more commonly known as  Lloyd's of London, filed the lawsuit in Western Pennsylvania because  United Airlines Flight 93 crashed in Somerset County. The group of  insurance underwriters also wanted the case heard in a court covered by  the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, according to Stephen Cozen, a  Philadelphia lawyer representing the underwriters. 
They believe the Philadelphia-based circuit that hears appeals of  Pennsylvania cases would be more sympathetic to the lawsuit than the 2nd  Circuit, whose jurisdiction includes New York. The 2nd Circuit ruled in  2008 that Saudi Arabia was immune from a lawsuit brought against it by  the families of the 9/11 victims in New York federal court. 
Other circuits have ruled that American citizens can pursue  terrorism-related claims against foreign governments, and the 3rd  Circuit is likely to agree with their reasoning, Cozen said. 
"U.S. citizens have the right to have their cases heard in U.S. courts," he said. 
The lawsuit claims Saudi Arabia and the organizations knowingly  provided material support and resources to al-Qaida in the years  preceding the 9/11 attacks. 
The defendants include the Saudi High Commission for Relief of Bosnia  & Herzegovina, Saudi Joint Relief Committee for Kosovo and  Chechnya, Saudi Red Crescent Society, the Saudi-based National Commerce  Bank, Al Rajhi Banking and Investment Co. and three Saudi citizens  connected to the organizations. 
"Absent the sponsorship of al-Qaida's material sponsors and  supporters, including the defendants named herein, al-Qaida would not  have possessed the capacity to conceive, plan and execute the September  11th attacks," the lawsuit states. 
A spokesman for the Saudi Embassy in Washingtoncould not be reached for comment. 
Cozen said the group filed the lawsuit yesterday -- three days before  the 10th anniversary of the attacks -- because it had to wait until a  lawsuit that 9/11 victims filed against the companies it insures was  concluded. The New York judge in that case barred the insurers from  adding terrorism groups and terrorist sponsors as third-party defendants  who could have been held liable for paying claims to the people suing  airlines and security companies, he said. 
Those claims added up to more than $215 million, the attorney said. 
"We now have the right to pursue the recovery of that money," Cozen  said. He said he is confident that his clients could collect damages  from Saudi Arabia if they win the lawsuit. 
Dan Gilbert, a Rockford, Ill., attorney whose practice includes  terrorism lawsuits, said the Lloyd's case faces a significant hurdle. A  1996 law allowing lawsuits against foreign countries that sponsor  terrorism requires that the State Department list the country as a  terrorism sponsor. The only four countries on the list are Cuba, Iran,  Sudan and Syria. 
Gilbert won a $308 million verdict in 1996 against Iran on behalf of  an Army Reserve lieutenant colonel and five Navy divers aboard TWA  Flight 847 in 1985. They were held hostage for 17 days in Beirut.  Damages were collected from assets the United States froze when it  severed relations with Iran. 
If the Lloyd's lawsuit succeeds, it will be a "great breakthrough" in attempts to hold terrorism sponsors accountable, he said. 
"They should be subject to liability," he said. "If you look at the  intent of the law, it was to prevent nations from providing support to  terrorists." 

Load-Date: September 9, 2011


End of Document