Lloyd's sees interest in standalone terror coverage
Business Insurance
May 2, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 30
Length: 342 words
Byline: SARAH VEYSEY
Body


PHILADELPHIA-The uncertainty about whether the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act will be renewed at the end of the year is prompting interest in standalone terrorism cover, according to a panel of Lloyd's of London underwriters.
The group of underwriters was gathered for a panel discussion at the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.'s conference.
Tina Kirby, underwriter for specialty lines at Beazley Group P.L.C. in London, said that some buyers whose policies have an April renewal, are considering purchasing standalone terrorism policies for the three months of 2006 that they may be uncovered for terrorism if TRIA is not renewed.
This poses risk managers a conundrum, however, she noted, because if the act is renewed they have bought cover they may not need, but if TRIA is not renewed then they would likely have bought cover at a less expensive rate than will be offered next year if the act is not renewed and demand for cover therefore increases.
For risks with little terrorism exposure-"the potato farm in Idaho-type risks"-prices for standalone terrorism cover are decreasing, noted Ms. Kirby.
But for properties in areas such as Manhattan or Chicago, prices are still firm as underwriters try to manage their aggregates, noted Ms. Kirby.
For some other lines of business rates are decreasing, the panel said.
Prices are decreasing for large, risk-managed property accounts, except for some accounts which have Florida exposure, according to Conor Finn, managing director of the nonmarine property division of Markel International, the London-based unit of Markel Corp.
In the technology, media and telecommunications risks sector, prices are coming under pressure, noted Mr. Bolton.
For some marine risks, prices are increasing, according to David Foreman, chief underwriting officer of Wellington Underwriting P.L.C. in London.
This is particularly true for marine energy risks, he noted, because many underwriters suffered large losses from Hurricane Ivan last year.
Wendy Baker, president of Lloyd's America Inc., moderated the panel discussion.

Load-Date: May 6, 2005


End of Document