Lobster facility fire in Nova Scotia 'suspicious,' Canadian minister says
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 19, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: MEDICINE; Pg. 1
Length: 552 words
Byline: Samantha Long
Body


Bernadette Jordan, minister of fisheries and oceans, said MPs should have the opportunity to voice their concerns about the ongoing disputes between commercial fishers and the Mi'kmaq people, who are afforded treaty rights to fish for a "moderate living".
Fierce clashes outside fish plants in southwestern Nova Scotia last week culminated in a weekend fire that destroyed a lobster pound used to store the catch of Mi'kmaq fishers.
A group of six Nova Scotia senators, meanwhile, condemned what they described as escalating violence against Mi'kmaq fishers.
NDP Leader Jagmeet Singh also spoke out on the situation by calling the violence against Indigenous fishers a form of domestic terrorism.
Eleanor Michael of Sipekne'katik First Nation said she is frightened by the attacks against her community.
"I need a complete and comprehensive investigation by the appropriate authorities", Bellegarde stated.
"I should be able to live my life as a young lady, but instead I'm stuck here fighting for my treaties and for what was, and is, ours", Gilbert said.
Nova Scotia Premier Stephen McNeil took to social media to urge Ottawa to define what constitutes legal harvesting in a "moderate livelihood" fishery.
Many commercial lobster fishermen say they consider the new Sipekne'katik fishery in St. Marys Bay illegal and worry that catching lobster outside the mandated season, particularly during the summer spawning period, will negatively impact stocks.
COVID-19 caseload in India crosses 75-lakh mark
The death toll climbed to 1,14,610 with 579 fatalities being registered in a span of 24 hours, the data updated at 8 am showed. The central teams shall also guide in effectively managing the challenges related to timely diagnosis and follow up.
Both sides want Ottawa to step in to help resolve the issue.
The Mounties have made two arrests in relation to other incidents linked to the dispute, charging one man with assault against a local Indigenous chief and charging another with arson for allegedly burning a vehicle.
Hours later, Canada's Minister of Public Safety, Bill Blair issued a statement saying, "I have now approved a request from Nova Scotia's attorney general to enhance RCMP resources as needed in that jurisdiction in order to keep the peace".
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said he is "appalled by the acts of violence, intimidation, and destruction taking place in Nova Scotia". "I'm deeply concerned about the acts of intimidation and violence".
"The perpetrators will be held accountable", he said Saturday on Twitter, noting that Ottawa has approved the request to provide more policing support.
"We need to find a path forward that recognizes the inherent and long-standing rights reaffirmed 21 years ago of Indigenous peoples for moderate livelihood", he said. "We're focused on keeping people safe".
Non-Indigenous fishers raided the facility, damaged property, killed Mi'kmaw lobsters and set a van on fire.
Many non-Indigenous critics, however, cite a clarification issued four months after the 1999 ruling, stating the Mi'kmaq treaty rights would be subject to federal regulations to ensure fish conservation.
The non-Indigenous protesters oppose the band's decision to start a commercial lobster fishing business that has operated outside the federally regulated lobster season since mid-September.

Load-Date: October 19, 2020


End of Document