LOCAL REACTION TO MOSQUE ATTACK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
FEBRUARY 27, 1994, SUNDAY,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 468 words
Byline: BILL HELTZEL, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Local Jews and Muslims reacted with horror to the slaughter Friday of 61 people at a Hebron mosque, but some have hope that the tragedy will spur peace talks that could prevent future carnage.
''It's a terrible event, both in terms of the loss of lives and the possibility that it will slow down or derail the peace process. I, like many people, am in a state of shock and mourning,'' said Michael Zigmond, a professor of neuroscience at Pitt and a founder of the Pittsburgh chapter of Peace Now. ''But sometimes things happen in history that are so terrible that everybody decides that enough is enough and they compromise.''
Maher Awwad, a self-employed businessman who lives in Mars, was born on the West Bank. He, too, fears that the peace movement will collapse, but he sees a glimmer of hope. ''That lies in the hope that the Israeli leadership that is seeking peace is indeed a believer in the peace process.''
''This is such an extraordinary event that it is bound to shock people into trying to find some way out, to live together and to work together,'' said Philip Baskin, a Squirrel Hill resident who has been active in local and national Jewish organizations.
Meyer Berger, a self-described peace activist, said the tragedy could accelerate the peace movement, if used properly.
Betty Pickett, executive director of the Pittsburgh chapter of the National Council of Christians and Jews, said the tragedy ''underscores the need for people to begin appreciating the uniqueness of other people, and that even though there may be longstanding misunderstandings and disagreements and even outright hatred, there have to be ways to get beyond that so people can live in peace.''
Zigmond thinks the Israeli government must make a gesture to Palestinians, just as Israel expects the Palestinian Liberation Organization to make a gesture after Palestinian acts of terrorism.
''And this is terrorism. It would be a mistake to think of this as some kind of nut who became psychotic like some nut in California who goes into a post office and kills.''
Zigmond said it did not appear that Baruch Goldstein, the Brooklyn-born physician responsible for the slaughter, was part of a conspiracy, in the sense of a group of people planning and participating in an attack. ''But it was a conspiracy, in the sense that he was part of an organization that supported this kind of thing and had a lot of encouragement.''
He said Jewish zealots in the occupied territories should be disarmed. ''They are fanatics, just like some groups of Palestinians are fanatics.''
Maria Usef, director of the Middle East Forum, agrees. She said the massacre was almost inevitable, ''when you have militant Jewish settlers nose to nose with Palestinians in a very small town. I don't see why they should walk around Hebron with machine guns.''

Load-Date: September 15, 1994


End of Document