Locals: Bin Laden's demise long overdue
Morris Daily Herald, Ill.
May 2, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 340 words
Byline: Jo Ann Hustis, Morris Daily Herald, Ill.
Body


May 02--Jay Sawyer of Morris is ecstatic about the death of terrorist leader Osama bin Laden.
"Absolutely," he said today over coffee at a local restaurant. "It's great news. Ten years in the coming, and finally we got him. What more could you ask for?"
Sawyer said retribution is possible, however.
"There's definitely a concern if this is gonna wake the somewhat slumbering dragon," he noted.
Retired FBI agent Robert Glendon was elated, too. At the same time, he was uncertain about retribution, partly because he said the United States made the war on terrorism a bigger operation than it really was.
Glendon was not surprised at the al Qaeda leader's death, which he said was really just a question of time. Realistically, he thought President Obama should take credit for bin Laden's demise.
"Just like the manager of a good baseball team gets the credit, President Obama should get the credit," Glendon said. "Now we have a different light that's going to be accorded to this (2012) election that's coming up."
Morris Mayor Dick Kopczick believed bin Laden would eventually be captured, but not necessarily killed. Now, he's concerned that reaction could incite "something even worse than we ever dreamed of."
"He was cold-hearted," the mayor said, noting that bin Laden was a criminal responsible for the deaths of thousands of civilians.
Jerry Terando of Morris, whose son, S/SGT. Joshua Terando, was killed by a sniper in Iraq in 2005, said bin Laden's death is long overdue for a man responsible for the deaths of thousands of others.
He said the leader's demise probably will not mark the end of the war on terrorism.
"On anything that involves blood, then you get the blood vendetta going," Terando pointed out.
To see more of The Morris Daily Herald, go to http://www.morrisdailyherald.com. Copyright (c) 2011, Morris Daily Herald, Ill. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document