Local Muslims fear stereotypes; Groups like ISIS a threat to Muslims as well, a leader says.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 8, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. B7
Length: 331 words
Byline: By Malik Perkins
Body


DAYTON - Muslims from the Dayton area say they do not want to be stereotyped following the president's speech about terrorism and the San Bernadino shootings.
President Barack Obama addressed the nation from the oval office on Sunday night.
"The threat from terrorism is real," he said. "But we will overcome it."
Muslims in the Miami Valley who spoke with this newspaper Monday agreed that terrorism is a serious threat, but they do not want their faith to be distorted or to be labeled as extremist because of others.
"It is very offensive to have to explain something obvious like that," said Nasser Kashou, Wright State University assistant professor in bio-medical engineering. "Murder is murder... A crime is a crime."
Kashou also serves as the adviser for the Muslim Center Association at Wright State. The organization focuses on providing prayer services for Muslims, many of whom are international students.
There are eight mosques and one Islamic school in the Dayton area. Omar Shyaam Yahya, who is a leader at the mosque Masjid At-Taqwa, said people who commit violent acts are not true Muslims.
"We are against violence," Yahya said. "People who do that are not studying from the same book as real Muslims."
He also said that there are Muslims who love the United States of America and who serve in the U.S. military.
"We love this country, too," Yahya said. "We are taught to live in a way that you would want a Muslim to be your neighbor.
During his address, the president asked Congress to prevent people who are on the no-fly list from buying guns. He also wants to restrict sales of assault rifles and wants authorization to use force against ISIS. Kashou said extremist groups like ISIS are a huge threat to Muslims as well, but he wants people to use critical thinking when dealing with people of different faiths and avoid judgment.
"We have to understand that there is good in everybody," he said. "It is the agenda of people who are trying to cause fear to make us forget that."

Load-Date: December 8, 2015


End of Document