LOCAL EMERGENCY WORKERS TRAIN WITH TERRORISM EXPERTS; THE ARMY WAS IN MADISON THIS WEEK TEACHING HOW TO DETECT AND NEUTRALIZE; TERRORIST THREATS.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
April 13, 2000, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 2000 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Local/Wisconsin,
Length: 314 words
Byline: Phil Brinkman Wisconsin State Journal
Body


If it happened in Oklahoma City, it can happen here, say terrorism experts, which is why the Army was in Madison this week training emergency personnel in detecting and neutralizing terrorist threats.
The city was one of 120 around the country to receive a $ 300,000 federal grant to combat possible biological, chemical and nuclear threats.
The money will be used to train firefighters, police, public health workers and others to detect and handle lethal materials, such as mustard gas or the nerve agent sarin.
While the training consists largely of showing people how to test for various chemicals using litmus paper or hand-held gas detectors, the biggest challenge may be getting emergency personnel to go against their own instincts in a terrorist situation and stay back, Fire Chief Debra Amesqua said.
''When we get on the scene we immediately want to mitigate the situation, but if we're not careful in cases of terrorism we can become part of the problem,'' Amesqua said.
Instead, first responders are taught to be alert to signs that a directed attack is under way, instead of a simple accident. For example, responders may observe large numbers of people exhibiting similar symptoms.
To date, there have been few such incidents in southern Wisconsin. Three years ago, the Madison Fire Department assisted the FBI in investigating a Janesville man accused of manufacturing the toxin ricin. He was convicted and sentenced to 12 years and 7 months in prison.
Several years earlier, firefighters responding to a house fire on Madison's South Side walked into a burning house whose doors had been booby-trapped with shotguns set to go off.
The grant will help pay for equipment and train about 200 emergency personnel in Madison and other Dane County communities, Division Fire Chief Arthur Dinkins said. Milwaukee received a similar grant, the only other Wisconsin community to do so.

Load-Date: April 14, 2000


End of Document