Local Responders To Get Terrorism Protection
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 28, 2004, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: METRO,
Length: 903 words
Byline: VALERIE KALFRIN, vkalfrin@tampatrib.com; Reporter Valerie Kalfrin can be reached at (813) 259-7800.  
Body


SUITS, OTHER GEAR PROVIDE DEFENSE AGAINST CHEMICALS
TAMPA - More than two years after the Sept. 11 attacks, Florida's first responders are about to receive some expensive suits designed to protect them from a terrorist attack involving toxic chemicals.
A $9 million Homeland Security grant will pay for 30,000 personal protection kits for the responders, officials said. About 1,700 of the kits will go to Tampa police and Hillsborough County sheriff's deputies.
Each kit will contain two chemical-resistant suits, a respirator, and gloves and boots to protect patrol officers and deputies, said Chuck Hagan, a project administrator for the state Division of Emergency Management.
The equipment offers a lower level of protection than what bomb squad, tactical and hazardous-materials units wear, but it will protect officers around the perimeter of an event so they can offer immediate aid and evacuate people, officials said.
"We want to reduce the time between any event and our response to that event," said Tampa police Capt. John Bennett, who heads the department's specialty teams. "The officer needs to have the tools right in their vehicle to hold the fort or until we can replenish them."
After the Sept. 11 attacks, Tampa police received air-purifying respirators, which cover the face and allow the officer to breathe through a filter, Bennett said.
The Florida Division of Emergency Management is supervising the distribution of the new kits to all of Florida's emergency responders by May 15, Hagan said. The federal grant totals $9.4 million.
Safeware Inc. of Largo, Md., with an office in Jacksonville, was awarded the contract in January to ship the kits in stages, officials said.
About 5,700 kits are allocated to a nine-county region between Sumter and Manatee counties, said Troy Walker, special agent supervisor for the Clearwater Field Office of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement.
Tampa police will receive about 800, Walker said. The Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office will receive about 880.
Each kit costs $308 and has a shelf life of about five years, Hagan said. He hopes federal money will become available to maintain the gear.
Gray Is For The Real Thing
The kits come in black nylon bags with waterproof bottoms. Included are two DuPont protective suits, a blue one for training and a vacuum-sealed gray one to be opened during an actual event, Hagan said.
The kits also have a 3M full-face respirator with filters for training and to protect against nerve and biological agents, black PVC boots, chemical-resistant gloves, decontamination agents and chemical-resistant tape to wrap around arms, legs and other potentially exposed areas, Hagan said.
Fire departments have worn protective gear for chemical spills for years, but outfitting police provided a unique challenge, he said.
Field tests guaranteed that the officers could drive cars, direct traffic and fire weapons while wearing the equipment, Hagan said.
"We had to swap out the gloves because they were so thick, they couldn't get their fingers through the trigger guards," he said.
Tom Latourrette, a scientist at Rand Corp. in Santa Monica, Calif., said Rand spoke to about 200 people from 80 departments in the spring and summer of 2002 about their protection needs. Terrorism protection was a big issue, he said.
Agencies pushed to get the equipment after the Sept. 11 attacks, but "we're a long way from understanding how it will be used," Latourrette said. "It stems from a lot of uncertainties: What exactly is going to happen? What are the police going to be doing? … A lot of the protocols for how this is going to be used need to be worked out."
Add 20 Minutes
For instance, donning the gear and taping up takes about 20 minutes, which would need to be factored into response time, Latourrette said. Tool belts are not accessible once underneath the suits, and there is concern about the suits tearing during vigorous activity. The suits are made of a chemical-resistant fabric called Tychem.
"It's pretty tough stuff, but it's not designed for structural collapse," Latourrette said. Its typical use is within an industrial environment.
"Transitioning that into emergency response is difficult, because these suits are cumbersome," Latourrette said.
Tampa police Chief Stephen Hogue said: "It's going to be a delay while we put on the suits, there's no doubt about it. But you can't ask the officers to run in and commit suicide. … Anything's better than nothing, and the state's providing them."
He thinks training will provide some answers. Fort Walton Beach police, where Hogue was police chief before coming to Tampa, also had received these suits.
"Depends on the level of threat, what kind of threat it is, what we know about it," Hogue said. "It's obviously going to be a touchy situation."

(CHART) (C) WHAT IT MEANS
Although the new chemical suits are not as protective as the ones worn by tactical and hazardous-materials units, they will protect officers around the perimeter of an event so they can offer immediate aid and evacuate people.

(CHART) (C) CHEMICAL - RESISTANT SUITS
DuPon's Tychem F Chemical Protection Suite
3M full-face respirator filters protect against nerve and biological agents.
Chemical-resistant tape wraps around arms, legs and other openings.
Chemical-resistant gloves
The suit is made from a special chemical-resistant fabric.
PVC boots
Tribune graphic by K. HUMPHREYS
Sources: Tampa Police department, DuPont

Graphic

 
CHART (2C)

Load-Date: March 1, 2004


End of Document