Local experits: bin Laden dead, terrorism lives
The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)
May 3, 2011 Tuesday


Copyright 2011 The Times-Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 690 words
Byline: Borys Krawczeniuk, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.
Body


May 03--For Chris Carney, the pursuit of Osama bin Laden personally dated back better than a decade.
Long before he was even a local congressman on the House Homeland Security Committee, well before 9/11, the former college professor from Dimock Twp. was a Middle East analyst for the federal government. His job was helping to keep Saddam Hussein "bottled up" in Iraq, but also included "paying attention" to bin Laden and al-Qaida.
When Mr. Carney heard President Barack Obama planned to address the nation late Sunday, he had a feeling about what the president would say. He woke up his sons so they could watch. He thought about the hundreds of thousands, no, millions of man-hours spent tracking down the world's most famous terrorists.
"Honestly, I was so elated," Mr. Carney said. "I knew it was coming. But when the president said it out loud, my eyes welled up."
As much as they celebrated bin Laden's demise, Mr. Carney, Pennsylvania's U.S. senators and local political scientists said it raised new questions about the United States' complicated relationship with Pakistan but mostly left the fight against terrorism ongoing.
"The war on terrorism is not over, but this is a significant turning point," Mr. Carney said.
Sen. Pat Toomey, who credited the countless military and intelligence employees and Mr. Obama, said bin Laden's killing could have a significant symbolic effect.
"It's a very good day for the United States of America. It's a good day for civilized society throughout the world. This is a big deal. It took a long time coming, but finally Osama bin Laden was brought to justice," Mr. Toomey said during a Monday morning appearance at the Greater Scranton Chamber of Commerce. "It's not immediately clear to me that this has a major immediate impact in the ongoing war against the extremists who want to do as much harm as they can to our country, but it's nevertheless very, very important."
Mr. Toomey said the killing could discourage terrorist recruitment because of the lengths to which the U.S. went to find bin Laden. The U.S. has "extensively degraded" al-Qaida over the years, but "the successors to the centralized al-Qaida network are still very much active, still looking for every opportunity to do as much harm as they can."
Mr. Carney and Sen. Bob Casey said Pakistani officials have many questions to answer because bin Laden was located so close to the capital of Islamabad and only a short distance from a military academy.
"To say this will complicate an already tense and complicated relationship is an understatement," said Mr. Casey, chairman of the Near Eastern and South and Central Asian Affairs Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
Mr. Carney has no doubt someone within the Pakistani government -- probably its controversial intelligence service that is more interested in keeping tabs on India than fighting al-Qaida -- knew of bin Laden's presence. Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari's assurances that he is serious about fighting terrorism are hard to believe, he said.
"He's saying that with a country full of al-Qaida supporters," Mr. Carney said.
Gretchen Van Dyke, Ph.D., who teaches a class on U.S. foreign policy at the University of Scranton, said the United States had eliminated a man that caused the country to spend $1 trillion in two wars and undermined the reputation of the Central Intelligence Agency, which did not foresee 9/11.
Other groups on terrorist watch lists -- Hezbollah and Hamas -- are unlikely to be discouraged by bin Laden's death, she said.
"Terrorism is not going away," Dr. Van Dyke said. "It has been around for years and years. It will likely continue to plague the international community although it might be on a much smaller scale."
Contact the writer: bkrawczeniuk @timesshamrock.com
To see more of The Times-Tribune or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://thetimes-tribune.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document