Local column: Have we beaten terrorism?
Idaho Falls Post Register
February 9, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 The Post Register All Rights Reserved
Length: 576 words
Byline: Jay Gaskill, Writer
Dateline: Idaho Falls, ID 
Body

     
Terrorism seems to have evolved from threats to the U.S. by foreigners to home grown mass killings. Have we shifted prevention tactics?, asks Jay Gaskill.
      
When will terrorism be over? Are we in southeast Idaho sufficiently removed from the zone of activity that we can afford to be complacent? The answer to that question depends on the nature of the threat. In an article of mine from 2004, I suggested this test for the demise of classic terrorism:
      
"Well-suppressed terrorism should the goal, not be zero incidents. If we are winning, we can expect that terrorism against us will not involve major national assets and will reduce in scale, falling into the background noise of ordinary crime within the next ten years."
      
Let me pause to define my terms. In the sense used above, classic international terrorism is a foreign enemy's (i.e. a state or non-state actor's) attempt through notorious, "terrifying" attacks on a country's civilian population with the specific objective of demoralizing and weakening poplar support for concrete actions against the enemy abroad. The goal is to promote discord, isolationism and US withdrawal from whatever venue where the enemy is active.
      
A quote from that post - "We face an uncommon terror campaign, a jihad aimed at the national jugular. We may have difficulty identifying our moment of victory, but our defeat would not go unnoticed."
      
Flash forward to the present day. We are almost there, but only because "ordinary crime" now includes mass killing events like the Law Vegas shooting of Oct. 1, 2017 and the Kentucky school shooting by a 15-year-old male on Jan. 23 this year. So, when a jihadist truck driver ran down and killed pedestrians at the World Trade Center in Halloween last year, it fell into the "background noise of ordinary crime."
      
Should we celebrate? Hardly. Ordinary crime now includes the private terrorism of lone rogue killers for whom ideology is secondary or altogether absent. The referenced mass killings of this type may be the new "background noise", but they are too numerous, too dangerous and too close to home to dismiss.
      
Do we have a trend? I suspect we do. As I have described in more detail elsewhere, there is a repeating pattern. Many of these killings are done by a discontented loner, usually male, often suffering from depression - whether medicated or not. The tendency to use homicide as therapy (possibly imitating notorious classic terrorist incidents) is a disturbing trend. But once the pattern is noticed, law enforcement attention can be more efficiently directed.
      
While INL is a hard target, well-secured against any terrorist attack, our schools are still soft targets for rogue shooters.
      
In the person of Police Chief Bryce Johnson, Idaho Falls has a new, highly competent, forward-looking law enforcement official at the helm. I think that now would be an excellent time to engage all local schools in a low key, but methodical and proactive security review in cooperation with IFPD and the county sheriff. New rules, protocols, lines of communication and - as feasible - some carefully crafted guidelines for reporting and tracking individuals of interest can be implemented gradually with appropriate training and periodic updating and review. You can be sure if - God forbid - we ever suffer through a mass killing incident, these and other measures will be implemented after the fact.
      
So, why wait?
     

Load-Date: April 1, 2018


End of Document