LOCKERBIE CAUSING NEW TEARS; Terrorism killed five from local family
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
May 8, 2000, Monday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 2000 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 567 words
Byline: Amelia Robinson Dayton Daily News
Body


DAYTON - Even after 12 years, Ram Prakash Dixit's youthful voice quivers when he talks about the five family members he lost when a bomb blew Pan Am Flight 103 from the sky over Lockerbie, Scotland.
"It's hard everyday. When five family members perish at the same time. . . . when one family member perishes it's hard," the 72-year-old professor of languages at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge said by phone last week. "I still get emotional."
He said he hates watching video of the explosion and remembers vividly seeing dead children.
"The people who did that are mad. They should be in a mental asylum," he said.
Ram Prakash Dixit's brother and sister-in-law, Om and Shanti Dixit of Fairborn, died in that explosion along with their daughter, Garima Dixit Rattan, 29, and her children, Suruchi Rattan, 3, and Anmol Ratton, 2.
The first week of testimony at a special court in the Netherlands ended Friday with the names of 270 victims of the Dec. 21, 1988, bombing read aloud into the court record. Among the dead were 189 Americans.
Relatives in the public gallery wept or held photographs of the victims during the hourlong recital of names, ages and addresses.
Defendants Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, who wore white prayer robes and caps to court Friday for the Muslim Sabbath, have pleaded not guilty. If convicted, they will be sent to a Scottish prison for life.
The trial could last a year.
No matter how long it lasts, Sudhaker Dixit, a Fairborn High School graduate and the only surviving member of Om Dixit's immediate family, wants answers.
"My hope is that this will shed some light on the events surrounding what happened," he said. "There is a lot that nobody knows.'
Dixit, an obstetrician in Riverside, Calif., said the threat of terrorism is greater than most Americans are willing to believe.
"The American people have no clue how organized these people are," he said of terrorists.
Security measures instituted at airports since the bombing do more to "make us feel better" than to actually protect us, he said.
"People who want to get weapons on the airplane will still do it," Dixit said.
He said his parents were hard workers who were committed to family.
Om Dixit, 54, was an associate professor of geography and chairman of the department of Earth Science at Central State University. The couple moved to Fairborn in 1970s.
"They came here from India to create a better life for their children. They were doing everything right," said Sudhaker Dixit, 37.
Sudhaker Dixit, a Wright State University medical school graduate, said he often returns to the Dayton area to visit friends and his deceased sister's widower, an area doctor who declined comment.
Ram Prakash Dixit said his brother had a bright future.
Om Dixit came to the United States from India in 1963 to study at the University of Texas at Austin. His wife and children soon followed.
Dixit had five brothers and two sisters. One other brother is dead. Their grandmother died at 99.
Om and Shanti Dixit's son, Prabhaker, 14, was killed during the April 3, 1974, tornado in Xenia that struck and destroyed their house.
Ram Prakash Dixit said the family was extremely close.
The Dixit family traveled to India shortly before Thanksgiving 1988 for Sudhaker's wedding and to vacation. They never made it back to the Miami Valley.
Sudhaker, then a 26-year-old resident at a Cleveland hospital, flew home early.

Load-Date: May 9, 2000


End of Document