Lombard man is charged with attempted terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
June 2, 2020 Tuesday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2020 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 257 words
Byline: By Susan Sarkauskas , ssarkauskas@dailyherald.com
Body


Bail was set at $1 million Monday afternoon for a 25-year-old man authorities believe intended to firebomb property at the village's municipal complex early Monday morning. Christian R. Frazee, of the 900 block of South Lombard Avenue in Lombard, faces felony charges of attempted terrorism and possession of incendiary devices, according to DuPage County court records. 
According to a news release from the DuPage County State's Attorney's Office, he was arrested at 12:27 a.m. Monday on the grounds of the complex, at a time when only village-owned vehicles, and those of village employees, were there. A police officer noticed him walking there, with a baseball bat hanging out of his bag. Frazee was carrying a Molotov cocktail firebomb in one hand and a lighter in the other, according to the release. Police found eight other lighters in his backpack, and they said Frazee was wearing black clothing, a hood, a face covering and latex gloves. "We believe this to be an isolated incident where a local individual was acting alone, not part of any broader group or organization," Lombard Police Chief Row Newton said in the news release. According to court records, Frazee was charged in June 2016 with misdemeanor trespassing and criminal damage to property, accused of entering a church and damaging an interior door. He was also charged in October 2016 with felony unlawful possession of a controlled substance. The charges were dropped per a plea agreement that saw him complete a program in the Mental Illness Court Alternative Program.

Graphic

 
Christian R. Frazee

Load-Date: June 2, 2020


End of Document