LONDON FORMS NEW UNIT TO COUNTER IRISH TERRORISTS
The New York Times
October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 696 words
Byline: By JO THOMAS
Dateline: LONDON, Oct. 22
Body


A new intelligence-analysis group has been organized to help the police counter Irish terrorism, Leon Brittan, the Home Secretary, announced today.
 ''We will not be bombed into boltholes by terrorists,'' he said.
The group, a committee comprising high-ranking civil servants from several departments and led by Mr. Brittan, will assess intelligence from the security services and terrorism experts and advise the antiterrorist Special Branch of Scotland Yard.
It will replace an existing committee made up of ''assistant secretaries,'' two steps lower than the ''deputy secretaries'' who will now serve.
British Home Sec Leon Brittan says new intelligence-analysis group has been formed to help police counter Irish terrorism (M)
The stepped-up antiterrorism effort comes after the bombing of Prime Minister Maragret Thatcher's hotel in Brighton two weeks ago in which a Member of Parliament and 3 other people were killed and 32 people were wounded.
 
A Second Step
The establishment of the intelligence committee was the second step the Government has taken in the last few days after several national newspapers criticized what was characterized as the Government's passive approach to problem-solving.
Over the weekend, in the first step, Michael Eaton, a labor negotiator and mining engineer, was appointed public spokesman for the National Coal Board on the miners' strike, now in its 33d week. The spokesman had been Ian MacGregor, the National Coal Board chairman, who had gained a reputation for abrasiveness.
Mr. Eaton made an appeal today to a union leader, Peter McNestry, for a new strike vote among workers, 82.5 percent of whom have voted in favor of the strike. Two of the three issues on the original strike ballot have been met by management, Mr. Eaton said, adding that he believed far more members would now vote against a strike.
At issue now is the scope of an appeals body that the coal board agreed to set up on mine closures. The union wants the board to deal with a wider range of issues.
Mr. McNestry rejected Mr. Eaton's call for another strike vote, but said he was willing to enter new talks with the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service.
 
'Time for Common Sense'
Norman Willis, general secretary of the Trades Union Congress, Britain's equivalent of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said of Mr. Eaton's appointment: ''The important thing now is industrial relations, not public relations. It is time for common sense across the negotiating table.''
The terrorist threat and the miners' strike have combined with a plunging stock market, the decline of British currency and growing concern about unemployment to present Mrs. Thatcher, who retains a big majority in the House of Commons, with the most pressing problems since she took power five years ago.
Another Government crisis looms with a strike threatened for Thursday by the National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers, the union that represents the foremen and other mine supervisors. A strike would close all the working mines, something the National Union of Mineworkers has been unable to do.
Mr. Brittan told the House of Commons today that the new interdepartmental intelligence committee would ''bring to bear the widest range of experience in assessing Irish terrorist intentions and capabilities'' and would ''advise on and co-ordinate the countermeasures required to meet them.''
 
'Everything Which Can Be Done'
''Total security is impossible in a free, democratic socity,'' Mr. Brittan said. ''Political and other leaders are vulnerable because they must be accessible. Everything which can be done will be done to prevent such outrages and to protect their targets.
''But we will not be bombed into boltholes by terrorists,'' he said. ''Those who believe that terror can pevail against democracy understand neither the members of this House - nor the British people.''
Mr. Brittan said the police, who are still gathering evidence about the bomb that narrowly missed wounding Mrs. Thatcher at the Grand Hotel in Brighton, are ''not yet in a position to escribe more fully the device itself beyond the fact it is believed to have comprised about 20 pounds of commercial explosive.''


End of Document