London Bridge attacker Usman Khan buried in PoK
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 9, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 414 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"Wake up Britain: this man is a fraud". Khan was a convicted terrorist who was jailed seven years ago over a plot to bomb the London Stock Exchange and build a terrorist training camp on land owned by his family in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.
The father of one of the victims in last week's terrorist attack in London accused Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Saturday of lying and trying to "make political capital" during last night's television debate.
"It was a bad thing", he said.
"And all the community knows me and they will know, if you ask them, they will know like these labels what they're putting on us, like terrorist, that they will know I ain't no terrorist". You might assume the choices open to you on this election are usually not exclusively to your liking.
Emotional' Will Smith campaigns against homelessness in New York
Earlier this week Mr Littlejohn said it would be the last time he organised the event , saying he wanted to end on a high. Hart said he hoped the Littlejohn campaign would make the audience more comprehensive.
"The Labour leader clarified the attack last Friday - leading to the deaths of 25-yearold Jack Merritt and 23-year-old Saskia Jones - as" utterly appalling". "That he wanted a society where you did address the huge problems where somebody committed very bad acts like that - yes of course you must imprison them, yes you must rehabilitate them if you can". "That he needed a society the place you probably did deal with the massive issues the place any person dedicated awful acts like that - sure after all, you will need to imprison them, sure after all, you will need to try to rehabilitate them when you can". He had also discussed staging a Mumbai-style attack on the UK Parliament and described by the judge who sentenced him for terrorism offences in 2012 as an ongoing risk to the public with a "serious, long term venture in terrorism". Such a sentence was later scrapped by the Tories and Khan was sentenced to 16 years following a profitable attraction in 2013.
Khan was automatically released midway through this sentence under now-scrapped sentencing laws. The parole board didn't assess Khan previous to his launch, regardless of the requests of a decide.
"In his first direct attack on Mr Johnson, who he had previously pleaded with to stop politicising the death of his son, he said: "[Jeremy] Corbyn spoke the truth last night. "We don't know why Khan killed, or what, if anything could have been done differently to prevent it".

Load-Date: December 9, 2019


End of Document