London attacks show Iraq is not the only battlefront
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 8, 2005 Friday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 970 words
Byline: By JON SAWYER Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau Chief
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Within hours of the attacks Thursday on rail and bus commuters in London, British Prime Minister Tony Blair vowed to "confront and defeat" those responsible.
The steely-eyed Blair was reminiscent of Winston Churchill, the World War II leader who rallied his countrymen in the face of Nazi Germany's aerial assault on the city. But even as Blair evoked memories of the Blitz and British resolve, the incident raises questions as to the possible motives of those behind the attack -- and how the British public might respond.
It was scarcely a week ago that President George W. Bush, defending his Iraq policies in a speech at Fort Bragg, N.C., declared that Iraq was but "the latest battlefield" in the global war on terror. "We must defeat them abroad," he added, "before they attack us at home."
London was a reminder that the battlefront isn't confined to Iraq.
"While I agreed with Bush's goal, it was more than nuttily optimistic," said Stephen Gale, a terrorism analyst at the Philadelphia-based Foreign Policy Research Institute. What the London attacks demonstrate, he said, is "what we already knew -- that it doesn't take very much to seriously disrupt the kind of societies we have."
Britain is the most important U.S. ally. Its 8,500 troops currently serving in southern Iraq represent the only significant contingent of non-U.S. military forces in the country; it has 1,000 troops serving in Afghanistan.
Blair won a third term this spring, although with a diminished majority for his Labor Party. He faces significant opposition to his pro-U.S. policies on Iraq, however, both within the party and with the public.
A survey last month by the Pew Global Attitudes Project, for example, reported that only 39 percent of those surveyed in Britain now believe that it was the "right decision" to use force against Iraq -- down from 61 percent in 2003 and 43 percent last year.
Among the British public, support for the U.S.-led war on terrorism has dropped as well, to 51 percent last month from 69 percent before the invasion of Iraq.
That the attacks were connected to the war in Iraq seems probable.
A group calling itself "The Secret Organization of al-Qaida in Europe" took responsibility for the attack, according to news reports, and said that the United Kingdom had been targeted for an explicit reason -- the role of its soldiers in alleged "massacres" in Iraq and Afghanistan.
On a Web site frequented by Islamic militants, the group went further. It warned two other U.S. allies in Iraq -- Italy and Denmark -- that if they did not withdraw their forces from Iraq and Afghanistan they would face comparable attacks.
Similar warnings preceded the terrorist attacks on commuter trains that took place in Madrid, Spain, on March 11 last year. Those attacks killed 191 people. Three days later, the Socialist Party won a stunning upset victory over the governing Popular Party, a staunch U.S. ally in Iraq. The new prime minister, Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, quickly extracted the 1,300 Spanish troops that had been serving in Iraq.
Suicide terrorism
Robert A. Pape, a University of Chicago political scientist, has made an extensive study of suicide terrorism worldwide since 1980. His new book, "Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism," contends that modern-day terrorism, including that of Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida, is far less related to Islamic fundamentalism than most observers believe -- that it is driven instead by coherent political aims, especially the desire to expel what are perceived as armies of occupation.
In an interview Thursday, Pape said the lesson of London is that al-Qaida and like-minded groups are alive and well, systematically focused on the clearly defined goal of forcing U.S. and allied troops out of predominantly Muslim countries.
"This is just part of the continuing al-Qaida attack," Pape said. "Although many have hoped that al-Qaida had been weakened by American counterterrorist attacks, the facts are otherwise."
The London attacks mark the 15th terrorist event since 2002 linked to al-Qaida or associated groups, he said. Those attacks have killed over 700 people -- more deaths than attributed to al-Qaida in all the years before the 9/11 attacks combined.
Pape said that the numbers are even more dramatic within Iraq, a country that had never experienced an incident of suicide terrorism before the U.S.-led invasion in March 2003. The number of such attacks totaled 20 in 2003, 48 last year and 50 just in the first five months this year.
In his book, Pape details how al-Qaida attacks since 9/11 have systematically targeted countries that have allied themselves with U.S. policy in Afghanistan, Iraq or both. The victims in those attacks, from Bali to Madrid, include citizens of 18 of the 20 countries that bin Laden himself has targeted as U.S. allies.
"What's motivating them is hatred"
U.S. officials and supporters of current U.S. policy dismissed suggestions of an al-Qaida strategy as coherent and limited as Pape suggests.
They also voiced confidence that Britain would stand firm.
"The animating impulse for terrorism is hatred, and specifically hatred for the values of liberal democracy," said Sen. Jim Talent, R-Mo., a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
"They adopt different excuses from time to time, but what's motivating them is hatred of all things Western," he said. "If the Iraq war stopped tomorrow, they would still be bombing and killing civilians -- because that's who they are."
Talent said attacks like those in London on Thursday would only make the anti-terrorism alliance stronger, especially in a country like Britain where Blair has just won a new electoral mandate.
"I don't think that these tactics, this sort of blackmail, will succeed," he said. "I think it's very unlikely that Blair, or the Brits, will pull out." 

Notes

 THE WAR ON TERROR BOMBINGS IN LONDON 

Load-Date: July 9, 2005


End of Document