LONDON CALLING;
YESTERDAY'S ATTACKS ALLOWED PARTISANS FROM ALL SIDES TO CLAIM VINDICATION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 8, 2005 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 711 words
Body


See? Now we have definitive proof. The slaughter in London demonstrates once again that you were right, whatever you thought. From water cooler chats to the musings of self-anointed pundits on the Internet's blogosphere, the barrage of analysis and interpretations pondering the motives for the London bombings, the proper reaction to prevent further attacks and the "root causes" of terrorism once again fills the air.
 And, wouldn't you know it, all the opinions yield the same conclusion: We were right.
By now, opinions on this wave of terrorism by Islamic extremists that scored its most important strike on September 11 have hardened so much that all new evidence becomes supporting proof for a point of view, no matter what the view.
 The arguments started coming even before the group calling itself "Secret Organization group of al-Qaida Organization in Europe" had a chance to proudly boast it orchestrated the latest series of blasts that not only killed dozens, and injured hundreds, but stole parents from their children, children from their parents and left hundreds of families and friends with losses that will ache for life. Terrorist experts said that claim of responsibility had the hallmarks of a hoax, but the attack itself looks like the handiwork of al-Qaida.
 Take a look at a prominent liberal Web log, the DailyKos.com. Early in the morning, someone signing a comment as "Steven D" predictably and succinctly explained that, "This is happening because of Iraq."
 British Prime Minister Tony Blair, of course, has supported Washington's war in Iraq more steadfastly than almost any other world leader. Hence, opponents of the war in Iraq will quickly pin the blame on Blair and, of course, on George Bush.
 Supporters of the war, for their part, argue this is further proof of the need to defeat terrorists fighting in Iraq or anywhere else in the world, who will stop at nothing unless the world takes the strongest possible action. The more death they bring, the more evident it becomes, they say, that we need to reform the entire Muslim world, beginning in Iraq. But opponents of the war see terrorism as a direct result of misguided policies that sow hatred against the West throughout the Middle East.
 The purported al-Qaida statement on London, incidentally, overshadowed another al-Qaida release yesterday, this one announcing the group had murdered Egypt's top diplomat to Iraq. Egypt, by the way, strongly opposed the Iraq war.
 Another online observer noted that if Iraq had truly been the cause of the London carnage, the blasts would have come long ago. Instead, said a contributor to DailyKos.com named David Sewell, the terrorists struck on the day the G-8 summit opened. This, he argued, "is pretty clearly a symbolic attack on Western industrial democracies."
 Others noted that terrorism by Islamist extremists began long before the launching of the Iraq campaign in March 2003.
 In fact, these London explosions came exactly one thousand days after the October 2002 bombings in Bali, Indonesia, which killed more than 200 people. By then the anti-war crowd could already pin the blame on the war in Afghanistan. And even before that, there were those who blamed anti-Western terrorism on Washington's support for Israel and on the plight of Palestinians living under Israeli occupation.
 Israelis, who have years of experience with exploding buses and civilian massacres, commented on the London tragedy expressing their condolences and solidarity, with one writer adding, "now you know how we feel." Like seemingly everyone else, Israel's supporters thought this attack proved the validity of their views on terrorism. One site, Israpundit.com, noted with a sense of vindication that the BBC openly called the attacks "terrorism." The BBC usually refers to "militant attacks" in Israel, based on an editorial policy stating that the word terrorist is "a barrier [to] understanding."
 On the other side, the left claims this attack, however horrific, proved its view right. As an anti-war writer declared in Counterpunch.com, his side predicted this would happen. The attack, the posting reads, is a "direct result," of the West's "brutality in Afghanistan, Iraq and Palestine."
 Clearly, we all agree: We were right, and you were wrong.

Notes

Frida Ghitis an international television journalist for over 20 years, is the author of "The End of Revolution: A Changing World in the Age of Live Television" (fghitis@yahoo.com).  

Load-Date: July 8, 2005


End of Document