London Court Orders 5 Held In Plot to Kill British Soldier
The New York Times
February 10, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 567 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Dateline: LONDON, Feb. 9 
Body


With sirens wailing and streets blocked off to permit its passage, a convoy of police vehicles sped across Britain and wound through central London on Friday to bring five terrorism suspects to court here from Birmingham.
  A sixth suspect, who was identified by Reuters as Basiru Gassama, 29, was charged with a terrorism offense in Birmingham on Friday evening, the police said.
 The six were among nine Muslims seized nine days ago in a roundup of suspects in Birmingham linked to an alleged conspiracy to capture a Muslim British soldier and show images of his killing on the Internet. The three other suspects have been released without charge.
  Of the five who faced terrorism charges in court on Friday, only one, Parviz Khan, 36, was specifically charged with engaging ''in conduct to give effect to his intention to kidnap and kill a member of the British armed forces.'' The charge made no direct reference to the Internet.
  The four others -- Amjad Mahmood, 31, Mohammed Irfan, 30, Zahoor Iqbal, 29, and Hamid Elasmar, 43 -- were charged along with Mr. Khan with planning to supply equipment and money in the knowledge that it might be used for an act of terrorism.
  Mr. Mahmood was also charged with failing to disclose information that might have helped prevent an act of terrorism.
  The charges were brought under British antiterrorism laws enacted in 2000 and 2006.
  The arrest of the nine suspects in Birmingham, Britain's second-largest city, stirred worries and anger among many Muslims, who said they believed that the police action and extensive coverage by television and newspapers had further stigmatized Islam. One of the three men released after the arrests said Britain had become a police state for Muslims.
  Some Islamic leaders in Birmingham sought on Friday to calm passions by appealing to Muslims to ''remain dignified and have a calm attitude,'' in the words of Mohammad Naseem, the chairman of Birmingham's Central Mosque. But others said the city's Muslims, about 15 percent of the population of one million, were still cautiously waiting to see the outcome of the whole affair.
  The Birmingham police said their inquiry had made great strides. ''Nine days ago I told you that we were in the foothills of a major investigation,'' David Shaw, the assistant chief constable in charge of the Birmingham investigation, told reporters. ''We have made extraordinary progress in that time, but it would be wrong of me to leave you thinking that this is any sense a completed inquiry.''
  Mr. Shaw said Muslims in Birmingham ''have fed back to us the frustration and damage experienced by the way some of the media have labeled them through their reporting.''
  By contrast, he said, local people had given ''fantastic support'' to police officers.
  ''Contrary to much of the reporting about the area, we have seen real leadership from all sections of the community, who have not only supported us but have also publicly supported our search for the truth,'' he said.
  The five suspects who appeared in court on Friday were ordered to be held until a hearing on Feb. 23. The police in Birmingham said the case had been referred to a London court under protocols covering terrorism cases.
  In a separate hearing, Abu Izzadeen, an outspoken convert to Islam who was arrested Thursday, was released on bail on Friday after being charged with encouraging terrorism in a speech last year.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 10, 2007


End of Document