London attacks draw attention to the real issues
University Wire
July 11, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 The South End via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 573 words
Byline: By Markeysha Davis, The South End; SOURCE: Wayne State U.
Dateline: DETROIT 
Body


The world can take their eyes off of Tom and Katie's love affair. People can turn their heads on the annual shark epidemic that plagues the oceans and gulfs where people turn to for summer recreation. Terrorism has struck again.
Last Thursday in London, four bombings -- which killed over 50 people -- shocked the city, as well as other countries around the world, reminding them that the nightmare of terrorism is not over. This was only a day after it had been announced that London would host the Olympic Games in 2012.
While the media was focusing on reality television, celebrity romance and tropical storms -- things that seem to be a staple in today's news -- all eyes (and cameras) should have been turn to our world leaders, asking them what was being done -- not to counter terrorism, but to end and/or alleviate our poor relations with these countries we accuse of terrorizing us.
Since the 9/11 bombings in New York in 2001, the United States has taken care in raising terror alerts in case of future attacks and had even gone further to declare "war" on terrorism by invading Iraq and other Mideastern nations hunting for the "perpetrators." What about England and the other countries whose leaders decided to support President George W. Bush and his war against terrorism? What measures have they taken to protect their own nations? According to last week's events, hardly any.
These pro-Bush countries seem to have let their collective guard down - if they were ever on alert - thinking that the invasion of these "terrorist" nations would end all threats at home. The attacks are horrid and tragic, but not meaningless. The perpetrators apparently have a beef with us and want us out of their affairs. Our leaders aren't too quick to move, though; some critics say that evacuating Iraq would be forfeiting their rich oil resources. President Bush has had the opportunity to cakewalk over the issue of withdrawal from Iraq several times, the national media not even pushing the topic recently. It seems that United Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair's support of American involvement in the country didn't go over too well either.
An end to foreign involvement in Iraq and other Mideastern nations might not bring an end to terrorism, fighting or disagreement among world leaders, but it may provide a means to improve relations between these countries. As the initiators of the "war," the United States needs to buckle down and find a way out of the battle they declared and have carried on for the past three years. To withdraw wouldn't mean to lose; to withdraw would mean that you are thinking of the people involved -- civilians and soldiers alike.
Now that attention is turned to the subject, maybe the media will find it beneficial to cover the issue for the sake of their viewers, readers and listeners. Not to say that animal attacks and tropical storms are menial, but there has been news coverage unworthy of primetime and front-page slotting. The media needs to turn to our president and our world leaders and ask them the tough questions. In the past, news media had proclaimed to be the "watchdog" of government affairs. At this critical juncture -- especially in wake of the London attacks -- the press needs to step up its game and quit relying on over-dramatized, sensationalized events to attract audiences.
But hey, the news is usually slow in the summer anyway.
Shark tales, anyone?
(C) 2005 The South End via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 11, 2005


End of Document