London attacks hit home
University Wire
July 12, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 University Daily via U-Wire
Length: 446 words
Byline: By Jeremy Reynolds, University Daily; SOURCE: Texas Tech
Dateline: LUBBOCK, Texas 
Body


Though far from the walls of Texas Tech University, the recent bombings in London have gone unnoticed on campus. Professors and students began discussing the events within hours of the initial reports that a red double-decker bus and three subway trains were bombed.
Chuck Pelowski, a junior general studies major from Abilene, said the attacks initially brought the events in the U.S. on Sept. 11, 2001 to mind.
"After 9/11, America got support from all over the world," Pelowski said. "As Americans we should show the same solidarity to London."
The bombings, which injured an estimated 700 people, have left some Tech students realizing that other countries besides America are targets.
"It's a war on terrorism," Pelowski said, "and America isn't the only country to have to deal with it."
Since the World Trade Center bombings, security at airports and seaports around the country has tightened. Pelowski said he feels safer in America after the attacks than he did before, and he said the recent bombings do not make him more afraid that terrorists could attack again on American soil.
Joli Hickman, a senior multi-disciplinary studies major from Euless, said terrorists are everywhere and not confined to United States' borders, and she said she feared the outcome of the recent attacks.
"We're closely tied with England," Hickman said. "I'm scared it's going to turn into a world war. But, I'm excited we'll now have more support in stopping terrorism. Now it's not just the U.S. versus terrorism."
Kelsey Robbins, a recent Tech graduate, said she read about the story online and she said she hoped the bombings would bring attention back to terrorists.
"Hopefully it will bring more attention back to real terrorism, and not just President Bush's crusade against the evil powers that be," Robbins said.
Michael Langdon, a sophomore business major from Lubbock, Texas, said he heard about the story after he got out of bed. He said the after effects of the bombings could be similar to the outcome of previous attacks around the world.
"It might influence elections in the coming years for a lot of European governments," Langdon said. "They'll start electing more liberal governments much like they did in Spain after the Madrid bombings."
Morgan Hare, a freshman Art major from Lubbock, said he saw a different outcome in the next few years.
"It wouldn't surprise me if they started searching people as they got on trains and buses much like they do at airports," Hare said.
He said the attacks were unfortunate, but were not on the scale of the World Trade Center attacks, so he said he was not as shocked when he heard about the London bombings.
(C) 2005 University Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 12, 2005


End of Document