Long Island Financial Briefs: November 30, 2007
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
November 30, 2007


Copyright 2007 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 713 words
Byline: Laura Theis
Body


Terrorism insurance extension gets Senate approval
A bill that would extend the government's assistance in backing terrorism insurance was passed by the Senate on Nov. 19.
The legislation, dubbed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision and Extension Act of 2007, offers extended relief to businesses that, without government intervention, would pay hefty premiums for terrorism coverage. And that's if they find terrorism insurance at all.
A major concern that helped trigger this second renewal of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act - the bill was passed in 2002 and then renewed in 2005 - was that without available and affordable terrorism insurance, mortgages for businesses would be widely unavailable.
Before originating a mortgage for a business, banks require proper insurance, including terrorism coverage, according to David Sterling, president of Woodbury-based Sterling & Sterling.
"People are already smarting from the credit crunch," he said, adding that removing TRIA backing would make banks even stingier with mortgages for businesses.
The real estate industry, therefore, lobbied heavily to get this extension passed in the House of Representatives and the Senate, Sterling said.
Kieran Quinn, chairman of the Mortgage Bankers Association, said in a statement that the extension of TRIA is "crucial to maintaining the smooth operation of the commercial real estate finance market. "
TRIA was originally passed in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks because reinsurance agencies, the companies that insure insurance companies, stopped covering acts of terrorism.
Many insurers also stopped offering terrorism coverage, and the ones that did raised premiums through the roof.
With TRIA, the government covers terrorism insurance claims above a certain value so insurers can offer the coverage at a lower cost.
The renewal bill, as written, extends TRIA coverage until 2022 - the previous extension expires Dec. 31, 2007 - but Sterling said there are still some kinks to be worked out.
The mortgage and real estate industries proposed the 2022 extension in hopes of reaching a long-term compromise to give the credit markets a chance to calm. Sterling said that compromise is likely to become written into the bill, with the 15-year extension taken out.
The legislation now sits with a Senate and House conference committee to work out differences and present it to the president for approval.
Israel addresses AMT
The impact of the Alternative Minimum Tax on a growing number of Long Islanders is not being overlooked.
Rep. Steve Israel, D-Huntington, held a roundtable discussion at the Long Island Association Nov. 19 to discuss the burden of the tax on an AMT-susceptible region.
Legislation has passed the House of Representatives that would save middle-class AMT payers more than $50 billion and Israel formed a panel of local accountants and economists to discover and report the impact of this bill on Long Islanders. Currently more than 300,000 Island taxpayers are estimated to be stuck with the AMT.
Israel also set up a page on his congressional Web site with the names of Long Islanders who have undeliverable tax refunds waiting for them at the Internal Revenue Service.
Countrywide freezes interest rates
Countrywide Financial, the largest mortgage lender in the country, announced Nov. 20 that it will start freezing interest rates for subprime borrowers with adjustable rate mortgages. Borrowers qualify for the rate freeze if they occupy the house, are current on all payments and can prove that when their mortgage resets, they will not be able to make the payments.
The move is designed to stop a run up of foreclosures when some mortgages reset in 2008.
Countrywide announced its program with three other California lenders - GMAC, Litton and HomeEq - which are collectively responsible for one-quarter of the subprime adjustable loans in the country.
Island accounting merger
Rockville Centre-based accounting firm Biscotti, Toback & Co. said that it was merging with Massella & Associates.
Lou Biscotti, chief executive of Biscotti, Toback, said in a statement that the merger is part of an ongoing strategy to add more partners and niches to his firm.
The combined firm is currently looking at new office space in Garden City and expects to move by next September.

Load-Date: December 1, 2007


End of Document