Long Island Financial Briefs: June 16, 2006
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
June 16, 2006


Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 658 words
Byline: David Reich-Hale
Body


Rich feel good, but investment changes needed
The wealthy see a future of growing investments. William J. Porter sees reason for changes in those investments.
The regional president and managing director of U.S. Trust on Long Island said the typical affluent investment portfolio for the top 1 percent in U.S. wealth needs to be altered.
For example, 15 percent of the affluent's funds are in cash -- way too high, according to Porter, who runs the Long Island operations for U.S. Trust, which put out its Survey of Affluent Americans on June 6.
"We would like to see that closer to 5 percent," Porter said.
Another concern, according to Porter, is that 15 percent of investments are in real estate.
"That should be lower," he said. "Real estate has had a good run. But interest rates are higher and there are more for-sale signs and the average wait time to sell a property is getting longer. Then again, we don't see this as a bubble. "
Porter said he was a little surprised to see so much affluent investment in real estate, because the latest survey showed much less confidence in real estate. For instance, 48 percent of respondents said real estate values will increase in the next year, while 33 percent said real estate will decline.
A year ago, 72 percent said real estate would move upward, while only 14 percent thought we were headed downward in real estate values.
Domestic blue-chip stocks take up the biggest piece of the affluent investment pie, at 21 percent.
As for the worries: Terrorism weighed heavily on the minds of the affluent, as 77 percent believed terrorism would hurt the economy. That's the same percentage that worried about terrorism last year. Also, 56 percent of the 150 people surveyed said terrorism threatened their personal security.
At the same time, 83 percent said their kids will have it tougher financially, making that the biggest worry of the affluent.
"That's been the case since the inception of the survey 25 years ago," Porter said. "It's a parental right to worry. "
The total outlook was good. For instance, the Affluent Investor Index hit a 63, well up from 48 in 2005.
"Ninety-one percent said their portfolio went up," Porter said. "Last year, 81 percent said their portfolio went up. Only 3 percent said it went down this year.
"There's confident in the economy, their investments and where they're headed," he added.
Trust in the union
The fruits of the Empire State Regional Council of Carpenters' labor have come to pass. The union's pension fund acquired a 45-percent stake in Boston-based First Trade Union Bank for about $25 million earlier this year.
The bank took the next step when it celebrated the opening of its newest branch in Hauppauge. The goals for the branch: to assist union-friendly businesses and serve union members.
First Trade Union Bank also has branches in Boston and Warwick, R.I.
Honda happening
The Internal Revenue Service said seven Honda vehicles meet the requirements of the Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit as a qualified hybrid motor vehicle.
The tax credit for hybrid vehicles applies to vehicles purchased on or after Jan. 1 and could be as much as $3,400 for those who purchase the most fuel-efficient cars.
Three Honda Civic makes, as well as two Honda Insights and two Honda Accords, were certified by the IRS.
Recently, a set of Toyotas was also recognized as hybrids worthy of tax credits.
Bank of America awards
The Bank of America Charitable Foundation has launched the third year of its Neighborhood Excellence Initiative. This year, the bank's total commitment under the initiative is $48 million. The program recognizes, nurtures and rewards organizations, local heroes and student leaders helping to rebuild and revitalize their communities in 40 of the bank's major markets across the country. One of those markets is Long Island.
Applications and nominations for the awards can be found online at www.bankofamerica.com/foundation. The application deadline is 8 p.m. June 30.

Load-Date: June 16, 2006


End of Document