Long Island Financial Briefs: January 6, 2006
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
January 6, 2006


Copyright 2006 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 648 words
Byline: David Reich-Hale
Body


It's 2006 and much to the surprise of some analysts, Westbury-based New York Community Bancorp is still around.Rather than getting bought up by the likes of Citigroup or HSBC, the opposite happened: NYCB went on a buying spree of its own in 2005 and acquired Long Island Financial Corp. for $70 million. It also expects to close on the acquisition of Atlantic Bank of New York for $400 million in the first quarter. Now, those analysts who questioned the company's future aren't sure what to make of NYCB. 
For example, while Citigroup's analyst gave NYCB the thumbs-up sign, pushing the rating to "buy," from "sell," another analyst saw it differently.Ryan Beck & Co. downgraded the savings and loan to "market perform" from "outperform."In a research note, Citigroup's analyst said NYCB's acquisitions are positive. Joseph Ficalora, NYCB's chairman, has said that the two purchases will help the thrift diversify its business. Ficalora said that after the deals close about 10 percent of its business will be in the commercial banking sector. Prior, NYCB had very little commercial presence.The two purchases didn't impress Ryan Beck & Co, however. Analyst Anthony K. Davis told American Banker that he sees very little earnings momentum over the next two years. He said that even if the Federal Reserve stopped raising rates, NYCB's margin will probably be flat in 2006.Both analysts agreed that NYCB's shares should be buoyed by the possibility that Ficalora would sell the bank. NYCB's shares were trading at about $17 as of the turn of the year, in between its 52-week low of $15.69 and high of $20.95. Of course the stock was nearly double its current price in 2004, before the stock went south after Wall Street chided its over-concentration in bonds at a time of rising interest rates.Terrorism Act updatedThe Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act of 2005 was signed into law by President George W. Bush on Dec. 22. The act is actually little more than a two-year extension of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, though there are minor differences. A bit more of the financial burden is being shifted over to the insurance industry.According to insurance broker Marsh Inc., the 2005 edition of the measure differs in a few ways. For instance, it no longer includes commercial automobile insurance, burglary and theft insurance and professional liability insurance. So insurers would still be on the hook for losses tied to terrorism - if the claims come in through those types of policies.Also, insurer deductibles are being increased. These changes don't concern Kurt Timmel, head of Marsh's Melville office. In a press release, Timmel said, "overall the insurance market should be able to accommodate the program changes."The entire study is at www.marsh.com.Banking on American ExpressHSBC will begin offering American Express-branded cards this year. American Express also has a deal in place with Bank of America, which, incidentally, bought credit card issuer MBNA Corp. Bank of America will issue and market the cards through its nearly 6,000 branches. The bank will be responsible for billing, customer service and charge authorizations. The Charlotte-based banking giant will also own the customer loans and receivables. Bond menMost financial institutions carry high bond ratings and experience low default rates, according to a survey by ratings giant Moody's Investors Service.Most banks, like insurance companies, need to have an investment grade rating in order to conduct business normally. For that reason, Moody's said, the findings were not a surprise."Financial institutions facing similar downgrades find it difficult to continue their basic operations or act as independent entities due to business or regulatory requirements," said Praveen Varma, a senior analyst at Moody's.Also, many banks that fall below investment grade, become acquisition targets.

Load-Date: January 6, 2006


End of Document