Long-term anti-terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 3, 1989, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Editorials; Pg. 14A; EDITORIAL
Length: 616 words
Body


The lives of hostages are not made more secure, nor is the cause of    peace in the Middle East advanced, when American presidents resort to    rash words and impetuous actions. By that standard, President Bush    deserves praise for what he has managed to resist saying and doing in    reaction to the apparent execution of Lt. Col. William Higgins by a    Shiite Moslem group in Lebanon.
 
     The president resisted the irrational urge to hold Israel at least    partly to blame for a crime committed by a band of terrorists dedicated    to Israel's destruction. He also resisted the unrealistic impulse to    launch a blind military strike against a target that has made itself    all but invisible in the chaotic rubble of Lebanon. Senators, editorial    writers and disc jockeys are relatively free to speak irresponsibly    without creating an international crisis. Presidents do not have that    luxury. By acting with restraint now, Mr. Bush avoids making our role    in the Middle East even more dangerous and complicated than it already    is.
    Still, there are a number of constructive actions that the White    House can be taking in an effort to provide us with more realistic    options when the next hostage dilemma presents itself. Some of them    apparently are under way. The Bush administration has sought help from    the Soviet Union, Arab governments, Moslem religious groups and even    the pope in attempting to prevent the executions of other hostages.
 
 Whether or not those efforts are immediately successful, they open    avenues of communication with parties that have not always been given    the opportunity to play constructive roles in the Middle East peace    process. Those new links also may help to improve our inadequate    intelligence capabilities in the region.
 
     At the same time, the debate over Israel's capture of Sheik Abdel    Kareem Obeid may lead to a new consensus on anti-terrorism policy. So    far, most of the criticism of Israel's action has been misdirected. In    the absence of normal diplomatic and legal channels, Israel could have    captured Obeid only by resorting to extraordinary means. The United    States correctly has asserted a similar right to act against suspected    terrorists when and where they can be identified.
 
     As a purely practical matter, though, Israel's attempt to use Obeid    as bait in a hostage exchange apparently backfired. It caused the    captors of Western hostages to retaliate rather than compromise.
 
     In moral terms, that element of the Israeli operation was even less    defensible. In nations of laws, suspected terrorists should be treated    as criminal defendants, not bargaining chips. If Israeli officials have    persuasive evidence that Obeid bears responsibility for Higgins'    kidnapping or for other terrorist acts, they should put him on trial.
 
 If they had no such evidence, they had no business bringing him into      custody in the first place.
 
     Civilized governments can adhere to international law without    becoming impotent in the face of terrorism. We can rebuild intelligence    capabilities that were allowed to deteriorate as a result of flawed    budgetary priorities and short-sighted diplomacy. We can work with    other governments to punish those outlaw nations that harbor and    support terrorists. We may even develop the capability to act with    precision against the captors of American hostages.
 
     Efforts of that kind require months of preparation, and they must    be carried out patiently over years. Those crying loudest today for    President Bush to do something apparently have something more    immediate, and far less effective, in mind.
 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, Clay Bennett; An Arabian soldier holds the rope controlling the blade of the guillotine which holds Uncle Sam, who is pointing a handgun at the soldier.

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document