LONG ISLAND JOURNAL;
Helping to Lift the Cover Off Terrorism
The New York Times
December 27, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Long Island Weekly Desk
Section: Section 14LI;; Section 14LI; Page 3; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1374 words
Byline: By MARCELLE S. FISCHLER

By MARCELLE S. FISCHLER
Body


SEQUESTERED behind a locked office door on the C. W. Post campus of Long Island University in Brookville is Harvey Kushner, a terrorism consultant.
Whenever there's a threat of attack or a bomb explodes or an airliner crashes, Dr. Kushner's renown goes up. There he was on Fox television recently, discussing the latest actions of Osama bin Laden and fielding phone calls from The Washington Post and U.S. News and World Report. He appears as a talking head regularly on CNN and MSNBC and provides authoritative sound bites on the Voice of America. He was the plaintiff's expert witness in the World Trade Center bombing case and called to advise and comment when the Alfred P Murrah Federal Building was blown up in Oklahoma City.
Each time, the threats come in. For security reasons, there are no photographs of his family in his office; no discussion of the location of his Long Island residence. Be assured, however, that Dr. Kushner, chairman of the school's Criminal Justice Department, always takes a few extra right turns on his way home.
Only a fool, he admits, wouldn't be daunted. But the counterterrorist, like the guerrilla warrior, advances his cause with the spotlight.
Hence his "Terrorism 1999 Anniversaries Calendar," which documents the histories and anniversaries of bombings, assassinations, hijackings and standoffs affecting Americans over the past 30 years with the graphic detail of an action movie. Despite the personal vigilance its promotion necessitates, Dr. Kushner is trying to heighten awareness of terrorism's threat.
"Every time the bomb goes off, there's a high profile and after that the interest level wears off," he said. "It's a very short span of attention. I'm trying to lengthen it with this."
As well as with the novel he's working on. His recent books, "Terrorism in American: A Structured Approach to Understanding the Terrorist Threat" and "The Future of Terrorism: Violence in the New Millennium," are more suited to the ivory tower set.
"I'm a firm believer that if we don't learn lessons from history, they repeat themselves," he said. "Especially when the terrorists are looking to repeat history. Why shouldn't the good guys be aware of it? Fear of the unknown is 10 times greater than fear of the known."
He said terrorists like to time their attacks to coincide with the anniversary of historical events and, especially, past terrorist attacks. So he's advised national, state and local police and even the motion picture industry to be aware of certain dates.
"Adolph Hitler was born on April 20," he said. "To some kooks out there, that's an important date." So is Jan. 22, the day Theodore Kaczynski pled guilty to being the Unabomber. For bin Laden, the month of January has four significant dates in terms of Middle Eastern terrorism: the eighth is the day Ramzi Yousef was sentenced to life in the World Trade Center bombing, on Jan. 17, 1996, Sheik Abdel Rahman received a life sentence. Mir Aimal Kasi attacked C.I.A. headquarters on Jan. 25, 1993 and was sentenced to death on Jan. 23, 1998.
"People like me, who have a radar screen for this, collect and disseminate that information," Dr. Kushner said. "There is a legitimate side to this operation. This is not one of these calendar companies that shows cats or hunks of the fire department."
He worries more about children downloading bomb recipes from the Internet than disturbed people ordering his calendar.
"If you could get Tim McVeigh to have this on the wall in his cell, crossing out the days, then it would really take off," he mused.
The calendar is published by Counterterrorism Inc. and the International Association for Counterterrorism and Security Professionals. "The last 10 years and more so today, the public has more of a need to know," Dr. Kushner said. "It's come to roost here. We're faced with all sorts of problems as we move into the next millennium."
Even in the suburbs. Nassau and Suffolk Counties are in the center of the nation's media capital. Long Island has an extensive shoreline. The World Trade Center is just a stone's throw away. And bias crimes tend to occur in areas with diverse populations, he asserted. According to Dr. Kushner's definition, terrorism includes incendiary rhetoric as well as violence.
"You'll have more bias crimes in certain types of groups in Nassau, Suffolk or New York City than you'll have in Idaho," he said. "I don't want Americans to think we're free here from militias, from Ku Klux Klans or from skin heads. We're smack in the middle of target USA. Given the concentration of people here and given the possibility of targetry, I don't want to frighten people but we have Brookhaven National Labs, we have the airports, we have Federal buildings, we have Plum Island.
"It can happen in the suburbs. It can happen in the city and vice versa. We are certainly not safe anyplace. The message clearly is we are not safe from domestic, we are not safe from international terrorists."
Dr. Kushner said he has had a lifelong fascination with global politics.
"There was a rich tradition in my family of always discussing politics and world affairs," he said. "I always had a fascination with military strategy and governments and influencing policies." He received his Ph.D. in political science from New York University in 1974.
It was the height of the insurrection on universities. He was the guy with the crew cut and the white socks.
"I've sort of come out of the closet in the past decade," Dr. Kushner said.
"I'm not embarrassed to say I was always studying terrorism," he said. "Thirty years ago, I would be a little fearful. The more I look at the actuary tables, I'm sliding down the mountain. What the hell, I might as well go out in a bang."
 
Sounds of the 60's
On the stage at the George Jackson School in Jericho, Patricia Shih is teaching third and fourth graders how to dance the Swim and the Jerk. The youngsters punch their fists into the air, first like Elvis Presley, then a la James Brown, as Ms. Shih launches into a lively rendition of a civil rights song. It's as if Ms. Shih, a child of the 60's, has transported her audience right back to that era.
Dancing in their seats, cheering and waving and singing along, the elementary school students are getting a dose of multiculturalism from the folk-fusion performer, along with a lesson about life in the Vietnam era. For the children's singer and songwriter, the concert is her own brand of social activism.
Ms. Shih, accompanied by her second husband, Stephen Fricker, on the electric guitar and George Meier on electronic drums, gives participatory concerts about racism, self-esteem, disabilities, literacy, substance abuse, the environment and nonviolence to hundreds of Long Island schoolchildren each week. On Tuesday, she will perform at the Jericho Public Library at 11 A.M. and at First Night Greenport at Greenport High School gym on New Year's Eve at 5 and 6 P.M. She will also perform at Sayville Middle School at 9:30 p.m.
"People are activists in many different ways," said Ms. Shih, 46, of Huntington. "Some people stamp envelopes, some people go out and stump for candidates, some people put their lives on the line. I can share my music. I can help rally people. I can help soothe people. I can make people cry.
"All my music has a positive slant to it. I hope to give children a feeling of empowerment so that they can do something even in a tiny little way.They can affect their world, their friends, their family, their community, their school. They have the power to do that."
As a teen-ager, Ms. Shih signed her first recording contract as part of a folk duo modeled after Simon and Garfunkel. But at 20, she quit and headed west to pursue a career in fine arts. She moved to Long Island with her first husband and spent several years as a glass artist. Her musical career geared toward children coincided with the birth of her daughter, Jennifer, 11.
Her first album was for 2- to 8-year-olds, the next for 10 years olds. Ms. Shih, who has performed all over North America, recently released her second adult compact disk, a personal album about drawing hope from adversity.
"Music is for communication, for touching somebody person to person," she said. "It opens up your heart and opens up your mind."

Graphic

 
Photo: Dr. Harvey Kushner, left, a consultant on terrorism, being interviewed by David Asman of Fox News Now. (Elizabeth Lippman for The New York Times)

Load-Date: December 27, 1998


End of Document