LONG ISLAND OPINION;
SEEING OFF A CHILD IN THE ERA OF TERRORISM…
The New York Times
October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 11LI; Page 28, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk
Length: 970 words
Byline: By MARY SQUIRE KRUMBEIN; Mary Squire Krumbein lives in Huntington.
Body


''I HATE hanging out at airports,'' said my daughter.
With tension hanging like festooning cobwebs, I resisted saying out loud, ''I hate hanging around home waiting to hang out at airports.'' Getting to Kennedy International Airport is never easy, and the way is fraught with potential traffic jams, accidents and breakdowns.
''Let's at least get that part over,'' I thought.
We got into the car. After her father went through the usual catechism of checking that she had tickets, passports, travelers' checks, there was quiet. All went smoothly until we reached the Cross-Island Parkway. Then traffic slowed to a crawl for miles. Though we knew we had oceans of time, we began to glance at our watches. Finally, the source of the backup became plain.
On the grassy bank of the outbound lanes stood an ambulance, two fire trucks and numerous police vehicles. Amid the crowd, a still body lay in the grass. In our car there was silence. The inbound lanes speeded up as the outbound came to a halt on the other side of the concrete barrier.
The Van Wyck came into view, and then the confusion of signs to terminals and elsewhere. Was it Terminal A or B we wanted? Ah, Terminal A. She and I hauled the luggage out of the trunk. Dodging cars, cabs and buses, we made it to the main entrance.
To our right were milling masses of people lined up at check-in counters, each with the flight destination above it. Laden with backpack, suitcase, carry-on bag and typewriter, we fought our way along the backs of the lines looking for one that read Tel Aviv. We didn't find it. Plopping down her far greater share of the load, my daughter said, ''Mom, watch this and I'll go find out.''
Lewis Carroll said of Alice that she gave herself very good advice, but she seldom followed it. As I stood there watching people around me, I told myself to breathe deep and relax. ''After all,'' I said to myself even as Alice was wont to do, ''you've done this four times, three times with this daughter.''
True. She is studying economic development at its source, and we've put her on planes to Central America and to Africa. Why don't I get used to it? Well, I thought I was. But I happen to work for the small college my daughter attends -Friends World College. Less than a week before, a beloved faculty member was killed by the hijackers aboard that Pan Am flight in Pakistan. We had spent the time trying to believe it, trying to understand, trying to make some sense of it. In the process, we realized how inured, how ''tough'' we had become to acts of terrorism. We had begun to accept them as a fact of life.
But now it wasn't just my child we were sending to the far corners of the earth. Many of our students were moving to seven program centers around the world. They were all ''our children.'' I remembered what his students had so urgently said at the memorial service for the slain faculty member, Nesar Ahmad:
''If he were here, he'd tell you not to be afraid. Don't give in to them. It's important for us as Americans to reach beyond our own borders, to learn, to understand.''
Thank you, Alice. That little pep talk helped when my husband and daughter returned and pointed beyond the end of the crowded lines, beyond a hiatus of seven or eight counters, to the very last one, manned by a crew of three. Yes, it did say ''Tel Aviv.''
We gathered the baggage and moved to this isolated end. The two young men and a woman smiled encouragingly at us and stood ready to check my daughter in. No, not yet. She wanted to wait for her friend so they could sit together. Time passed. A lot of employees passed on some errand. That errand was very probably to scout this deserted end of the terminal and the three people, with luggage, standing there.
Finally our daughter decided not to wait, and to the smiling relief of the airline personnel, she presented her ticket and was checked in. As her baggage went into the inner sanctum to be X-rayed, she and the clerks giggled as she prepared a sign for her friend saying seating was arranged and all was well. The two young men found tape and helped her post her sign prominently. We went in search of something to eat.
This was, after all, an airport, and the less said about the food and service the better. Alice emerged again and reminded me that hundreds of people here came to work every day, threats, terrorism and such notwithstanding. As we waited (and waited) another student, on his way to London, turned up, and he joined us. He had never before left his native Florida, and Europe held only mild terror for him after a month in New York.
The time came to move on. We found the gate, but there was still lots of time. We stationed ourselves where we could look out the huge windows at the bustle of service vehicles rushing to and fro and still see the passengers for Israel trickling by. No familiar faces. At last we held her close and we all spouted cliches born of love we couldn't, daren't, express. She went beyond the pale, and we started home.
The trip back was a breeze. There was very light traffic. For once we would be home before she was more than halfway there. On the grassy hill there was no sign. Only a damaged car pulled up beyond the curb. What had happened? How many other lives were affected by this accident? We'll never know. Home, a stiff drink and bed. The first thing I heard on the news the next morning was ''Bombing in Paris injures 41.'' Her stopover was Paris. But the bombing was nowhere near the airport. She would arrive safely, and she did.
But this time I felt differently about those 41, as I had so painfully learned to feel about the nearly 400 aboard Flight 038.
''Don't let them win,'' said my mental Alice. ''Don't let them frighten you into cowering in some corner and forgetting the value of human life. Keep looking. There must be a way to peace.''


End of Document