Looking up: Our mood is brightening;
 With thoughts of war and terrorism shrinking, people here and across America are a bit more optimistic about life these days. Some shoppers and standholders at Central Market today even feel the sluggish economy is already starting to bounce back.
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 19, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 321 words
Byline: Susan Baldrige
Body


The baked ham is calling your name, the Easter baskets need to be filled and little Johnny must get a new tie to wear to church Easter Sunday.
For the first time in a long time, normal, everyday concerns are replacing worries over terrorism and battles on foreign soil for people here and across the nation.
Who knows -- tomorrow the sun might even shine.
#MOOD.BALD.A2n#
"I think we're less worried about terrorism now because we went over and took care of business," said Willie Conyers Jr. of Lancaster, who was doing a little Easter shopping of his own this morning at Central Market.
"I think President Bush did a hell of a job," he said.
Conyers hit the nail on the head, describing the mood of fellow shoppers at Central Market today who were mostly relaxed and joyous about the holiday.
A lot of the relief, they said, had to do with how quickly the United States toppled the Iraqi leadership.
"The war turned out to be a good thing," said Russ Gooding of Ephrata, who was getting milk jugs refilled at market.
Gooding and his wife, Erica, said they think the outcome of the Iraq conflict lowered the threat of terrorism in America.
"Having seen how quickly our forces cleaned house might make other nations very reticent about any terrorism attacks that could be traced back to them," said Russ Gooding.
Most of America is agreeing with the Goodings.
For the first time since the Sept. 11 attacks, Americans were focusing on things other than war and terrorism, according to a new national poll taken April 10-16 by the Pew Research Center, an independent opinion-research group based in Washington.
That same poll found President George W. Bush's overall approval rating to be high -- 72 percent.
And while people in other places named the economy as their current top worry, people here seemed more optimistic.
"I think how well things are going over there has had a calming effect on people," said Janie Eck-
Please see MOOD page A4

Load-Date: April 24, 2003


End of Document