Looking Back; ITEMS FROM THE FORWARD'S ARCHIVES
The Forward
December 20, 2013


Copyright 2013 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Page Two; Pg. 2
Length: 490 words
Body


1913   100 years ago
CAPTIVE IN A SALOON
I beg of you, please have pity on  me and save me. I am being held  captive. I am scared they will kill  me. I am next to a saloon. Sarah.  So read a note written in Yiddish,  found on an Osborn Street sidewalk  in the Brownsville section of  Brooklyn by one Louis Burstein.  After reading it, Burstein translated  it at the nearest police station. He  then went with three detectives to  the spot where he found the note.  Looking around, they did, in fact,  see a nearby saloon. After searching  all the apartments in the tenement  next door and finding nothing,  they moved on to the tobacco shop  on the other side of the saloon,  which had two apartments above  it. When no one answered the door,  they broke it down to find a young  woman and a man brandishing a  chair at them. The man put down  the chair after the cops pulled out  their guns. Realizing she had been  saved, the woman burst into tears.  Only 20 years old, Sarah Rupak  has been in the United States only  six months. Irving Marcus, her captor,  was placed under arrest.
1938   75 years ago
HEBRON PLEDGES ALLEGIANCE
Three thousand Arab villagers  gathered on a hillside near Hebron  and pledged their allegiance to the  British rulers of Palestine. Demonstrators  also fulminated against  the mufti of Jerusalem and his  followers, who they believe to be  behind most of the terrorism in  Palestine. Under the direction of the  Arab leader and the sworn enemy  of the mufti, Fakhri Bey Nashashibi,  demonstrators swore loyalty to the  British forces and thanked them  for battling terrorism. Nashashibi  also condemned the mufti and his  followers for engaging in terrorism.  A British official in attendance,  one General O'Connor, thanked  Nashashibi, telling him and the  crowd that they would continue  to fight terrorism in Palestine and  that they hope Arab villagers will  help them in their mission. Coincidentally,  Sheikh Said Al Khatib, an  administrator of the Haram al-Sharif  mosque in Jerusalem, also an  opponent of the mufti, was killed  during the demonstration.
1963   50 years ago
NAZI TRIALS COMMENCE
The trial of 22 Nazis who are  accused of participating in the  murder of 2 million people in the  Auschwitz concentration camp network  has commenced in Frankfurt,  West Germany. Considered the largest  and most significant trial of war  criminals since the Nuremberg trials  of 1945, the Auschwitz trial, as it  is known, deals mostly with former  SS members who returned to Germany  and were viewed as respectable  citizens after the war. Half  the defendants are charged with  murder, and the second half are  charged with being accessories to  murder. Led by Hans Grossmann,  the prosecution spent five years  collecting evidence; among this are  interviews with 1,300 witnesses.  At least 200 of those witnesses are  expected to testify during the trial,  which is projected to last six to eight  months.

Graphic

 
IMAGE: 1900Future Star:Forverts favorite actor, singer and comedian EddyCantor on his stoop in the Lower East Side. He is pictured atabout 6 years old in a holiday suit and shoes.; FORWARD ASSOCIATION

Load-Date: December 23, 2013


End of Document