Loose Talk
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
January 5, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 472 words
Byline: In Our View
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Leave it to former Vice President Dick Cheney to politicize the war on terror. His latest comments suggest the cranky Cheney, who led the Bush administration into a host of blunders during eight years in office, is willing to stoop to new lows to find fault with the Obama administration.
In his recent comments, Cheney said Obama "seems to think if he closes Guantanamo and releases the hard-core al-Qaida-trained terrorists still there, we won't be at war. He seems to think if he gets rid of the words 'war on terror,' we won't be at war."
Hogwash.
Cheney's comments followed an aborted Christmas Day plot to blow up a Northwest Airlines flight destined for Detroit. The Obama administration admittedly fouled up when Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano incredulously asserted that the system had "worked.''
In fact, the system did not work. And Obama quickly came forward to note that it did not work. Information that was supposed to have been shared between agencies did not reach the right people, and the president has scheduled a series of meetings to attempt to attempt to plug these gaps.
But as even Republican critics of the administration have since noted, it is very difficult to uncover lone terrorists bent on murder.
It is worth noting that the Obama administration immediately identified the Dec. 25 jetliner attempt as an act of terrorism. When Richard Reid attempted to blow up a jetliner by igniting explosives in his shoes during the Bush administration, it took five days before Bush acknowledged it was, in fact, a terrorist attack.
Furthermore, congressional Republicans have acknowledged that Guantanamo detainees who were released during the Bush administration have since become al-Qaida operatives in Yemen.
Cheney's words have understandably angered those on terrorism's front lines. John Brennan, who has worked for five presidents and is Obama's counterterrorism adviser, took issue with Cheney's remarks on Sunday news programs.
"I'm very disappointed in the vice president's comments," Brennan said. "Either the vice president is willfully mischaracterizing this president's position, both in terms of the language he uses and the actions he's taken, or he's ignorant of the facts.
"And in either case it doesn't speak well of what the vice president is doing. The clear evidence is that this president has been very, very strong.''
Brennan said "partisan politics should be put aside when something as important to national security as the threat of terrorism . ... It continues to haunt us."
People are right to be critical when security systems fail. But to suggest the Obama administration is kowtowing to terrorists by avoiding the word "war" is as absurd as it is dumb.
Dumber yet is Cheney's desire to turn an attempted attack against this country into a patently partisan political opportunity.

Load-Date: January 5, 2010


End of Document