LORD DIPLOCK'S ULSTER
The New York Times
October 6, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 345 words
Body


JUSTICE To the Editor:
 In a Sept. 25 news article, The Times noted some revealing and significant comments by Lord Kenneth Diplock, a visiting English judge observing American criminal courts. Essentially, Lord Diplock argued that in Britain guilt or innocence was more a gut feeling, not to be confused by technicalities, and that verdicts of guilty without ''substantial'' injustice would be allowed to stand.
hese comments are revealing in that they come from the architect of the special courts in Northern Ireland which were established to process, rather than adjudicate, suspected terrorists.
AN-A
Unencumbered by such technicalities as juries or due-process protection, these courts are remarkably productive. Despite the fact that in 7 out of 10 cases considered a confession is the only evidence introduced, the conviction rate is better than 80 percent.  Since you need not be charged for seven days and there is no bail consideration, the rate of confessions is not surprising, given the interrogation methods of the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
In essence, Lord Diplock's technicalities are considered safeguards in the U.S. This has been true even at the height of urban unrest in the 1960's.
His remarks are significant in that, while this sham judicial process was created to deal with political terrorism, the victims on this conveyor belt are treated as common criminals in prison rather than as political prisoners, as required by Geneva conventions.  Perhaps the injustice is not substantial enough to warrant judicial interest.
The rapidly expanding worldwide protest over the prisoners in the H-Block of Long Kesh prison is but one manifestation of the depth of the injustice. In a recent decision, the European Court on Human Rights was compelled to rebuke Britain for the contradictions and insensitivity of its justice system in Northern Ireland.
A slip of the tongue on the part of Lord Diplock? I think not. For the first time, perhaps, the truth has slipped out on the British occupation of Northern Ireland.  MICHAEL J. CUMMINGS Albany, Sept. 25, 1980


End of Document