Lottery game may help fund anti-terrorism efforts
Chicago Daily Herald
November 28, 2001, Wednesday Cook,Lake,DuPage


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 376 words
Byline: John Patterson Daily Herald State Government Editor
Body


SPRINGFIELD - Faced with the prospect of having to pay millions of dollars for heightened security in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks while also dealing with a failing economy, Illinois lawmakers are turning to the state lottery for help.  
On Tuesday, a Senate committee supported a plan to use up to four special drawings of the Pick-Four lottery game to help foot the state's anti-terrorism bill.  
"A special lottery might bring out people who would not otherwise buy lottery tickets but want to show their patriotism and support for this specific cause," said state Sen. Kirk Dillard, a Hinsdale Republican who came up with the patriot game idea.  
He would not put any dollar estimates on how much the lottery might raise. On average, the lottery generates about $1.4 million a day for the state. Sales and profits can vary greatly depending on jackpot sizes. Dillard predicted the total could be higher because people who don't normally play the lottery would buy tickets in the name of patriotism.  
"There's no telling what this might raise," he said.  
The state is likely to incur millions of dollars in costs related to overtime for state police and other security in addition to buying items such as metal detectors. At the same time, lawmakers must cut at least $500 million from the state budget as an already weakened economy plunged into a recession after the terrorists attacks.  
This is not the first time such a funding ploy has been used. Dillard said a special lottery was sponsored in 1981 to help fund athletic programs at the University of Illinois.  
If Dillard's plan is successful, lottery officials would conduct four special drawings before June 1. After paying out winnings and covering other costs, the money would go to the state treasury. The intent, Dillard said, would be to use the funds for anti-terrorism expenses.  
And today, Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan's sweeping set of anti-terrorism laws is expected to be voted on in the Illinois Senate. The proposals specifically define terrorism, expand wire- tapping authority for police, and make it a crime to donate money to groups that support terrorism.  
A late addition to Ryan's plan is a provision that would send to prison someone caught carrying a gun onto a plane.

Notes

Additional Zone/Page: F3-5,Fox-5

Load-Date: November 28, 2001


End of Document