Lott: Election boils down to action on terrorism; 'Broader meaning': He disputes those who think the economy is becoming a dominant issue in the campaign
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 20, 2002 Sunday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a12
Length: 458 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


This year's midterm congressional elections will boil down to a referendum on President Bush's handling of the war on terrorism, Senate Republican Leader Trent Lott said Saturday.
"There are occasions when elections take on a broader meaning," said Lott, of Mississippi. "The war on terrorism isn't over, it has only begun. I do think terrorism and the war on terrorism will still be very much a factor. It could be a referendum on the job that's been done there."
Lott disputed many who have suggested the economy is once again becoming a dominant issue in this year's elections. Most polling after the Sept. 11 attacks put national security at the top of voter concerns, but a string of surveys since have shown voters increasingly worried about an economy that has sunk into recession, in part because of the attacks.
Lott said security is at the base of all voter concerns and will dominate the election campaign.
"President Bush's leadership will be an important factor," said Lott. "That's what I think will be an important issue - personal security."
Many Republicans hope Lott is right, because Bush's approval ratings have soared when the focus is on terrorism, while Democrats gain when attention shifts to the economy.
Lott said political leaders continue to receive threat assessments showing that the potential of more attacks is possible.
"It's very scary," he said. "The higher priority will be security. That's what Americans, I believe, are looking for now in America. They want security and the defense of our country abroad, and also they want personal security."
Lott said the narrow division of the Senate, where Democrats have a 50-49 edge, and the competitive nature of the election season will leave fewer than 10 races in the country competitive.
"I do believe that all politics is local," said Lott. "It really does depend on the quality of the candidate."
In races where both parties have strong candidates, however, Lott said Bush's popularity and a sense of national unity over the war on terrorism will give Republicans an edge that could make the difference.
Lott was in Iowa to campaign in one of those races. He appeared in Des Moines and Cedar Rapids to raise money on behalf of Rep. Greg Ganske, a Des Moines Republican challenging Sen. Tom Harkin, who is seeking a fourth term in office.
"This will be one of the top five races in the country," Lott said. "This is a race that will determine, I believe, who will be in the majority in the United States Senate."
Lott rejected suggestions that Bush will suffer from the ongoing scandals in the wake of the failure of Enron, one of Bush's biggest financial supporters.
"I don't think that will effect the administration," said Lott. "He's very disturbed by what happened there."

Graphic

 
Mug - Trent Lott

Load-Date: January 22, 2002


End of Document