Love crosses ideological borders; Hard to believe he would kill A quick route to extremism An uncommon relationship Now he's in jail for terrorism 'He has to explain himself'
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
October 1, 2006 Sunday


Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.   All Rights Reserved  
Section: G; Pg. 2
Length: 1353 words
Byline: Sebastian Rotella
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


PARIS - He has spent the last year in Iraq's notorious Abu Ghraib prison, a suspected foreign militant held in a tent beneath a punishing sun. She remains in the neighborhood on the northeast edge of Paris where they grew up, worrying, wondering, trying to bring him home. But the 23-year-olds are separated by more than distance and prison walls. He's a Muslim who grew up in a housing project and worked as a deliveryman. She's a middle-class university student from a Jewish background who has relatives in Israel. Yet they fell in love. And they stayed together after he fell into the harsh world of Islamic extremism. He became remote, obsessive, groggy from overnight prayer rituals. He told her it was a sin for them to touch each other. So he sat across the room when she visited, making his mother serve as chaperon. She remained loyal even after he turned up in Iraq, after 10 of his friends were slain, maimed or jailed. She still talks about their romance as if it has a future.
On one level, the story of Peter Cherif and his girlfriend is a Romeo-and-Juliet tale. On another, it offers a look at the confused world of young European extremists. "He was never anti-American," said the pretty student, her eyes shining with tears. "He likes McDonald's, rap, American war movies. He never said anything anti-Jewish." The girlfriend asked that her name be withheld for reasons of safety and because she has kept the relationship a secret from her family. "We talked a lot about Israel and the Palestinians, how kids and innocent people always suffered," she recalled. "He was more concerned about the Palestinians, so I told him about the Israeli side. And he listened to me. I can't believe he went off to Iraq to kill anyone." But French anti-terrorism police say Cherif belonged to a cell of young Islamic extremists that took root in the 19th arrondissement of Paris in 2003. Cherif was the sole member of the group with military experience.
Recruits to Islamic extremism are younger and more volatile today because radicalization happens faster than ever, investigators say. "That's what's interesting and worrisome," said a senior French anti-terrorism official. "No logic, totally aberrant behavior. We've seen some of them, just before leaving for jihad, whose lives were dissolute, not at all Islamic." Cherif's father, who died when his son was 14, was a Catholic Afro-Caribbean immigrant. His mother, Myriam, was born in Tunisia. She talks proudly about her own father's medal-winning exploits with the French military in World War II and Indochina. Myriam Cherif has struggled with illness, as well as her son's ordeal. She did not raise Cherif as a practicing Muslim; he did not speak Arabic as a child. His interests were typical: sports, MP-3s, the Internet. He grew up in a household that cherished French values of democracy, secularism and tolerance, his mother said. Their neighborhood is multi-ethnic. Cherif's girlfriend is not devout. One of her parents is Jewish; she regards Judaism as a strong element of her identity. She has visited relatives in Israel. She considers herself open to all faiths and nationalities. "I have always had many religions around me, and I like it like that," she said.
The couple has known each other since middle school, but their romance began in 2002. Cherif had just been discharged from the army. He had permanently damaged his back and ankle in a parachute jump, ending his hope of joining an elite unit and following a military career like his grandfather. Although hobbled, Cherif was athletic and broad-shouldered, and had a streetwise charm. As they grew close, his girlfriend said she began to see the world through his eyes. Like many dark-skinned working-class youths, he was haunted by prejudice and paranoia, by the conviction that his fellow French citizens saw him as a thug. "He told me, 'You watch. You'll see how people react when we go out. They are thinking: What's a girl like that doing with a guy like him?' It was true. When people saw him on the subway, they would hide their cell phones like they thought he was going to steal them. That hurt him a lot. But he learned to live with it. He was proud to be with me. And I was proud to be with him." The relationship seemed to give Cherif a renewed sense of purpose. He got a job as a deliveryman, saving enough to buy a car and help his mother with household expenses. But Cherif also turned increasingly religious, perhaps due to restlessness and the psychological blow of his career-ending injury. Anti-terrorism investigators say such traumas often open the door to radicalization. Cherif started praying in his room every night, the girlfriend said, then decided to go to the neighborhood mosque. There he met Farid Benyettou. Only a year older, Benyettou wore thick glasses and unruly long hair beneath a turban, but had the magnetism of a true believer. Cherif joined a "study group" that spent hours at Benyettou's apartment. The girlfriend said she never met Benyettou, whom Cherif called "My Professor." But the street ideologue soon intruded into her life. "It was like a sect," she said. "Benyettou knew all the weak and strong points of his disciples. He made them fast. He kept them awake all night praying. The fatigue made them vulnerable. Then he started clearing the environment around them. He knew I was a strong influence. He told Peter to get rid of me; I was an obstacle to his faith, a non-Muslim." Cherif acquired a beard and a withdrawn, sullen air. He recoiled from sexual temptation, avoiding physical contact with his girlfriend and even averting his eyes from billboard advertisements for lingerie. Cherif's transformation also distressed his mother. "They toy with our children, brainwash them," she said. "They bring together a group and tell them they are all brothers together. That fraternal love, it fulfills something everyone is looking for. But it turns into hate for the outside world."
When he left for Damascus, the Syrian capital, in May 2004, Cherif said he was going to join friends studying at a Quranic school. "He said no one looked at him strangely on the street in Syria; he felt welcome, comfortable. He told his mother we should come visit. It's hard for me to think he was getting ready to fight in Iraq if he wanted us to join him," the girlfriend said. But by July, Cherif had cut off contact. His girlfriend heard his voice for the last time during a short, tense call to her cell phone in November 2004. Cherif asked insistently about his mother. He told his girlfriend not to use his name on the phone. "He told me: 'I can't talk right now. I'll try to call you again, but I can't promise anything.' Then he hung up. I looked at the number and I realized it was an Iraqi area code. From then on, I was desperate." U.S. troops in Iraq captured Cherif and another Frenchman near Fallujah Dec. 2, 2004, shortly after the ferocious battle for that insurgent stronghold. Court documents indicate Cherif was detained, unarmed, at a checkpoint and imprisoned at Camp Bucca in southern Iraq. In August 2005, he was transferred to Abu Ghraib. His girlfriend and mother question the length of time he has been held and the fairness of Iraq's judicial system. In March, lawyers, acting on behalf of Cherif and the two women, filed suit in Paris, alleging unjust imprisonment.
In response to a recent inquiry from the Los Angeles Times, a U.S. military spokesman in Baghdad reported Cherif was tried in Iraq's Central Criminal Court between June 28 and July 4 on charges of illegally crossing the border. Iraqi courts sometimes use immigration laws to go after suspected foreign fighters. Cherif was convicted and will be turned over to the Iraqi prison system, said Army Lt. Col. Keir-Kevin Curry, the U.S. military spokesman. The sentence: 15 years. Cherif's girlfriend wants to believe that he did not take part in combat. "It's possible he was convinced to fight, but I want to think he hung onto his true ideas," she said. "I hope he gets brought back to France. He has to explain himself to everyone. He has to explain himself to me."

Load-Date: October 2, 2006


End of Document