Love and Terrorism
The New York Times
July 5, 2015 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 772 words
Byline: By ADAM WILSON
Adam Wilson is the author of ''Flatscreen: A Novel'' and ''What's Important Is Feeling: Stories.''
Body


THE SEVEN GOOD YEARSA Memoir By Etgar KeretTranslated by Sondra Silverston, Miriam Shlesinger, Jessica Cohen, Anthony Berris171 pp. Riverhead Books. $26.95.  Etgar Keret's story collections are like good punk rock records: fast, fun and cultishly admired. And yet despite the inclusion of a few foundation-rattling standouts, even the best punk records ultimately leave the listener under the spell of undiminishing sameness. 
The same goes for Keret's collections. Not that Keret is completely to blame; his genre is the parable, and if it weren't for the demands of the market, these stories would be individually packaged rather than bound in books. The best of Keret's stories, ''Surprise Egg,'' say, from his 2006 collection ''The Nimrod Flipout,'' explode with distortion. In the case of that particular story, there's also an actual explosion -- a suicide bomb -- and the story's power lies in the immediacy of its ending: a bomb-­widowed husband dreams of the foot of his dead wife slowly stroking his face. Keret forgoes easy moralizing and refuses to politicize the personal or to offer an obvious message. When Keret, who is Israeli and writes in Hebrew, first appeared in English, he was hailed as a savior of short stories from the dour realism of Raymond Carver, and a liberator of Israeli fiction from the big-picture density of writers like David Grossman. His stories were unapologetically absurd and libidinous, and if they weren't all winners, then at least there was something refreshing in Keret's imaginative conceits.
  What then to make of ''The Seven Good Years,'' Keret's first book-length foray into nonfiction? Its title refers to the time between the birth of Keret's son and the death of his father, though it's unclear whether we're meant to take the modifier at face value. Were these good years for Israel, a country ceaselessly embroiled in conflict whose military tactics Keret has vocally opposed? For Keret, who despite the magnitude of the events that bookend this series of vignettes, spends many of these pages leisurely attending literary festivals abroad? The juxtaposition is important; the ceaseless whine of rockets contextualizes even the most humdrum activities, and the narrative continuity gives these pieces a cumulative power absent from Keret's fictions. ''People feel their mortality more than anywhere else on the planet,'' Keret explains of the Middle East. The book opens with Keret in an empty maternity ward. All the doctors have rushed to the E.R. to treat a group of people injured in a terrorist attack. Lev, Keret's son, must patiently wait to be born.
  Later -- by this point Lev is 7 -- an air raid siren forces the family out of the car where they must lie facedown on the highway. Keret invents a game called Pastrami Sandwich -- mommy and daddy are the bread, Lev is the meat -- in order to assuage Lev's anxiety. Taken together, these anecdotes paint a picture of combat-zone parenthood that goes beyond politics while reinforcing the imperative need for lasting peace.
  Fatherhood is not the only subject of interest. We have ruminations on everything from delayed flights to telemarketers. Some of it is profound, much of it less so. Keret joins a yoga class for pregnant women that makes him feel better about his chubby stomach. Later he grows a mustache, then shaves it. Keret has a tendency toward reductive summation and his explorations often cutely resolve before they have a chance to get going. The nonfictional Keret is gentler than his fictional self; instead of an angry young man we get a defanged father. As a critic, Keret is not one to shy away from polemics -- he is an outspoken critic of Netanyahu's government and has written persuasively on the subject -- but these essays aspire to a wider populism. A piece on the iPhone game Angry Birds refuses to dig beyond the surface of an initial observation, and another, on Keret's strained relationship with his Orthodox sister, slowly builds tension, then quickly cuts off before feelings are hurt. None of this would be problematic, but at fewer than 200 pages, the book is too slim to comprise so much filler.
  Keret is best when he sticks to family, and particularly the subject of his father, a Holocaust survivor. Keret risks sentimentality recklessly and often. When it works, the payoff is powerful: a palpable urgency of emotion. There's a lot of love in this book. One hopes it's contagious.
              Like to be first? Get The New York Times Book Review before it appears online every Friday.                           Sign up for the email newsletter here.                              

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/05/books/review/etgar-kerets-the-seven-good-years-a-memoir.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Etgar Keret (PHOTOGRAPH BY YANAI YECHIEL)        

Load-Date: July 5, 2015


End of Document