Love Island winners Jack and Dani split
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 7, 2018 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: CULTURE; Pg. 1
Length: 298 words
Byline: Julia Gonzales
Body


And the supposed reason behind the split has now been revealed.
Jack and Dani have been couple goals since they first met this summer on the 2018 series of Love Island, pairing up immediately and never wavering from each other's sides since.
At the time of filming the pair were still coupled-up, which may leave some viewers confused when the show airs.
So most of us are still a bit shook from last night's news.
'But Dani and I got through it, ' he added.
It saw them exchanging presents, dancing together and lovingly gazing into each other's eyes.
The pair had also wrapped up the filming of their own reality TV series, following their life together after the villa.
Pakistan Won't Be Your 'Hired Gun' Anymore: Imran Khan To US
We are there to fight global terrorism and to prevent Afghanistan from ever again becoming a safe haven for worldwide terrorism. Khan hit back by saying the United States should not blame Pakistan for its failings in Afghanistan .
The couple's split comes after an awkwardly timedLove Island: The Christmas Reunion trailer dropped during I'm A Celebrity's advert break.
In an Instagram story, Dani announced that after "an incredible six months" the couple, who won the show this year, had "decided to part ways" after realising they weren't destined to be together long-term.
Jack Fincham and Dani Dyer finding out they wereLove Island winners. We both plan to stay friends.
A source told The Sun: "Dani may have said this was a mutual decision, but that's not the case".
"They are both incredibly busy and they have chose to call time on their romance".
Another source said how the demands of life after the villa made it hard for the pair to go on.
The aim of theLove Island is to couple up with someone in the villa, then convince the nation you're the strongest couple.

Load-Date: December 7, 2018


End of Document