Loyola College-Maryland reacts to terrorism possibility
University Wire
February 25, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The Greyhound via U-Wire
Length: 598 words
Byline: By Mike Hilt, The Greyhound
Dateline: Baltimore
Body


Last week, the threat of terrorism came knocking on the doors of college students all over the nation as colleges and universities were placed on the FBI's list of potential "soft targets" for terrorist attack. Like other colleges, Loyola College-Maryland is preparing for the possibility of a terrorist attack.
"This is a concern … no doubt," said Terry Sawyer, special assistant to the president. Loyola joins schools, businesses, malls and even families all over the nation in preparing for this new type of threat.
Loyola College-Maryland
Institutions of higher education are, however, only one of many of these "soft targets" on that list.
"The threat of terrorism forces us to make a choice. We can be afraid, or we can be ready," said Tom Ridge, the new secretary of Homeland Security in his Feb. 7 address to the nation.
This message is being repeated across the nation as all aspects of American life have to adapt to this new concern.
"[D]on't get nervous," Director of Public Safety Tim Fox said as he described Loyola's stay-alert approach to facing this threat.
Fox's remarks echoed the call for calm of many government officials and also emphasized the need to be vigilant in this time of uncertainty and fear.
"[There are] actual measures that we can take to minimize the threat," said Fox.
Among the measures he described are locking the doors of buildings in areas that are easily accessible to the public, such as those doors that face Charles Street or Coldspring Lane. Students and faculty will need to use their ID card to gain access to these areas.
As part of Loyola's vigilance, Sawyer, along with several other Loyola officials, is part of a crisis response team that meets regularly to assess the college's preparedness and to make the college ready for any type of possible attack. This team views the threat as affecting Loyola in one of three ways.
First, an attack that would occur somewhere in the nation, but would not directly affect the campus. In this case, which is the type that Sept. 11 would fall under, counseling and other such services would be offered to the college community. Second, an attack that would occur in Baltimore but still not directly affect the campus, and third, an attack on campus or around campus that would directly affect the campus.
This committee is also looking at the provisions and safety measures that would be needed for the college to deal with all of these three types of attacks. Loyola is working with several other colleges and universities along with the Office for Domestic Preparedness, which is part of the Department of Justice.
Other colleges throughout the nation share Loyola's response to this potential of attack. Frank Ficko, associate director of security at Fairfield University in Connecticut, emphasized that Fairfield will remain vigilant, but will continue on with life unafraid of this threat.
Fairfield entered a period of "lockdown" last week, posting campus police officers at main entrances to campus to ensure that all those entering campus were affiliated with the college. Fairfield is making preparations similar to those at Loyola and is also taking similar measures to respond to the current heightened concern.
"Students are asked to be patient," said Sawyer when describing the possibility of increased security as the threat becomes more severe.
The college may experience changes that will prove inconvenient to the student and faculty population, but these changes are necessary and for the protection of that population.
(C) 2002 The Greyhound via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 25, 2003


End of Document