Macedonians Try to Link 7 With Terrorism 
 The New York Times
March 4, 2002 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 284 words
Byline:  Reuters 
Dateline: SKOPJE, Macedonia, March 3  
Body


The country struggled today to identify seven terrorism suspects killed in a police shootout that has raised many questions among Western diplomats reported to have been their targets.
     "The only thing we are certain about at this moment is that the gunmen are not from Macedonia, but we are still trying to establish where they are from," a senior Interior Ministry official said. 
He said the police were trying to compare the dead men's fingerprints, dental records, addresses and other evidence with information from foreign intelligence services. 
 Police officials have said they suspect the gunmen were foreign fighters from Muslim countries who were planning attacks on government officials and foreign embassies. The police also said they believed some of them were from Pakistan.
The seven were killed in a northern suburb of this capital early on Saturday, the police said. An Interior Ministry official said the police fired warning shots as the men approached in a van. The suspects then opened fire, and the police fired back, killing all seven, officials said. No police officers were wounded.
Macedonia's chief coroner, Aleksej Duma, said autopsies had been performed on all the bodies but they had not made a significant contribution to determining their identities.  Ambassadors from the United States, Britain and Germany visited the morgue on Saturday and saw some of the bodies, diplomatic officials said.
Western officials in Macedonia have expressed surprise at reports that their embassies were potential targets. They said they had not been informed in advance of any threat. "There is still this uncomfortable feeling that we don't know the whole truth," a Western diplomat said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 4, 2002


End of Document