MACEDONIA ACKNOWLEDGES IT STAGED "ANTI-TERRORIST" ACTION THAT KILLED 7 MEN
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 1, 2004 Saturday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 29
Length: 341 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SKOPJE, MACEDONIA
Body


* Six have been charged with murder of Pakistanis in incident from March 2002.
Macedonians smuggled seven Pakistanis into the country - then gunned them down, claiming they were terrorists, authorities said Friday. The police staged the killings, in March 2002, to show they were taking part in the U.S. campaign against terrorism, officials said.
Police spokeswoman Mirjana Konteska said that six people had been charged with murder: three former police commanders, two special police officers and a businessman.
If convicted, they could get sentences ranging from 10 years to life in prison.
The killings were "an act of a sick mind," Konteska said. "They … ordered the brutal murder of the seven Pakistani men." The incident was followed by a two-year investigation.
She described a plan to promote Macedonia as a player in the fight against global terrorism; the plan involved smuggling the Pakistanis into Macedonia from Bulgaria, housing them, and then killing them.
The killings, she added, were part of an attempt to "present themselves as participants in the war against terrorism and demonstrate Macedonia's commitment to the war on terror."
Since breaking away from Yugoslavia in 1991, Macedonia has been eager to win U.S. political and economic support in its search for acceptance into the Western camp of nations.
Macedonia has been a close U.S. ally in the Balkans. It has staunchly supported the U.S.-led war on terrorism and sent troops to Iraq.
The action was carried out in March 2002 by special Macedonian police who claimed to have eliminated a terrorist group, allegedly plotting to attack international embassies and representatives in Macedonia.
Konteska said that the seven Pakistani men were in fact illegal immigrants who were lured into Macedonia by promises that they would be transferred to Western Europe.
She refused to directly name the suspects.
Kontenska mentioned, however, that police generals Goran Stojkov and Boban Utkovski, as well as senior police official Aleksandar Cvetkovski, were among those allegedly involved.

Notes

NATION/WORLD

Load-Date: May 1, 2004


End of Document