Macron: I won't condemn caricatures of 'Prophet Muhammad'
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 2, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 474 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Before the attack on Charlie Hebdo's offices, militants online had warned the magazine would pay for publishing the cartoons. The Dutch cartoons were originally published by the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten as part of an exercise in free speech.
The front-page reads: "All of this, just for that".
French President Emmanuel Macron said on Tuesday it was not his place to pass judgment on the decision by the satirical magazine, saying France has freedom of expression.
The Kouachi brothers and a third Islamist gunman, who killed five people in the 48 hours that followed the Charlie Hebdo massacre, were shot dead by police in different stand-offs, but 14 of their alleged accomplices go on trial on Wednesday.
Its editorial team insisted that it was "essential" to republish the cartoons as the trial opens.
"Such a deliberate act to offend the sentiments of billions of Muslims can not be justified as an exercise in press freedom or freedom of expression", said Mr Chaudhri in another tweet.
"There is in France a freedom to blaspheme which is attached to the freedom of conscience".
The editorial said they were asked if they would ever print other caricatures of Prophet.
Hello Ampere - Nvidia will announce its latest graphics innovations on September 1
However, it does give away that September is going to be the month when Nvidia finally releases the new family of graphics cards. Rumors have been circulating that Ampere is close to launch, and graphics card shortages appear to back that up.
"This happened: it was the publication of these drawings, considered blasphemy by a number of Muslims, which was the motive for the January 7 massacre by assassins who wanted to, as they shouted on their way out from the premises of Charlie Hebdo, 'Avenge the Prophet, '" Sourisseau continued.
The former director of Charlie Hebdo, Philippe Val, also hailed a "remarkable idea" for defending freedom of thought and expression in the face of "terror".
"The freedom to caricature and the freedom to dislike them are enshrined and nothing justifies violence", the French Council of the Muslim Faith wrote on Twitter in response.
The suspects, who go on trial on Wednesday, are accused of providing various degrees of logistical support to the killers.
The trial was originally set for last spring but was delayed by the coronavirus crisis that shut down most French courthouses.
The trial, which will run for 10 weeks and be filmed throughout, is likely to evoke painful memories.
"At least half a dozen" terror attacks have been thwarted since the start of the year, the anti-terrorism prosecutor Jean-François Ricard told local news outlet Franceinfo.
"It is about individuals who are involved in the logistics, the preparation of the events, who provided means of financing, operational material, weapons, a residence", he told France Info radio on Monday.

Load-Date: September 3, 2020


End of Document