Mail Bombs and Other Threats Have the Wealthy Cranking Up Security
The New York Times
October 28, 2018 Sunday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Express
Length: 823 words
Byline: By LAURA M. HOLSON
Body


In recent years, the unpredictability of terrorizing events has kept Americans on alert, wary of threats to their safety and well-being.
A gunman killed 58 people attending an outdoor concert in Las Vegas last year. School violence has become commonplace enough that some teens carry bulletproof backpacks. And this week, at least a dozen homemade pipe bombs were mailed to outspoken critics of President Trump and forced the evacuation of a shopping mall in New York. 
  Specific threats and a general sense of anxiety, security experts say, are causing more people to seek the services of private security firms; some are hiring bodyguards and drivers trained to protect them in case of peril.
  At Pinkerton, a private security and detective agency founded in 1850, requests for executive security have increased 20 to 30 percent annually over the last five years, said its vice chairman, Tim Williams. And people are looking for safeguards in all areas of their lives that pose risks, experts say, including information technology and social media.
  ''People are scared right now,'' Mr. Williams said.
  Kidnapping and terrorism are rare in the United States, and only the wealthiest Americans can afford to hire full-time protection. But because of a strong stock market and generous tax cuts, the universe of billionaires (and millionaires, for that matter) is expanding.
  ''More people are able to afford this,'' said Tim Horner, a former captain in the New York Police Department who is now a senior managing director at Kroll, a private security firm. ''Clearly, the perceived risk and real threat level has increased.''
  According to Mr. Williams, a trained driver can cost from $2,000 to $10,000 a day, which may include an armored car, countersurveillance and armed guards. A full-time bodyguard from a well-established firm costs between $150,000 and $300,000 per year, said other industry executives.
  Corporations, too, are more willing to foot the bill for prominent figures, especially those considered to be potential targets in today's hyperpartisan political environment. In 2017, Facebook spent $7.3 million to protect its chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, which included security at his homes, access to private airplanes and protection while traveling, according to news reports. And this year, the company reported it would pay him an additional $10 million for security.
  Employing a security detail does not guarantee safety, particularly for celebrities who make their whereabouts publicly known. Mr. Horner advises wealthy clients to limit their exposure on social media.
  ''If you have a big profile, then you need to manage it and be careful what information gets out,'' he said.
  Kim Kardashian was robbed at gunpoint in her Paris hotel in October 2016 one day after she posted a photograph on Instagram that showed her bodyguard, Pascal Duvier. (She wrote: ''This guy is always in my shot!'') She was bound and gagged as thieves took off with millions of dollars in jewelry. A month later, Mr. Duvier quit.
  Many requests that security firms are getting from their wealthy clients are driven by threats that have already been made, but others are from general anxiety about what is in the news. ''One of the problems with security is perception,'' said Christopher Falkenberg, president of Insite Risk Management and a former Secret Service officer. ''People focus on what is sexy now.''
  He said clients were concerned about international terrorism last year after attackers killed eight people by driving a van into a crowd of pedestrians on London Bridge before a stabbing spree. But a traveler abroad is more likely to be killed in a car crash than by a terrorist, Mr. Falkenberg said. ''Now, we have mail bomb attacks and people are interested in their mail security.''
  He added: ''What people are concerned about is disruption.''
  Robert Dodge, who oversees corporate risk services at security firm G4S, said he had seen an increase in mail screening among Silicon Valley's technorati even before this week's pipe bomb threats. He said some wealthy individuals have converted a discreet area on their property into a command center, where bodyguards in plainclothes keep watch. Some of the guards carry weapons.
  ''As world events get more traumatic,'' he said, ''reality is going to meet perception, and you are going to see even more people hiring security.''
  So what are nonmillionaires to do so they can feel safe? There are a variety of technological advances: apps to track travelers when they are abroad, and home security systems that can be monitored online. And a trend among corporations, experts said, is training employees how to respond if there is an active shooter or other threat at the office.
  ''That same training can be used at home,'' Mr. Dodge said.
  But perhaps the best approach, he said, is to be vigilant and aware of one's surroundings. ''Put away your smartphone,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/27/us/terror-private-security-bodyguard.html

Load-Date: October 28, 2018


End of Document