Mailbox explosions injure 6 people Attacks called domestic terrorism by authorities

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 4, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 490 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


MILAN, Ill. - In an attack described as domestic terrorism, pipe bombs accompanied by anti-government propaganda exploded in six mailboxes in rural parts of Illinois and Iowa, injuring six people.
The bombs were accompanied by notes criticizing the government and saying more "attention getters" were on the way.
There were no immediate suspects.
In all, eight devices were found Friday and seven of them exploded, said Thomas Ahearn, spokesman for the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms office in Chicago.
None of the people who were hurt - four postal workers and two residents - suffered life-threatening injuries.
"We are reviewing this as a domestic terrorism incident," said James Bogner, an FBI spokesman. "We don't know if all the devices have been found or there are devices remaining. … We probably won't know for a while."
Officials urged residents to report anything suspicious they might find in their mailboxes.
"Do not touch the item or slam the mailbox closed," said Postal Inspector Linda Jensen, who described the bombs as three-quarter inch steel pipes attached to a 9-volt battery. The bombs appeared to be triggered by being touched or moved.
Mail delivery in all rural areas of Iowa east of Cedar Rapids and in northwestern Illinois was suspended today while authorities investigated the origin of the bombs.
Dennis Schoening, manager of the Quad Cities mail processing and distribution plant in Milan, said it's the first time in his 24 years of service mail delivery was canceled
"Even in blizzards, we try," he said. "There may be pockets we can't get to, but we make the effort."
Jon Petersen of the ATF said late Friday that officials from an FBI multi-agency terrorism task force and the U.S. attorney's office in Iowa's northern district had a number of leads.
"We are working with our profilers," he said.
Jensen said the way the bombs were placed suggests they are linked, but more than one person could be involved. She said it appears rural mailboxes were chosen to lessen the chance of someone seeing the bomber tampering with mailboxes.
The communities where the bombs were found are within a circular area roughly 120 miles across.
Jensen said it was too early to say whether the bombings were indiscriminate or targeted postal workers or mailbox owners.
Postal Service vice president Azeezaly Jaffer said the bombs were accompanied by a typewritten note in a clear plastic bag that began: "Mailboxes are exploding! Why, you ask?"
Then it said, in part:
"If the government controls what you want to do they control what you can do. … I'm obtaining your attention in the only way I can. More info is on its way. More 'attention getters' are on the way."
It also said: "If I could, I would change only one person, unfortunately the resources are not accessible. It seems killing a single famous person would get the same media attention as killing numerous un-famous humans."
The note was signed, "Someone Who Cares."

Load-Date: May 8, 2002


End of Document