Maine terrorism task force authorized;
The group would consist of FBI and other federal agents, and state and local police officers.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
August 5, 2004 Thursday, Final Edition


Copyright 2004 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT; Pg. A1
Length: 770 words
Byline: DAVID HENCH Staff Writer
Dateline: SOUTH PORTLAND
Body


A Joint Terrorism Task Force focusing specifically on Maine will operate in the next fiscal year, analyzing intelligence and conducting investigations. Sen. Susan Collins announced the creation of the task force at a news conference Wednesday, saying that Maine may be relatively low on terrorists' target list but it is not immune to their presence.
"If you read this report," she said, holding a copy of the Sept. 11 commission's findings, "you find the names of small cities and small towns all over the United States. Even though Maine might not be a target of terrorist attack, it can be used by terrorists as they launch operations against more urban areas."
Collins cited the very first page of the report, which begins its description of the catastrophic attack by noting that on Sept. 11, 2001, two men named Mohamed Atta and Abdul Aziz al Omari boarded a plane in Portland.
Maine's long coastline, its extensive international border with Canada, three deep-water ports and two international airports make it a strong candidate for a task force, she said.
The FBI authorized the Joint Terrorism Task Force in Maine, which will join 84 other task forces in 40 states across the country. The groups are made up of FBI and other federal agents, and state and local officers assigned to investigate terrorism. The Boston task force, for example, played a key role in coordinating security last week at the Democratic National Convention.
Three dozen representatives of state, local and federal agencies gathered at the Department of Homeland Security district office in South Portland Wednesday to hear Collins announce the creation of the task force and describe what would be expected of departments and officers who participate.
Members of the task force would have access to FBI databases and be trained in terrorism investigation. Each police officer's home department would pay his base salary. The FBI would provide a car, a cell phone, a pager and other necessary equipment, and pay overtime.
The FBI expects a yearlong commitment because of the extensive training involved. The bureau said it would be happy with four or five police officers dedicated from Maine departments, and the task force could grow in the future.
"The issue now is how Maine will respond to this offer," Collins said after the meeting.
Although some other federal agencies pledged personnel, local and state police were reluctant to commit.
Col. Craig Poulin, chief of the Maine State Police, said he supports the concept but would have to evaluate the other priorities in his department before he could commit troopers to the effort full time.
Federal officials will accept a part-time commitment to the task force because of the limited personnel available in Maine, Collins said.
The unit would have work to do. Police were told that the four FBI agents now assigned to terrorism investigations in Maine have worked on 100 cases.
Collins said the task force would go a long way toward breaking down the barriers that can exist between law enforcement agencies - barriers that the Sept. 11 commission said contributed to the intelligence failures preceding the attacks.
Collins chairs the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, which is holding hearings on some of the key recommendations of the Sept. 11 commission.
Maine's U.S. Attorney Paula Silsby said the task force would complement the existing Anti-terrorism Advisory Council, which allows local, state and federal agencies to share information.
The FBI already has deputized 30 state and local officers as deputy U.S. marshals to help the FBI respond to reports of suspicious behavior that could relate to terrorism, she said.
James Osterrieder, the FBI's supervising agent in Maine, said functions of the Joint Terrorism Task Force are already at work, and state police detectives are already available to help the FBI.
Osterrieder said he will put together a budget for the operation, which would be funded in the next fiscal year.
"It's up and running now really, in essence," he said, citing the four FBI agents, an immigration agent and half the time of a CIA agent dedicated to terrorism work. The state police has had detectives working with the Boston task force, and one of them is a member of the Boston task force's hazardous-materials team, he said.
"This formalizes how we address the terrorism issue in Maine," he said. "If a point in time comes when I need bodies to investigate a fairly significant threat, I will be able to pick up the phone and they have assured me they will have bodies."
Staff Writer David Hench can be contacted at 791-6327 or at:
dhench@pressherald.com  

Graphic

 
Staff photo by John Patriquin
Sen. Susan Collins speaks at a news conference in South Portland on Wednesday.

Load-Date: August 5, 2004


End of Document