Maine prosecutor promises care in war on terrorism;
Homeland security prosecutor William Schneider says he'll respect Mainers' constitutional rights.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
September 2, 2002 Monday, Holiday Edition


Copyright 2002 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT; Pg. 1A
Length: 379 words
Byline: GREGORY D. KESICH Staff Writer
Body


The lead prosecutor for the federal government's war on terrorism in Maine says his effort will not require trampling any constitutional rights.
William Schneider says that when he takes his new job as homeland security prosecutor in the U.S. Attorney's Office in Portland next December, part of his job will be making sure that investigations are handled fairly.
"I was a drug prosecutor for many years, and a primary role for a drug prosecutor is advising law enforcement, giving them correct advice on the proper way to do things," he said. He said the same will be true investigating terrorist organizations.
Schneider is currently a state representative from Durham. He served as an assistant U.S. attorney and Cumberland County district attorney before running for the Legislature in 1998. He is a graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and served as a captain in the Army.
For the last two years, he has served as the assistant Republican floor leader in the House, and was a candidate for the U.S. attorney for Maine position after the election of President Bush.
Schneider says he does not expect to spend much time in court when he starts his new job.
"I don't expect that there will be many, or any, terrorism prosecutions in Maine," he said. "Much of my work is going to be coordinating (preparedness) efforts, working with all the state and federal agencies. It will be more of a policy type of role, unless something, God forbid, happens."
All 93 U.S. Attorney's offices are hiring prosecutors like Schneider. With the Homeland Security Agency still taking shape, the Department of Justice prosecutors will be the lead coordinators of state and federal agencies in their areas.
"The best way to prevent future attacks is to be prepared," Schneider said. "I think we need to think in terms of long-term security."
Part of that, he says, is to maintain individual protections from intrusive government investigations.
"We need to look to the Constitution for our guidance," he said. "We can fight any terrorist organization and any threat within the guidelines of the Constitution . . . the more we have to sacrifice civil liberties, the more the terrorists will win."
Staff Writer Gregory D. Kesich can be contacted at 791-6336 or at:
gkesich@pressherald.com  

Graphic

 
Schneider

Load-Date: September 2, 2002


End of Document