Maine hub casts wide net for criminal intelligence; The basic summary deck is going to go right here and will usually go four lines in this space here.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 29, 2007 Thursday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2007 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. A5
Length: 410 words
Byline: DAVID HENCH Staff Writer --
Body


Maine's ''fusion center,'' a state-run intelligence hub charged with identifying possible terrorism activity in the state, has embraced its mission by collecting information about a wide range of criminal activity, said the unit's top official.
State Police Lt. William Snedeker, head of special services, said casting a wide net for criminal intelligence improves the chances of identifying possible terrorists or activities that might support terrorism.
''Money laundering, cigarette smuggling, drug smuggling, immigrant smuggling - these are usually for-profit organized or semi-organized crime ... We have to give that due diligence to make sure somebody isn't using that activity to fund terrorism,'' Snedeker said.
A more specific example might be the recent surge in copper thefts, most of which is low-level burglars trying to make quick money. However, some of the break-ins have been at power plants and other critical infrastructure that require closer investigation, he said.
Maine's Information and Analysis Center, one of 43 so-called fusion centers nationally, started taking shape over a year ago but has been up and running for only about six months and so is still evolving, Snedeker said. The unit, headquartered in Augusta, includes members of the State Police Criminal Intelligence Unit and staff from the Maine Emergency Management Agency.
A Government Accounting Office report that criticized the distraction from the centers' anti-terrorism mission didn't take into account that the centers are still developing and evolving and trying to establish best practices, Snedeker said.
The Maine fusion center is developing agreements with police agencies around the state to funnel possibly relevant information to the central clearing house. That information may mean little to a local agency, but coupled with information from other parts of the state or from national bulletins, could be relevant.
By the same token, much of what gets reported is discarded because it can be quickly dismissed as unrelated to terrorism, Snedeker said.
The center communicates closely with the Joint Terrorism Task Force run through the FBI and overseen by the U.S. Attorney's office. That task force serves as the operational arm for much of the follow-up investigation when the center's intelligence might relate to terrorism, said the FBI's supervisory agent in Maine Todd DiFede. 
Staff Writer David Hench can be contacted at 791-6327 or at:
dhench@pressherald.com

Load-Date: November 29, 2007


End of Document