MAINE PREPARES TO HANDLE TERRORISM;
Nearly $500,000 in federal money will help state officials plan for the unthinkable.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
May 13, 2001 Sunday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: MAINE & NEW ENGLAND; Pg. 1B
Length: 877 words
Byline: DAVID HENCH Staff Writer
Body


A judge, a newspaper editor and two police officers were dead, and investigators found the killer's basement filled with bomb-making equipment.
It was the kind of crime that people associate with distant countries scarred by centuries of ethnic and religious violence. But it actually occurred in tiny Columbia, N. H., just 25 miles from the Maine border.
The 1997 death of Carl Drega, who gunned down four people with an assault rifle before being killed in a police shootout, is an easily forgotten example of the potential for terrorist activity even in Maine's back yard.
As the government prepares to execute Timothy McVeigh for bombing the federal building in Oklahoma City in 1995, Drega's act is a reminder that terrorism doesn't always happen somewhere else.
"Who would have thought something would happen in Oklahoma City killing 168 people? Why there? It's in the middle of nowhere," said Maj. Gerald Dunlap of the Maine National Guard. "That kind of brought it home to people. It could have been anywhere."
Dunlap heads the Weapons of Mass Destruction 11th Civilian Support Team, a Guard unit that is one of 27 being formed around the country as part of a new commitment to preparing for terrorism on U.S. soil.
The federal Department of Justice awarded almost $500,000 to Maine last month to help the state ready itself for a terrorist attack and its aftermath.
The money will be used to assess the vulnerability of potential targets across the state and to build the capacity to respond to such a disaster if one occurs.
"Terrorists look for a place where they can make a statement," Dunlap said. "It doesn't have to be New York City. It's really not a matter of if something happens, it's when and where and do you want to be the one that isn't prepared."
The money is being funneled through the Maine Emergency Management Agency. The counties' emergency management directors, working with local fire chiefs and business owners, will assess the potential threats in their areas.
That information will be used to increase security, select equipment and provide training, said Steve Burgess, operations officer for the Maine Emergency Management Agency.
"God, we hope it never happens here, but you never know. The target of opportunity can be anywhere," Burgess said. "The targets in Maine may not be as large as some of these other locations, but there's still an expectation on our part that that could happen in the state of Maine."
Officials won't discuss what sites could be potential targets in Maine. But some of the more high-profile facilities include large hospitals, government buildings and fuel storage terminals.
Next month, officials will get a feel for terrorism preparedness in Portland when the city hosts a disaster preparedness drill at the Portland International Jetport.
Geared to the potential for a fiery jet crash, the scenario will gauge the ability of firefighters, emergency rescue workers, hospitals and support services to respond to a massive number of casualties.
Later this summer, a similar scenario is planned to deal specifically with weapons of mass destruction.
The state's existing resources will be bolstered by next year, when Dunlap expects his National Guard team to be certified. Once operational, the team will be available to be dispatched by the governor to a terrorist attack or any chemical, biological or radiological emergency.
The team will help identify the threat and how to respond to it, and alert medical personnel on treating symptoms.
Burgess said that preparation can pay off, even if a terrorist attack never occurs here.
Deadly biological and chemical compounds can be unleashed by accident as well as on purpose.
A major toxic release from a nuclear power plant, a fuel tanker, or a chemical or gas storage facility would demand the same type of disaster response that a terrorist attack would.
But while response preparation is important, preventing a terrorist attack remains the most important goal.
Authorities say that vigilant border patrols and an informed public can play key roles in prevention.
"If there was a Ryder truck out in front of the state capitol building and nobody was around it, maybe next time someone will think that truck shouldn't be there," said Dunlap, of the Maine National Guard. "The more you can increase awareness, the better. But not so people are frightened, because then you're falling into the perpetrator's hands."
Richard Price of Cumberland, a retired U.S. Air Force colonel and a consultant on terrorism, said the public can be just as valuable once a terrorist incident occurs.
Price and his wife, Barbara, who is a chemist, operate Applied Sciences and Analysis, and have been publishing a newsletter about chemical and germ warfare for years. Last month, they convened a conference in Croatia on responding to biological and chemical terrorism.
Price said it is essential for any state or region to be aware of the potential hazards to its residents, which can include even agricultural pesticides or the chemicals used in papermaking.
"An educated public will benefit us more than spending billions," said Price. "The challenge is how you prepare the public without creating panic."
Staff Writer David Hench can be contacted at 791-6327 or at:
dhench@pressherald.com  

Load-Date: May 14, 2001


End of Document