Maintain resolve in war on terrorism
USA TODAY
June 18, 2004, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 745 words
Body

Our country is facing a difficult time, and we should expect further challenging times ahead. The war on terrorism most likely will carry on for many years, possibly even decades. We, as a people, cannot forget why we must pursue this course. This is not President Bush's war; this is our war. Our focus cannot be broken by partisan politics.
Remember the confusion, fear and dazed feelings following 9/11? Remember the fear of more attacks? The gas masks and duct tape? How many of us could have imagined that more than two and a half years later no attacks have occurred on our soil?
I believe we can attribute this success to the strong, proactive position taken by Bush, increased action by our government agencies, cooperation with allied governments and the heightened vigilance of many average Americans.
Al-Qaeda declared war on us more than 10 years ago. Initial targets were U.S. citizens, interests and symbols overseas. Our perceived safety in the homeland afforded us a false sense of comfort and security. Only in the past three years have we overtly responded. No, this temporary lull does not indicate that we have won the war. Yes, I still think they are coming after us; they will seek our most innocent and complacent. None of us wishes to live and raise our families in fear, but we cannot let down our guard. Freedom has never been free, but it has always been worth the price.
Adam Kirk Pruden
Sunrise, Fla.
'Bring 'em home'
Both the Fallujah Brigade -- a compromise that gave control of Fallujah to an Iraqi brigade in exchange for the withdrawal of U.S. Marines -- and George W. Bush's Iraq war of choice are failures. Where are Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and ties to the 9/11 attacks ("Fallujah Brigade tries U.S. 'patience,' " News, Monday)?
Close to $ 150 billion has been wasted. More than 800 soldiers have been killed. More than 5,000 have been injured, and numerous U.S. troops have suffered mental health problems.
How many more soldiers have to be killed or wounded before Bush admits he made a huge mistake? Bring 'em home! Move up Iraq's elections, and bring all of our troops home by December 2005.
Bill Kibble, retired captain
U.S. Air Force, Boise
Salute at-home dads
The story "Every day is father's day" really struck a chord. Like the fathers in the story, my husband, Mark, stays home with our kids: Jennifer, 9, and Samuel, 7 (Life, Monday).
Not only did we take a financial hit, but there has been the social stigma as well. A few family members and friends were horrified by the arrangement, and at least one openly asked what is wrong with a man who makes his wife work while he stays home all day.
Maybe they should spend a day watching him juggle the kids, the laundry, the housework and the shopping. Millions of women, and a growing number of men, have done this job. They know, as I do, that it takes organization, commitment and determination -- the same skills you need for any 9-to-5 job in the corporate world. But also needed is the ability to change a diaper while singing The Alphabet Song several times a day.
Happy Father's Day, Mark, from Jenn, Sam and me. We love you.
Carmelle Druchniak
Manchester, N.H.
Reagan hurt blacks
As an African-American, I would like to respond to the commentary by Julianne Malveaux, "A legacy that left blacks behind" (The Forum, June 11).
She is absolutely right that Ronald Reagan showed disdain toward blacks by gutting poverty programs that were helping move us into the middle class. As a result of cutting "waste" -- meaning poor people and, by inference, black people -- he succeeded in eliminating or shrinking job training, health and mental health programs, housing and education.
This started with his election as governor of California and followed him to the White House. Results included homelessness, high rates of unemployment, high infant-mortality rates and inadequate care for the mentally ill.
Those of us lucky enough to get a college education and return to our communities prior to Reagan's election found ourselves confronting social, educational and economic conditions that still plague us today. Our forward march to "the promised land" has left millions of our children and families behind, despite our best efforts. I'm convinced that if we had been able to provide the advice, counseling and mentoring we received in the past, millions of people would not now be uneducated and living in poverty.
Naomi Gray
Former health commissioner
City and county of San Francisco

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document