Mainers pausing to honor attacks' victims, survivors - Correction Appended
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
September 11, 2008 Thursday
FINAL Edition


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2008 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. A1
Length: 696 words
Byline: DIETER BRADBURY Staff Writer
Body


With prayers and parades.
With moments of silence and salutes to the flag.
With memorial services and donations to charity.
These are the ways in which Mainers will mark the seventh anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, when 19 al-Qaida terrorists hijacked four jetliners, piloting two of them into the World Trade Center and one into the Pentagon. The fourth plane crashed in a field in Pennsylvania after passengers tried to retake the craft from the hijackers.
The passage of time might have dimmed some of the fervor and emotion that surrounds these observances, which commemorate the deaths of 2,974, but those involved in planning events say it's important to maintain the memorial rituals, to honor those who died and to remember their survivors.
''It's important for people who are attempting to put some closure on the event,'' said Michael Clarke, a Bath firefighter who participated in search and rescue operations at the World Trade Center seven years ago. ''It's something I live with every day.''
Clarke, a member of a regional Federal Emergency Management Agency urban search and rescue team, joined with other Bath firefighters to create a Sept. 11 memorial. The marker, made from a piece of steel girder from one of the twin towers, will be temporarily moved for use in a memorial service Friday morning at Boothbay Region High School.
The 8:30 a.m. service will be part of the annual convention of the Maine State Federation of Firefighters. Participants will include honor guards from law enforcement and firefighting agencies, as well as about 350 students.
A Maine Forest Service helicopter will be flown to the site, and aircraft from Brunswick Naval Air Station will soar as students plant flags on the athletic field.
''It's going to be a very impressive sight to see,'' said John Long, a captain in the Boothbay Fire Department.
Events today include a parade, flag-waving and a moment of silence in downtown Freeport, organized by three women known as the ''Freeport flag ladies.'' The women have been waving flags on Main Street every Tuesday morning since the terrorist attacks.
JoAnn Miller, one of the flag ladies, said interest in the annual 9/11 observance has been waning, but she detects a renewed interest this year - perhaps because of the presidential election.
Elaine Greene, another of the flag ladies, said the event might mean less now to the average person.
''But it doesn't mean less to the ones who were very closely touched by it, who lost a family member or a friend,'' she said.
The eight Maine soldiers who have died in the fight against terrorism will be honored at a Battlefield Cross Memorial Dedication at 3 p.m. today in the Hall of Flags at the State House in Augusta.
The dedication, organized by the Maine National Guard, will include family members of the soldiers and will feature remarks by Gov. John Baldacci and Maj. Gen. John Libby, the guard commander.
This evening, Westbrook will host a memorial service led by the Maine Public Safety Pipe & Drum Corps, a bagpipe band whose members are present or former firefighters, police officers or other public safety employees.
The 6 p.m. service, at Riverbank Park on Main Street, will follow a brief procession of Westbrook firetrucks, police cruisers and public safety personnel.
A prayer service for the Sept. 11 victims will be held at noon today on the steps of the Cumberland County Courthouse on Federal Street.
The event is being organized by the Awakening America Alliance, a conservative Christian group whose members advocate for a greater religious presence in civic life.
The Maine Credit Union League will make donations to all five Maine chapters of the American Red Cross today, in a 10:30 a.m. ceremony at the Sept. 11 Memorial on Portland's Eastern Promenade.
Greene, the Freeport flag lady, said she plans to continue holding memorial services and paying tribute to the victims of terrorism for as long as American soldiers are overseas fighting for freedom.
''People have to get on with their life, they absolutely have to, it's necessary,'' she said. ''But we are the reminder.''
Staff Writer Dieter Bradbury can be reached at 791-6329 or at:
dbradbury@pressherald.com
Correction


Clarification: A story on Page A1 Wednesday* should have made clear that the eight soldiers honored in a memorial ceremony for Mainers who died in the battle against terrorism were all members of the Maine National Guard. The total number of soldiers with ties to Maine who have been killed in Iraq, Afghanistan or elsewhere is 39. *Story ran on Thursday, September 11, 2008.
Correction-Date: September 12, 2008

Graphic

 
Gregory Rec/Staff Photographer
Boothbay Fire Chief Dick Spofford examines a marker made of steel from the World Trade Center that will be used in a ceremony Friday in Boothbay.

Load-Date: December 30, 2008


End of Document