MAINE'S DELEGATION UNITES BEHIND AIRSTRIKES;
 THE STATE'S SENATORS AND CONGRESSMEN SAY THE ANTI-TERRORIST ATTACKS WERE NECESSARY.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
August 21, 1998, Friday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: FRONT,
Length: 486 words
Byline: Mary Raitt Jordan Staff Writer
Body


Maine's congressional leaders said Thursday they ''are standing as one'' in support of the president's decision to bomb terrorist sites in Afghanistan and Sudan.
The airstrikes were executed after top U.S. officials learned that terrorist groups planned more attacks against Americans like those against the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania earlier this month.
''It has long been the policy of our nation to swiftly and severely punish acts of terrorism,'' U.S. Sen. Olympia Snowe said in a prepared statement. ''As a member of the Senate Committee on Armed Services I want to further examine the evidence used in identifying these targets and the terrorist acts, and urge our allies around the world to join with us in a united effort to fight terrorism.''
U.S. Rep. Tom Allen, a member of the National Security Committee, praised President Clinton's decision, saying he has ''been particularly worried'' about terrorism.
In a written statement, he said the United States ''cannot tolerate terrorism against Americans or other civilians anywhere around the globe.''
Allen, a Democrat from Portland, said that ''terrorism has become a terrible fact of life in the post-Cold War world.''
He called Thursday's strike ''swift and appropriate action'' that would ''reduce the likelihood of such attacks in the future.''
Snowe, a Republican, agreed, calling Clinton's actions a ''judicious use of force'' that she believes was necessary to save American lives.
It was a position that her fellow Republican, U.S. Sen. Susan Collins, also supported.
Collins, in a written statement, said that terrorist groups must understand that ''they may not attack American citizens with impunity. The United States must protect its citizens and ensure there is no safe haven for those who would strike against us.''
Clinton's decision also garnered the support of a visiting politician, U.S. Rep. Martin Meehan, D-Mass., who was with Allen in Portland to talk about campaign finance reform when the terrorist sites were struck.
''The targets of the strike were responsible for the bombings in Africa, and we need to respond quickly,'' said Meehan, also a member of the National Security Committee. ''Having a sophisticated response to terrorism is something we've been working on.''
U.S. Rep. John Baldacci said legislators were told the attack was ''carefully planned for about a week'' and was not a ploy to distract Americans from Clinton's involvement in the Monica Lewinsky scandal. The planning was going on for quite a while and involved the speaker of the House, Congress, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency.
''It's unfortunate there is that cloud,'' Baldacci said of the investigation involving Lewinsky. ''But an attack such as this couldn't have been put together since Monday.''
Baldacci, a Democrat, said the president's decision had bipartisan support.
''We are standing as one,'' Baldacci said.

Notes

sidebar airstrikes

Load-Date: August 22, 1998


End of Document