Major Terrorist Attacks Originated From Tribal Areas Of Pakistan: U.K. Parliamentary Panel Report
RTT News (United States)
August 3, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 395 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A British parliamentary committee report says several major terrorist attacks across the world, including those in London, Madrid and Bali, had their origins in the tribal areas of Pakistan, adding that the Pakistan-based Islamic terrorist outfit the Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) was responsible for last year November 26 attacks on India&apos;s major coastal western metro of Mumbai.
"It was from the tribal areas in Pakistan that the bomb plots in London, Madrid, Bali, Islamabad, and later Germany and Denmark were planned," said the report on "Global Security: Afghanistan and Pakistan," by the Foreign Affairs Committee headed by Mike Gapes.
The report, released Sunday, quoted a former CIA director as having said the Pakistan-based LeT, blamed by India for several attacks on its soil including last November&apos;s in Mumbai, had reached a "merge point" with the Al-Qaida.
It added that the LeT group, which was responsible for the November 2008 Mumbai attacks that also targeted westerners, in particular U.S. and U.K, nationals, was also operating from these tribal areas, in addition to other areas bordering India, especially Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK).
The report said a section within the Pakistani Army and the country&apos;s external intelligence agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), still was feeling that "India, rather than Islamic terrorists," was its main threat.
However, the report welcomed the increasing recognition at the higher echelons within the Pakistani military of the need for a re-calibrated approach to militancy, but said it was concerned that this might not necessarily be replicated elsewhere within the Army and the ISI.
It welcomed the remark of Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari that terrorism, not India, was the real threat to his country, though it raised doubts over "whether the underlying fundamentals of Pakistani security policy have changed sufficiently to realize the goals of long-term security and stability in Afghanistan."
The report reinforces the widely-held belief that Pakistan is the epicenter of Islamic terrorism that threatens not only neighboring countries like India, but also poses a significant threat to countries where there are large concentrations of Pakistani expatriates.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document