MAJOR SECURITY EFFORT IS PLANNED TO HEAD OFF TERRORISM AT GAMES
The New York Times
April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Sports Desk; series
Length: 1485 words
Byline: By ROBERT LINDSEY
Series: RACE TO THE GAMES: GETTING READY FOR THE OLYMPICS; Second of three articles
Dateline: LOS ANGELES, April 1
Body


The traditional hardware of Olympic competition includes the baton, the stopwatch, the balance beam and the starting block.
For the 1984 Summer Games, it also includes the following items that have been ordered by local police officials for the Olympics: 6 silencer- equipped submachine guns, 10 infrared night surveillance sensors for helicopters, 26 high-powered rifles, 5 sets of radio equipment to communicate underwater and a 4-foot-7-inch tall robot called ''Felix'' that shoots shotgun shells and helps defuse bombs.
The threat of bloodshed has hung heavily over the Olympics since Palestine Liberation Organization terrorists killed 11 members of the Israeli team during the 1972 Summer Games in Munich.
But officials here assert that defending against terrorists has never been more difficult than it will be at this year's Games, when athletes will have to be transported over freeways to 23 widely scattered sites in more than a dozen communities in three counties, each with its own independent police department.
A security force of more than 17,000 people is being organized to protect the 10,000 or so athletes expected at the Summer Games.
Nothing Comparable in History
''In terms of a law enforcement challenge, there has probably been nothing comparable to it in history,'' Comdr. William Rathburn, Olympic security coordinator for the Los Angeles Police Department, says. ''But even though it's complicated, and it's difficult, it's do-able.''
Edgar N. Best, a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent who is director of security for the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee, recently said: ''We're pleased with what we're doing, but you can never be sure you're doing everything; we don't want to be over confident that we've done everything there is to do.''
With help from the Central Intelligence Agency and the F.B.I., police agencies here, some of whose members have been selected to receive unusual top secret intelligence clearances from the Federal Government, have for more than a year been seeking to monitor dozens of groups in this country and abroad that are regarded as potential candidates to use terrorism at the Olympics.
The list, according to a security official, includes militant groups in this country such as the Weather Underground and Puerto Rican nationalists; terrorist groups in the Middle East, Central America, and Northern Ireland, and various ethnic groups that officials fear might try to use the Olympics as a forum to bring attention to their political grievances, such as the longstanding feud between Turks and Armenians and disputes between Serbo and Croation factions.
Although it is doubtful the officials would acknowledge it even if they had, the security agents say that so far they have not received warnings of any specific plans for terrorist acts at the Games.
''Our people and others around the world are very tuned into events around the world,'' Sherman Block, the Los Angeles County sheriff, said, and ''at this point there doesn't appear to be any kind of terrorist threat to the Olympics.''
 
Largest Single Expense
Threat or not, a vast and expensive security apparatus is being designed for the Games. Although they won't be specific about the amount, Olympic organizing officials say that security is the largest single expenditure in their $497.7 million budget.
The total appears likely to be at least $100 million. In addition, Congress has appropriated $50 million for any Olympic security costs incurred by Federal agencies, and the Defense Department is lending a fleet of helicopters, a variety of advanced electronic ''intrusion detection'' equipment and other gear to local authorities.
According to police officials and others who are knowledgeable about the subject, the planning of security arrangements for the 1984 Games, which began more than two years ago, has been hampered by two factors: The broad geographic dispersion of the Games, which means no single police agency is in charge of things, and a longrunning rivalry between the F.B.I. and the Los Angeles Police Department over which agency should be in charge during a major terrorist incident.
Given the traditional jurisdiction of each local police department over the affairs within its own city limits, it was not feasible for any one agency to take charge of such a farflung event, Commander Rathburn said.
 
Each City Determines Its Action
''We don't have a national police force,'' he said. ''You can't have one man in charge.'' If an emergency occurs during the Olympics, he added, each city will determine its own course of action.
Nevertheless, Commander Rathburn said, there has been close cooperation among the dozens of city, state, county and Federal law enforcement agencies as plans were developed for Olympic security. He added that operations during the Olympics will be coordinated from a joint communications center in Piper Center, a building owned by the City of Los Angeles.
Into this facility, he said, there will be a continuous flow of intelligence about possible security problems. Specialists will be on call to handle a variety of specialized matters, such as helicopter support, the disposal of a conventional bomb or an incident involving a purported nuclear device.
Still not fully resolved is whether a new F.B.I. Hostage Rescue Team or the Los Angeles Police Department's Special Weapons and Tactics Team would have primary jurisdiction if terrorists abucted Olympic athletes.
 
Refused to Sign Agreement
This question became a matter of dispute last summer when Daryl F. Gates, the Los Angeles police chief, refused to sign an agreement granting the F.B.I. primary jurisdiction. The agreement had previously been accepted by all other cities where Olympic events will take place. Mr. Gates argued that his department's SWAT team had much more experience than the F.B.I.'s new unit and he held out for the right to take charge if hostages were taken in his city during the Olympics.
In February, Richard Bretzing, who heads the F.B.I. office here, and Mr. Gates announced that they had signed an agreement calling for them to work together if a hostage incident occurred during the Olympics.
But some on both sides in the dispute, while trying to emphasize the merits of reaching at least a consensus to cooperate, conceded that in order to get an agreement, it had had to be worded so ambiguously that it leaves unclear which agency would in fact be in charge if terrorists kidnapped a group of foreign athletes and that this ambiguity could lead to serious problems if such a crisis occurred.
 
No Other Disagreements
For all of the controversy over the issue of dealing with terrorists, security officials say there has been no disagreement on other basic elements of the Olympic security plan, which include tight physical security at Olympic sites, screening of the 50,000 or so people who will work at the Games and continuing emphasis on the gathering and analysis of intelligence and the use of armed, paramilitary units if hostages are taken.
Although spectators will not be screened for weapons as they enter Olympic facilities, officials say that elaborate safeguards will be taken to keep athletes separated from the spectators and others.
High fences, television surveillance cameras and a variety of electronic ''intrusion detection'' devices will be used to limit unauthorized access to the Olympic Villages, where the athletes live.
Anyone entering the villages, the officials say, will have to pass through a metal detector and have a photo identification badge issued by the organizing committee. After a guard matches the face of the bearer with the photo on the badge, a computer will be used to confirm its authenticity by decoding a magnetic stripe on the badge.
 
Only a Few Will be Armed
Although more than 16,000 people are scheduled to be assigned to security duties, only a small fraction will be armed policemen with powers of arrest. The majority will be unarmed temporary workers with two-way radios who will monitor Olympic sites and summon law enforcement officers if they are needed.
Along with thousands of other employees who will be given access to Olympic venues during the Games, these security guards will be subjected to a review of their background to assure they are not security risks, a procedure that Mr. Best said will be ''adequate but not excessive.''
Although security officials refuse to discuss the matter, saying they do not want to disclose their intentions, it seems certain that armed policemen will escort some teams between the Olympic Village, where they live, and venues, especially those from countries whose political climate makes them most likely to make their teams targets for terrorism. Israel and other countries are likely to bring their own cadres of guards, although they have been told their security personnel will not be allowed to bring firearms into the Olympic villages.
Next: Traffic.

Graphic

 
photo of Edgar N. Best


End of Document