MAJORITY IN POLL OPPOSE ATTACK AS RETALIATION FOR TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 14, 2001, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 258 words
Byline: WILL LESTER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON --
Body


More than half of Americans would oppose launching retaliatory attacks against countries proven to have direct links to terrorist acts, says an Associated Press poll. Men were about evenly split on the question, women opposed by almost 2-to-1.
"I'm really against launching an attack," said Della Coe, a 55-year-old Republican from the Dallas area. "A terrorist act is more the act of a smaller group. The ones who suffer when we retaliate are generally not the ones who carried out the terrorism, but children and family members."
The United States retaliated after terrorist bombings of two of its embassies in Africa by striking a pharmaceutical plant in Sudan and a terrorist stronghold in Afghanistan. Four men charged in the bombings of the U.S. embassies are on trial in New York.
After the October attack on the USS Cole, many politicians called for a response. GOP vice presidential nominee Dick Cheney called for "swift retaliation" if the attackers could be identified.
Presidential candidate George W. Bush said there should be "consequences."
Republicans were evenly split on the question of retaliation in the poll conducted for the AP by ICR of Media, Pa.
Democrats opposed retaliatory attacks by almost 2-to-1 and just over half of independents opposed launching an attack, while a third favored such an action.
Other findings in the poll:
* Almost three-fourths in the poll said they have at least some confidence in President Bush on the issue of national security.
* Americans by a 2-1 margin backed bringing U.S. troops home from Bosnia.

Graphic

 
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Associated Press; ICR o Media, Pa.: (National; security)

Load-Date: February 15, 2001


End of Document