MAJOR NEWS;
In Spain, Monarchy Saves Democracy From the Military
The New York Times
March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 498 words
Body


Francisco Franco was still in his grave last week and Spain's fledgling democracy almost joined him. Seeking a return to military rule, 200 rightist soldiers seized Parliament and held most of the country's leaders at gunpoint for 18 hours before surrendering on orders from Spain's supreme authority, King Juan Carlos.
More than a million people marched in Madrid Friday, celebrating the survival of democracy and the cool courage shown by the hostage parliamentarians and their king. In an extraordinary demonstration of democratic solidarity, rightist Manuel Fraga Iribarne and Communist leader Santiago Carrillo marched arm-in-arm.
Recent attempted coup by rightist soldiers in Spain noted
Clearly sobered by the coup attempt, which was partly provoked by Basque terrorism, the less hardline wing of the Basque separatist group, E.T.A., yesterday freed three foreign honorary consuls it kidnapped Feb. 19 and announced an unconditional ''cease-fire.''
The Parliament takeover was led by Antonio Tejero Molina, a wildeyed lieutenant colonel with a record of mutiny in the Civil Guard, the paramilitary national police and frequent target of Basque guerrillas. But despite elements of farce - when all seemed lost, Colonel Tejero refused to flee from Spain, explaining that he got airsick - the attempt could not be shrugged off as a cockeyed plot.
More than 50 officers were arrested, including Gen. Alfonso Armada Comyn, the deputy army chief of staff, and Lieut. Gen. Jaime Milans del Bosch, who (prematurely) proclaimed a state of emergency in his Valencia military region. He had been transferred to Valencia in 1977 from an armored division near Madrid. About 100 men from the division joined the mutineers last week; if all 9,000 had advanced on Parliament, the siege could have had a quite different ending.
That it didn't was due almost entirely to King Juan Carlos, whom Franco groomed from boyhood as a like-minded successor but who chose to be the architect of a parliamentary democracy. Not about to abandon his creation in its infancy, the King went on television wearing full-dress uniform and a chestful of medals. ''The crown, symbol of permanence and unity of the fatherland, cannot tolerate in any form actions...that aim at interrupting by force the democratic process,'' he said. A few tense hours later, the rebellion collapsed.
The next day, a weary Parliament returned to its bullet-pocked chamber and completed the task so dramatically interrupted by Colonel Tejero -confirmation of Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo as successor to Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez. The resignation last month of Mr.  Suarez, Prime Minister since 1975, produced the interregnum that apparently invited the coup attempt.
For a sector of the military, the advent of democracy has meant terrorism, separatism, pornography and economic decline. Although urging a rigorous investigation of the plot, King Juan Carlos said a crackdown on the military ''would be little advisable.'' (Unbending military, page 4.)


End of Document