MAJOR NEWS: IN SUMMARY;
Ambush ExplodesSomoza Sanctuary
The New York Times
September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5; Week in Review Desk
Length: 293 words
Body


When United States Marines gave Nicaragua to the Somozas more than four decades ago, the family's fortune was launched but their cavalier way with dictatorial power eventually proved fatal. Last week, 14 months after President Anastasio Somoza Debayle was forced into exile and 24 years after his father was assassinated, General Somoza's white Mercedes Benz was riddled by bullets and a rocket in downtown Asuncion, Paraguay. Mr. Somoza, his driver and an aide were killed.
AN-A
Nicaraguans celebrated joyfully but their Sandinist revolutionary Government said it was not responsible. The White House recently affirmed that the Nicaraguan Government was not supporting violence or terrorism outside its borders, thereby authorizing $75 million in United States aid. The Sandinists had ''nothing directly to do with the death of Somoza,'' said a junta member in Managua. In Asuncion, the police suspected Argentine terrorists and rounded up several dozen persons for questioning.
General Somoza's luck turned sour after the 1972 earthquake killed 10,000 people in Managua. Blamed for diverting international aid to family enterprises that were eventually valued at $500 million, he began to lose the support of local business interests.
Pressure from Washington, and from liberal Latin American governments backing the Sandinists' guerrilla-led insurrection, forced him into exile on July 17, 1979. Declared unwelcome in Miami and the Bahamas, he found a haven in Gen. Alfredo Stroessner's Paraguay, one of Latin America's longest-running dictatorships.
State Department condolences were reserved, deploring violent death ''no matter to whom it occurs or where.'' General Somoza's children chartered a jet and flew his body to Miami. He was buried there yesterday.


End of Document