MAKING PROGRESS IN TERRORISM WAR;
   TAKE GENERAL WARNINGS OF ATTACK SERIOUSLY, BUT ALSO TAKE COMFORT IN STEPS TO CURTAIL TERRORIST THREAT.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
May 23, 2002 Thursday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A16
Length: 650 words
Body


Some members of Congress wanted more warnings about possible terrorist actions against the United States. They've got those warnings now ...in spades.
From President Bush on down, administration officials have been taking turns ringing the alarm bell since Sunday, when Vice President Dick Cheney cautioned that more terrorism against Americans is "not a matter of if,' but when.' "
FBI Director Robert Mueller warned Monday that it was "inevitable" that suicide bombers would hit the United States in the future. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld got into the act Tuesday when he told a Senate subcommittee that terrorists will eventually acquire nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. "They (terrorists) inevitably will get their hands on them, and they will not hesitate to use them," Rumsfeld said. Not to be outdone, Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge told a business group that Americans would be fooling themselves if they believed they're immune from suicide attacks such as those that have taken place in Israel. And Secretary of State Colin Powell joined the parade when he said, "Terrorists are trying every way they can to get their hands on weapons of mass destruction, whether radiological, chemical, biological or nuclear."
OK, guys. We get the picture. With words like "inevitable" and "nuclear" being used in the same sentence, the nation is now sufficiently jittery and on alert. Make that red alert.
Some of the same members of Congress who spent much of last week accusing the administration of waiting too long to share pre-Sept. 11 information with the American public are now upset about the loud and clear warnings coming out of Bush Central. "I think there's a coverage component to this, C-Y-A," complained Massachusetts Democrat John Kerry.
Sure, there's a bit of cover-your-accountability behind the latest round of warnings; the White House press secretary acknowledged as much. Still, even Chicken Little can be right, especially when there's already a very tragic example of the sky falling on America when terrorists attacked New York and Washington on Sept. 11.
Terrorist organizations such as al-Qaida have been wounded by the United States and its allies since Sept. 11, but they're not dead. A reminder of that reality came Tuesday with the release of an annual State Department report on nations that harbor or sponsor terrorist activity. The latest report brands seven nations as terrorist states: Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Cuba, Syria, Libya and Sudan.
That's the bad (and somewhat old) news. The good news is that nine months after the World Trade Towers crumbled, the United States appears to be building its capacity to combat terrorism on several fronts. In a Wednesday interview, the State Department's coordinator for counterterrorism said a variety of tools are being used within a growing international coalition.
"For some nations, this means new counterterrorism laws, tighter border security and increased financial controls," said Ambassador at large Francis X. Taylor. "For others, it means contributing military assets to operations in Afghanistan. For others still, it is an aggressive sanctioning of terrorist groups in order to curtail their criminal activity. All of these are solid steps forward in fighting the terrorist threat."
Some 1,600 members of the al-Qaida network have been arrested in 95 nations, about $100 million in terrorist funding has been blocked, and anti-terrorism training is under way with 35,000 students in 130 nations. "(But) as long as there's a single al-Qaida member out there, we're probably under threat of attack," Taylor said.
Take the general warnings seriously. There are real reasons to believe terrorists want to hit the United States again. At the same time, take some comfort in knowing that the war on terrorism continues in ways that may bring us closer to the day when warnings are no longer a fact of life.

Load-Date: May 24, 2002


End of Document