Mali attack latest in wave of terrorism; One American killed before security forces free hostages.; NEW DETAILS TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 21, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 740 words
Byline: Dionne Searcey andAdam Nossiter
Body


Mali troopers help a hostage head for safety from the Radisson Blu hotel.
Hooded law enforcement officers charge the Radisson Blu hotel where gunmen were holding hostages on Friday in Bamako, Mali.
DAKAR, SENEGAL - Heavily armed gunmen shouting "Allahu akbar" stormed a Radisson Blu hotel Friday in Bamako, the capital of the West African nation of Mali, seizing scores of hostages and leaving bodies strewn across the building.
The gunmen barreled past the hotel's light security early in the morning, confusing guards with fake diplomatic license plates, and then burst into its glass-door lobby with their guns blazing.
"They started firing everywhere," said a receptionist at the hotel who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. "They were shouting, 'Allahu akbar.' They cut someone's throat, a white man.
"I hid in my office," he said. "I saw four of them, armed to the teeth."
A senior U.N. official said that as many as 27 people had been killed, with bodies found in the basement and on the second floor, according to a preliminary assessment of the attack.
One American was killed, according to a senior U.S. military official. At least one Belgian citizen died in the siege as well.
The nationalities of the other victims were not immediately clear.
The gunmen took "about 100 hostages" at the beginning of the attack, said Gen. Didier Dacko of the Malian army. He said soldiers had sealed the perimeter and went "inside looking for the terrorists."
By late afternoon, the siege appeared to be over. No more hostages were being held, said Col. Salif Traore, Mali's minister of interior security.
At least two of the assailants had been killed, officials and witnesses said.
"We can confirm that the attack has ended," the White House said in a statement.
From early on during the attack, dozens of hostages, many of them crying, streamed out of the hotel after hiding in their rooms, said Amadou Sidibé, a local reporter at the scene.
According to the operators of the hotel, 125 guests and 13 employees were inside the hotel after the siege began.
The siege in Mali, a former French colony, came only a week after terrorists with assault rifles and suicide vests killed 129 people in attacks across Paris.
It was not immediately clear who was responsible for the attack in Mali. Al-Jazeera reported that it had received a recording asserting that a local militant group, Al Mourabitoun, had carried out the siege in conjunction with al-Qaida's regional affiliate, though the claim could not be independently confirmed.
France's defense minister told French television that Mokhtar Belmokhtar, a longtime al-Qaida member who claimed responsibility for the 2013 siege of an Algerian gas plant in which dozens of hostages were killed, was "likely behind" the attack in Mali, but acknowledged that "we are not completely certain of it."
Al-Qaida supporters quickly praised the attack, with one even saying that the Islamic State "should learn a thing or two," reflecting the rivalry between the two groups.
Mali has long struggled with insurrection and Islamist extremism, including smaller-scale attacks on a restaurant and another hotel this year.
"We don't want to scare our people, but we have already said that Mali will have to get used to situations like this," President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita of Mali, who was on a visit to neighboring Chad, told France 24. "We must all remain humble. No one, nowhere is safe given the danger of terrorism."
Twelve to 15 Americans were believed to be at the hotel when the gunmen first arrived, a U.S. defense official said. Six American citizens were recovered safely from the hotel, he added. The status of the others was not immediately clear.
Kassim Traoré, a Malian journalist who was in a building about 160 feet from the Radisson, said the attackers had told hostages to recite a declaration of Muslim faith as a way separating Muslims from non-Muslims.
Those who could recite the declaration, the Shahada, were allowed to leave the hotel. Al-Shabab, an al-Qaida affiliate in East Africa, used a similar approach in the attack at the Westgate Mall in Nairobi in 2013.
The security forces moved through the hotel, floor by floor, freeing hostages as they went.
The Carlson Rezidor Hotel Group, the operator of the Radisson Blu Hotel Bamako, said it was in contact with local authorities, and the U.S. Embassy said it had issued a warning to staff members and U.S. citizens to shelter in place.

Load-Date: November 21, 2015


End of Document