MAN IN THE NEWS;
FRIEND TO THE WEST, FOE OF TURKISH TERRORISTS
The New York Times
September 13, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 637 words
Byline: By DREW MIDDLETON
Body


Gen. Kenan Evren, the leader of the new Turkish military Government, faces the double task of defeating terrorism and bolstering his country's position as NATO's bastion in the troubled Middle East.
Both General Evren, the Chief of Staff, and Gen. Haydar Saltik, head of the new National Security Council, are strong supporters of Turkey's membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization but are said to resent what they consider insufficient attention by the Carter Administration to Turkish need for arms and spare parts.
General Evren's first task, analysts said, will be to combat terrorism by well-armed groups representing the extreme left and the extreme right in Turkish politics.
He has pleaded repeatedly for the transfer of more authority to commanders operating under martial law in several Turkish provinces and for more stringent punishment of terrorists. He is said to be especially sensitive to the spread of terrorism in the provinces of Erzurum and Kars on the Russian and Iranian frontiers.
General Evren, described as a slight, gray-haired man noted for being soft-spoken, was born in Alasehir, near Izmir, in 1918. Like most officers of his generation he regards the army as the guardian of the republic founded by Kemal Ataturk, the most successful Turkish soldier of the century.
 
Commander in Korean War
General Evren graduated from the Turkish Military Academy in Ankara in 1938 and was later an artillery officer at the General Staff College in Istanbul. Considered strongly pro-Western, he commanded a Turkish artillery regiment in the Korean War.
General Evren, although deeply concerned by the previous civilian Government's inability to cope with terrorism, has no political ambitions, according to Turkish diplomats in Washington. Calling him a quiet family man who is ''cautious and steady,'' they said he ''is not like the Brazilian and Argentine generals who have seized power'' in that ''he does not want to install a military regime that will perpetuate itself.''
They guessed that he saw the combination of terrorism and the deteriorating military situation in the Middle East as menaces to Turkey that could be countered only by the temporary imposition of martial law.
 
Daughters Attend University
They noted that General Evren's personal interests included concern over the future of his three daughters at a university in Ankara and agreed that it was difficult to envisage him as a potential dictator. But they emphasized his deep worry over Turkey's ability to contribute effectively to the defense of NATO's southern flank. The Turkish Army has 470,000 men in 17 divisions and 16 independent brigades; the air force has 303 combat planes.
Intermittent cutoffs of American arms aid, however, have reduced the combat readiness of both forces. On the plus side, analysts said, are the training, discipline and motivation of the Turkish forces.
Generals Evren and Saltik, an analyst said, are clearly aware of both Turkey's importance to NATO and the fact that the alliance's command system in the Aegean affronts most Turkish officers, who believe it gives too much authority to Greece.
 
Prospects for Cyprus Talks
Civilian officials in the Pentagon think that, given sufficient military aid, the Turks will forget about the Aegean command and negotiate seriously with Greece over Cyprus, the traditional issue of dispute between Ankara and Athens.
But NATO analysts say the new leadership will be too concerned about its own military situation to accept placebos like the recent $50 million loan approved by the United States Congress. They predict that once General Evren has brought terrorism under control, he will ask for a thorough examination of the quickest means of transforming Turkey's resources into a modern force capable of holding the southern flank in the event of war in Europe.


End of Document