Man held in N.C. plotted to attack Biden, federal officials say
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 25, 2020 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 540 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


While Treisman faces pornography charges and has not been charged with any crimes related to his possession of guns or other evidence, a judge ruled that due to the evidence, he should remain in custody.
When Treisman, who went by the aliasAlexander S. Theiss, was arrested and investigations began, the investigating officers found out that the teenager had an unusual interest in acts of terrorism, including mass shootings.
Treisman drew attention on May 28 when employees of Fifth Third Bank in Kannapolis alerted police to his van, which they believed had been abandoned in their parking lot, the documents said.
When officers arrived, they found four rifles, a 9mm handgun, explosive materials, books on bomb-making, and $509,000 in cash inside the van.
According to court documents cited by the Washington Post and the Daily Beast on Friday, Treisman had posted on Reddit that he had to "save bernie" and posted a meme wondering if he should kill Biden days after Senator Bernie Sanders (I-Vermont) suspended his presidential campaign on April 8.
Court documents say police found Alexander Hillel Treisman's van, which contained numerous guns and explosive material, parked outside a bank.
Between March 2020 to May 2020, he conducted internet searches seeking information about Biden's home address, state gun laws, rifle parts and night vision goggles.
Treisman previously purchased an AR-15 approximately four miles away from Biden's home.
Karen Khachanov goes insane against Evans - ATP Antwerp
Khachanov argued with Nour briefly and suggested they watch the replay together after the match. Fans were quick to condemn Khachanov's actions, however many were also critical of the umpire.
Investigators also uncovered a massive trove of child pornography on eight different devices that Treisman was using.
Among the number of the shocking content contained within the electronic devices was a series of Internet searches for Biden's home address in DE and apparently came within four miles of the residence after purchasing an AR-15 in New Hampshire.
Authorities also found a handwritten "Autobiography" in his jail cell that referenced mass shootings.
Treisman is facing charges of possessing child pornography. A note on his cell phone from October of previous year also included a detailed plan to carry out a mass shooting around Black Friday or the busy Christmas shopping period.
On April 3, 2020, he recorded what he described as "the flawless porn video", in which he rapes and impregnates a girl after killing her parents with a shotgun.
"A video was also found on his phone by investigators of Treisman near the Mandalay Bay Casino in Las Vegas - the site of the worst mass shooting in modern American history - saying" "That's the one, that's where they did it... nice".
The judge order said agents had found a picture of a rental agreement for an apartment in Canada and e-mails between Treisman to a Canadian immigration lawyer about moving to the country.
The filing states that Treisman has no previous criminal history and that his counsel told the Federal Bureau of Investigation he was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome at age 12, though he denied any having any mental health conditions in his initial interview with law enforcement.

Load-Date: October 26, 2020


End of Document