Man convicted of Lake County terrorism threats wants his defense team dismissed prior to sentencing
Lake County News-Sun, Gurnee, Ill.
January 30, 2018 Tuesday


Copyright 2018 
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 540 words
Byline: Jim Newton, Lake County News-Sun, Gurnee, Ill.
Body


Jan. 30--A California man convicted of making terrorism threats against the Lake County Building and Gurnee Police Department is seeking to dismiss his attorneys and represent himself ahead of a pending sentencing hearing.
Daniel Pederson, 36, was scheduled to be sentenced Tuesday in Lake County Circuit Court after fitness issues had caused lengthy delays in his case.
But after being found fit for sentencing earlier this month by Circuit Judge Mark Levitt, Pederson has requested that Levitt hear motions claiming ineffective assistance of counsel and requesting that he be allowed to serve as his own defense in court.
Levitt said Tuesday morning he will hear the motions Friday.
The request follows more than two years of court outbursts and behavior that repeatedly sent Pederson back to a state mental health facility for evaluation and treatment. He was twice found unfit for a sentencing hearing before being found fit this month.
If his request to represent himself is granted, it is not clear how soon his sentencing hearing could take place.
Assistant State's Attorney Ben Dillon said after Tuesday's hearing that it could potentially occur as soon as Friday after the new motions are heard, but both prosecutors and defense attorneys have said it is also possible Pederson might attempt to revive a motion to vacate his jury conviction, which was previously denied when he was considered unfit.
The case against Pederson began Sept. 12, 2014, when prosecutors said he called the Illinois Department of Health Care and Family Services and said he was going to "kill people" and "light up" the Lake County Courthouse in Waukegan and the Gurnee Police Department.
After initially entering a guilty plea and accepting sentencing deal, he withdrew the plea and was convicted on charges of making a terrorism threat, a felony that carries a potential sentence of 6 to 30 years in prison.
In fall 2016, Levitt found Pederson unfit for sentencing due to his behavior following his conviction.
Following several loud and sometimes profane outbursts in court last year during a hearing to determine if Pederson had been restored to fitness, Levitt again found Pederson unfit and ruled that he would be returned to a state Department of Human Services health facility in Elgin.
Pederson has since been remanded back to Lake County Jail.
During the hearing earlier this month at which Levitt found Pederson fit, state health officials testified that it was their belief Pederson understood the charges against him and his outbursts were based on his opinions, not uncontrollable impulses or delusions, as lead defense attorney Keith Grant has argued.
Pederson has said in court that the charges against him were due to "a third-party, fabricated bomb threat."
He has also called his case a conspiracy against him, that the trial process was "rigged," and that Lake County is "corrupt as (profanity)" during previous court appearances.
With the notice of Pederson's new motions, a formal sentencing date has not yet been rescheduled.
jrnewton@tribpub.com
___ (c)2018 the Lake County News-Sun (Lake County, Ill.) Visit the Lake County News-Sun (Lake County, Ill.) at www.chicagotribune.com/suburbs/lake-county-news-sun Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: January 31, 2018


End of Document