Man arrested in terror probe is indicted
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 17, 2011 Thursday
CITY-C Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B03
Length: 294 words
Byline: By Mike Newall

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


A Lebanese man arrested in Philadelphia in 2009 on allegations that he tried to buy antiaircraft missiles and automatic weapons has been formally indicted on terrorism charges.
Dani Nemr Tarraf, 39, is accused of paying undercover FBI agents $30,000 for Stinger antiaircraft missiles and assault weapons. The weapons were to be shipped overseas for the support of Hezbollah, according to the indictment, filed Tuesday in federal court in Philadelphia.
Tarraf, who had residences in Slovakia and Lebanon, told agents that the weapons were heading to Syria and Iran to be used by the "resistance," and that he wanted missiles that could "take down an F-16," the indictment said.
Tarraf's arrest was part of a four-year probe led by the FBI's Philadelphia Joint Terrorism Task Force, which resulted in the indictments of two dozen alleged Hezbollah operatives and sympathizers. Sixteen were arrested in November 2009 in sweeps from Philadelphia to Michigan. Many were charged with trafficking in stolen and counterfeit electronics.
The biggest catch was Tarraf, who authorities allege was a Hezbollah weapons-procurement officer. He was initially indicted on a host of weapons charges. 
Investigators would not say what new evidence supported terrorism charges. Since his arrest, Tarraf has been held at the Federal Detention Center in Philadelphia. 
Special Agent J.J. Klaver, a spokesman for the Philadelphia office of the FBI, said it was not unusual in ongoing investigations for further indictments to be levied against a suspect. 
Tarraf was arrested when he arrived in Philadelphia to inspect the Stinger missiles and Colt M-4 carbines. A trial date has not yet been set. He faces life in prison.
Contact staff writer Mike Newall at 856-779-3237 or mnewall@phillynews.com.

Load-Date: March 17, 2011


End of Document