Man Arrested in Jeddah After Stabbing a Guard at French Consulate
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 1, 2020 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 366 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


She "Assures the victim of his full support and expresses his confidence in the Saudi authorities to shed light on this attack and ensure the security of the French right-of-way and community in the country", she added.
A guard at the French Consulate in Jeddah was wounded after a man attacked him with a "sharp tool" on Thursday. The guard was hospitalized and is out of danger.
The French Embassy "strongly condemned" the attack against a diplomatic outpost.
The French embassy in Riyadh urged its nationals in Saudi Arabia to exercise "extreme vigilance". Paty was killed by a teenager of Chechen origin who said he wanted to punish the teacher for showing pupils cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed during a class on freedom of expression.
Future pandemics will be worse without major strategy shift, study says
The economic cost of pandemics must be factored into consumption, production, and government policies and budgets. The global cost of COVID-19 was estimated at $8-16 trillion by July.
Earlier on Thursday, three people were killed and several others injured in a knife attack in Nice, France. It wasn't immediately clear if that attack or the one in Jiddah involved the current controversy, which has seen protests across the Muslim world.
"The Muslim community should condemn the stabbings in France. such savagery has no place in civilized society.it is inhuman. one makes ones case and a stronger impact through discourse rather than violence. such actions are ultimately self defeating and lead to the racist behaviors in U.S. and many other countries.it could also affect the Biden-Trump election to the detriment of Muslims everywhere", said Nasir Raza, a Pakistani American professional.
The Saudi Overseas Ministry has mentioned the dominion "rejects any try to hyperlink Islam and terrorism, and denounces the offensive cartoons of the prophet". Saudi clerics have too condemned the caricatures, but have also cited the prophet's "mercy, justice, tolerance".
Saudi state media pinned the blame on Al-Qaeda, but so far there has been no claim of responsibility from the group and observers point at simmering resentment among arch-conservatives in the kingdom over the entertainment push.

Load-Date: November 1, 2020


End of Document