Man Guilty Of Lying To the F.B.I. In Sheik Case
The New York Times
February 19, 2004 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 654 words
Byline: By WILLIAM GLABERSON
Body


A New Jersey gas station owner was convicted yesterday of making false statements to federal agents when he denied helping a Yemeni cleric who prosecutors said made a trip to Brooklyn in 1999 to raise money for international terrorism. 
   The verdict from a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn came in a case that exposed many details of a complex federal investigation into what the prosecutors described as a terrorism-financing network centered in Brooklyn.
   The gas station owner, Numan Maflahi, faces a possible prison term of five years when he is sentenced on May 26. Prosecutors said Mr. Maflahi, an immigrant from Yemen who is an American citizen, was the personal assistant and driver for the sheik, Abdullah Satar, a former member of parliament in Yemen.
   In keeping with the trial's murky suggestions about veiled activities inside New York City, the proceeding ended with the disclosure of a strange incident last week. A court transcript unsealed yesterday showed that a female juror told the judge, Nina Gershon, last Thursday that she was frightened after being approached outside the courthouse by someone she described as a Middle Eastern man.
   The details of the incident were sketchy. But after the juror reported that she had been approached and followed by the man who at first invited her for coffee, the juror was excused and security was increased for the other jurors. 
   The transcript showed that the prosecutor, Kelly A. Moore, told the judge it appeared that ''someone attempted to tamper with the juror.'' But the lawyer for Mr. Maflahi, Hassen Ibn Abdellah, said he was sure ''nobody from my side had anything to do with what happened to her.''
   The jurors were escorted from the courthouse by federal marshals yesterday.
   During the trial, Mr. Abdellah portrayed Mr. Maflahi, 30, of Little Ferry, N.J., as an observant Muslim who was often in the company of Sheik Satar by chance at mosques in Bay Ridge, Canarsie, downtown Brooklyn and elsewhere during the sheik's four-day trip. 
   Mr. Maflahi made the statements the prosecutors said were false during a taped interview with agents last year. He said then that he was in no way involved with Sheik Satar's fund-raising. 
   But testimony from an F.B.I. anti-terrorism agent, Brian Murphy, showed that round-the-clock surveillance of Mr. Maflahi indicated that he frequently drove the sheik around the city during the visit. 
   Wiretaps on Mr. Maflahi's cellphone showed that he took calls that were intended for the sheik. In response to one call for the sheik, Mr. Maflahi was recorded saying, ''This is the number you can reach him any time.''
   In Yemen after reports about the Brooklyn case, Sheik Satar was quoted by a Web site for a political party, the Yemeni Union for Reform, as denying ties to terrorism. 
   He was quoted as saying that in the West, ''unfortunately, in their opinion, the Muslim is a criminal, even before he is born.'' He said he had made nine visits to the United States.
   At the trial, Mr. Murphy testified that after the sheik left Brooklyn on Jan. 1, 2000, he went to Italy, where he met with known terrorists and made a speech exhorting 15,000 people to join the jihad. Mr. Murphy said the sheik denounced the United States for pursuing a terrorism suspect ''to curry favor with the Jewish population and to project hatred upon Muslims.''
   Yesterday, Mr. Maflahi, who is free on $200,000 bail, left the court surrounded by supporters without making any comment to reporters. Mr. Abdellah said ''the terminology used in the case was inflammatory'' when the prosecutors raised the specter of terrorism. 
   But the prosecutor, Ms. Moore, insisted that Mr. Maflahi had information that could have helped federal agents working to protect the country's security.
   ''The defendant's lies to the F.B.I. in this case,'' she said after the verdict, ''interfered with a larger terrorism investigation.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Numan Maflahi                   

Load-Date: February 19, 2004


End of Document