Man Is Indicted on State-Level Terror Charges in Killing
The New York Times
July 3, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 490 words
Byline: By LIAM STACK
Body


A Seattle man accused of killing a New Jersey man as an act of ''revenge'' for United States military action overseas was indicted on terrorism charges on Thursday, the first time in New Jersey that a defendant has faced a state-level terror charge in a murder case.
A grand jury in Essex County returned a nine-count indictment against the man, Ali Muhammad Brown, 30, in the June 2014 killing of Brendan Tevlin, 19. Mr. Brown was charged with crimes including terrorism, murder and carjacking, a statement from the office of the acting Essex County prosecutor, Carolyn A. Murray, said.  
  Prosecutors said Mr. Brown shot Mr. Tevlin multiple times while he was stopped at a traffic light in West Orange, N.J. Mr. Tevlin had just completed his freshman year at the University of Richmond, in Virginia, and had returned home to Livingston, N.J., for summer vacation.
  After killing Mr. Tevlin, prosecutors said, Mr. Brown moved his body to the passenger seat of his car and drove to a nearby building, where he left the body.
  Mr. Brown eventually confessed to the murder, according to court documents filed in August in Washington State, where he is accused of three other killings. The documents were posted online in full by The Los Angeles Times.
  This is the first time New Jersey prosecutors have brought terrorism charges against a defendant in a murder case. The Essex County prosecutor's office said in a statement that it had received permission from the acting attorney general of New Jersey, John J. Hoffman, to bring the charges against Mr. Brown, who is Muslim.
  Ms. Murray's office said information gathered before and after Mr. Brown's arrest led her office to seek terrorism charges. ''Based on the evidence and the information we have at this time, we believe this is the appropriate course of action,'' the statement said.
  The prosecutor dismissed charges against Eric Williams, 19, and Jeremy Villagran, 20, both of West Orange, who were also detained in the carjacking. Both men were arrested and charged in August with Mr. Brown.
  Mr. Brown told investigators all four killings were acts of revenge against the United States for the ''evil acts'' it allowed to take place within its borders, including drug use, and for military action in Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan that resulted in civilian casualties, the documents said.
  ''My mission is revenge,'' he said, according to the documents. ''For the lives, millions of lives are lost every day. All these lives are taken every single day by America, by this government. So a life for a life.''
  He told investigators that he considered Mr. Tevlin's death a ''just kill,'' which he defined as the murder of an adult male that took place when no women, children or elderly people were present.
  When investigators asked Mr. Brown if he took responsibility for the killings in New Jersey and Washington State, the court documents say he replied, ''Just doing my small part.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/03/nyregion/man-accused-in-killing-is-indicted-on-terrorism-charges-a-first-for-new-jersey.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ali Muhammad Brown, 30, was charged in New Jersey. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NY.COM)        

Load-Date: July 3, 2015


End of Document