Man with fake bomb stabs 2 in London, is shot to death by police
Chicago Daily Herald
February 3, 2020 Monday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2020 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: WORLD_; Pg. 2
Length: 302 words
Byline: By Gregory Katz and Danica Kirka Associated Press
Body


LONDON — A man recently released from prison after serving time for terrorism-related offenses strapped on a fake bomb and stabbed two people on a busy London street Sunday before being shot to death by police, officials said. Deputy Assistant Commissioner Lucy D'Orsi said police identified the attacker as 20-year-old Sudesh Amman. He had been convicted of publishing graphic terrorist videos online and had stockpiled instructions on bomb making and knife attacks, according to police. 
Officers had been trailing Amman at the time of Sunday's attack, D'Orsi said, but were unable to head off the bloodshed in the commercial and residential south London neighborhood of Streatham, where Amman struck outside a major pharmacy on a busy shopping afternoon. The incident in London recalled a November stabbing attack carried out by another man who had served prison time for terrorism offense. Two were killed in that attack. Prime Minister Boris Johnson said measures will be introduced Monday to bring "fundamental" change to the way people convicted of terrorism offenses are handled in prison and afterward. "The suspect had been recently released from prison where he had been serving a sentence for Islamist-related terrorism offenses," D'Orsi said of Sunday's attacker. It seems likely the victims will survive Sunday's attack. D'Orsi said a stabbing victim in his 40s thought to be in life-threatening condition has improved. She said the victim is no longer in danger and that a woman who had been hospitalized has been released. One other female victim is still in the hospital with lesser injuries police believe were caused by flying glass after the attacker was shot dead. Officials praised police, but questions are likely to be raised about why the officers trailing Amman could not prevent his attack.

Notes

Eds: UPDATES: with suspect having been convicted up publishing graphic terrorist videos online. With AP Photos. Eds: UPDATES: with details of earlier conviction. With AP Photos. Eds: UPDATES: With AP Photos. EDITS: raises details of incident to pargraphs 3 and 4. With AP Photos.

Graphic

 
PA via AP Police attend the scene after a stabbing Sunday in London. Police were already following a man who had recently been in prison on terror-related charges when he put on a fake bomb vest and stabbed two people, who are expected to survive.

Load-Date: February 3, 2020


End of Document