Man Pleads Guilty to Role In Millennial Terrorism Plot 
 The New York Times
March 10, 2001 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 969 words
Byline:  By ALAN FEUER 
Body


An Algerian man has pleaded guilty to helping smuggle explosives into the United States from Canada as part of a suspected plot to terrorize unknown American targets around the time of millennial celebrations in 1999.
     As part of his plea, the man, Abdel Ghani Meskini, 33, also agreed to testify against other suspects in the case, according to a court transcript. It is a development that could prove to be a major break in what has so far been a mysterious and confounding investigation. 
 The case against Mr. Meskini began on Dec. 14, 1999, when government customs officials in Port Angeles, Wash., stopped a man who was trying to drive his car off the ferry from Vancouver, British Columbia.
That man, Ahmed Ressam, broke into a dead run after a few simple questions and, when he was caught, the authorities said, they found several jars of RDX, a military explosive, in his car, along with four Casio watches fashioned as homemade detonators.
They also found a slip of paper on Mr. Ressam with Mr. Meskini's home phone number. Two weeks later, after tapping the phone and placing Mr. Meskini under surveillance, the authorities took him into custody in Brooklyn, saying they had seen him discarding airplane tickets and other documents. 
Mr. Meskini's guilty plea on Wednesday, which was reported yesterday in The Washington Post, occurred before Judge Loretta A. Preska in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the same place where four men are now on trial, facing charges that they joined with Osama bin Laden in a global conspiracy that led to the bombings of the American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in August 1998.
Speaking in English, his second language, Mr. Meskini told the judge that he had traveled to Seattle to give "money, transportation, a communication device and other means of assistance" to a man he referred to only as Reda, "whose entry into the United States through Canada created a substantial risk of destruction of real or personal property within the United States."
Investigators have said that Abu Reda is an alias used by Mr. Ressam and that Mr. Meskini was dispatched on Dec. 11, 1999, to meet him at the Best Western Inn in Seattle and serve as his translator and driver as well as to give him cash withdrawn with a stolen debit card.
The man who sent Mr. Meskini on his mission, investigators say, was another Algerian named Mokhtar Haouari. In his guilty plea, Mr. Meskini confirmed that he went to Seattle on Mr. Haouari's orders and that he and Mr. Haouari made several phony passports and Social Security cards together as well as opened bank accounts under made-up names in order to gain access to credit cards and checks.
The authorities have so far been unable to determine what, if any, specific targets the men were considering, but court papers filed in Seattle on Wednesday reveal that the Best Western, where Mr. Ressam is said to have had reservations, is within blocks of the city's landmark Space Needle. 
"The millennial celebrations were scheduled to take place at the Space Needle on Dec. 31, 1999," the papers say. "The celebrations were canceled" by Mayor Paul Schell "because of his concern over the explosives found in Ressam's trunk."
Mr. Meskini's plea and his apparent willingness to testify were certainly well-timed: Mr. Ressam is scheduled to go on trial in Los Angeles on Monday and Mr. Haouari's own trial is set to begin next month in New York. Federal prosecutors there would not comment on any aspect of the plea.
The two trials are a pair of strands in what investigators suspect is a shadowy web connecting the millennium bombing case to Mr. bin Laden and his organization, Al Qaeda. While American officials have acknowledged there is no hard evidence that Mr. bin Laden was behind the millennial plot, they have said that some of the suspected plotters are linked to Mr. bin Laden's worldwide network.
For example, Mr. Haouari once worked closely with a man named Mohambedou Ould Slahi, who investigators say is a brother-in-law of one Mr. bin Laden's trusted deputies. Mr. Slahi, according to investigators, was also in constant contact with a Sudanese construction company that served as a front for Al Qaeda when Mr. bin Laden was based in Khartoum, Sudan, from 1991 to 1996.
There are, in fact, so many intriguing links between the defendants in the millennial plot and other terrorism trials and suspects throughout the world that one would need a wall-sized map, a crate of push pins and several spools of yarn to fully grasp them.
Mr. Ressam, for one, is now being tried in absentia in Paris at a trial where two dozen suspects have been charged with being part of a militant Algerian network that is said to stretch from Turkey to Canada.
According to Canadian court papers, he is also believed to have stayed at an apartment in Montreal that was rented by a man named Mustafa Labsi, who was arrested last month in Britain on terrorism charges.
There is also an Algerian fugitive named Abdelmajid Dahoumane, the fourth man charged in the millennial plot, who has been questioned by the Algerian police, American officials say, about his possible links to Mr. bin Laden.
Then there is Mr. Meskini, the man who pleaded guilty this week, the man who might hold answers.
Of course, if Mr. Meskini's own words are to be trusted the government could have a difficult time building a case on what he says. 
He not only told federal agents at the time of his arrest, "I have nothing do with terrorism," a claim that his guilty plea belies, he also engaged in a revealing colloquy with a federal judge about phony forms of identification that were found in his apartment and that he said were used to bilk several credit card companies.
"So you are generally a dishonest person, right?" the judge, John F. Keenan, asked him.
"Yes," Mr. Meskini replied. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 10, 2001


End of Document