Man pleads guilty in bomb threats -- again
News-Topic (Lenoir, North Carolina)
March 11, 2017 Saturday


Copyright 2017 News-Topic
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 285 words
Byline: Kara Fohner, News-Topic, Lenoir, N.C.
Body


March 11--A man charged with making several hundred bomb threats in three counties last summer pleaded guilty Friday to the last of hundreds of charges, but no additional time was added to the prison sentence he already is serving.
Cody Matthew Startt, 27, of Matoaka, West Virginia, was convicted in Caldwell County of 58 counts of making false bomb reports, three counts of making a false bomb report to a public building and 61 counts of terrorism, the District Attorney's Office said in a press release. In Catawba County, Startt pleaded guilty to 71 counts of making false bomb reports, one count of making a false bomb report to a public building and 72 counts of terrorism.
Lenoir Police Chief Scott Brown said in court that in Lenoir alone, Startt made 64 calls over six days and "just caused a lot of panic and tension throughout the community."
Startt made calls to multiple businesses, including Fatz Cafe, Dollar General and Walmart.
"Just from the comfort of his armchair, wherever he was, he caused a lot of panic throughout the entire 25th judicial district," Brown said.
Startt was arrested July 6 in West Virginia, and last month he pleaded guilty in Burke Superior Court to 253 counts of terrorism, 251 counts of making false bomb reports, and two counts of making a false bomb report to a public building. He was sentenced at that time to 11 to 21 years in prison.
Judge W. Todd Pomeroy said in Caldwell Superior Court that Startt's sentence in the Caldwell and Catawba charges will be served at the same time as his sentence in the Burke charges.
___ (c)2017 the News-Topic (Lenoir, N.C.) Visit the News-Topic (Lenoir, N.C.) at http://www.newstopic.net/ Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: March 13, 2017


End of Document