Man arrested at Richmond airport on terrorism charges
Commonwealth Times: Virginia Commonwealth University
January 25, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: PRINT-EDITION; Pg. 1
Length: 300 words
Body


Man arrested at Richmond airport on terrorism charges
January 25, 2016
Andrew Crider, Staff Writer
A Northern Virginia man allegedly en route to Syria to join the Islamic State was arrested on Jan. 15 at the Richmond International Airport.
The Department of Justice reported 28 year-old Joseph Hassan Farrokh was arrested at RIC on terrorism charges. Mahmoud Amin Mohamed Elhassan, 25, who officials say drove Farrokh to Richmond, was also arrested on terrorism charges in Woodbridge.
Farrokh, a U.S. citizen, had cleared the airport's TSA security checkpoint prior to being apprehended by FBI agents at his gate. Farrokh has been charged with attempting to provide material support and resources to a terrorist organization.
Elhassan, who is a legal U.S. resident from Jordan, has been charged as Farrokh accomplice. Both men reside in Woodbridge.
Farrokh purchased a plane ticket on Dec. 21 from Richmond to Chicago, where he would then board a separate flight to Jordan and from there travel to Syria, according to an FBI special agent's affidavit in the DOJ's criminal complaint.
Elhassan introduced Farrokh to an FBI informant who he believed was a Jihadist and could advise Farrokh on how to join ISIS, according to the DOJ. In total, three FBI informants posed as Jihadist during the investigation.
The FBI informant who Elhassan introduced to Farrokh had previously agreed to become an informant for the FBI to reduce sentencing for a separate criminal charge, according to the complaint.
Farrokh and Elhassan could face 20 years in prison if found guilty. An initial hearing is scheduled for Jan 19.
The FBI, DOJ and Airport Police declined to comment.
Share this:
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window)

Load-Date: January 25, 2016


End of Document