Man accused of terrorism enters plea
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 22, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: Tristate, Pg. a 3
Length: 324 words
Byline: Seth Hettena
Body


A man charged with terrorizing his former boss for three years entered a plea of not guilty in Dubuque District Court this morning.
Ralph Weinbender, 43, 978 Spires Drive, was formally charged with terrorism and fourth-degree criminal mischief at his arraignment before District Judge Robert Curnan.
Weinbender remains free on bond. He posted a $10,000 cash bond Jan. 8 hours after his initial appearance in Dubuque Associate District Court.
The charges against him say Weinbender emptied six rounds from a .22- caliber gun into a home on Clarke Crest Drive where Steven Ressler and his family were sleeping in 1992.
No one was injured but several bullets were lodged in the wall of the bedroom where Ressler's children were sleeping, court documents say.
Ressler was Weinbender's supervisor at John Deere Dubuque Works and participated in Weinbender's dismissal, police said.
Police said Ressler videotaped someone firing a BB gun at his home in 1993. Police suspected Weinbender was the man whose face was obscured on the tape. They got the missing clues when Weinbender's marriage unraveled last year.
A few days after receiving a divorce settlement in September, court documents say, Debra Weinbender found her estranged husband waiting for her beside her car.
"You just don't know what is going to happen," Weinbender allegedly told her. "I will kill a member of your family."
Weinbender pleaded not guilty to charges of first and second-degree harassment in that incident. A judge ordered him to have no contact with his wife while the charges against him are pending.
In 1995, police were able to positively link Weinbender to the BB gun shooting at Ressler's home when Debra Weinbender identified her husband as the man in the 1993 videotape.
They obtained a warrant to search Weinbender's home. Police found a Ruger . 22 caliber semi-automatic handgun hidden under a stairwell.
Ballistics tests matched the gun to the bullets found in Ressler's home.

Load-Date: December 9, 1996


End of Document