Man guilty of laundering drug money; It was the third such case since May. A customs official said remitters were terrorism "magnets."
The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 15, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B03
Length: 275 words
Byline: John Shiffman, Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


In the third case of its kind since May, a North Philadelphia money remitter has pleaded guilty to money-laundering charges, Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents said yesterday.
Juan Maria, 49, owner of Genoveba Communications Inc., pleaded guilty to sending $92,000 to the Dominican Republic that he believed to be illegal drug proceeds, officials said.
U.S. District Judge Legrome D. Davis set sentencing for Sept. 18. Under the federal sentencing guidelines, Maria likely faces at least four years in prison, said Assistant U.S. Attorney Jeffrey Whitt.
Maria's attorney, Kenneth A. Young, did not return a phone call yesterday.
In May, another Philadelphia man, Seide Venord, was sentenced to 21/2 years in prison for laundering $267,000 in drug money, also to the Dominican Republic.
Venord and Maria were licensed money remitters, officials said.
Also in May, Mohammed Khurshan, a naturalized U.S. citizen from Bangladesh, pleaded guilty to operating a remitting business without a license and to fraud. ICE agents said that Khurshan had sent more than $900,000 to a Singapore company in increments just below $10,000 - the limit at which banks are required to report the transactions to the Treasury Department.
"Money remitters who are willing to move illicit proceeds overseas pose significant homeland-security threats," said John Kelleghan, the acting special agent in charge for ICE in the Philadelphia division. "They serve as magnets for criminal organizations and even terrorist groups looking to wire-transfer their dirty money abroad with no questions asked."
Contact staff writer John Shiffman at 215-854-2658 or jshiffman@phillynews.com.

Load-Date: July 15, 2006


End of Document