MAN GUILTY IN NYC PLOT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 2, 2012 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5
Length: 689 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


NEW YORK -- A Queens man was convicted of a host of terrorism charges Tuesday for participating in a plot led by al-Qaida to stage suicide attacks in the New York subways, an effort that prosecutors said was stopped just days before three former high school classmates planned to set off homemade bombs during rush hour.
The two-week trial offered a rare look at the evolution of a terrorist plot and the workings of al-Qaida training camps where the former Flushing High School classmates received their orders.
The plot began after the defendant, Adis Medunjanin, traveled to Pakistan with two friends from high school with the intention of fighting U.S. troops in Afghanistan. The two friends testified that they were instead recruited to an al-Qaida training camp, where they were told that they would be far more valuable to their cause by returning to the United States to carry out an act of terrorism.
A lawyer for Mr. Medunjanin, 28, a naturalized citizen born in Bosnia, argued that he had dropped out of the plot after falling out with the friends, Najibullah Zazi and Zarein Ahmedzay.
He faces life in prison at his sentencing, which is scheduled for Sept. 7.
The case against Mr. Medunjanin centered on the testimony of Mr. Ahmedzay and Mr. Zazi, who had already pleaded guilty to their involvement in the plot and hope for leniency during sentencing.
Charges in FAMU hazing
ORLANDO, Fla. -- Prosecutors are expected to file charges today after a five-month investigation into the hazing death of Florida A&M University student Robert Champion, authorities said Tuesday.
Several people will be charged with "a range" of felony and misdemeanors, said Danielle Tavernier, spokeswoman for the Orange-Osceola State Attorney's office.
Mr. Champion, a 26-year-old drum major with FAMU's famous marching band, died in November after being beaten aboard a charter bus following the annual Florida Classic football game in Orlando.
$53 million embezzled
CHICAGO -- The former comptroller of Dixon, Ill., has been indicted on charges of defrauding the city of more than $53 million since 1990, almost doubling the amount authorities initially estimated she stole.
Prosecutors had previously accused Rita A. Crundwell with misappropriating more than $30 million since 2006. Ms. Crundwell used the money to finance a lavish lifestyle and her champion horse-breeding business, prosecutors allege. Ms. Crundwell had been chief financial officer for Dixon since the early 1980s until she was fired last month in the wake of the allegations.
Strauss-Kahn immunity nixed
NEW YORK -- A judge Tuesday rejected Dominique Strauss-Kahn's claim of diplomatic immunity in his effort to dismiss a civil suit filed by a hotel housekeeper who claimed that the French leader had sexually assaulted her.
In his decision, Judge McKeon quoted from an International Monetary Fund document advising its officials that they enjoy immunity from the judicial process only in respect to their official duties. The judge added that even that limited immunity expired with Mr. Strauss-Kahn's resignation from the IMF when the suit was filed.
U.S. tourism campaign starts
NEW YORK -- How do you sell Times Square and the Grand Canyon? The Carolinas and California?
Residents of Japan, Canada and the United Kingdom are getting a taste Tuesday of the United States' first-ever marketing campaign to try and stave off declining tourism.
The print, web and video ads released Tuesday were created by Brand USA, a partnership of government agencies and private companies. The consortium was developed to act like the tourism ministries of countries such as Ireland, Italy or Israel.
It's the first time that the U.S. has marketed itself as a tourist destination to people living in other countries.
While tourism has increased globally over the last decade, the U.S. slice of those travelers has fallen, due in large part to complicated visa procedures and heightened security that followed the Sept. 11 attacks. The 10 years after the attacks are often referred to as the "lost decade" for U.S. tourism, because new procedures drove millions of international travelers to other countries.

Load-Date: May 2, 2012


End of Document