Man gets 4 years in federal prison for FBI hoax
The Salt Lake Tribune
June 9, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BREAKING; Local
Length: 298 words
Byline: By Pamela Manson The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Posted: 3:51 PM- When Andy Hart tipped off the FBI that some of his associates were plotting to firebomb a mink farm in rural Utah, federal authorities jumped into action.
Members of the agency's Joint Terrorism Task Force spent a weekend last September investigating the threat. Hart was wired and agents tailed him as he drove up Provo Canyon with two purported conspirators. A helicopter was called in as back up.
The story, however, was fabricated by Hart, who admitted he was merely trying to curry favor with the FBI. The 23-year-old was hoping the federal agents would persuade state authorities to remove his ankle monitor -- punishment for an earlier offense -- as a reward for his assistance, according to his defense attorney.
Hart no longer needs to wear a monitor. U.S. District Judge Dee Benson sentenced him Monday to four years in a federal prison for making a false statement about an act of domestic terrorism.
The judge noted Hart has a criminal history that involves falsehoods, including forgery and giving false information to a police officer, and said he seems to have "an addiction to lying."
"This is an absolutely silly, stupid crime," Benson said.
John Huber, an assistant U.S. attorney, said the offense went beyond a prank.
"In this post-Oklahoma City bombing world, this post-9-11 world, this is a big deal," he said.
Hart, who pleaded guilty in a deal with prosecutors, reported that his associates intended to "napalm" the mink farm, according to court records. He claims that he used unwitting participants as part of his charade at one point.
Huber alleged that Hart informed his two companions on the ride in Provo Canyon about what was happening and turned his listening device on and off so the agents tailing him would think it wasn't working.
 pmanson@sltrib.com 

Load-Date: June 9, 2008


End of Document