Man allegedly invoked Newtown in threat; Suspect faces terrorism charge after allegedly threatening shooting at Boone high school
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 24, 2013, Friday


Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1C
Length: 476 words
Byline: ASHLEY B. CRAIG, DAILY MAIL STAFF
Body


A Raleigh County man is facing a terrorism charge after allegedly invoking the mass shooting in Newtown, Conn. when he threatened a Boone County high school.
David Henry Linville, 26, of Shady Spring, was arrested Wednesday morning at his home.
Deputies went searching for Linville after receiving information that he had made a threat against Sherman High School earlier this week, Boone Chief Deputy Chad Barker said.
Barker said Linville made a threat Monday evening via social media to an unnamed male student to "relive the Newtown shooting" and was specific about Sherman High School.
The student took the threat, which Barker said was "very specific and disturbing," to the school's administrators. They then contacted the school resource officer, a Boone sheriff's deputy.
"It scared the kid to death," Barker said. "Unfortunately in the society we live in today, you don't know if the guy is serious or not. There's no way we're going to stand idly by and not address it."
The threat was in reference to the Dec. 14 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, where a man shot and killed 20 first-graders and six adults before turning the gun on himself. The shooter had killed his mother at their home earlier that morning.
"Threats like this are taken very seriously and will not be tolerated," Boone Sheriff Randall White said in a press release. "Safety of our school children is our number-one priority, and we will not allow anyone to compromise that."
Investigators spent most of Tuesday trying to identify Linville. Barker said once Linville was identified, Raleigh deputies located him Wednesday morning at his home and brought him to the Raleigh Sheriff's Department. Boone deputies interviewed him there.
"He gave a confession," Barker said. "He didn't deny sending the threat."
Barker said deputies still are trying to clarify how Linville knows the boy who reported the threat. Deputies did not find any weapons in Linville's home.
Schools in the Big Coal River area were running on a modified schedule Wednesday morning as a precaution while deputies searched for Linville. Barker said Sherman High was on a modified lockdown and officers were at the school during the search.
The sheriff's office worked closely with the Boone County school board and administrators at Sherman High. Deputies thanked the students, staff, parents and administrators for their cooperation.
"We pretty much knew where he was," Barker said. "It was just a matter of putting hands on him. We did not feel that he was near the school. If we did, students would not have been allowed at the school Wednesday morning."
Linville was charged with threats of a terrorist act, a felony punishable by one to three years in prison. He was arraigned in Raleigh County Wednesday and is free on a $30,000 bond.
Contact writer Ashley B. Craig at ashley.craig@dailymail.com or 304-348-4850.

Load-Date: May 24, 2013


End of Document