Man's Cooperation in Terrorism Cases Spares Him From Serving More Time in Prison
The New York Times
October 24, 2015 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 842 words
Byline: By COLIN MOYNIHAN
Body


A man who was indicted in 2002 on charges of planning to open a jihadist training camp in Oregon was sentenced on Friday to the time he has spent in prison, with prosecutors and a federal judge saying he had provided key evidence in terrorism trials.
The man, Earnest James Ujaama, followed an unlikely path to the sentencing, in Federal District Court in Manhattan. His trajectory stretched across more than 15 years and included roles as a suspected terrorism supporter and an international fugitive, two stints in prison totaling about six years and, finally, a partnership with federal prosecutors seeking to convict others accused of terrorism-related crimes. 
  On Friday, John Cronan, deputy chief of the terrorism and international narcotics unit in the United States attorney's office for the Southern District of New York, called Mr. Ujaama's cooperation ''extraordinary'' and ''largely unprecedented.'' 
  Speaking in a soft voice, Mr. Ujaama told Judge Katherine B. Forrest before being sentenced that he hoped to start a new life as an academic.
  ''You have great potential to move forward in a very positive way,'' Judge Forrest told him, adding, ''I hope you take the opportunity you have now.''
  Before coming to the attention of the federal authorities Mr. Ujaama, 49, was respected in his community in Seattle but also a petty swindler. Judge Forrest noted in court that he had written a well-received book and had been seen as a mentor for young people. But he had also diverted payments from a business partner, the judge said, and had dealt in counterfeit watches. He also appeared never to have filed a tax return, she added.
  In 2002, Mr. Ujaama was indicted in federal court in Washington State on charges that he conspired in 1999 to provide material support for terrorism by proposing to open a jihadist training camp in Bly, Ore., and by helping to run a website, Supporters of Shariah, used to advocate violence against the United States.
  Mr. Ujaama resolved that case in 2003 by pleading guilty to conspiring to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act by, among other things, installing software on computers in Afghanistan belonging to Taliban officials. He was sentenced to two years in prison and agreed to cooperate in the prosecution of other suspects. Instead, he fled to Belize in 2006 to avoid testifying against co-conspirators.
  Mr. Ujaama subsequently returned to the United States and pleaded guilty in 2007 to new charges brought by prosecutors in Manhattan. Those charges included conspiring to provide and conceal material support or resources to terrorists, providing material support or resources to terrorists and unlawful flight to avoid giving testimony. 
  He later testified at the trials of two men said to have participated in the conspiracy to establish the jihadist camp in Oregon: Oussama Kassir, a Swede of Lebanese descent, and Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, also known as Abu Hamza al-Masri, an Egyptian-born cleric who preached at a North London mosque and helped to orchestrate the kidnappings in 1998 of 16 American, British and Australian tourists in Yemen.
  Mr. Mostafa was convicted in 2014 on 11 terrorism-related charges, some of them connected to the episode in Yemen, with Mr. Ujaama delivering crucial testimony at his trial.
  Mr. Ujaama testified, for example, that in 1999 Mr. Mostafa had sent Mr. Kassir and a second man from Britain to the United States so they could help organize a training camp in Oregon for volunteers who would eventually fly to Afghanistan and fight alongside the Taliban against the Northern Alliance.
  Mr. Ujaama also testified that later, while he was living in London and designing the Supporters of Shariah website and a newsletter called Al Jihad, Mr. Mostafa told him to bring a man named Feroz Abassi to Afghanistan and deliver him to a Taliban commander, Ibn Shaykh.
  ''Sheikh Abu Hamza directed me to take him to Ibn Shaykh,'' Mr. Ujaama testified. ''He told me that he was, Abbasi was, going for jihad training and then going to the front line.''
  Mr. Mostafa, Mr. Ujaama testified, said he had contacted Wakil Ahmad Muttawakil, the foreign minister for the Taliban, ''to arrange my safe entry and travel inside Afghanistan.''
  He added that Mr. Mostafa had also given him envelopes containing thousands of British pounds that he was to give to specific people, including Mr. Shaykh.
  Mr. Cronan of the United States attorney's office cited Mr. Ujaama's cooperation with the government, telling Judge Forrest that he had met ''upward of 70 times with prosecutors.'' Some of those meetings, Mr. Cronan said, lasted all day, and Mr. Ujaama appeared to have done his best to recall key details.
  ''He was an extremely important witness,'' Mr. Cronan said.
  A few minutes later, Mr. Ujaama briefly addressed the judge, saying he regretted ''irresponsible'' and ''harmful'' behavior and wished to find ''some joy'' by pursuing academic studies.
  ''I wish I would have never gotten involved with Abu Hamza,'' he said. ''I think he's a bad man.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/24/nyregion/terror-suspects-unprecedented-aid-in-other-cases-spares-him-more-prison.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Earnest James Ujaama (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN MCDERMID/REUTERS)        

Load-Date: October 25, 2015


End of Document