Man-made disasters focus of training City ill-prepared for bio-terrorism, expert says

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 11, 2000, Friday


Copyright 2000 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5A
Length: 567 words
Byline: THERESE SMITH COX
Body


DAILY MAIL HEALTH REPORTER
If terrorists planted a canister of anthrax at a Charleston Civic Center concert and hundreds of spectators breathed in the lethal spores, the incident most likely would spawn mass pandemonium.
"Based on what I've seen, most hospitals would not be prepared," said Terry Fenger, director of the forensic science program at the Marshall University School of Medicine. "This would be a whole different aspect of terrorism than other types."
Fortunately, the probability of such a scenario in West Virginia is low, though most experts believe chances that a similar incident could happen in large U.S. cities are high, he said.
Remember the sarin gas release in a Tokyo subway in 1995 that killed 12 people? The Oregon salad bar where salmonella was deliberately introduced in 1984? The PBS documentary about Russian production of smallpox even after a U.S. treaty to keep the lethal virus frozen and isolated?
"I am sure people are paying a lot more attention than what they used to," said John Pack, director of the state's Office of Emergency Services, about the possibility of terrorist attacks.
West Virginia is planning how emergency officials can contend with mass outbreaks of disease due to insidious and lethal agents such as sarin, anthrax, smallpox, ebola or other biological agents.
West Virginia University officials agreed Thursday to include the West Virginia National Guard's Camp Dawson training center in a program to train medical responders, hospital staff and other health workers how to deal with the effects of terrorism.
The pact is another step to develop the Preston County camp as a national center for training for all types of weapons of mass destruction. Already, workers are constructing a $ 19 million facility there.
The Virtual Medical Campus, formed at WVU in 1999 with six industry groups, soon will train U.S. communities to better respond to natural or man-made disasters, including those spurred by biological and chemical weapons. Among WVU's expertise is a global mapping technology that could predict how anthrax might disperse in the air.
"Camp Dawson has facilities used for hands-on training," said Rusty Russell, director of the Virtual Medical Campus. "Some training can't be done on-line. They have disaster support training experience."
WVU's Center for Rural Emergency Medicine, under which the virtual campus is located, is halfway through a two-year study for the Justice Department. The center will propose a plan to train hospital administrators and emergency personnel across the country to respond to disasters prompted by weapons of mass destruction.
Congress last year mandated that states improve their preparedness to detect and manage terrorism.
Pack's office in June received $ 567,000 from the Justice Department to help provide detection equipment, antidotes, respirators, protective clothing and training for first responders in West Virginia.
Pack's staff also is teaching workshops across the state on terrorism. Three are schedule in the next month, including one Sept. 7 at the Ramada Inn.
"In West Virginia, we believe the likelihood of weapons of biological agents would be minimal," Pack said. "But not to have plans and be prepared, the consequences would be huge. This isn't one of the issues where you stick your head in the sand."
Writer Therese Smith Cox can be reached at 348-4874 or by e-mail at therese@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: August 15, 2000


End of Document