Manhunt Continues in Central England After Random Stabbing Spree
The New York Times
September 7, 2020 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 705 words
Byline: By Anna Schaverien
Body


At least one person was killed in a series of attacks in the city. The police believe the victims were chosen at random, but they are not treating the rampage as terrorism.
A search was underway in Birmingham, England, on Sunday for a man who was said to have carried out a series of stabbings across the city that left at least one person dead and seven more wounded, two of them seriously, the police said. 
  The police have shared images and video footage of the man thought to be responsible for what the police said appeared to be a ''random attack.'' 
  Chief Superintendent Steve Graham of the West Midlands Police said that officers were still searching for a motive, but that there was no indication the stabbings were related to terrorism, a hate crime or gang violence.
  The police have confirmed that at least one man was killed and that two people, a man and a woman, had serious injuries. Five others were also wounded, and their injuries were described as minor.
  No link has been established among the victims, leading the police to believe that the stabbings were done at random.
  They declared the situation a ''major incident,'' a designation that describes any episode involving serious harm or a security risk to the public. A murder investigation has been opened.
  The attacks happened in several spots across central Birmingham, a city about 120 miles northwest of London. The first was reported to the police shortly after midnight in the north of the city, and the others followed over the next few hours, ending in an area known for its busy nightlife. The police said they believed that the stabbings were linked and that one man was responsible for the crimes.
  ''We are doing everything we can to trace the offender,'' Superintendent Graham said at a news conference. 
  Video footage of the suspect taken from surveillance cameras was released by the West Midlands Police on Sunday evening as they appealed to the public to help in identifying the man. 
  The police have urged anyone who was in the city center late Saturday or early Sunday to share information, photographs or video related to the attacks.
  The video of the suspected attacker matches descriptions given by witnesses to some of the incidents. 
  A witness to one stabbing told Sky News that he had seen a man wearing a black hooded sweatshirt and a cap stabbing a woman in the neck several times. The man evaded attempts by other witnesses to chase him.
  ''It happened very quickly,'' the witness, Savvas Sfrantziz, a bar owner in the nightlife area, told Sky News. ''He just went up to her and just stabbed her. I've never seen anything like it.''
  David Nash, who runs another bar in the same area, said that as the bars were closing around 2 a.m., he saw someone in a hooded top walking down the street and heard someone shout, ''Stop him -- he's just stabbed somebody!''
  ''Then, of course, this person took off into the night,'' Mr. Nash told BBC News. The area was soon overrun by emergency vehicles, he added.
  The police have urged Birmingham residents to be alert, warning that the attacker was still at large, and they promised to increase the presence of uniformed and armed officers within the city center on Sunday.
  ''Our emergency services are working hard to find whoever is responsible and bring them to justice,'' Britain's home secretary, Priti Patel, said on Twitter.
  The country's foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said it was ''a very serious incident'' and urged anyone in the area to ''be vigilant.''
  David Jamieson, the West Midlands police and crime commissioner, said, ''We're well used on a Friday and Saturday night to activity, but I think what is different is the randomness of this particular event.''
  Serious violent crime, including stabbings, has risen sharply in Britain in recent years. While gun crime is a rare occurrence compared with the United States, Britain has faced a large increase in knife crime.
  Six people, including a police officer, were injured in Glasgow, Scotland, in late June amid a stabbing attack in a hotel. Days earlier, three people were killed and three others injured in a stabbing at a park in Reading, England, in what the authorities described as a terrorist incident.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/06/world/europe/uk-birmingham-stabbing.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sunday in Birmingham, England, the day after a man stabbed several people the day before. Officials released video of a suspect. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PHIL NOBLE/REUTERS)               

Load-Date: September 7, 2020


End of Document