Manners hijack thriller angle in Just's latest novel
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 8, 2006 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A&E; Pg. F8
Length: 272 words
Byline: By Harry Levins Post-Dispatch Senior Writer
Body


Two years ago, novelist Ward Just produced "An Unfinished Season," ostensibly a coming-of-age novel but actually a novel of manners. Now, the author gives us "Forgetfulness." Ostensibly, it's a terrorism thriller. But once again, it's actually a novel of manners -- and once again, it's a good one.
At the center of the tale stands Thomas Railles, an American painter who lives with his French wife in a village on the French side of the Pyrenees. One evening, his wife goes for a stroll. She never returns.
Her murder was the work of four shady North Africans; French authorities eventually arrest them. Because two of Railles' boyhood chums work for the CIA and because he did a bit of work for them in the past, he gets to sit in on the interrogation -- even to become part of the interrogation.
A plot summary makes "Forgetfulness" sound juicier than it is. The terrorism angle is vague and unresolved. That judgment isn't meant as a slam against the novel, because it isn't about terrorism. It's about Railles, a man in his mid-60s, left to cope with life all by himself.
As the book progresses, Railles must turn his keen artist's eye inward on his soul as he deals with a changed world in which people fidget with something called a BlackBerry.
If you're turned off by novels of manners, you'll find "Forgetfulness" a tedious tale that goes nowhere. But if you appreciate introspection and lovely writing, you'll find "Forgetfulness" hard to put down and Thomas Railles impossible to forget.
Just's fans -- and I'm among them -- will know what I mean.
---
'Forgetfulness'
A novel by Ward Just Published by Houghton Mifflin 272 pages, $25

Notes

 Books 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - (Book cover: 'Forgetfulness' by Ward Just) 

Load-Date: October 9, 2006


End of Document