Many runners are back this year; One Centerville resident had her race cut short by last year's terrorism.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 20, 2014 Sunday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NATION & WORLD; Pg. A17
Length: 617 words
Byline: By Brian Kollars
Body


Amy Johnston of Oakwood holds up her bib number while checking in Saturday at the Boston Marathon. Johnston completed last year's race and was two blocks from the finish line when two bombs exploded. "I was a little shaken last year, but not enough that I'm not willing to go back and do it again, " she said.
Pamala Berry has some unfinished business on the streets of Boston.
Berry was cruising along near the 23-mile marker in last year's Boston Marathon when all hell broke loose. Some three miles up the road, two bombs exploded and the race was stopped in its tracks.
"I was coming down the street, and all I'm seeing is runners," she recalled. "We were getting ready to make a right turn and all of a sudden there was a big barricade. Everyone was so puzzled.
"When I found out later what had happened, I almost felt kind of guilty, because I was still out there running."
The Centerville resident ended up wandering through surrounding neighborhoods. Cell phone service was spotty, so she was unable to contact a friend who planned to meet her at the finish line.
"A bunch of us went into a CVS pharmacy; they were so nice," Berry, 61, said. "They were pulling beach chairs off the shelves and letting us sit in them. We were freezing. That's when my cell phone went off. My friend's neighbor called and ended up walking me to Fenway Park."
Berry will run her 13th Boston Marathon on Monday, but she didn't have to qualify. Race officials welcomed back 5,624 runners who were between the halfway point and the finish line when the bombs exploded. Eighty-five percent of that group - 4,781 runners - took them up on the offer to return.
Amy Johnston of Oakwood made her Boston debut last year. She had completed her run and was two blocks from the finish when she heard explosions. She immediately thought about her mother, who had accompanied her to the race.
"I could see a cloud of white and gray, debris shooting into the air. I saw the second one, too," Johnston said. "I met people who were down close. It was frightening. People were crying; they looked scared to death."
Johnston found her mom and headed to her downtown hotel.
"It got to 6:30 in the evening and I realized I was still in my running clothes and had not eaten or bathed," she said. "We just stood in the front of the TV."
She still thinks about that day, and the memories lingered.
"Anytime I heard a boom, especially at night, I'd get up and roam the halls and the kids were like, 'Go back to bed, mom.' That's all you thought about."
Mitch Westbrook, a Farmers-ville native who lives and works in Boston, has run the marathon three times as a "bandit," which means he was not officially entered. The race plans to crack down on bandits this year, so Westbrook will compete as a charity runner, raising money for the b.good Family Foundation.
He had just finished acknowledging some friends in the crowd and was closing in on the homestretch when last year's race was halted.
"I heard the bombs go off, and I got to the corner of Boylston where they had stopped everyone," Westbrook said. "I could see the smoke and kind of smell it. The initial reaction from the runners so far back was confusion. A lot of folks were disappointed they didn't get to finish the race. As the details came out, all that changed."
The mindset of many across the nation also changed. Greg Barnhart of Fairborn will be running in his first Boston Marathon after qualifying last September in Erie, Pa. He said he drew inspiration from last year's race.
"After I saw last year's event, I really wanted to be there so I committed to train hard, and I made it happen," he said. "I'm really going to enjoy it. I'll slow down a little bit and try to take it all in."

Load-Date: April 20, 2014


End of Document