MANY THINK POST-COLD WAR WORLD MORE DANGEROUS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
July 7, 1994, Thursday


Copyright 1994 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World;
Length: 419 words
Body


ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. (AP) Americans believe threats of international nuclear war, terrorism and proliferation are growing since the demise of the Soviet Union, a nationwide survey shows.
"We're finding that people don't feel more secure and that the fall of the Soviet Union and opening up of Eastern Europe has not convinced people that the world is a safer and more benign place," said Hank Jenkins-Smith, the survey's senior researcher and director of the University of New Mexico's Institute for Public Policy.
The survey of the general public and scientists also showed broad support for more funding to prevent nuclear proliferation and terrorism; for research to increase nuclear weapons safety; and training to ensure competent nuclear weapons managers.
And the survey found strong support for decreasing spending for development and testing of new nuclear weapons.
"We wanted to try to better understand how the general public now perceives nuclear weapons since the end of the Cold War," Kerry Herron, project leader at UNM, said Wednesday.
The survey was commissioned by Sandia National Laboratories, a federal defense research laboratory in Albuquerque, which before the end of the Cold War was responsible for developing delivery systems for nuclear weapons.
The random telephone survey of 1,301 people nationwide was conducted between June 1993 and March 1994 by the UNM Institute for Public Policy and the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Random written surveys were gathered from 1,226 scientists from Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratories and Los Alamos National Laboratory.
To balance those scientists generally considered more supportive of nuclear weapons technologies and policies, the survey included 1,155 random written responses from the more critical Union of Concerned Scientists.
The margin of error was plus or minus 3 percentage points.
The survey showed 43 percent of all respondents thought the breakup of the Soviet Union decreased the likelihood that the United States would become involved in a nuclear war.
But 61 percent thought the chances of a nuclear war occurring somewhere in the world had increased since the Soviet Union dissolved. Seventy-six percent thought more countries would get nuclear weapons capabilities.
Also, 59 percent thought it was not feasible to eliminate all nuclear weapons in the next 25 years. But if that were to occur, 85 percent thought it would be extremely difficult to keep other countries from rebuilding them.

Load-Date: October 30, 1994


End of Document