MANY ALLIES BACK U.S. MISSILE STRIKES
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
August 21, 1998, Friday


Copyright 1998 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a2
Length: 406 words
Byline: JOJI SAKURAI, Associated Press writer
Body


Key American allies expressed strong support today for the U.S. attacks in Afghanistan and Sudan, but Boris Yeltsin and several Muslim nations denounced them.
President Clinton said Thursday's missile strikes against suspected terrorist centers came in retaliation for the Aug. 7 bombings of two U.S. embassies in East Africa that killed 257 people and injured thousands.
Yeltsin called the U.S. bombings indecent, but his spokesman said the Russian president was mainly upset about not being informed in advance.
"I am indignant and I condemn (them)," Yeltsin said in Murmansk. "I didn't know that this strike would be carried out, and that means the whole world was unaware of that. And this makes the strike even more indecent."
Some foreign commentators questioned whether the strikes were timed to distract the public from Clinton's sex scandal with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky.
The popular Turkish newspaper Hurriyet was particularly blunt: "The Monica Missiles," it declared in a headline.
South Korea's Kukmin Daily agreed. "The bombing is comparable to double checks in a chess game punishment of terrorism and cover-up of sex scandal," it said.
In contrast, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl today strongly backed the U.S. attacks, saying that terrorism requires "resolute action by all countries." France concurred, with Prime Minister Lionel Jospin saying "we must give determined and firm responses against terrorists."
The U.S. strikes also received support from Australia, New Zealand, Britain and Israel, but drew criticism from some Asian nations, including Malaysia and Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim country.
Indonesia said it "strongly condemns any form of terrorism, although in the fight against terrorism Indonesia cannot condone intervention or aggression towards sovereign nations."
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, a frequent critic of Washington, said the move made the United States appear like a bully.
"If it's a big power, it can attack anyone. It decides and it executes, making small countries feel it's dangerous to live in this world," Mahathir said.
In Pakistan, officials today condemned the strikes.
"The act of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of these Islamic countries cannot but be a matter of grave concern to the people of Pakistan," said Foreign Minister Sartaj Aziz.
A right-wing political and religious leader, Munaar Hasan, promised anti-U.S. protests.

Load-Date: August 21, 1998


End of Document