MANY TOURISTS REVAMPING PLANS IN FEAR OF TERRORISM, EXPERTS SAY
The New York Times
January 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 1448 words
Byline: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL
Body


In little more than six months, terrorist attacks on travelers have shaken the volatile travel industry and altered patterns of international tourism, according to industry and government representatives.
Around the nation, travel agents say, clients are calling to ask whether it is safe to take trips. Some fearful customers, they say, have canceled overseas trips and others have shifted their destinations to places considered potentially less dangerous, choosing in some cases, the Soviet Union and other Communist countries.
Immediately after the terrorist attacks on Dec. 27 at the Rome and Vienna airports, for example, Trans World Airlines lost about 4,000 bookings, according to a reliable airline source that T.W.A. spokesmen did not dispute.
President Reagan, in his news conference last night, was asked how safe he thought it was for Americans to travel in Europe in view of recent terrorist attacks.
Mr. Reagan said that while there had been ''great improvement'' in airport security since last summer, it was hard to know how to deal with suicide attacks such as those in Rome and Vienna.
He said many regular travelers had told him they would plan no trips to Europe ''under the present situation.''
 
Advising the Cautious
Travel agents are fielding many of the questions from worried travelers. ''A year ago we would have said, 'Go on a cruise,' '' said Joseph Hallissey, president of the American Society of Travel Agents, who is head of his own agency in Dearborn, Mich. ''The Achille Lauro blew us away.''
The seizure of that Italian cruise ship on Oct. 7 and the killing of an elderly American passenger followed an earlier terrorist assault, the hijacking of T.W.A. Flight 814 out of Athens. After the ship hijacking, terrorists on Nov. 23 hijacked an Egyptair flight from Athens to Malta. Egyptian commandos stormed the plane and 60 people died. The terrorist attacks, moreover, come during a record year of crashes and fatalities for commercial aviation.
In the latest expression of concern over terrorism, the Vatican's United States Catholic Office for Pilgrimages held a meeting yesterday in New York City with a security official of the Federal Aviation Administration, travel agents and tourism and airline officials. Among other things, the pilgrimage office's executive director, the Rev. John E. Lazar, called for distribution of a fact sheet advising travelers on ''proper conduct and procedure in the event of an act of terrorism.''
Father Lazar, who said he served as host of the conference yesterday to express the concerns of Pope John Paul II, also called for strengthened security for American Catholics on pilgrimages and other trips abroad and for better counterintelligence to pinpoint security risks.
In another expression of concern over terrorism, the Superintendent of Schools in Memphis, Willie W. Herenton, called for a halt to school-sponsored trips overseas. A group of Memphis high school students landed at Rome's Leonardo da Vinci airport last month just three hours after 17 people were killed in a terrorist attack at the El Al departure counter. An attack at the Vienna airport about the same time killed two people.
Travel data covering the recent period of violence are not yet in, and the available data is hard to interpret, experts say. Over all, for example, international air traffic by American carriers was up 11 percent through November, according to the Air Transport Association. But comprehensive breakdowns by country or area are not available.
According to the latest figures of the Federal Department of Transportation, air travel to Greece last August, shortly after the two-week siege in the T.W.A. hijacking in which one American was slain, was down more than 31 percent. Air travel to Italy the same month was down one half of 1 percent, and air travel to Egypt remained unchanged. Air travel to Israel was up more than 8 percent, and the Middle East as a region registered a 2.7 percent rise.
But other fragmentary data and accounts from travel representatives point to a sharper effect. A poll commissioned last July by the U.S. Travel Data Center, an industry association in Washington, indicated that of 6.5 million Americans who had made reservations abroad, 1.4 million changed them after the T.W.A. hijacking. #850,000 Cancel Bookings Of these, the poll found, 850,000 canceled their bookings outright, and 220,000 others shifted their destinations to places in the United States.
Many travel agents have found themselves in the difficult position of having to calm nervous clients on the one hand, and demanding better security for them, on the other.
The meeting yesterday at the Vatican's pilgrimage office, which is in the Roman Catholic Church Center at 1011 First Avenue near 55th Street, highlighted the conflicting concerns.
One church-affiliated travel agent, Marie F. Romagnano of Mother of the Church Marian Travel in Boston, said she was dismayed with what she portrayed as lax security during charter flight stopovers to and from Europe and the Middle East.
''I'm never sure somebody hasn't passed them something in the bathroom,'' she said, adding that she had led tour groups through the Rome, Manila and Athens airports shortly before or after they were involved in terrorist incidents.
 
Call for 'Sledgehammer' Method
She called for stern preventive measures by airlines and tour operators. ''The only way to deal with the situation is with a sledgehammer,'' she said.
Many of the agents asked the F.A.A. representative, Hector Gonzales, a security official out of the New York office, the question their clients had been asking them: Is travel safe?
''Every travel agent is getting similar calls,'' said Voight Gilmore, secretary general of the American Society of Travel Agents.
''It's safe,'' Mr. Gonzales replied. ''We're taking measures we feel are reasonable.''
Among these, he said, were assigning armed sky marshals to selected flights and appointing air-ground ''security coordinators.''
Mr. Gonzales also said the aviation agency last month began conducting checks of prospective airline employees who would have access to aircraft.
But several Israeli tourism and airline officials, citing Israel's tight security measures, said other nations and airlines were not doing enough.
 
'Other Countries Can Do It'
''If Israel can do it, other countries can do it,'' said Moshe Shoshani of the Israel Commission for Tourism in New York. ''The U.S. Government is doing more but not enough.''
He said checked baggage, as well as carry-on items, should be X-rayed and that every car entering the airport should be stopped for at least a quick look by guards, as is done in Israel.
''The moment you're stopping cars, this will be known,'' he said.
Salim Maroun, general manager of Alia, Royal Jordanian Airlines, in New York, told those at the meeting that Alia set up its baggage checkpoints right inside the terminal doors.
Other travel agents said a more positive approach was needed. Esta Greenstreet of Kenness International, a Manhattan travel agency, said the message she wanted to convey was simple: ''We're going, that's all,'' she said. ''Nothing's going to stop us.'' She added: ''I'm not going to stop walking because I'm afraid of crossing the street, or for fear of getting mugged in the U.S.''
Some travelers have voiced similar sentiments. Anna Glass, a 70-year-old widow from Port St. Lucie, Fla., said she had spent much of her life traveling around the world.
''Being a senior, why would I wait a year or two?'' she said. ''I want to see all I can while I can. It's too late in our years to wait.'' This spring, she said, she plans to take a 33-day trip to Australia, New Zealand, Tahiti and Fiji with Saga Holidays, an agency specializing in tours for the elderly.
Phil Martin, a spokesman for Saga in Boston, said he had seen some shift in destinations. ''Australia is one of our favorites now because it's noncontroversial and fascinates,'' he said.
Recently, he said, for security reasons, one client canceled a trip to Madrid, another changed from Tunisia to Australia and a third changed from Rome to a national park in the West.
Mr. Gilmore, secretary general of the travel agent society, said he had recently witnessed a growing interest in Alaska, Hawaii and the Caribbean, as well as to Soviet bloc countries.
Many of the travel agents at the conference voiced support for a national policy of sanctions against nations that offer aid or sanctuary to terrorists.
''Those who cannot accept or seek to learn the culture and policies of others must be made to retreat until they are ready to join once again the civilized world,'' said Peter J. Purpura, owner of Chosen Ventures, a Brooklyn travel agency.

Graphic

 
photo of Moshe Shoshani and Rev. J. Lazar (NYT/Marilyn K. Yee) (page B7)


End of Document