Many forms of terrorism exist in world
University Wire
September 18, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 The Crimson White via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 771 words
Byline: By Heather Wyatt, The Crimson White; SOURCE: U. Alabama
Dateline: TUSCALOOSA, Ala. 
Body


As I watched the press conference given by President Bush on Friday, I became upset. I have had mixed emotions about Bush and his administration throughout the term of his presidency. There were times when I had felt compassion for him because of events such as Sept. 11 and Hurricane Katrina.
More recently, this compassion reared its ugly head again as his unpopularity is soaring out of control and he is spending most of his time defending his actions instead of providing America with a reason to like him.
As I watched this press conference, my compassion turned into disgust as I realized it is merely a derivative of the rhetoric he uses to make me feel bad for questioning his authority.
I am probably one of many who are tired of battles between liberals and conservatives with no goal other than insulting the intelligence of the other party. I don't want to do that. I want to be productive, and I think a good place to start is to examine the way in which the president presents issues to American citizens.
In The Crimson White alone, there have been several columns about the war in Iraq and its connection to al-Qaida, oil, Saddam Hussein and patriotism. In many ways, I have thought I was unpatriotic over the course of the past few years because of the questions I ask about the necessity of the mess that we are so intertwined in.
I counted at least 10 times in the first 20 minutes of the press conference that Bush said "protect our country" and "Mideast" and "terrorists." In my mind and the mind of many others I have spoken with, a terrorist looks like someone from the Middle East.
The problem is threefold. First, the assumption that everyone from the Middle East looks the same, has the same ideals and has the same experiences is flat out racist whether the intent is there.
Having been guilty of this, I was forced to educate myself on what countries exist in the Middle East, what their predominant religions are and not to assume I know what someone from that region looks like.
The second problem is that citizens have the idea that they need to protect themselves from everyone in that area. The government has handed the entire Middle East to us on a deadly platter that we are to be afraid of at all times. We are obsessed with having an enemy, and things will never change unless we eliminate the idea of the "other."
The third problem is to assume that terrorism is a Middle East construction. The word "terrorist" in the dictionary means someone who threatens to demoralize, intimidate and subjugate, such as a political weapon or policy.
Clearly, the attacks on Sept. 11 and the actions of the previous Iraqi regime fall under this category. I would never argue with this but instead suggest that there might be examples of this definition within the United States that have nothing to do with anyone in the Middle East but instead American-born citizens.
Probably the most historic example would be the Ku Klux Klan. While most Americans might think this group is no longer a threat to America, I would like to point out that it still has thousands of active members with one clear objective: to rid the United States of all nonwhite, non-Christian humans by whatever means necessary and use the Bible to justify their actions.
In addition to their current activity, the Klan was responsible for thousands of deaths of blacks throughout the 19th and 20th centuries until murder laws were more strictly enforced. The greatest measure against this group was that they were merely frowned upon yet allowed to outwardly and actively commit violence under the guise of free speech.
Some might even venture to say that the actions of the current administration portray intimidation and subjugation to the American people in the name of patriotism. In reality, it seems supporting this war is far less patriotic than most Americans would like to think.
Bush's rhetoric and reasoning for more money and a clearer security measure from Congress is to reignite Americans' fear of terrorism and that our government is being forced to participate in actions to "protect our country." It seems our hard-line stance on foreign policy is nothing but a smokescreen to the real issues.
My mother tells me that I am too hard on America. I take that with stride because like a mother is hard on her child, I am hard on my country.
I love America, and while its pure democracy remains a utopian idea for now, I think if more people examine the current status quo because they care about the country, we might be on the right path.
Heather Wyatt is a senior majoring in American studies.
(C) 2006 The Crimson White via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 18, 2006


End of Document