Many firms shun federal terrorism insurance
USA TODAY
April 2, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: MONEY;
Length: 1176 words
Byline: Christine Dugas
Body

The terrorism insurance act passed by Congress late last year has been a letdown to many U.S. companies, industry experts say.
Only about 20% of businesses and entities such as school districts and airports have opted to pay for the government-backed terrorism coverage, according to industry consultants and insurance companies.
"The Main Street business owner is not concerned about terrorism and is not interested in terrorism insurance," says Milton Moses, CEO of Community Insurance Center in Chicago. "People are very cost-conscious. Even if it only costs an extra $ 100 or so, they're not buying it."
Less than 10% of small businesses and 20% of midsize companies have purchased terrorism coverage, according to a survey by the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers released last month.
Only large, high-profile companies or properties are taking it up. And even they are often looking for alternatives to the government program because they say its coverage is so costly and limited that it leaves them dangerously exposed.
Big companies in high-risk locations are increasingly buying stand-alone terrorism insurance, which can provide better coverage because it is outside the government-mandated program. The Houston Airport System, for example, recently agreed to pay $ 383,000 for $ 100 million in stand-alone terrorism coverage.
Other companies are considering banding together to form mutual insurance companies so that they have more control over costs and coverage. "They're saying that the property and casualty industry is not meeting their needs," says James Costner, senior vice president of Willis Group Holdings, a large insurance broker.
Congressional fix
Before the Sept. 11 attacks, terrorism coverage was included in standard commercial property and casualty insurance. But it became hard to get after the industry was hit with an estimated $ 40 billion in insured losses stemming from the attacks. To help fix the situation, the industry pushed Congress to pass a law to provide a government backstop in the event of another major terrorist attack.
But in the haste to get legislation passed, many issues were not resolved. "They glossed over the problems," says Bruce Thomas, vice president of Conning Research & Consulting. "It's hard to view it as a success."
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act created a program in which the federal government will share in the cost of a foreign terrorist attack that produces at least $ 5 million in insured losses.
Insurers must offer terrorism coverage if they provide commercial property and casualty insurance, but they can charge what they want unless there is state price regulation.
"It's all a mess at the moment," says Deborah Beck, executive vice president of the Real Estate Board of New York. "It's good that terrorism insurance is available. But it's bad that there are still pockets that are so difficult and costly to cover. And the law has significant holes."
Among those shortcomings:
 * It doesn't cover domestic acts of terrorism. If there were another Oklahoma City-type attack, businesses and property owners generally would be on their own, unless a state requires coverage or companies have a broader stand-alone policy.
 * It leaves it up to the Treasury Department to certify an act of terrorism before it will be covered under the law. That's a concern to some companies.
For example, they wonder what would happen if there is a terrorist attack on U.S. soil during the Iraq war. Would it be considered terrorism or wartime retaliation? Acts of war are typically excluded by insurance.
 * It doesn't require insurers to cover terrorist attacks involving nuclear, chemical or biological agents. These perils were generally not covered before the Sept. 11 attacks.
But with the anthrax scare and threat of a dirty bomb and other types of biological weapons attacks looming, many businesses had hoped the law would provide some coverage. "Unfortunately, that has not turned out to be the case," Beck says.
 * It doesn't ensure that businesses in high-risk locations can get property and casualty insurance at all. Since the Sept. 11 attacks, insurers are limiting the total amount of their exposure in marquee buildings and high-risk areas.
Some small businesses in the Empire State Building, for example, have been dropped by their insurance companies and now are scrambling for property and casualty insurance, says Sharon Emek, an insurance agent at CBS Coverage Group in Manhattan.
 * It's only a three-year program. "Some companies are saying, 'If it's only going to be around for three years, why buy it now?' " says Gail Norstrom, managing director at Aon Risk Services. " 'Why not spend the money on better security or buy stand-alone coverage?' "
Still, for all its shortcomings, the law has benefited the industry, some say. It has made terrorism insurance more widely available and helped to bring down the cost of the coverage, says Robert Hartwig, chief economist for the Insurance Information Institute.
When the Houston Airport System tried to get terrorism coverage before the law was passed, it was told it would cost more than $ 1 million. Today, it has the same coverage for less than half the cost.
How coverage costs stack up
The costs of commercial terrorism coverage under the new Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) are all across the board, depending on the type of business and its location, experts say. A mom and pop restaurant in a small Midwest town might not have to pay anything to get the terrorism coverage added to its property and casualty insurance.
The cost of coverage for companies in metropolitan areas could equal 10% to 25% of annual property and casualty premiums. But some have been charged much more.
Many companies are willing to pay more for broader stand-alone terrorism coverage. Gail Norstrom, managing director of Aon Risk Services, gives a hypothetical example of how the cost of TRIA coverage might compare with a stand-alone policy:
Suppose a building's owner pays $ 500,000 a year for $ 500 million in property and casualty insurance coverage with a $ 250,000 deductible. Its insurer might charge an extra 25%, or $ 125,000 a year, for TRIA coverage. If the same building's owner wants to buy stand-alone terrorism coverage, it would probably be able to get $ 200 million in coverage with a $ 1 million deductible, Norstrom says. The cost would likely range from $ 600,000 to $ 1 million a year. The advantage is that it would cover domestic as well as foreign terrorism. To add nuclear, chemical and biological terrorism coverage, it would cost much more.
TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC BEGINS HERE
Largest insured losses
The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks caused the biggest insurance loss in history. World's top insured losses (in billions):
Sept. 11 terrorist attacks (1): $ 40.2
1992 Hurricane Andrew: $ 19.2
1994 Northridge, California earthquake: $ 16.3
1991 Japan, Typhoon Mirelle: $ 7.1
1990 Europe, winter storm Daria: $ 6.1
1999 Europe, winter storm Lothar: $ 6.0
1995 Hurrican Hugo: $ 5.9
1990 Europe, winter storm Vivian: $ 4.2
1999 Japan, Typhoon Bart: $ 4.2

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Bill Perry for USA TODAY; GRAPHIC, B/W, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODAY, Source: Insurance Information Institute (BAR GRAPH); Terrorism's aftermath: Only large, high-profile companies are signing on for the government-backed terrorism insurance that was created after the Sept. 11 attacks, which destroyed part of the Pentagon.

Load-Date: April 2, 2003


End of Document