MAOIST EXTREMISTS REAPPEAR IN INDIA
The New York Times
October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 765 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRAS, India, Oct. 11
Body


Police units are engaged in a wide-ranging hunt for people described by officials of the state of Tamil Nadu as Maoist extremists committed to violent confrontation with government authority.
At least a dozen young men, labeled as members of groups that are called and call themselves Naxalites, have been killed in what police officials have described as shootouts and exchanges of fire. In addition, the police in this state have detained a large number of sympathizers of the extremists, including some lawyers and journalists.
Still, the police say that a hard core of the leftists led by university-educated youths and financed by money the police insist comes from outside the state, have eluded arrest. The authorities believe that these units are entrenched in agricultural villages in the western districts of the state where they are said to have organized landless laborers and poorer peasants.
Maoist extremists committed to violent confrontation with government authority reappear in Indian state of Tamil Nadu
The resurgence of the Naxalites, a name taken from the Naxalbari district of West Bengal where the movement began, is still only a faint echo of the late 1960's when bands of youthful disciples of Mao Zedong took to the countryside in the hope of fomenting revolution.
 
Pitched Battles With the Police
They decapitated landlords and fought pitched battles with the police, mostly in the state of West Bengal. Thousands of suspected Naxalites were arrested and many were imprisoned for long periods.
In Tamil Nadu the Naxalites have reappeared in two western districts, about 150 miles west of here, where landlords and moneylenders are said to have flouted land reform and debt relief laws and to have exploited the peasants and landless laborers.
These conditions have provided excellent breeding grounds for Naxalite terrorism that is being countered, sympathizers charge, by police terrorism.
K.V. Sankaran, a lawyer here who is president of the Madras Bar Association, was arrested without warrant for having intervened on behalf of some Naxalites who he said were being kept in jails under inhuman conditions. He was charged with sedition but was released on bail after the Bar Association passed a resolution condemning the arrest. Another lawyer and an editor of a Tamil newspaper were also arrested for alleged connections with the Naxalites.
Mr. Sankaran said that the police were ''making much'' of a small localized movement limited to some 200 villages in the Dharmapuri and North Arcot districts.
 
Group Won Peking's Support
The Naxalites were once a national problem. When the movement arose in West Bengal in 1967 it immediately won the approval of Peking, which denounced the two other Indian Communist groups, the pro-Moscow Communist Party and the more nonaligned Marxist Communist Party, as revisionists.
The Naxalites functioned outside the parliamentary system, organizing mass uprisings among the landless workers in West Bengal, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh. In 1969 the Naxalites were organized into a political party called the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist), but the party was outlawed and then operated underground.
Over the following years, as it dissipated into several factions, each group operating on its own in remote and backward areas, the group lost its centralized leadership and a mass base.
According to an official report there were not more than 15,000 Naxalites in the country, split into five major and many smaller groups. But because of a rise in unemployment and unrest among the landless workers, the Naxalite concept now appears to be spreading into new areas under the leadership of educated young people.
The Naxalite scare in Tamil Nadu began two months ago when a bomb exploded in a police car carrying three captured Naxalites. The suspects and three policemen were killed instantly. Since then several instances of bomb-throwing and attacks on police stations have been reported as the police began combing the hills for the extremists' hideouts.
 
Aid From 'Foreign Sources'
A police official said that most of the Naxalites had evaded arrest by crossing over to the neighboring states of Kerala and Karnataka.  They also seem to be getting money and weapons from ''foreign sources,'' he said.
The appearance of Naxalites in Tamil Nadu is in no way comparable to the original popular uprising at Naxalbari and later at Srikakulam in Andhra Pradesh. However, in the villages where the Naxalites have been operating they have been able to win the sympathy and support of landless villagers, according to political analysts here.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: map of India


End of Document