March spurs counterprotestGroups clash at rally against Muslim speakers in schools
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 12, 2012 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 1
Length: 567 words
Byline: ROB SHAW, The Tampa Tribune
Body


Groups clash at rally against Muslim speakers in schools
School board candidate ties Islamic group to terrorism; his opponents allege intolerance
BY ROB SHAW
The Tampa Tribune
TAMPA As many Americans observed a quiet remembrance of the deadly terrorist attacks 11 years ago on American soil, the scene Tuesday outside the Hillsborough County School District was anything but solemn.
There was screaming. There was shouting. There were angry words and finger pointing.
"No hate in Hillsborough," one sign read. "Racist jerks go home," said another.
The event started out as a quiet anti-CAIR march by school board candidate Terry Kemple. He and about two dozen supporters walked from a Sept. 11 prayer rally at a downtown park to the steps of the school district headquarters a few blocks away, where a news conference was planned.
They were met there, however, by a similar-sized group unhappy with the message they have been hearing the past nine months about the Council for American Islamic Relations. The CAIR group has been under fire since its executive director, Hassan Shibly, spoke to a Steinbrenner High School class last year.
Shibly and CAIR have been criticized by Kemple and others as having terrorist ties.
Samantha Bowden, 24, of Tampa showed up as a "voice of reason and tolerance" to counter the Kemple protest.
"If Terry Kemple is elected, I truly feel sorry for our students' futures," Bowden said. "The company he keeps is small-minded."
Michael Freincle agreed.
"I feel as a Jew, I need to stand up when I see hatred," the 25-year-old Brandon resident said. "They've lost the moral high ground. What this group has a problem with is another religion."
Kemple and other supporters of the anti-CAIR movement dismissed any notion of hatred.
"This is not anti-Muslim, this is talking about groups with ties to terrorism," said Kemple, who is running for a countywide school board seat. "We want to let the school board know there's more than a few of us who believe that. We want the people in America to wake up."
Kemple and others said there was no better day than Sept. 11 to speak out about the threat of CAIR in the classroom.
"It's a day of awareness," he said.
Had there been more awareness and discussion 11 years ago, Kemple said, the "chatter" that took place before that deadly day might have been picked up on and the calamity prevented.
School board member Stacy White, who has backed Kemple's plan, heard the protests firsthand. He joined Kemple and others who spoke out on the issue about an hour before the school board meeting.
"These folks are true patriots," White said. "No one but school staff has an inherent right to be in our classrooms."
During the school board meeting, the controversial issue came up only during the public comment section near the end, when three speakers addressed it. The board took no action.
In other matters, the board:
Gave final approval to a policy designed to cut down on student transfers for athletic purposes.
Approved next year's $2.8 billion budget, which calls for slightly lower school property taxes for Hillsborough residents.
Appointed Julie Hasson as principal of Symmes Elementary. Principal Patrick LaLone of Davis Elementary and Principal Cecilia Troutt of the LaVoy Center are switching positions.
rshaw@tampatrib.com
(813) 259-7999
Copyright © 2012, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: September 13, 2012


End of Document