MARCOS VS. AN EXPERIMENT IN DEMOCRACY
The New York Times
April 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 320 words
Body


To the Editor:
President Marcos of the Philippines betrays the acts of an enemy of peace and democracy with the arrest and detention of Aquilino Pimentel, the moral leader of the Filipino Democratic Party, on suspicion of aiding subversives (news story April 18).
Mr. Pimentel has long been an advocate of a nonviolent approach toward the political normalization processes in the Philippines.
President Marcos of the Philippines betrays the acts of an enemy of peace and democracy with the arrest and detention of Aquilino Pimentel, the moral leader of the Filipino Democratic Party, on suspicion of aiding subversives (news story April 18).In 1980, with the support of a highly motivated constituency, he defeated a Marcos candidate in the race for the mayoralty of Cagayan de Oro City by 75 percent of the vote. He won again when the Marcosappointed commission on elections attempted to deprive him of his victory.
Indeed, the triumph of the democratic experiment in Cagayan de Oro City serves as a beacon of hope for nationwide peaceful democratic processes.
The spirit of the Cagayan de Oro movement, which gave birth to the Filipino Democratic Party, is not lost on President Marcos. The question is whether, faced with a rising tide of political sophistication and maturation in the reform movements, which now threaten his monopoly of political power, the President is shifting from his measured political liberalization back to state terrorism.
President Marcos knows he cannot win political contests forever. By his high-handed crackdown on the visible leaders of legitimate political movements, is he again provoking his opposition to opt for a violent confrontation, where he has the advantage of U.S. military support? We hope not.
Let Mr. Pimentel and the Filipino Democratic Party speak. Let the people speak.
WILFRED M. CORNELLO, New York, April 19, 1983
The writer is chairman of the Movement for a Free Philippines.


End of Document