MARILYN KLINGHOFFER DIES AT 58; WIFE OF VICTIM OF SHIP HIJACKERS
The New York Times
February 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; OBITUARY
Length: 849 words
Byline: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN
Body


Marilyn Klinghoffer, the widow of Leon Klinghoffer, who was slain by terrorists aboard the hijacked Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro last fall, died of cancer yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital. She was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs. Klinghoffer, who had entered the hospital two weeks ago, died at about 5 A.M., according to Letty H. Simon, a friend who often spoke for the Klinghoffer family during the ordeal that had thrust its members into the public spotlight.
Though Mrs. Klinghoffer had been ill for more than a year, she had never mentioned it in interviews or her public statements.
A Personnel Manager
Until last October, Mrs. Klinghoffer, a small woman with short gray hair, had lived her life in relative obscurity, a personnel manager for a business- and trade-magazine publisher and, for 36 years, the wife of an appliance manufacturer who had overcome humble beginnings on the Lower East Side.
While the nation came to regard her as a voice of defiance against international terrorism, her family and friends knew her as a person devoted to her 69-year-old husband, who had suffered a stroke several years ago that paralyzed his right side and left him in a wheelchair, able to walk only a few steps with a cane.
Though she continued to work at the magazine publishers, Gralla Publications, and was herself ill, friends said, she spared no effort in caring for her husband, even checking such details as the number of steps he might have to climb or the width of doorways his wheelchair might have to pass through.
In part to celebrate their 36th wedding anniversary last fall, the Klinghoffers joined nine friends from the New York area for a cruise of the Mediterranean aboard the Achille Lauro, and were thus caught up in a drama that captured world attention for weeks.
What began as a sunny vacation at sea turned into a nightmare on Oct. 7. After hundreds of passengers debarked in Alexandria, Egypt, for a sightseeing tour, Palestinian terrorists hijacked the ship, with its crew of 350 and the 97 remaining passengers, including the Klinghoffers.
 
Taken Hostage at Gunpoint
The next day, Oct. 8, the Klinghoffers were among 11 American and 6 British hostages taken at gunpoint to an upper deck. There, over the protests and pleas of Mrs. Klinghoffer, the terrorists took her husband away and, she later learned, shot him to death and hurled him into the sea.
The rest of the passengers, though terrorized, were freed unharmed the next day. The terrorists were apprehended after United States jets intercepted an Egyptian plane taking them to freedom. They have been convicted of weapons charges and are being held in Italy for trial on murder and hijacking charges.
International attention focused on Mrs. Klinghoffer as she returned to her home at 70 East 10th Street and told President Reagan in a telephone call that she had seen the hijackers in jail and had spit in their faces. ''Oh, God bless you,'' Mr. Reagan was said to have replied.
As Mr. Reagan and other public figures spoke out against terrorism, Mrs. Klinghoffer and her husband became symbols of the nation's outrage. And while Mrs. Klinghoffer made few public statements, her defiance of terrorism found expression in various forms and forums.
 
A Memorial Foundation
She vowed to go to Italy to testify against the hijackers. With her blessing, her employer, Milton Gralla, set up the Leon Klinghoffer Memorial Foundation, dedicated to fighting terrorism.
In an Oct. 30 appearance before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Klinghoffer delivered a plea for a worldwide commitment to combating terrorism, calling it ''the gravest danger confronting the civilized world.''
Though Mrs. Klinghoffer at first resisted appeals from magazines and film makers for her husband's story, she agreed recently to sell it to an independent production company for a film or television docudrama, said Jay Fischer, a family lawyer. He declined to discuss the terms.
Mrs. Klinghoffer made the agreement, Mrs. Simon said, ''because she felt the story was important enough to be told, and to make sure this world recognizes the need to eradicate terrorism.''
 
'A Courageous Woman'
A White House spokesman, Michael Guest, said President Reagan would send personal condolences to the family. ''Mrs. Klinghoffer,'' he said, ''was a courageous woman who stood for her principles in speaking out eloquently against terrorism.''
''In the face of P.L.O. terrorists, her courage and defiance became a symbol of America's determination to meet international terrorism,'' Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, who had met Mrs. Klinghoffer on her return from Europe, said through a spokesman, Gary Lewi.
Mayor Koch, in a statement, said Mrs. Klinghoffer ''taught the world a lesson in courage in the months following the murder of her husband.''
''She gave a message to the world in denouncing terrorism and became an inspiration for all of us,'' he said.
Mrs. Klinghoffer is survived by two daughters, Ilsa and Lisa, both of Manhattan, and her mother, Rose Windwehr of South Orange, N.J.
Funeral arrangements were incomplete last night.

Graphic

 
photo of Marilyn Klinghoffer (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)


End of Document