Marines: Today will be history; Museum leaps ahead by displaying items from war on terror
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
September 16, 2007 Sunday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-5
Length: 483 words
Byline: AILEEN M. STRENG
Dateline: QUANTICO 
Body


 The National Museum of the Marine Corps doesn't just tell the story of the Corps' history.
 "We care about what happened 230 years ago, but we also care about what happened 230 days ago," said Lin Ezell, director of the Marine Corps Museum.
 Several items from the global war on terrorism were unveiled Thursday at the museum, where they were temporarily on display in its central gallery the same day President Bush addressed the nation on the situation in Iraq.
 The artifacts include a 16-foot RQ-2B pioneer aerial vehicle, used for real-time intelligence of the battlefield; a Dragon Eye mini-unmanned aerial vehicle, used for intelligence in urban or close-quarters combat situations; a captured al-Qaida banner used in insurgent videos; and a warning sign from an attacked Humvee.
 The museum also opened two new exhibits on the war on terrorism. "Faces of War" and "One Team - One Fight" features the photography of Marines on assignment in the battlefield.
 Additionally, the museum displayed a Marine pattern uniform worn in Iraq by a Navy Cross recipient; and a flight suit worn while serving combat tours in Afghanistan and Iraq.
 "If museums would wait 20 years, 50 years or 100 years to try to get their hands on artifacts, they would find that [the artifacts] were dispersed, destroyed or thrown away," Ezell said.
 Instead, a constant effort is made to find items that help tell the story of what Marines are doing today to combat terrorism.
 "There are Marine photographers, Marine combat artists and historians in the field," Ezell said. "We can tell them what to look for, and they can tell us what they see."
 One day, for example, Cpl. Jeremiah Workman put on his Marine utility uniform. The next day it was stuffed with cotton and preserved, Ezell said. Workman received a Navy Cross for heroism while serving as a squad leader with the 3rd Battalion, 5th Marine Regiment in Fallujah, Iraq.
 The items in the temporary exhibition will be preserved, encased and prepared for permanent display. The RQ-2B will be hung for display late this month.
 Col. Mark Werth, a former commander of an unmanned air vehicle squadron, spoke of the history of the program, which began in the mid-1980s. Since that time, the unmanned vehicles have provided Marines with intelligence and surveillance, flying countless flight hours.
 "We've really found them relevant on the battlefield," Werth said.
 Ezell said the museum will continue to look for artifacts. It welcomed its 500,000th visitor on Labor Day, only 10 months after it opened to the public in November.
 "Don't think the museum is done," she said. "We will be constantly changing, improving and adding to our collection. We are here for today's Marines, as well as for yesterday's Marines."
WANT TO PLAN A VISIT?
For more information about the museum, log on to usmcmuseum.org
Aileen M. Streng writes for the Potomac News and Manassas Journal Messenger.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 20, 2007


End of Document