Marion Le Pen SLAMS EU for bringing terrorism and unemployment into France
The Acorn: Drew University
February 15, 2017 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 349 words
Body


The Kremlin on Tuesday denied allegations of interference and sabotage made by members of French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron's campaign team, calling them "absurd", Le Monde reported.
Griveaux accused the state-owned global Russia Today channel, which is building up its French service ahead of the election, and the Sputnik news agency of trying to taint Macron, who was forced last week to deny rumours of having had a gay affair.
Richard Ferrand, Macron's party chief, said on Monday the French politician was a "fake news" target of Russian media and that his campaign was facing thousands of cyber attacks.
"The pundits are relying on history - in 2002, Jean-Marie Le Pen (Marine's father) went through to the second round but was defeated by Jacques Chirac, with the support of his opponents who could not bring themselves to vote for the controversial National Front candidate", he said.
Get Data Sheet, Fortune's technology newsletter.
Last week, the candidate drew ire from French Jewish leaders when she said the country's Jews should stop wearing kippot, as a way of helping in the struggle to defeat radical Islam.
Griveaux accused the state-owned Russia Today channel and the Sputnik news agency, both of which have French-language sites, of trying to taint Macron, who was forced last week to deny rumours of a gay affair. Fillon faces an intense crisis in his election campaign following revelations about jobs as parliamentary assistants in favor of his wife and two eldest sons.
In addition, Ferrand said the Macron campaign was being hit by "hundreds if not thousands" of attacks probing the campaign's computer systems from locations inside Russian Federation.
USA intelligence agencies said in a report last month that Russian President Vladimir Putin had directed a cyber campaign to help Republican Donald Trump's electoral chances by discrediting Democrat Hillary Clinton in the 2016 presidential campaign.
Ground zero in the global populism battle has moved to Europe and France in particular is in focus as Marine Le Pen fight to take control of the Presidential palace.

Load-Date: February 15, 2017


End of Document