Market can find private solution to cat capacity shortage
Business Insurance
May 15, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8
Length: 325 words
Body


Cleanup operations for the damage caused by last year's devastating hurricanes may be well underway, but the insurance market for many catastrophe-exposed areas is still a mess.
As we report on page 1, a lack of affordable reinsurance capacity is causing some insurers to cut back on windstorm coverage in the southeastern United States. In addition to a dearth of reinsurance capacity, the withdrawals are being driven, in part, by changes to catastrophe models that are being updated in light of the 2005 losses.
And it's not just windstorm insurance capacity that is shrinking. The higher loss estimates that are being incorporated in the models are also driving capacity away from earthquake risks.
Given the importance of insurance coverage for catastrophe risks, it might be tempting to see some form of federally-backed catastrophe fund as the answer to the capacity problem. Indeed, there have already been some proposals for the creation of a catastrophe fund for personal lines risks.
Although we can see the benefit of federally-backed coverage for risks that defy most underwriting methods, such as terrorism risks, we would urge extreme caution against extending the approach to provide a broad-based backstop for natural catastrophes.
While policyholders will no doubt face some short-term discomfort when trying to find cat coverage in a tight market, the insurance market should, as it has done in the past, fairly quickly find its own solution to the capacity problem. In fact, innovative cat reinsurance vehicles are already being created to provide more capacity. As we report on page 3, so-called ``sidecar companies'' are being established by existing reinsurers, with the backing of hedge funds, to take advantage of reinsurance rate increases.
Commercial insurance markets may on occasion need help to solve economic problems, as was and still is the case with terrorism insurance. Natural catastrophe insurance presents no such case.

Load-Date: May 19, 2006


End of Document