Market contemplates a world without TRIA; Responses vary to possibility that federal backdrop won't be extended
Business Insurance
March 21, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 11
Length: 1705 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


If there's one thing risk managers and insurers alike don't like, it's uncertainty.
Yet that's exactly the situation surrounding the future of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act. TRIA, which provides a federally guaranteed backstop to help insurers cover losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire on Dec. 31.
Legislation that would extend TRIA for two years has been introduced in both houses of Congress. But no extension legislation is expected to come to a final vote until the Treasury Department issues a report on the state of the terrorism insurance market. Treasury does not have to issue the report-which will be based on the responses of policyholders and underwriters-until June 30.
That leaves underwriters uncertain of whether they can count on the backstop for policies whose coverage extends into 2006 and beyond. That, in turn, leaves policyholders facing the possibility of having to pay more for less terrorism coverage upon their next renewals.
But while there is concern about what the future may hold, it has not translated into panic.
And perhaps it won't. Several risk managers asked to comment on the current state of the terrorism insurance market declined to because of ongoing negotiations in the first round of renewals since 2002 when the TRIA backup isn't a given. But D. Terry Fleming, director of the division of risk management for Montgomery County, Md., said that he's already talked to his property insurer, which he declined to identify, about how terrorism would be covered when he renewed the coverage midyear.
''They told us they would offer the coverage whether or not TRIA was extended,'' said Mr. Fleming. They were offering full limits for the same price as they were last year. Because of our loss experience, they gave us a very competitive rate. We're very happy with what happened-definitely.''
Outlook unclear
For others, though, the outlook remains unclear. ''Basically, our current policy includes a TRIA endorsement, which adds coverage. For our renewal, we expect that the carrier will attach a conditional TRIA endorsement, extending coverage until at least Dec. 31,'' said a Midwestern risk manager whose employer declined to be identified.
''If the government does not renew the coverage, the endorsement will cease to be effective. However, if the government does renew the coverage, any changes to the coverage will be added to the policy by modifying the endorsement. I, personally, believe that the government will renew TRIA,'' said the risk manager.
''The renewals that we have just bound, which include major real estate holdings in key central business districts, were renewed with full terrorism (coverage) and the understanding by the underwriters that coverage would continue for the full 12 months, regardless of what happened on Dec. 31,'' said Alexandra Glickman, area vice chairman and managing director of the real estate and hospitality services division of Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. in Glendale, Calif.
''I think the general consensus is that there will be some form of TRIA backstop-it may not be universal,'' said Ms. Glickman.
Marjorie Young, a vp with E.G. Bowman Co. in New York agreed that so far there hasn't been overwhelming wariness. ''Some of the insurance companies are concerned about where they write property insurance and workers compensation. I think everybody has a great deal of faith in the government-no one's expressed any concern, not yet,'' she said.
But even if the consensus proves correct and TRIA wins a two-year extension, insurers are preparing for a world without TRIA, say insurers and brokers alike. And there is no consensus as to how insurers will respond.
''There's obviously a concern'' about TRIA's future, particularly among policyholders in metropolitan areas as well as insurers,'' said Bob Blumber, managing director-national property practice for Marsh Inc. in New York.
''More and more underwriters are taking positions,'' said Mr. Blumber. Some say they won't provide coverage if TRIA isn't extended, and ''some are still ironing out their position,'' he noted.
''It's all over the lot'' regarding what insurers will do come 2006 in the absence of TRIA, said Mr. Blumber.
''The market response at this point is anything but uniform,'' agreed Aaron Davis, a vp with Aon Corp.'s Aon Risk Services in New York. ''Certain carriers have committed to offering terrorism capacity beyond the expiration of TRIA. Other carriers are offering terrorism on a sublimited basis, and a majority of the carriers are still relying on conditional exclusions that will allow them to either exclude the risk altogether or sublimit it, or reprice the terrorism premium post-Dec. 31.''
American International Group is ''in a little different position than some other companies,'' noted Richard Thomas, senior vp and chief underwriting officer for AIG's domestic brokerage group in New York. ''Under TRIA, we have a very large retention in 2005. Our retention this year is just under $3.3 billion for terrorism. In other words, we would have to sustain slightly less than $3.3 billion from a terrorism event before we could recover from TRIA. With a retention that size, we're underwriting to that. Our underwriting today contemplates managing our aggregate exposures for workers compensation and property insurance in the various target areas where we have insureds. Obviously, if TRIA is not extended, we'll continue the practice of monitoring our aggregate exposure by target locations, and there will be a cap on that,'' he said.
''Particularly in the real estate industry, they need to know that the coverage is going to be there, to be able to plan new construction projects going forward,'' said Mr. Thomas. ''Obviously, their business planning extends well beyond the end of 2005.''
''Our policyholders certainly value financial integrity, and we intend to make sure that we maintain very strong financial integrity,'' said Randy Schreitmueller, a vp at Johnston, R.I.-based Factory Mutual Insurance Co., which does business as FM Global. ''What we've done to prepare-we are going forward with a set of provisional renewal conditions. Basically, what it boils down to is terrorism sublimits in the event that TRIA expires.'' The sublimits depend on geographic location, and they vary from $100 million to $250 million.'' The lower limits apply to locations in major city centers.
Insurer concerns
''From what I'm hearing, people have generally been receptive'' to insurer concerns, said Mr. Schreitmueller. ''Let's face it; before TRIA, most carriers weren't extending coverage at all.''
''I think that concern is starting to build, but it's still not as much a concern as you would expect, whether it's producers or customers,'' said Tim Rose, president of Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.'s Liberty Mutual Property division in Weston, Mass. ''It depends on a few things, such as the level of sophistication of the buyer and what their corporation's view is of their terrorism risk.''
''The companies have a lot at stake with extending the backstop. As the year progresses, I believe the pressure will continue to build and as the issue plays out in Congress. There are risks that will be considered unacceptable to carriers because of the exposures that put the insurance company's financial viability at risk,'' he said.
As an example of risks that could cause workers compensation insurers concern, Mr. Rose cited large employee concentrations in single buildings in jurisdictions that have high benefit structures. An exposure on the property side is heavy value concentrations in urban areas or on single risks, or single buildings type of risks and any combination of the two, could be a very substantial exposure, he said.
''We are already seeing a capacity crunch in the market, in particular in Tier 1 cities like New York, Washington and Chicago,'' in both the stand-alone market and the all-risk market, said Aon's Mr. Davis.
''Carriers are taking a very careful look at their aggregate exposures in their Tier 1 cities, and they're tending to allocate capacity to clients that are already on their books,'' said Mr. Davis.
''How do you think about a terrorism maximum loss event?'' asked Gary Kaplan, executive vp and chief underwriting officer at Zurich North America Commercial in Schaumburg Ill. ''It has traditionally has been thought of as an uninsurable exposure.''
''The most important thing that really hasn't happened is the reinsurance market really hasn't rushed in to fill the void,'' said Mr. Kaplan.
''Private reinsurance won't be there to replace the federal backstop when TRIA expires,'' added Jason Schupp, Zurich's assistant general counsel, also in Schaumburg.
Mr. Kaplan said he expects ''there would be a movement to exclude terrorism to the extent of the capacity removed by the expiration of the federal backstop.''
''We don't see our individual capacity contracting. We currently have in place the discipline to operate in year three of the program or post-TRIA,'' said Mr. Schupp. ''There's just so much capacity to go around. Right now, some of that capacity is federal capacity provided by TRIA. If that goes away, yes, there will be exclusions as the industry adjusts to a lower amount of capacity.''
''With TRIA's expiration, it will come down to how the insurance industry allocates the limited capacity available to this risk,'' said Mr. Schupp. ''We would expect to see a decrease in availability.''
''We're working with insurance companies to try to come up with alternatives'' if TRIA expires, so that underwriters can reserve some capacity for terrorism coverage, at a price, said Marsh's Mr. Blumber.
In some cases, ''it will be a matter of whether some of these clients will realize they need terrorism insurance,'' he said. They have to plan for the worst-case scenario, said Mr. Blumber.
Currently, Marsh is seeing terrorism insurance take-up rates in the 50% range, Mr. Blumber said. Part of the reason is pricing, but clients are also realizing that the risk is there and ''it's not something that's going away,'' he said. ''It will be a bigger issue going into 2006.''
''A post-TRIA environment does not appear to be very pleasant for either insurers or policyholders,'' said Mr. Schupp.

Load-Date: March 23, 2005


End of Document