Marvel charm lost in plot
The Towerlight: Towson University
May 5, 2013 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS-LIFE; Pg. 1
Length: 360 words
Body


I'll start out by saying this: I know I overanalyze superhero movies.
OK, now that that's out of the way, I immediately began analyzing "Iron Man 3" while walking out of the theater. It was entertaining, sure, but holy plot hole Batman (oh wait wrong movie).
I have to say I thoroughly enjoyed the first half of the movie. I was excited to see some character development from Tony Stark and who doesn't love the blonde kid with the potato gun? However, the first half did feel a bit more like a Nolan Batman film than a light-hearted Marvel movie, dealing with heavy concepts like suicide, PTSD and terrorism (OK, now I don't feel as bad about the Batman reference).
After the first half, I was preparing for the many plots they had going on to intersect and come to some huge epiphany. I was also expecting to see Tony dealing with what happened in New York in the Avengers, since it was a hot topic in the first half, and, of course, some badass Pepper.
But alas, I got none of those things.
Instead, they made a joke about terrorism.
In fact, the whole second half of the movie was kind of a joke and the action scenes were fun to watch, but cheesy.
It was clear to me that Marvel bit off more than they could chew with this one, trying to live up to the success that was "The Avengers."
Instead, they made a hot mess. The movie should have been Tony-centric and focus on character development like the first half hinted, especially in the scene where Tony opens up to Pepper, which I thought was really showing his character's progress. Instead, they tried to incorporate the extremis arc and the Mandarin, which to me could have fit into separate movies.
The many plots also left a lot of questions unresolved and a few gaping plot holes. And for me, the villain felt flat and one-dimensional.
But all in all, the movie was enjoyable and a lot better than "Iron Man 2." I just hope that every Phase Two Marvel movie doesn't try to be "The Avengers," but instead tries standing out individually on a smaller scale. After all, the heroes are supposed to live in the shadow of the Avengers until it is time to assemble, so Marvel shouldn't have a problem doing the same.

Load-Date: September 18, 2013


End of Document