Maryland Man Is Accused Of Plotting to Aid Terrorism 
The New York Times
August 5, 2005 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 601 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON; Gary Gately contributed reporting from Baltimore for this article.
Body


A Maryland man was arrested yesterday and accused of conspiring to aid terrorism by training to become a jihadist fighter in camps in Pakistan, federal authorities said. 
  The man, Mahmud Faruq Brent, was accused of traveling to Pakistan in the months after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to receive training in camps operated by Lashkar-e-Taiba, a group loosely affiliated with Al Qaeda whose primary goal is to fight against Indian forces in the disputed province of Kashmir.
The Pakistani group was declared a foreign terrorist organization by the United States in December 2001.
  Mr. Brent, who the authorities said also went by the name of Mahmud al Mutazzim, was an associate of Tarik Shah, a New York jazz musician who was arrested on May 28 on terrorism charges in a federal sting operation. 
  According to a criminal complaint against Mr. Brent that was unsealed yesterday, Mr. Brent, in telephone calls and in at least one meeting, described his stay in the camps to Mr. Shah. 
  Mr. Brent told Mr. Shah that he had been in the mountains in Pakistan training with ''the mujahadeen, the fighters,'' the complaint says.
  Although Mr. Brent has a home in Baltimore, he was arrested in Newark. His home was searched early yesterday afternoon by agents from the Baltimore Joint Terrorism Task Force. He made his first court appearance late yesterday before a magistrate judge in Federal District Court in Manhattan. 
  The complaint says that Mr. Shah, who was also a martial arts expert, trained Mr. Brent in martial arts when the two men lived in Beacon, N.Y., in 2001 before the Sept. 11 attacks. In recent months, the two men had discussed plans to make a martial arts training video for Muslims in the United States interested in becoming militants, the complaint says.
  There are no allegations that Mr. Brent or Mr. Shah were actively planning any violent terrorist action.
  The arrest of Mr. Brent is the latest episode in the investigation of Mr. Shah, 42, and an associate, Rafiq Sabir, 50, a medical doctor from Boca Raton, Fla., who was arrested on the same day as Mr. Shah. 
  He and Dr. Sabir were accused of swearing an oath of allegiance to Al Qaeda. Mr. Shah was charged with offering to provide martial arts training to jihad fighters, while Dr. Sabir was accused of offering medical assistance. 
  Both men have pleaded not guilty to the charges, which resulted from an undercover operation in which an F.B.I. agent posed as a recruiter for Al Qaeda.
  Federal agents linked Mr. Brent to Mr. Shah through a telephone number for Mr. Brent in an address book belonging to Mr. Shah that the New York police found during a search after Mr. Shah's arrest in December 2003 on larceny charges.
  The complaint against Mr. Brent shows that Mr. Shah, although he has vehemently denied the charges against him, cooperated briefly with the authorities. On the day he was arrested, Mr. Shah called Mr. Brent on instructions from F.B.I. agents and arranged to meet him that day at a hotel near Columbia, Md., the complaint says. Federal agents made a video recording of the meeting. 
  During their meeting, the complaint says, Mr. Brent described to Mr. Shah how difficult it had been to reach the camps and said that all his connections to Pakistan were ''kinda gone.'' 
  But he said that his visit to the camps had been ''one of the better decisions of my life'' and that he hoped that ''Allah would bless him'' for his efforts. Passport records show that Mr. Brent was in Pakistan from February to June 2002.
  The complaint says that Mr. Shah has no cooperation agreement with the government at this time. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 5, 2005


End of Document