Masked pope, faith leaders pray for peace and pandemic's end Masked popefaith leaders pray for
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 21, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 011
Length: 280 words
Byline: Nicole Winfield Associated Press
Body


aw_201021_Vatican Peace Appeal lt
^$^ROME - A masked Pope Francis welcomed religious leaders to a socially-distanced interfaith peace prayer Tuesday, appealing for a unified international effort to work for peace and an end to the coronavirus pandemic.
Christian, Muslim, Jewish, Buddhist, Sikh and Hindu leaders stood for a minute of silence to pray for all the victims of COVID-19 and a universally available vaccine, as the sun set on the piazza overlooking the Roman Forum.
"The pandemic is reminding us that we are blood brothers and sisters," they said in a joint appeal issued at the end of the service.
For weeks, Francis has shunned facemasks in his public and private audiences despite a surge in COVID-19 cases across Italy and even inside Vatican City. But he donned one throughout the prayer service Tuesday, removing it only to speak. In a sense he was following Italian law, since facemasks must now be worn indoors and out.
His guests followed suit, keeping their distance from and using individual pens to sign the appeal. The microphone was disinfected after each speaker finished delivering remarks about the need to work for an end to wars, hunger, terrorism and the pandemic.
Francis focused his remarks on the temptation to "save yourself," and think of your own interests "as if nothing else mattered."
"It is a very human instinct, but wrong," he said.
"No people, no social group, can single-handedly achieve peace, prosperity, security and happiness. None," he said. "The lesson learned from the recent pandemic, if we wish to be honest, is the awareness that we are a global community, all in the same boat, where one person's problems are the problems of all."

Load-Date: October 21, 2020


End of Document