Mass. man charged in terror probe; 27-year-old tried to join jihad for years, feds say
USA TODAY
October 22, 2009 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 512 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Body


Tarek Mehanna, charged Wednesday with conspiracy to provide support to terrorists, embarked on a persistent yet hapless quest over seven years to join a global jihad against the U.S., according to court documents.
The federal documents outline a strange odyssey that took the 27-year-old Sudbury, Mass., resident and an associate across the globe, where they repeatedly failed to gain entry to terrorist training camps.
In 2004, the documents allege, Mehanna and associate Ahmed Abousamra arrived at a "mud hut" in Yemen in another unsuccessful attempt to enlist in the terrorist movement. An unidentified man who met them at the door quickly turned them away.
In addition to the world travel, documents allege, Mehanna had talked with associates about at least two possible plots in the U.S.: the assassination of two U.S. government officials and an attack on a shopping mall.
None of the unnamed officials was ever in any danger, federal prosecutor Michael Loucks said Wednesday. Mehanna and his associates abandoned the shopping mall idea when they were unable to obtain automatic weapons, the documents say.
The charges against Mehanna mark the U.S. government's latest case in a recent string of terrorism investigations into varying threats to the U.S.
The unrelated cases -- including charges against an Aurora, Colo., man, Najibullah Zazi, for conspiring to use peroxide-based bombs to attack an unspecified target -- are occupying dozens of federal investigators, from New England to the Mountain West. The investigations, terrorism analysts say, indicate authorities have grown increasingly reluctant since 9/11 to ignore even the slightest threat.
"It's just not that hard anymore to do something terrible," says Matthew Levitt, a former FBI analyst.
In Mehanna's case, court documents allege a long, awkward and ultimately unsuccessful journey to join a war against his own country.
Mehanna's arrest Wednesday on terrorism charges was not his first encounter with federal investigators. Last November, the graduate of the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy was arrested for lying to the FBI about the whereabouts of associate Daniel Maldonado, the documents say. The perjury charge against Mehanna is pending. Maldonado, of Houston, is now serving a 10-year prison sentence for training with al-Qaeda. Abousamra has fled to Syria.
Since Mehanna surfaced in that case, investigators used confidential informants to get details of his plans. The documents say the idea to attack the mall was inspired by the 2002 sniper attacks in Washington, D.C.
In a Massachusetts federal court Wednesday, Mehanna was ordered held until an Oct. 30 hearing. His attorney, J.W. Carney, could not be reached for comment. Asked whether he believed the charges against his son, Ahmed Mehanna told the Associated Press: "No, definitely not."
Marc Sageman, a former CIA officer and al-Qaeda analyst, says Mehanna's alleged activities track a "common trajectory" of some aspiring Western-based terrorists. "Hundreds of people talk about doing things, but very few go through with it," Sageman says. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Sudbury Police Department

Load-Date: October 22, 2009


End of Document