Massacre probed as terrorism, FBI says [JUMP]Farook had contact with an al-Qaida affiliate, official says; Farook had contact with an al-Qaida affiliate, official says
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 5, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 1
Length: 888 words
Byline: Richard A. Serrano,  Brian Bennett AND Jack Dolan Los Angeles Times
Body


SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. - San Bernardino shooter Syed Rizwan Farook had contact with people from at least two terrorist organizations overseas, including the al-Qaida-affiliated Nusra Front in Syria, a federal law enforcement official said Friday. 
 His wife and fellow shooter, Tashfeen Malik, also pledged allegiance to an Islamic State leader in a Facebook posting, two federal law enforcement officials said. 
 The revelations came as the FBI formally announced it was investigating the shooting rampage as an act of terrorism. 
 The investigation so far has developed indications of radicalization by the killers and of potential inspiration by foreign terrorist organizations, FBI Director James Comey said. He added that authorities have no indication that
these killers are part of an organized larger group. 
 Farook and Malik died in a police shootout Wednesday, several hours after bursting into a holiday potluck for the San Bernardino County Health Department and killing 14 people. 
 As the investigation expands, the law enforcement source said, agents are trying to learn more about the couple's contacts in the U.S. and overseas, especially those in Pakistan, where Farook visited and Malik was born. 
 One key question, said the official, is if they had any weapons or terror training in Pakistan. 
 The source described some kind of contact between Farook and people from the Nusra Front and the radical al-Shabab group in Somalia. It's unclear what type of contact or with whom. 
 Authorities in Pakistan also said Friday that they were investigating whether Malik had ties to Islamic militant organizations. 
 Officials cautioned that Malik's Facebook posting did not mean that the militant group directed Malik and her husband to carry out the Wednesday attack, and that investigators think it instead suggests that the couple had become self-radicalized. 
 One of the officials said the Facebook post was made under a different name and had since been removed. 
 A Facebook spokesman confirmed that the company took down the profile page that included the post cited by law enforcement officials. He said the post was discovered a day after the shooting when Facebook employees conducted a search of the site for the shooters' names. 
 The company's policy, he said, was to remove posts that support or glorify terrorism. The post had gone up Wednesday about 11 a.m., about the same time the shooting began, he said. He said Facebook provided the contents of the post to law enforcement. 
 Witnesses and police have said Farook, a county public health worker, had been at the holiday party but left, possibly after a disagreement with a co-worker, and returned with Malik to attack the gathering. 
 That could be construed as workplace violence, the law enforcement source said, noting that evidence and witness recollections suggest that they shot Farook's supervisors first. 
 Or, the source said, after they got away and were missing for several hours, they might have hoped to launch a previous plan for an even larger strike. 
 An acquaintance who prayed with Farook at a San Bernardino mosque said that the shooter said he liked his wife because she wore a niqab, a veil that covered almost all of her face. 
 Ali, a student at California State University, San Bernardino, said he occasionally talked to Farook at Dar al Uloom al Islamiyah of America mosque. 
 He said Farook met his wife online, a practice Ali said is common among his friends. 
 The couple were married in Islam's holy city of Mecca in Saudi Arabia last year, according to Farook's co-workers at the Health Department and others who knew them. The Saudi Embassy in Washington confirmed that Farook spent nine days in the kingdom in the summer of 2014. 
 Authorities said that when he returned to the U.S. in July 2014, he brought Malik with him on a fiancee visa. 
 The couple's infant daughter was born in May, according to records. Malik was 29, according to records. San Bernardino Police Chief Jarrod Burguan had erroneously given her age as 27. 
 Farook, a U.S. citizen of Pakistani descent, was 28. 
 An attorney representing Farook's and Malik's family said Malik never spoke about Islamic State or terrorism. 
 As far as I know, there was no discussion of any of that, Mohammad Abuershaid said. 
 The couple hadn't been married that long, he said. It wasn't like the family had much time to get to know her. 
 Tashfeen was an individual who kept to herself most of the time, Abuershaid said. 
 He added that she was a soft-spoken housewife who stayed at home with the baby. 
 David Bowdich, the assistant director in charge of the Los Angeles FBI office, said the assailants attempted to destroy their digital fingerprints. Two crushed cellphones were found in a trash can. 
 Comey said the FBI was trying to determine if the assailants were inspired by foreign terrorist organizations.We are spending a tremendous amount of time, as you might imagine, over the last 48 hours trying to understand the motives of these killers and trying to understand every detail of their lives, Comey said. We know that this is very unsettling for the people of the United States. What we hope you will do is not let fear become disabling, but to instead channel it into an awareness of your surroundings. 
 Information from The Washington Post was used in this report.

Load-Date: December 5, 2015


End of Document