MASTER PEACE Bam: Curb drones, no more 'global' terror war
Daily News (New York)
May 24, 2013 Friday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 8
Length: 527 words
Byline: BY JAMES WARREN NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF
Body


WASHINGTON - President Obama on Thursday announced new curbs on targeted killings and suggested the nation should begin moving away from the open-ended global war on terror that began in response to the Sept. 11 attacks.
Obama's declarations came in a long-anticipated speech, dramatically and briefly interrupted by a give-and-take with a protester, in which he defended his anti-terrorism efforts.
He offered a vision of a narrower worldwide conflict with fewer drone strikes, making clear the nation will not forever be on a war footing against terrorists.
"Our systematic effort to dismantle terrorist organizations must continue," he said. "But this war, like all wars, must end. That's what history advises. That's what our democracy demands."
Indeed, the speech underscored his rejection of the whole notion of a "self-defeating," seemingly endless "global war on terrorism," as opposed to a more focused effort aimed at specific extremists who pose a true threat to the U.S.
But "doing nothing is not an option," Obama said. To do nothing, he said, "would invite far more civilian casualties where terrorists seek a foothold."
"We will never erase the evil that lies in the hearts of some human beings, nor stamp out every danger to our open society. But what we can do - what we must do - is dismantle networks that pose a direct danger to us, and make it less likely for new groups to gain a foothold, all the while maintaining the freedoms and ideals that we defend."
He said America must take threats of terrorism "seriously, and do all that we can to confront them."
At the same time, he argued that "America's legitimate claim of self-defense cannot be the end of the discussion. To say a military tactic is legal, or even effective, is not to say it is wise or moral in every instance."
Obama disclosed new, stricter rules on the use of unmanned aircraft to attack areas that are not clearly war zones, like Yemen and Pakistan.He also indicated that the military will essentially now handle oversight of the drone program, rather than the Central Intelligence Agency. Drone strikes have generally been declining, and new CIA Director John Brennan prefers to focus his agency on espionage and the collection of intelligence, not the quasi-military demands placed on it after 9/11.
When Obama began to discuss his desire to close the Guantanamo Bay prison where terror suspects are held, a protester rose to criticize him for not doing it earlier. He briefly engaged her and later said he had "cut her a little slack" due to the passions such issues can provoke.
She later interrupted him again, and, he joked to the audience, "I'm going off script here, as you might expect."
"The voice of that woman is worth paying attention to," he said as she was being led out of the National Defense University.
"Obviously, I do not agree with much of what she said, but these are tough issues and the suggestions that we can gloss over them is wrong. When that judge sentenced Mr. Reid, the shoe bomber, he went on to point to the American flag that flew in that courtroom. He said that flag will fly there long after this is all forgotten. That flag stands for freedom."

Graphic

 
THE NEWS SAYS: The President may not wish to wage war, but the hostiles are still coming our way. The President said the military will take over the drone program from the CIA, and there will be fewer strikes. Reuters President Obama, in White House speech Thursday, says war on terror, "like all wars, must end." Getty

Load-Date: May 24, 2013


End of Document