Maybe 'cowboy mind set' is what we need; Unlike his predecessor, President Bush is not afraid to take decisive action against terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 9, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Opinion; Pg. a4
Length: 639 words
Byline: DAVID HAMMER
Body


I read with interest my friend and former colleague/adversary Bill Fuerste's article in the Telegraph Herald (Dec. 19).
His article commenced with this language: "One wonders if President Bush had studied a little harder and worked more at Yale to remove his bring-em-on Texas cowboy mind set, and to become a mission-not-accomplished learned man, would we still be involved in this $$ @87-billion-daily-body-bag-counts-no-end-in-sight mess of Iraq?"
As I grow older, I grow less sure of many things, but I am certain that invective and ridicule leads to no constructive suggestion, although it does do a good job of warning the reader that what follows is neither dispassionate nor fair.
The price we are paying is high, but the price has always been high to preserve what we are and what we hope to be.
The similarities of the ridicule of Mr. Bush are as mean as they were with respect to President Lincoln when he was vilified during the Civil War by those who also expected a quick fix and an easy solution. There are none. And Robin Hood was a myth.
Nor need we naively hypothesize some national savior who will sweep all before him or her.
The tragedy of 9/11 was demonstrably the result of the lack of serious responses to attacks on us overseas during the Clinton years. Why would the terrorists not expect that they could get away with what they did on 9/11?
Bill has characterized the decisive actions of President Bush as stemming from "a Texas cowboy mind set." (Wasn't it the Texas cowboy mind set that defended the Alamo and by that sacrifice created Texas independence?) If it is a "Texas cowboy mind set," then I suspect that that is precisely what is needed to successfully combat the terrorists.
Decisiveness, by whatever label, is needed and we are fortunate to now have a president who possesses it. He early recognized that we would not wait until we are attacked to strike at those who harbored our enemies. The Doctrine of Preemption will certainly turn out to be as significant as the Monroe Doctrine. The recognition is that we cannot wait until an attack on us is consummated before we move against those promoting the attack. This, I submit, is an effective response to terrorism. I submit that the decision by Libya shows the success of our actions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Now, terrorism is not new. It has always been around, but historically, until events in Palestine and Northern Ireland, it has been directed against the leaders. The thinking of the terrorists was that if you decapitate the ruler, you will end the state.
But if you wish to personalize the problem, you have picked the wrong president. And the answer will not come from the intellectual elite who ran our country during the Clinton years and who declined to effectively respond to terrorism.
Remember, we had a Rhodes Scholar president who couldn't even define "is." So, I submit that the ivory tower folks fell with the Twin Towers.
I can remember my own war, which was the Korean Conflict, and I remember watching from the military base the television debate of that time, between Adlai Stevenson and another man of action, whom I believe also came from the area around Texas, Dwight Eisenhower.
In the debate, Stevenson (whom I since talked with and was a very intelligent man) analyzed with great skill the cause of the Korean War and its consequences, but what he did not offer was any solution. Eisenhower said he would go to Korea, and he did.
What I thought was interesting about Bill's article was that he, as an acknowledged Democrat, didn't find his savior among the shrillness of the Democratic presidential hopefuls. Is that not, one wonders, the significance of the article?
The author is a partner in the Dubuque law firm of Hammer, Simon & Jensen. A writer and Sherlock Holmes aficionado, he is a member of the Baker Street Irregulars.

Load-Date: January 9, 2004


End of Document