MCC forum explains whys of attacks Instructors try toeducate on reasons behind terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
September 25, 2001, Tuesday M1,Fox


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 397 words
Byline: Anna Johnson Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


Over the past two weeks, McHenry County College student Neal Waltmire has been disturbed by some of the comments other students have made about Sept. 11th's terrorist attacks.  
Waltmire, 19, said he felt some of the remarks he heard, especially about what military action the United States should take, were ignorant, and he wanted to offer another opinion.  
But, the Ringwood resident felt he didn't know enough about how and why the attacks occurred to say anything.  
Like many other students and MCC staff, Waltmire attended the college's first forum on the terrorist attacks on Monday to learn more.  
"I wanted to understand the situation," Waltmire said. "And I'd like to be knowledgeable on policies so I can talk to people about them and have a conversation backed with facts."  
Titled, "Situations and Events Leading to Recent U.S. Attacks," the college organized the forum so students and staff could receive an overview of terrorism, Middle East history and Islam.  
"The goal here was to get a general overview of the situation in order to see it from different angles," said Angel Dorantes, director of MCC's Multicultural Programs and Services.  
As the forum's focus, four MCC instructors discussed their area of expertise, expressed their viewpoints and fielded questions from audience members.  
One of these was Todd Culp, a history and political science instructor who began teaching at MCC this fall.  
He spoke to an audience of about 75 during Monday's lunchtime forum about why terrorism happens, how someone becomes a terrorist, and more specifically, what people in the Middle East think of the United States.  
"You would be amazed by how impressed they are by American culture and American ingenuity, though they may not like our government and our policies," he said.  
MCC philosophy instructor Jim Gould also talked briefly on Monday about why people do not like Americans and how the United States can help dissolve terrorism.  
"We have to step back and think of the root causes of terrorism," Gould said. "Unless we address the root questions, we will live in fear."  
In addition to the afternoon forum on Monday, MCC also held a similar forum on Monday night.  
Dorantes said MCC plans to hold additional, more specific, educational forums throughout the year.  
"We really need to do more of these so we can ask more questions and become more informed," he said.

Graphic

 
mcceducation_1ne0924claDT MCC geography teacher Ted Erski, far right, began Monday afternoon's forum at MCC, "Situations and Events Leading to Recent U.S. Attacks," with a presentation on Israel's history. Dave Tonge/Daily Herald

Load-Date: September 26, 2001


End of Document