McCain talks terrorism, immigration in Mesa visit
East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Arizona)
August 6, 2016 Saturday


Copyright 2016 East Valley Tribune
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 488 words
Byline: Shelley Ridenour, East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Ariz.)
Body


Aug. 06--The world is in the midst of "the most difficult times," Arizona's senior U.S. Sen. John McCain told a crowd of about 50 at a downtown Mesa event July 19.
To a crowded house at Mango's restaurant, the Republican said all of the ISIS activity means "we are living in a more dangerous world than ever before."
That's not just his opinion, McCain said, but is shared by military and intelligence officials at the federal level. He and those other folks all believe that there will be more attacks such as the tragedy in Nice, France, and other recent bombings.
McCain said his base of knowledge of military issues and terror activities is part of the reason he can continue to serve in the Senate. He is seeking re-election this fall.
McCain was in the Navy for 22 years and was a prisoner of war during the Vietnam War for five and a half years. He is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and a member of the Senate's committees on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, as well as Indian Affairs.
McCain said he's proud to have been in the military and told the members of the Hispanic Coalition, who arranged the gathering, that "Arizona provides more to our military than any other state." He cited Boeing and its Apache helicopters, Luke Air Force Base, Davis-Monthan Air Force Base and the Marine contingency at Yuma.
McCain emphasized to the audience that the southern border with Mexico isn't as secure as it should be. But, he said, 40 percent of all illegal immigrants didn't sneak across a border, but rather came to the U.S. on a visa that has since expired.
McCain said he's always "favored a path to citizenship" for such people living in the U.S. illegally.
"It won't be easy," he said. He wants those people to undergo background checks, pay back taxes, learn English and "get in line to get a green card." That process will take years, McCain said, perhaps as long as a decade.
McCain said his decades of representing Arizona people in the Senate make him "believe the Hispanic community has been and will be an important part of our state."
McCain didn't specifically answer a question about how he could help the state ensure that Arizonans can keep their guns if federal gun laws change.
"Let me point out that none of us want guns in the wrong hands," he said. The key is keeping "weapons out of the hands of the people who shouldn't have them."
Responding to another question, McCain said decisions about issuing driver's licenses to illegal immigrants should be made by state officials, not the federal government.
McCain faces challenges in the Aug. 30 primary election from Republicans Alex Meluskey, Clair Van Steenwyk, Kelli Ward and write-in candidate Sean Webster.
-- Contact Shelley Ridenour at 480-898-6533 or sridenour@ahwatukee.com
___ (c)2016 East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Ariz.) Visit East Valley Tribune (Mesa, Ariz.) at www.eastvalleytribune.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: August 8, 2016


End of Document