McCain uses Susan Rice to relaunch war on women; Criticism of diplomat comes with steep cost
USA TODAY
November 20, 2012 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 521 words
Byline: DeWayne Wickham
Body


John McCain and Lindsey Graham are on a fool's errand.
The hawkish GOP senators have launched a pre-emptive strike against Susan Rice, the U.N. ambassador, who is  a  contender to replace Secretary of State Hillary Clinton once Clinton quits her job as the nation's top diplomat.
With President Obama winding down the Afghanistan war over their protests, McCain, R-Ariz., and Graham, R-S.C., have now opened a domestic front against the president's foreign policy by going after Rice. They couch their opposition to her in an overblown objection to Rice's inaccurate characterization of the Sept. 11 attack on the U.S. diplomatic mission in Benghazi, Libya, as a spontaneous action and not the terrorism intelligence reports confirmed.
Non-sensical bombast
"I am dead-set on making sure that we don't promote anybody who was an essential player in the Benghazi debacle," Graham said. McCain was more bombastic during a Fox News appearance. "I will do everything in my power to block her from being secretary of State," he said.
The talking points the Obama administration gave Rice in advance of her appearances on several Sunday morning  shows did not brand the Benghazi attack, which took the lives of Ambassador Christopher Stevens and three other Americans, as terrorism.  That's it. That is the long and short of what McCain and Graham have said publicly about their opposition to Rice becoming secretary of State. It is nonsense.
Convenient flip-floppery
McCain was not always so enthused about the idea of the Senate blocking confirmations.  In 2005, when President Bush nominated John Bolton to be U.N. ambassador, McCain was a  key defender of the then senior State Department official. Bolton's opponents said he was unfit for the job because, among other things, he allegedly tried to get a State Department analyst to change an intelligence finding to support his views.
"We need an ambassador who has the trust of the president and the secretary of State," McCain said on the Senate floor in defense of Bolton. Then he went on to say "elections have consequences, and one consequence of President Bush's re-election is that he has the right to appoint officials of his choice."
Seven years later -- with  a Democrat  in the White House -- McCain and Graham ignore those words and threaten to  stop  a vote on Rice, should Obama nominate her for the top State Department job.
But in going after Obama in this way, they run the risk of opening an even wider gap between the Republican Party and women, 55% of whom voted for Obama in his lopsided victory this year over GOP candidate Mitt Romney. A dozen female members of the House of Representatives drove home that point when they held a news conference to accuse McCain and Graham of being sexist and racist in their attack on Rice, who is black.
While the Republican senators might prevail in keeping Rice from being promoted  -- either by forestalling her nomination or blocking a Senate confirmation vote -- their opposition to her will be seen by many  as proof of a GOP war on women. That will cost Republicans dearly.
DeWayne Wickham writes on Tuesdays for USA TODAY. 

Load-Date: November 20, 2012


End of Document