McCarthy: U.S. 'can't control the world';
The former senator fears that the Iraq war will encourage other attacks and invite terrorism.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
April 15, 2003, Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2003 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 477 words
Byline: Randy Furst; Staff Writer
Body


Thirty-five years after he created a national political furor by running for president as a peace candidate, former U.S. Sen. Eugene McCarthy sounds as dubious about U.S. military policy as ever.
     "It's as though they have a contingency plan now for attacking any country they want to," the Minnesota Democrat said in a telephone interview from Washington, D.C.
     He added, rather sharply, "I'm against it."
      Now 87, McCarthy ran in the primaries against President Lyndon Johnson in 1968, and many Vietnam War protesters supported him. He fell short, and another Minnesotan, Vice President Hubert Humphrey, won the Democratic nomination after Johnson withdrew from the race. Humphrey lost the presidential election to Richard Nixon.
   McCarthy said he is worried that the Bush administration has grander military designs.
     "They can't control the world in the manner with which they are trying to control Iraq, and it invites terrorism," he said. "You ought to have some reasonable certainty that you are going to accomplish something good before you begin it."
     Other wars might not be so easy to win, he cautioned. "It's a lot [easier] fighting people in the desert than in the jungle."
     McCarthy quoted Alexis de Tocqueville, the French historian and political theorist who visited the United States in 1831. "De Tocqueville said that if a democracy has a military establishment which is bigger than what it needs to be for a particular purpose, it starts looking for trouble. It becomes a republic within the republic. It develops its own policies. I think that's what's happened" in the United States, he said.
     McCarthy called Bush a "pretender" because of the disputed way he became president. "I think that, traditionally, pretenders like to start a war that shows they're in charge."
     He said the Iraq war "didn't have to be fought twice. At least it could have been wrapped up 10 years ago after George Sr. carried on a real invasion. I think they should have finished it off when the Arabs were all involved against the Arabs instead of reducing it to a confrontation [with] the United States and England."
     As for his impressions of news coverage of the war, McCarthy said, "I was back home a week ago. The Minneapolis and St. Paul papers had headlines that took up half the page. I think they were bigger headlines than anything in World War II." He chuckled. "I think it is out of proportion. You pick up the paper now, you begin to breathe heavily."
     McCarthy twice ran for president as an independent and said he is writing an article criticizing the two-party system. He said, perhaps half-jokingly, that he might run again.
     "My father lived to be 98, so I can threaten people for another 10 years," he said.
Staff librarian Linda Scheimann did research for this report.
Randy Furst is at rfurst@startribune.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 16, 2003


End of Document