McConnell Says Obama Has Blind Spot In Prosecuting War On Terror
RTT News (United States)
February 3, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 350 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ken., gave a speech Wednesday in which he was highly critical of President Barack Obama&apos;s national security policies.
During the speech at the Heritage Foundation, McConnell said there are "too many signs that the current administration has a blind spot when it comes to prosecuting" the war on terror.
"Its handling of the Christmas Day bomber may have been the most egregious example, but it was no isolated case," McConnell added.
He argued that the Obama administration&apos;s approach to anti-terrorist policies has been to "announce a new policy or to change an existing one based not on a careful study of the facts, but as a way of conspicuously distancing itself from the policies of the past, even the ones that worked."
McConnell said this is "a very dangerous route" that reflects "a deeper problem; namely, the return of the old idea that terrorism should be treated as a law-enforcement matter."
The Senator mentioned how, three days into office, Obama said he would close down the Guantanamo Bay detention facility within one year, yet now one year later the facility is still open.
"Well, one year later, the administration is still trying to untangle the complex national security issues involved in fulfilling that pledge," McConnell said. "Its own deadline has come and gone. And, thankfully, Gitmo is still open for business. But this was a dangerous precedent to set."
He also criticized the administration&apos;s decision to end the CIA&apos;s enhanced interrogation program, saying, "Rather than looking closely at the implications of shuttering this vital program, the administration simply ended it, without even getting final sign-off from the CIA."
"The bottom line is this," McConnell said in closing, "Treating terrorism as a law enforcement matter is precisely the attitude that kept us from seeing this threat when we should have. Reverting to it now is not only dangerous, it&apos;s potentially disastrous."
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 15, 2010


End of Document