McGovern speaks at U. Montana on alternative ways to fight terrorism
University Wire
October 16, 2001


Copyright 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-Wire
Length: 426 words
Byline: By Ted Sullivan, Montana Kaimin
Dateline: Missoula, Mont.
Body


A former senator and presidential candidate said Monday he is behind President Bush and America's retaliation against the Taliban, but he suggested a different approach to fighting terrorism.
"Perhaps we need to take a hard look at the kind of world we live in, where slightly over half the people are in poverty, masses of them without jobs, without adequate food or clean water, without decent homes and toilet facilities and with little or no education," said George McGovern, a U.S. ambassador to the United Nations.
McGovern spoke to a nearly full University of Montana Theatre for this week's Mansfield Conference and told the crowd he has a three-step plan to fight terrorism. His goal would be to develop children's minds in poor countries and reduce the anger that drives terrorism, McGovern said.
U. Montana
His plan would involve taking $ 5 billion and using it for the following purposes: first, he said, he would provide a nutritious school lunch every day for every child in the world -- to draw them into school and improve learning. Second, he said, he would support nutritional supplements to pregnant mothers and their infants through the age of 5 to be extended worldwide. Third, he said, he would provide funds for better teachers worldwide.
"In my opinion, that may do a lot to dry up some of the sources of distress, despair and unease in the world," McGovern said.
It's not a sure solution, and for now, he said, he is satisfied with America's strategy.
"I support the president and his effort to bring to justice those responsible for murdering these 6,000 innocent Americans," McGovern said. "I also support his efforts to safeguard the country against future attacks."
McGovern is a former democratic senator from South Dakota, a 1972 presidential candidate and a World War II B-24 pilot. He currently is U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations food and agricultural agencies.
McGovern, who has been to villages in Asia and Africa, said poverty doesn't justify the recent killings, but it shows how helpless people may view terrorists as heroes.
Scenes of the terrorist attacks rival scenes McGovern saw in World War II, he said.
"I personally watched with horror these two large commercial jet liners smashing into the twin towers in New York City," McGovern said. "But is it possible desperate young men rebelling against their powerlessness, whether they be rich or poor, saw in the collapse of those gigantic buildings saw their first evidence that they are not necessarily powerless."
(C) 2001 Montana Kaimin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 16, 2001


End of Document