McGowan focus: Homeland security;
Hennepin County sheriff is evoking some criticism, skepticism. - Correction Appended
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1226 words
Byline: Mike Kaszuba; Staff Writer
Body


The nightclub in Israel was a long way from Minneapolis, but there was Hennepin County Sheriff Pat McGowan, inspecting the damage caused by a terrorist bomb.
     Since last summer, the three-term sheriff who has cast himself as a leading terrorism expert in Minnesota has also flown to Ireland with top FBI officials and led a national meeting on weapons of mass destruction in Seattle.
     "Terrorism is a local issue," McGowan maintains. "While I would say primary targets may be in other locations, we would be naive not to plan to think something could be … done here."
   As the head of a department whose main responsibility is to run the county jail and secure the courthouse, however, McGowan's focus on homeland security has provoked a skeptical reaction among some officials.
     "I have to ask you, why would we talk about weapons of mass destruction in Hennepin County as really something that's terribly real?" said Gail Dorfman, a Hennepin County commissioner. "We didn't find them in Iraq. What makes you think we're going to find them here?"
     Others say they think McGowan is on the right track.
     Noting the oft-cited but unsubstantiated report that the Sept. 11 terrorists had at one point considered targeting the Mall of America in Bloomington, Hennepin County Commissioner Penny Steele said, "I think it's only responsible to try to protect this state, even if it isn't a No. 1 priority on somebody's list."
     Setting priorities
     With both the FBI and state public safety officials also working on terrorism issues, it is unclear where McGowan fits in. While the sheriff has drawn accolades for his work, and was active before the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, other law enforcement officials have said McGowan remains a secondary source for information on how to combat terrorists.
     McGowan himself is matter-of-fact in stating his contributions to homeland security. He was, he said, part of a team whose meetings with FBI Director Robert Mueller led to the now familiar color-coded national terror alert system. He also has formed a uniquely close alliance with the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs, a pro-Israel lobbying group in Washington, D.C., aligned with the neoconservatives shaping foreign and military policy for the Bush administration.
     "He's got a very sincere concern about homeland security - not only in Hennepin County. He's traveled to other parts of the globe," said Dan Johnson, the state operations director for homeland security.
     In budgetary terms, McGowan's homeland security efforts remain modest. Though the Sheriff's Office has a proposed $62 million budget for 2005, just $446,000 would be spent on a new homeland security unit. The five people assigned to the unit, in fact, make up a fraction of the 770 full-time jobs within the department. McGowan, denying he was preoccupied with homeland security, also said his anti-terrorism emphasis has helped bring $7.1 million in federal money, freeing the county from having to use local tax money for his efforts.
     Yet McGowan's terrorism focus has come at a time when some of the sheriff's historical functions, such as providing squad car patrols, are now confined to the few remaining rural areas in the county.
     Mike Opat, another Hennepin County commissioner, said it is difficult to refute those - like McGowan - who insist that a terrorist attack in the Twin Cities can never be ruled out. "I agree with Pat that we need to be vigilant," he said. "But if you're not careful about that, it can border on fanaticism."
     Ramsey County
     McGowan also has found an ally in Bob Fletcher, the Ramsey County sheriff who in 2002 created his own weapons of mass destruction unit. Gary Olding, who heads the unit, said it was established because "no one was stepping up to the plate" shortly after the 9/11 attacks. "The sheriff filled the void," Olding said.
     While Olding said there were terrorist targets in Ramsey County, the federal government last week announced that Ramsey County, St. Paul and Dakota County would not receive special urban area anti-terrorism money in 2005. The money, which will continue to go to Hennepin County and Minneapolis, has largely been given to urban centers that have likely targets. Republican Sen. Norm Coleman and other Minnesota members of Congress hope to get the funding restored.
     Tony Bennett, a Ramsey County commissioner who has frequently sparred with Fletcher, said he is unsure whether it is the sheriff's responsibility to focus on terrorism. "Those are great, great wonderful things," Bennett said of the WMD unit. "The question is … is there something else suffering" as resources are diverted to homeland security.
     Olding said the unit, which has six to 12 deputies, is not a financial drain and said its budget only includes the deputies' salaries.
     Fletcher said he has worked closely with Hennepin County on terrorism. While praising McGowan's anti-terrorism efforts, Fletcher acknowledged it was "a little unusual" for a county sheriff to stake out a national and international profile. Fletcher said his department, while noting McGowan's expertise, relies on the FBI and other state and federal agencies for terrorism information.
     "I would agree with the sheriff of Ramsey County," said Scott Knight, president of the Minnesota Chiefs of Police Association. "Given that we have all these solid sources available to us, I think it's highly unusual. … I think the chief law enforcement officer belongs at home."
     Israeli experience
     McGowan's ties to the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA) were highlighted last January when the organization selected him as one of 14 U.S. law enforcement officials who toured Israel and had meetings with top-level Israeli security and military officials. In October, the Sheriff's Office co-hosted a two-day seminar by Israeli security officials in the Twin Cities. The seminar, one of only three held in the country by JINSA, was heavily attended by law enforcement officials from across Minnesota but was closed to the public.
     McGowan said he has paid scant attention to JINSA's political leanings. Since the early 1990s, the group has honored a series of conservative Democrats and Republicans, including Vice President Dick Cheney and Paul Wolfowitz, the deputy secretary of defense. JINSA's long list of directors and advisers include Rudy Boschwitz, the former U.S. senator from Minnesota, and Richard Perle, an assistant defense secretary under President Ronald Reagan.
     "I consider it to be one of the best organizations I'm associated with," said Boschwitz, who said he was an early supporter of JINSA, which was formed in the 1970s. "It has related American needs with Israeli needs" and supports the Bush administration's foreign policy, he said.
     Marcia Halteman, a JINSA spokeswoman, said the organization invited McGowan because he is "very well thought of." She said that much of the group's training is conducted in the belief there may well be another "grand attack" by terrorists in the U.S. "Is it going to be 10 malls, the Mall of America?" she said. "We believe in a safe and secure America."
     McGowan agrees: "At some point in time, we are going to get hit again in the United States of America."
     Mike Kaszuba is at     mkaszuba@startribune.com.  
Correction

- An article on Page B3 Wednesday incorrectly reported the status of a joint public-safety training facility in Scott County. The facility has not yet opened.
Correction-Date: December 16, 2004, Thursday

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: December 16, 2004


End of Document