McSally Supports Major Wins for Arizona in Department of Interior Funding Bill
Yellow Sheet Report
July 19, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS
Length: 390 words
Byline: luige.delpuerto@azcapitoltimes.com
Body


Provides Robust Funding for PILT and Wildfire Prevention ProgramsWashington, D.C.  Today, the U.S. House of Representatives passed legislation making appropriations for the Department of the Interior (DOI) and other federal agencies. The bill passed the House 217 to 199.“This legislation reins in the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) regulatory agenda, repeals the harmful Waters of the United States rule which stifles economic development and job creation, and relieves livestock operations from regulatory red tape. It provides critical funds for the Payment in Lieu of Taxes (PILT) program, which provides important resources for all of Arizona’s fifteen counties, particularly in rural areas, to help balance their budgets and pay for essential services. 
This legislation will also give federal agencies the resources they need to suppress wildfires, manage our forests, and reduce hazardous fuels,” said Congresswoman McSally. “The bill also allocates resources for federal, state, local, and tribal agencies to combat the opioid epidemic and provides funds for the Internal Revenue Service to further implement the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. I worked with the leaders of these Appropriations Committees to ensure these important programs received substantial funding and was pleased to support this legislation on the Floor today. ”The FY 2019 Interior and Environment Appropriations Bill:  Directs $500 million in funding for the PILT program which sends funds to local governments in states to help fulfill budget shortfalls that would harm local government responsibilities.  Allocates $3.9 billion for the DOI and the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) to fight and prevent forest fires that threaten communities across the nation.  Provides $5.9 billion for the Indian Health Service and $3.1B for the Bureaus of Indian Affairs and Indian Education.  Combats the opioid epidemic by providing $415 million for the Office of National Drug Control Policy and targets $280 million for the High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) program.  Strengthens sanctions against terrorism by providing $161 million for the Treasury Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.  Funds small business loan programs for veterans ($12.3 million) and women entrepreneurs ($18.4 million).
Copyright © 2018 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: July 25, 2018


End of Document