MCV SEEKING $2.5 MILLION FOR TERRORISM IMPROVEMENTS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
January 15, 2002 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-4
Length: 455 words
Byline: Tammie Smith, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Tammie Smith at (804) 649-6572 or tlsmith@timesdispatch.com,  
Body


As lead hospital in central Virginia in case of a major disaster, MCV Hospitals is proposing $2.5 million in improvements to be able to treat a mass influx of victims of biological or chemical attacks.
The efforts were disclosed yesterday as members of a 7th Congressional District security panel formed last November by U.S. Rep. Eric I. Cantor toured the hospital in downtown Richmond.
"MCV Hospitals and the entire VCU Health System are working diligently .*.*. to be ready to assist in the face of any increased terrorist threat to the Richmond area," said Cantor.
Medical College of Virginia Hospitals, Virginia Commonwealth University's teaching hospital, is a Level 1 trauma center and the designated medical command center for the Richmond area.
The upgrades would include an outside mass decontamination shower system that could handle hundreds of people an hour - instead of the 20 that can be handled in a decontamination tent bought a year ago.
That tent was set up outside the emergency room during last weekend's inaugural activities as a precaution.
"We would have done that anyway," said Dr. Sheldon Retchin, noting that even before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, MCV Hospitals would have been on alert during the high profile event at the state Capitol just blocks away.
Also proposed: additional designated space inside the hospital for isolating people with contagious diseases such as smallpox, additional protective gear for hospital employees, and terrorism training for several hundred emergency room employees.
"Everything that is a major target is downtown," said Dean Broga, director of environmental health and safety at the hospital. "Being able to respond very quickly to large groups of people is critical."
The large-deluge showers, for instance, could handle people as fast as they could walk through, he said.
Broga said upgrading a ward in the hospital for biological contamination would require that unit to have a ventilation system separate and isolated from the rest of the facility.
"One of the factors now is that in the city there are only so many isolation facilities available, and in most cases somebody is in them," he said. Those facilities are also used, for instance, to isolate tuberculosis patients or people with autoimmune disorders that make them highly susceptible to germs.
As part of the same fact-finding tour, Cantor's security panel last week visited the airport, where he announced a $2 million federal grant to improve baggage screening.
A third meeting will follow, with the information gathered from the meetings compiled into a report to be submitted to Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge next month. Cantor said he is prepared to ask for more federal money for MCV Hospitals.

Load-Date: January 16, 2002


End of Document