Md. Senate's top 2 Republicans relinquishing leadership posts
Daily Record, The (Baltimore, MD)
October 6, 2020 Tuesday


Copyright 2020 BridgeTower Media All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 319 words
Byline: Bryan P. Sears
Body


The top two Republicans in the Maryland Senate will not seek reelection to their leadership posts.
Sens. J.B Jennings and Steve Hershey, the minority party leader and whip, respectively, made the announcement late Tuesday night. The pair were facing a challenge in an election scheduled for Saturday.
Sen. Michael Hough, R-Frederick, was named a likely challenge Hershey for his position. Later, Sen. Bryan Simonaire, R-Anne Arundel, emerged as a potential challenger to Jennings.
Jennings and Hershey have led the caucus since 2014 and 2015, respectively, and are liked both within their party and by Democratic senators.
Some are now questioning whether changes in the Senate’s politics require adjustments after six years.
Hershey moved front and center for some who felt that a number of messages posted to social media  primarily his Twitter account  placed Republican senators from competitive districts in politically difficult positions.
For instance, he pushed back hard when President Trump flirted with the notion of delaying the Nov. 3 election because of the coronavirus pandemic.
“For anyone sitting on the sidelines who won’t speak loudly, I’ll say it again for those in the back: We aren’t delaying our November election. It is an absurd notion, an unAmerican suggestion and one that every Republican colleague of mine should disavow, without hesitation,” Hersey posted on Twitter in a message.
Some Maryland Republicans said Hershey’s response potentially put Republicans in competitive districts in Anne Arundel, Baltimore and Harford counties in a difficult position. Other said the message wasn’t intended to spotlight members of the Maryland Senate.
Hersheywas also criticized by some for messages on Twitter following a mass shooting in El Paso, Texas, an incident he called an incident of white nationalist terrorism.
(This story will be updated.)
Copyright © 2020 BridgeTower Media.  All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: October 12, 2020


End of Document