MEDDLING U.S. POLITICIANS IRK BRITONS WORKING TO END IRA TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 4, 1994, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 13B; WILLIAM SAFIRE COLUMN
Length: 704 words
Byline: William Safire Copyright New York Times News Service
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Politicians in Boston and New York, eager to solicit the vote of American Irish Catholics, gave a hero's welcome to the Irish Republican Army's political spokesman, who recently helped arrange cessation of terrorist bomb attacks on Britons.
This second tour of the U.S. by Gerry Adams went down badly in the United Kingdom. Most people in Britain do not think anybody deserves lionization and a fresh infusion of funds for stopping, or perhaps only suspending, a policy of systematic murder. They resent the portrayal of Northern Ireland as a place occupied by British soldiers to prevent the inevitable unification of the Irish people.
The Brits argue that Adams, unlike Nelson Mandela, never talks of "one person, one vote" because a million Irish Protestants in Ulster form a vast majority that wants to remain part of the United Kingdom. Unlike Yasser Arafat, the IRA spokesman cannot complain of no nation for his people because of the existence of the Irish Republic, where Catholics form the great majority.
Nothing would please the English, Scottish and Welsh more than to be able to withdraw forces from the Irish outpost established in Cromwell's time. But to do so would abandon a million British subjects to bloody civil war. The IRA has its fierce and murderous counterpart among Irish Protestants.
To pull out peacekeeping troops, as the IRA demands with its "British out," would turn the place into an orange and green Bosnia. A million British ethnic Irish do not want to be nationally cleansed, and the English cannot in honor set their nationals adrift.
As a result, British subjects in Northern Ireland have a more secure future in their townships than Israeli citizens do in their settlements in the West Bank or on the Golan Heights .
Most Americans don't get that picture. We tend to think that "the troobles" have gone on too long, that religious wars are out of date, that it might be tidier with all the Irish under one political roof, and that today's terrorists are tomorrow's statesmen - so why doesn't London quit quibbling about whether the IRA's "complete cessation" is "permanent" and get on with negotiating directly with Adams?
That attitude, whipped up by ethnic-blocking U.S. politicians, is what drives the British up the wall.
London survived the 21-year terrorist blitz without buckling; the IRA bombs made headlines but made no allies or progress. Because the terrorists realized they were losing their war, and time was against them, they (like the broke and isolated Palestine Liberation Organization) were driven to see what a truce could produce.
In London's view, U.S. pressure on "the Irish peace process" would strengthen the IRA and endanger the sort of extended negotiation that hotheads cannot abide.
What sort of deal is workable? Most people here think that Prime Minister John Major's demand that Adams first pledge eternal peace is only a militant pose to cover up more secret dealings among Belfast, Dublin and London.
If the IRA "cessation" holds, the British troops who do not have permanent barracks and grounds in Ulster could be withdrawn in stages. That would cut the non-Irish British military presence in Northern Ireland by half, a consummation this generation of IRA leaders could never achieve by terror.
As that takes place, the hope is that the border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic would become more porous; business investment and tourism, now impeded by violence, would pick up to form binding ties; political power would devolve to localities.
Catholic nationalists could shrug off as vestigial the "technical sovereignty" of the United Kingdom while Protestant unionists could claim their British protection in the event of a power grab or persecution.
That gradual coming together, even if punctuated by outbursts of the old hatred, is the future as plotted by Rosy Scenario, which beats renewed terrorism or civil war.
If Major can bring it off, he will justify the past generation's steadfastness (and stop Britain's lurch toward Labor as well). Coming negotiations will not be helped if the cheers of American politicos embolden the former terrorists to expect to extract at the peace table what they could not coerce with bombs in department stores.

Load-Date: October 5, 1994


End of Document