MEDIA FEEDING HYSTERIA ABOUT 'FUNDAMENTALISM'
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
March 22, 1993, Monday,
ALL RIZVI, A FORMER UW-MADISON GRADUATE STUDENT, NOW LIVES IN EDITIONS


Copyright 1993 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion; GUEST COLUMN; Column
Length: 612 words
Body


Does one become a fundamentalist by being a practicing Muslim? This is a fear developing in the minds of Muslims who live in the United States. The extensive media emphasis upon Islamic fundamentalism following the arrest and indictment of two Muslims in connection with the World Trade Center bombing is largely responsible for this misperception. Islam and radical fundamentalism, which are two ends of a pole, are being portrayed as two sides of the same coin.
The basic duties of a Muslim include reading prayers (namaz), fasting during the ongoing month of Ramadan, giving charity, and pilgrimmage to Mecca. Muslims are required to read namaz five times a day, spending five to 10 minutes each time. Ramadan is significant because the Koran was revealed during this month. During Ramadan, Muslims are required to fast from dawn to sunset.
By Nilofar Rizvi
Certain acts are regarded as a part of Islamic culture. These include abstinence from alcohol, drugs or any intoxicant, and not eating pork. In Islam, a great emphasis is also put on communal amity symbolized by going to the mosque to read prayers, particularly on Fridays. This requires standing shoulder to shoulder (men and women stand in separate sections). The main principle is that everyone, irrespective of his or her worldly status, is equal in the eyes of Allah.
Inside the mosque, it is normal for Muslims out of respect for Islam communal affinity to try and greet others present, either verbally or by shaking hands and embracing. For an outsider, this may seem to be a well-knit group, when, in reality, most of the people present are unacquainted.
The bombing of the World Trade Center was by no means a religious act permitted by any doctrine of Islam. In fact, until the motives behind the bombing are determined, it would be premature to label it as anything other than a terrorist act. If the investigations prove that one or more of the so-called Muslim nations is a sponsor, then it should be labeled as Iranian, Iraqi, Palestinian, etc., radicalism, not Islamic fundamentalism.
Similarly, Irish terrorism is not called Catholic terrorism, nor is David Koresh's fanaticism in Waco labeled Christian fundamentalism.
What has prompted the Muslim inside me to say this? Even if the alleged bombers are proven guilty, the act cannot be related to Islamic fundamentalism. The following quotations from an English version of the Koran (translated by M. Pickthall) may explain:
''Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight against you, but begin not with hostilities. Lo: Allah loveth not aggressors.'' (Surah II, verse 190).
''Allah forbiddeth you not those who warred not against you on account of religion and drove you not from your homes, that ye should show them kindness and deal justly with them. Lo! Allah loveth the just dealers.'' (Surah LX, verse 8).
Having grown up in India, I have never known religion to be any point of conflict between me and my Indian friends, the majority of whom are Hindus. In times of crisis, they have come forward to help me without religious qualms. My religion is mine, and theirs is theirs.
A few months ago, I argued that the actions of a group of Hindus - in the name of religion, but for political gain - should not be defined as Hindu fundamentalism. All Hindus and Muslims cannot be blamed for the communal tension in India, and yet, the American news media brands actions by the most convenient term.
Last year, following the destruction of a Muslim mosque at Ayodhya in northern India, the convenient term was Hindu fundamentalism. Now, the World Trade Center bombing is being blamed on Islamic fundamentalism. The Muslim inside me protests against both.

Load-Date: May 17, 1995


End of Document