Media fueling terrorism
University Wire
July 14, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 The Parthenon via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 358 words
Byline: By Michael Hupp, The Parthenon; SOURCE: Marshall U.
Dateline: HUNTINGTON, W.Va. 
Body


The bombings in London were brutal acts affecting many people's lives and the media was there to cover it. I am not knocking the media for covering a major news event. I am questioning how the media go about covering acts of terror.
The first thing I heard on Fox News Tuesday morning was "67 percent of Americans think a terrorist attack is imminent within the next few months." My jaw dropped as I listened to the interviews that accompanied the piece.
One woman said she was scared to death. Another man said it is time to beef up security in America's major cities. Voiceovers as pictures of the Golden Gate Bridge, the Statue of Liberty and a nuclear plant are collaged on the television screen. I mean cheese and crackers! Why don't we just give terrorists schematics on possible spots to conduct terrorism?
It is the media's job and vital to the news process that true news events are covered objectively. Is it vital to shove that information down people's throats until the general population is scared to leave their homes due to the threat over an attack? I do not think so. That is the problem with society today. Sure we want as much information as possible generated to us, but you have to ask yourself at what cost.
I am positive someone is going to read this and take what I am writing to heart the wrong way. I repeat it is vital that society is informed about events and to be prepared, but we are playing a guessing game here. If you live in New York then yeah, you should be a little on edge, but Omaha or Cheyenne or Charleston? Come on. It is becoming mass hysteria.
Everywhere is a possible target and we shouldn't become complacent. It is just time for the media to quit focusing on negativity, hate and terror. We as journalists are fueling the fire and giving the terrorists what they want: a country on edge. If we do not continue to try to carry on normal lives throughout the world then we are letting them win. It is time for the media to switch their focus. Not from covering the events surrounding terrorism, but what we can do to fight it. Not scare people to death. News does affect lives.
(C) 2005 The Parthenon via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 14, 2005


End of Document