Medvedev vows 'crueler' anti-terrorism measures
The Salt Lake Tribune
April 2, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World
Length: 566 words
Byline: By Arsen Mollayev Associated Press Writer
Body


Makhachkala, Russia » President Dmitry Medvedev made a surprise visit Thursday to the violence-racked southern province of Dagestan, telling police and security forces to use tougher, "more cruel" measures to fight the "scum" responsible for terrorist attacks.
Russia's security chief said some terror suspects had been detained.
Twin suicide bombings in Moscow -- which Islamic militants from the North Caucasus claim to have carried out -- have refocused attention on the violence that for years has been confined to Russia's predominantly Muslim regions. The rush-hour attacks Monday on the Moscow subway killed 39 people and left nearly 90 hospitalized.
On Wednesday, two suicide bombings in Dagestan killed 12 people, including nine policemen, a frequent target of attacks in part because they represent Russian authority. Another explosion Thursday killed two suspected militants and wounded a third in Dagestan near the border with Chechnya. Police said the men may have been transporting a makeshift bomb.
Medvedev on Thursday copied the style of Russia's powerful prime minister, Vladimir Putin, both in his dress -- a black T-shirt under a black suit coat -- and his rough language in ordering that much more be done to stop the attacks.
"The measures to fight terrorism should be expanded, they should be more effective, more harsh, more cruel, if you please," he told federal and local officials in a televised meeting.
In recent months, police and security forces have killed at least two high-profile Islamic militants, but they have been unable to capture the veteran Chechen militant Doku Umarov, who has claimed responsibility for the Moscow subway attacks.
"We have torn off the heads of the most odious bandits, but clearly this was not enough. In any case, we will find them all and punish them," Medvedev said.
But the president also warned officials that they must avoid aggravating deeply ingrained prejudices.
"People who live here in the Caucasus are citizens of Russia, not people of Caucasus origin. It's not a foreign province, it's our country," he added.
The terrorist attacks in the North Caucasus are believed to be motivated not only by radical Islam but in some cases by a desire for personal revenge against members of spolice and security forces, who have been accused of killings, kidnappings and torture. The heavy-handed tactics have served to swell the ranks of Islamic militants. More on Doku Umarov
Vengeance » Doku Umarov, who leads Islamic militants in Chechnya and throughout the North Caucasus, said the Moscow subway bombings were revenge for the killing of civilians by Russian security forces. "Any politician, any journalist who accuses me of terrorism only makes me laugh, causes me to grin. I have not heard anyone accuse Putin of terrorism for the murder of civilians who were killed on his orders," Umarov said in a video posted Wednesday on kavkazcenter.com, a Web site used by rebels.
Brief bio » Umarov, 45, fought Russian forces in both separatist wars in Chechnya of the past 15 years. Shortly after taking over the leadership of the rebel movement in 2006, he announced a change of tactics. Instead of struggling for Chechen independence, the militants would seek to create an Islamic state across the North Caucasus. Umarov declared himself the emir, or military leader, of a Caucasus emirate. He is believed to receive financial support from al-Qaida.

Graphic

 
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, right, and officials observe a minute of silence for victims of this week's suicide bombings, in Mahachkala, the capital of Dagestan, a province in Russia's volatile North Caucasus, Thursday, April 1, 2010. Medvedev made a surprise visit to the violence-wracked southern province of Dagestan, telling authorities to use tougher, "more cruel" measures to fight terrorism. (AP Photo/RIA Novosti, Mikhail Klimentyev, Presidential Press Service)
Jeanne Tiller, widow of slain abortion doctor George Tiller, hugs a family member during the sentencing of Scott Roeder in Sedgwick County District Court in Wichita, Kan., Thursday, April 1, 2010. Roeder was convicted last January of murdering Tiller's husband, Dr. George Tiller. (AP Photo/Jeff Tuttle, Pool)
In this photo made Wednesday, March 17, 2010, corporate Russian lawyer Alexei Navalny waves from his office window in Moscow, Russia. In a country where exposing shady practices can be risky, Navalny is taking a stand, becoming a public advocate for the rights of minority shareholders in corporations, against state or billionaire oligarchs who, according to Navalny, are often less than open about what they're doing with a company's assets and money. (AP Photo/Alexander Zemlianichenko)
Jeanne Tiller, widow of slain abortion doctor George Tiller, hugs a family member during the sentencing of Scott Roeder in Sedgwick County District Court in Wichita, Kan., Thursday, April 1, 2010. Roeder was convicted last January of murdering Tiller's husband, Dr. George Tiller. (AP Photo/Jeff Tuttle, Pool)

Load-Date: April 4, 2010


End of Document