Meehan, Toomey behind push to make Iran pay for terrorism
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 2, 2015 Friday
CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News Politics; Pg. A03
Length: 587 words
Byline: By Jonathan Tamari

Inquirer Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON - Bills sponsored by two Pennsylvania Republicans that seek to derail the international nuclear deal with Iran unless the country pays $43.5 billion it owes U.S. victims of terrorism moved ahead in the House and the Senate on Thursday despite a veto threat from the White House.
 The measure, led by Rep. Pat Meehan of Delaware County, passed the House in a largely party-line vote. His plan would bar President Obama from lifting sanctions on Iran until it pays restitution for terrorism it sponsored. Sen. Pat Toomey introduced a companion bill in the Senate, where it advanced out of a committee Thursday.
 "Until they pay these victims what they're owed, let's say no to Iran - not one cent," Meehan said, echoing a phrase that House Republicans, including Speaker John A. Boehner, used to promote the measure on Twitter.
 His bill passed the House on a 251-173 vote. Of the 10 Democrats who supported it, two are from Philadelphia: Reps. Chaka Fattah (who supported the deal with Iran) and Brendan Boyle (who opposed it).
 Iran will gain access to tens of billions of dollars in frozen assets - estimates range from $29 billion to $150 billion - once sanctions are lifted as part of the nuclear agreement. 
 Meehan said Obama should have insisted in negotiations that some of that money be given to the families of terrorism victims who have won judgments in U.S. courts, but received no payments.
 As precedent, he pointed to a 2008 deal with Libya that forced that country to pay $1.5 billion to victims of the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing and a bombing of a Berlin disco as a condition of renewed relations with the U.S.
 "If this opportunity is squandered, in effect you'll have judgments that are unenforceable," Meehan said at a news conference Wednesday.
 He was joined by Kenneth Stethem, whose brother, Chief Petty Officer Robert Stethem, was beaten, shot, and killed during the 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847. His body was dumped on the tarmac. A federal court awarded his family $300 million in punitive damages, to be paid by Iran, in 2002.
 "If the president doesn't take the opportunity, and Congress doesn't take the opportunity, to hold Iran accountable for their terrorist acts now, I have to ask, when will they?" said Stethem, a former Navy SEAL.
 In Pennsylvania, victims of Iranian-backed terrorism, or their survivors, are owed more than $800 million, according to Toomey's office.
 Most of that amount, $655.5 million, stemmed from the death of Benjamin Blutstein, a Hebrew University student killed in a 2002 bombing. Joseph Cicippio, of Norristown, was awarded $91 million after being abducted in Beirut and held for five years, and Gail Belkin, of Monroeville, was killed by a suicide bombing in Jerusalem, resulting in an $18.5 million court judgment, according to Toomey's office.
 The White House said it focused its negotiations solely on Iran's nuclear program, which it said led to more international support for the deal. Blocking the agreement by stopping the promised sanctions relief "would greatly undermine" national security interests, said a statement from the Office of Management and Budget.
 "It would result in the collapse of a comprehensive diplomatic arrangement that peacefully and verifiably prevents Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon," the OMB said. The agreement's disintegration would "deal a devastating blow to America's credibility."
 The White House promised a veto if the bill reaches the president. 
jtamari@phillynews.com
  @JonathanTamari
www.philly.com/capitolinq

Load-Date: October 2, 2015


End of Document