Meeting to be proving ground for Afghanistan WAR ON TERRORISM - Correction Appended
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 19, 2010 Monday
SECOND EDITION


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 517 words
Byline: DEB RIECHMANN • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


KABUL, AFGHANISTAN - At an international conference on Tuesday, the Afghan government will ask donors to put 80 percent of aid money behind programs that the Afghans - not foreign capitals - deem important to development.
It's a high-stakes meeting for the Kabul government, which wants to show the world leaders attending that it's making strides toward running its own affairs.
Displaying a new streak of independence, Afghan officials are seeking to take the driver's seat to guide their nation out of three decades of conflict. Having spent billions and lost so many troops in nearly nine years of war, international leaders remain uneasy about letting go of the wheel. Still, the U.S. and other donor nations believe that strengthening the Afghan government is the only way to end their military involvement in Afghanistan.
"If after the Kabul conference we do not embark on the delivery of the things that we promised to deliver, then the donors as well as everybody else has every right to complain about us and tell us we are not serious," said Afghan Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal.
Staffan de Mistura, the top U.N. official in Afghanistan who is co-chairing the meeting, said there was much work to be done to increase the capacity of the Afghan government. "Realignment will not be overnight," he said. "It will be a process."
Zakhilwal and other key Afghan ministers, working with sparse staffs, have spent weeks writing papers, outlining a plan of action with benchmarks for agriculture, reintegrating insurgents back into society and economic and social development.
They are not only battling international skepticism, but must also prove themselves to the Afghan public, who have little trust in their government.
The conference is "useless," said Bissullah, 43, a man from the north end of Kabul who goes by only one name. "I am not hopeful that this conference is going to benefit us in any way."
Afghan lawmaker and political analyst Shukria Barekzai in the capital called the Kabul conference just another international meeting.
"They are only speaking about nice and wonderful reports and big promises," she said. "We, as a nation, are tired of the lip service. We are tired of having more casualties. We are tired of living in war."
Thousands of Afghan soldiers and police have been deployed to secure the capital during the one-day meeting. Officials worry that Tuesday's conference will draw a repeat of the violence seen at national peace conference in May when two militants were killed in a gunbattle with security forces and a rocket landed with a thud about 100 yards from the meeting site.
Just before noon Sunday, a suicide bombing near a market killed three civilians and wounded dozens. On Friday night, a combined international and Afghan commando force captured a Taliban bomb-making expert in the capital.
Workers were busy sprucing up the city Sunday. A large banner has been hung near the airport to welcome U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and delegations from more than 60 nations.
Correction


Correction published Tuesday, July 20, 2010 - A chart listing U.S. military war deaths in Monday's main news section contained some outdated numbers. The correct information appears at left. (Correct graphic is linked to the story)
Correction-Date: July 20, 2010

Graphic

 
 GRAPHIC - U.S. MILITARY WAR DEATHS | AP 

Load-Date: July 20, 2010


End of Document