MEETING WILL HELP MEASURE TERRORISM RESPONSE;
TOWN-HALL-STYLE SESSION IS FIRST OF SIX NATIONALLY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 8, 2003 Wednesday Illinois Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. D1
Length: 693 words
Byline: Philip Dine Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The focus of the nation's homeland security officials will be squarely on St. Louis today, as they travel to the nation's heartland to learn whether ordinary people are prepared for a terrorist attack and what people want the government to do to protect them.
Federal authorities also hope to return home with lessons from what they describe as the St. Louis region's superior efforts at regional coordination, particularly in the area of public health.
"St. Louis and the region are doing a lot of things that we like, including the interstate mutual aid agreements with Southern Illinois and the intrastate agreements within Missouri," said Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge, who'll lead the session at St. Louis University.
The St. Louis event, slated for noon to 2 p.m. in the Busch Student Center, will kick off a series of six town-hall-style meetings around the country. The goal is to get people and local businesses more actively involved in fighting terrorism and to find out what's on the minds of people outside the Capital Beltway.
St. Louis was chosen as the initial site partly to send a message to the Midwest that while concerns about terrorist attacks have been most evident on the East and West coasts, no part of the country is immune.
That's especially the case with an area like St. Louis, which:
* Occupies a key spot in America's transportation grid - from Lambert Field to trucking to vital bridges over the Mississippi River.
* Boasts a national symbol in the Gateway Arch.
* Is surrounded by agricultural resources.
* Has leading research and military facilities.
"You are a hub, a transportation hub, with lots of critical infrastructure, public venues and the agriculture of the heartland," Ridge said in an interview Tuesday at the White House. "People may feel relatively immune, but given the unpredictable nature of terrorism, no one's immune.
"We don't want you to be worried or alarmed - we just want you to be prepared. You can't secure the homeland until you secure the heartland. You can't secure the heartland until you secure the hometowns."
Ridge, 58, is a former governor of Pennsylvania who was the first homeland security adviser before being selected by President George W. Bush to head the new department.
The 300-person audience for today's meeting was selected largely by invitations through community groups and by word of mouth. It will be televised locally on KSDK (Channel 5) and covered on radio station KMOX without commercial interruption, and will also be webcast on ksdk.com.
Earlier today, Ridge will tour St. Louis University's centers doing research on bioterrorism and cyberterrorism, and then meet with local officials.
Each town hall session will be flexible, said Patricia McGinnis, president of the Council on Excellence in Government, the quasi-public group that is sponsoring the meetings.
"What we hope will happen is we will have a lively and very constructive conversation where people will speak up their concerns, and Secretary Ridge and Mayor Slay and the others who will be there will talk about how they can work more effectively together," she said.
Along with Ridge and McGinnis, a panel will discuss terrorism-related topics and answer questions. It consists of Mayor Francis Slay, St. Louis Public Safety Director Samuel Simon, St. Louis University chief medical officer Dr. Karen Webb, Missouri Homeland Security Director Tim Daniel and Steve Rohleder of Accenture, a company helping sponsor the event. Former CNN anchorman Frank Sesno will moderate.
St. Louis offers "real models there that we would like to share with other communities across the country," McGinnis said, adding that what's learned in St. Louis would "help shape the rest of the project."
Subsequent town-hall sessions are slated for Miami, San Diego, Houston, Seattle and Lexington, Ky.
===
Meeting coverage
All of the audience seats at today's meeting on homeland security have been filled. The public can watch the proceedings on KSDK (Channel 5), listen on radio station KMOX and view a webcast on ksdk.com. People can register their ideas on homeland security through two Internet sites: citizensecure.org or excelgov.org.

Notes

HOMELAND SECURITY; Reporter Philip Dine; E-mail: pdine@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880; Note: a shorter version of this article appeared in the FIVE STAR LATE LIFT Edition, page D1.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo headshot - (Tom) Ridge; Homeland security secretary; Note: Photo appeared in the FIVE STAR LATE LIFT Edition, page D1.

Load-Date: October 9, 2003


End of Document