Megahed fighting denial of citizenship
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 17, 2012 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 1
Length: 1186 words
Byline: ELAINE SILVESTRINI, The Tampa Tribune
Body


Attorney of man tied to local terrorism case says rejection 'reeks of vindictiveness'
BY ELAINE SILVESTRINI
The Tampa Tribune
TAMPA Two weeks before he was arrested on terrorism-related charges, Youssef Megahed applied to become a U.S. citizen.
More than four years later -- after a criminal trial, a deportation hearing and two lawsuits -- Megahed has gotten his answer from the federal government: No.
Even though a jury found Megahed not guilty of criminal charges and an immigration judge found there was no evidence that he should be deported, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services says Megahed has not earned the right to become a citizen because he failed to prove he is "a person of good moral character."
Calling the decision "clearly erroneous," Megahed's attorney, Charles Kuck, is asking a federal judge to overturn the ruling, which he said "reeks of vindictiveness."
"This is the government's attempt to do what they failed to do twice now, which is to paint my client as some kind of bad actor, which is not true," Kuck said. "Clearly, they've had it in for him from the beginning."
In the meantime, Megahed remains a lawful, permanent resident of the United States; he still has a green card allowing him to live and work in this country.
Two weeks after he applied to become a naturalized citizen, July 24, 2007, Megahed and his friend Ahmed Mohamed were arrested in South Carolina on Aug. 7, 2007, after deputies there said they found suspicious explosive devices in the trunk of their car.
The Egyptian men -- then students at the University of South Florida -- were accused of being part of a nascent terrorist cell.
Mohamed pleaded guilty to providing material support to terrorists by posting on the Internet a video in which he demonstrated how to use a toy's remote control to detonate a bomb. He was sentenced to 15 years in federal prison.
Megahed was not implicated in Mohamed's jihadist video, but he was indicted on weapons charges relating to the items in the car, which the defense maintained were homemade model rockets. Three days after a federal jury acquitted Megahed, he was picked up by immigration agents.
Three days before Megahed's deportation hearing in August 2009, his parents and siblings were sworn in as American citizens.
Judge Kenneth Hurewitz blocked the deportation. "In spite of the scale of this investigation, the FBI did not uncover any evidence whatsoever linking (Megahed) with a particular plot, plan or intention to commit a terrorist act," he wrote. "None of the FBI's interviews or other investigative work suggests that (Megahed) ever had or has the intent to harm anyone."
After he was released, Megahed took and passed the citizenship test. But U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services failed to rule on his petition. He filed a lawsuit and forced an interview. Then in December -- more than a year after his third citizenship interview -- he sued again, trying to force a decision that law says must be made within 120 days.
Three weeks after the lawsuit was filed, immigration authorities issued their ruling denying Megahed's citizenship. Even though Megahed prevailed twice before -- in the criminal trial and deportation hearing -- the rules are different for citizenship decisions, the notice pointed out.
In the other proceedings, the legal burden was on the government to prove the accusations. This time, Megahed had the task of proving himself worthy of citizenship -- that he is "a person of good moral character; is a person attached to the principles of the United States Constitution; and is favorably disposed towards the good order and happiness of the United States."
The fact that Megahed was acquitted of criminal charges and not deported, the agency informed him, "does not entitle you to a favorable decision on your naturalization application."
Kuck, Megahed's attorney, said Megahed has met his burden to prove he is a person of good moral character as defined by federal law. He has no criminal convictions and has done nothing wrong, Kuck said, and now the burden is on the government.
The agency filed a motion in federal court asking that Megahed's lawsuit be dismissed as moot because it had given Megahed his answer.
But Kuck responded by asking a judge to rule that the citizenship agency had forfeited its right to decide the case by not acting within 120 days as required by law. The service is "determined to deny this application on grounds that hold no factual or legal basis," Kuck wrote. "The service cannot be trusted with a review of this case given their demonstrated desire to deny our applicant a fair and constitutionally just hearing."
The agency's 17-page citizenship denial includes excerpts of transcripts of Megahed's three citizenship interviews in which he was interrogated about the South Carolina trip, whether he had viewed anti-American Internet sites and his relationship with Mohamed.
When pushed for details about what was in the car when they were stopped, Megahed repeatedly referred the interview officer to "the list," an apparent reference to an evidence log that had been provided to the agency.
"Your responses show a continuing pattern of vague, non-responsive testimony," the agency wrote.
Kuck said the agency selectively chose limited portions of transcripts of nearly 10 hours of interviews in which Megahed was asked the same questions "over and over and over again." Megahed was "frustrated" with the questioning, Kuck said.
The agency also found Megahed's answers about his relationship to Mohamed to be "non-responsive," which the notice says "amounts to a failure to meet your burden of proof."
Kuck said Megahed "had no involvement with what Mohamed was doing." Their friendship was "not based on Mohamed's crazy tendencies in regards to terrorism."
The agency wrote that the amount of time the two spent together "is important because it goes to an association with someone who had been arrested and detained in Egypt for supporting HAMAS (Islamic Resistance Movement) and other terrorist organizations; who was very open about his anti-American views; and who, after being arrested with you, eventually pled guilty in federal court to providing material support to terrorists.
"Your close association with Mohamed is also apparent from the 113 phone calls between you and Mohamed between June 6, 2007, and Aug. 3, 2007. Also, your excursion to a shooting range in Tampa, Florida to fire your Mossberg rifle with Mohamed and your possession of Mohamed's laptop computer at the time of the arrest in South Carolina indicate your level of association."
Mohamed's attorney, Lyann Goudie, said Mohamed was detained and tortured in Egypt for about three months after he was accused of donating to a charity that the government asserted supported terrorists. He eventually was cleared and released, she said. Goudie said the U.S. State Department investigated the allegations and also cleared Mohamed before he was allowed to enter the country on a student visa.
esilvestrini@tampatrib.com
(813) 259-7837
Copyright © 2012, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: March 19, 2012


End of Document