Megamall battles terrorism insurance
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 1, 2002, Friday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 582 words
Byline: Dee DePass; Staff Writer
Body


The terrorism insurance issue hit home for the nation's largest mall last week when Mall of America's owners had to obtain a temporary restraining order against its mortgage company, which wanted to force a terrorism policy on the mall.
     GMAC Commercial Mortgage Corp. demanded that the Bloomington mall get a policy against terrorism. Mall owners Simon Property Group, saying the cost was prohibitive, took GMAC to court. A Hennepin District Court issued a temporary restraining order against GMAC a week ago.
   "The owners of the Mall of America were left with no alternative but to seek a restraining order," Simon officials said in a prepared statement Wednesday.
     The proposed terrorism coverage was "nearly three times the cost of the mall's 'all risk' property insurance premium for 2002," Simon officials said. The coverage limits also were unreasonably low relative to the value of the mall and excluded a number of risks, they said.
     The amount insurers are requiring for the specialty coverage is "a commercially unreasonable sum which will only increase the financial burden on the mall's tenants, many of whom are small business owners," they said.
     The terrorist coverage issue is being felt nationwide because most property insurers and reinsurers stopped providing terrorism insurance after the Sept. 11 attacks. The industry has largely waited for Congress to create a law that helps share the risks of terrorism between the private insurance market and the government.
     Insurance industry groups and insurers such as the St. Paul Cos., Chubb Insurance Group. and other large property insurers have complained about the lack of congressional action.
     More large commercial lenders appear to be following GMAC's lead in demanding that their bigger customers have the coverage. The Woodfield Mall, in Schaumburg, Ill., a Chicago suburb, confirmed this week that it is having problems refinancing its loan. Morgan Stanley Dean Witter & Co. won't make a loan until that mall's property owners obtain terrorism insurance. Other building projects also have slowed or been halted over the insurance issue.
     Mark Kulda of the Insurance Federation of Minnesota predicted the current problem months ago and blamed Congress for its lack of action.
     Bob Hartwig, an economist at the Insurance Information Institute in New York, predicted that until some form of guidance comes from Washington, terrorism insurance will continue to be excluded on primary insurance policies, and separate policy premium quotes will rise significantly.
     "This is a problem that will continue to snowball," said Jay Hyde, director of the newly formed Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism. "The insurance companies have made it very clear that they will not offer these kinds of terrorism coverages anymore. And the few who do will be exorbitantly expensive."
     Without the coverage, loan covenants risk default, he said.
     To battle the problem, the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, which Hyde also heads, has partnered with the National Football League, Hilton Hotels, Union Pacific Rail Road, and 40 lodging, manufacturing, banking, restaurant and property associations.
     "Members of the coalition are meeting with [U.S.] Senate staff to explain the urgency of the problem throughout the economy," said Hyde, noting that the House passed its version of a bill last session. "We need the Senate to act."
    _ Dee DePass is at ddepass@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: March 1, 2002


End of Document