Memorial
The Bismarck Tribune
March 31, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 8A
Length: 411 words
Body


War feeds upon sacrifice. And that sacrifice should be acknowledged.
The North Dakota Army National Guard and the Bismarck City Commission are partnering to create a Global War on Terrorism Fallen Heroes Memorial. It will be located just south of Fraine Barracks near Liberty Memorial Bridge. It's to be a small plaza, with, as its focus, a pair of boots, a hat and dog tags - modern symbols of boots-on-the-ground soldiers.
Constructing this war memorial is the right kind of thing to do. It will acknowledge the sacrifice of those who gave their lives for our country. It ensures those lost are not forgotten.
So far, 20 service members from North Dakota have lost their lives in this global war on terrorism. It would be naive to believe there will be no more. War memorials should always be a reminder of the price of the decision to enjoin the battle.
The estimated cost of this war memorial has been set at $50,000. There will be a campaign to raise the funds in May and June, and work on the memorial is expected to begin in late spring or early summer. Raising these funds should be no problem.
North Dakota Adjutant General Dave Spryczynatyk put it this way: "We have lost a number of young men and women in this nation that have fought for the freedoms we so much cherish."
Bismarck-Mandan has a number of war memorials, including one on the state Capitol grounds. Each Memorial Day, groups of veterans tour the memorials and cemeteries, raising flags, conducting ceremonies and firing salutes to honor the fallen. The Global War on Terrorism Fallen Heroes Memorial will be added to the itinerary, which, for North Dakota, begins with the Spanish American War and marches through time to include World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, Gulf Storm and now the battles in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The memorial will include plaques with the names of those North Dakotans killed in this most recent war - the global war on terrorism.
For those who have worn the uniform in time of war, to have communities acknowledge them means a lot. For those families of soldiers who have fallen, to have their community acknowledge their sacrifice and the sacrifice of their loved ones means a lot. These people have made personal and deep contributions to our nationhood.
The National Guard and the city of Bismarck are acknowledging the sacrifice of another generation of soldiers in our latest war. It is the right thing to do. If asked, please help.
a fitting
tribute

Load-Date: March 31, 2009


End of Document