Memorial will honor victims of Flight 93
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 15, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 7
Length: 411 words
Byline: doug lang Central Alternative High School
Body


Editor's note: Students at Central Alternative High School are conducting in-depth research on the impact and significance of global terrorism.
The Telegraph Herald is publishing essays written by the students as part of their project that will culminate in a public seminar on global terrorism in the spring of 2008.
On Sept. 11, 2001, four planes were hijacked. Three out of four planes were flown into their intended target. The fourth plane, Flight 93, did not make it.
Originally heading to San Francisco, Calif., from Newark, N.J., it made an unexpected turn toward Washington, D.C. When the passengers learned from family members on the ground, via cell phones, that other planes were flown into the World Trade Center, the passengers and crew voted to try and take back control of the plane. During the attempt, the terrorists lost control of the plane and it crashed into a field in Somerset County, Pa.
Currently there is a temporary memorial overlooking the crash site. It is a section of a fence that is 40 feet long and the area is filled with things left behind by visitors as their tokens of appreciation. There also are written messages left behind in books and cards. All the items placed here are taken care of with special preservation techniques. There are now plans to build a permanent Flight 93 National Memorial.
The plans include a Tower of Voices at the entrance of the site. The tower will contain 40 wind chimes and will be surrounded by rings of White Pines. The sound of the wind chimes will honor the victims as their last contacts were their voices. The Entry Portal will lie on the northwestern edge of the Bowl, which forms the heart of the memorial. The Bowl will be circular shaped and surrounded by 40 groves. Within each grove there will be 40 red and sugar maple trees. Between the trees there will be a walkway to the Sacred Ground. In the Sacred Ground, people will be able to see the crash site from close up. There also will be a wall with the 40 names of the people who died carved into it.
I believe this is an important memorial because what the people on Flight 93 did should not be forgotten. They defeated hijackers. Some people say this was the first victory in the war on terrorism. I also think the idea of the memorial is great. It will be interesting to see it finished.
Information for the article comes from the pamphlet "Flight 93 National Memorial," published by the National Park Service, and www.Honorflight93.org.

Load-Date: March 15, 2008


End of Document