MEN, WOMEN OF U.S. MILITARY GIRD FOR WAR AGAINST TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 21, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a6
Length: 599 words
Byline: JOHN McALPIN, Associated Press writer
Body


McGUIRE AIR FORCE BASE, N.J. -- U.S. military troops scrambled into action Thursday, stuffing belongings into duffel bags and saying sad goodbyes to loved ones as they prepared for what promises to be a long battle against terrorism.
More than 2,000 Marines shipped out from Camp Lejeune, N.C., for a long-planned tour of the Mediterranean that could turn into a mission against terrorists.
"If Marines are called upon in the Mediterranean, we would be the first to go," said Col. Andrew Frick, commander of the 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit. "We are the point on the spear."
His 2,200 Marines and sailors said goodbye to loved ones, then loaded bulging duffel bags, helmets and rifles onto buses and helicopters for a trip to the docks. Among them was Staff Sgt. Reuben Long of Danville, Iowa, who said goodbye to his 16-month-old daughter, Madison, outside a barracks.
"I love you," he whispered repeatedly, kissing the child's face as his wife, Heather, watched. Then he grabbed his M-16 rifle and pack and jumped aboard a bus.
At McGuire Air Force Base in central New Jersey, giant C-141 cargo planes could be seen taking off every 10 minutes for destinations unknown.
Col. John Pray, wing commander, said McGuire's KC-10 refueling planes and C-141s were deployed, and up to 64,000 National Guard and Reserve members within 300 miles of the base could be sent from McGuire.
In Wrightstown, a town outside Fort Dix and McGuire, troops in combat fatigues stopped at shoe stores, hardware stores and other businesses in preparation for the call-up.
Judy Mead-Morgan of Bridgewater watched the preparations with a mixture of apprehension and pride.
"I'm scared for my sons, and I'm scared for America," said Mead-Morgan, 49, who has one son aboard the USS Enterprise in the Persian Gulf and another in the Marine Corps reserves. "I'm very proud of them, but I'm torn. I don't want them to be there, and yet I do."
The Air Force has been ordered to dispatch more than 100 fighters, B-52 bombers and tankers to the Persian Gulf as part of the first phase of President Bush's war on terrorism. Around the country, supply planes and refueling tankers took to the skies, while Army troops and Marines awaited orders, ready to fight in a war without borders.
"I volunteered for this assignment, so I'm anxious to get over there," said Marine Cpl. Bruce Carlstrand, 32, who said goodbye to wife Debbie and sons, Brandon, 7, and Tyler, 3, at Camp Lejeune. "I wasn't hoping for something like this to happen, but I'm glad to be on the front lines, so to speak."
Debbie Carlstrand said the deployment left her depressed: "But just think of it this way he's out helping protect our country."
At Fort Hood, Texas, the largest military base in the country with 42,000 soldiers, the family of Army Sgt. Joel Vaughn waited to learn whether he would be called to action.
When he was sent to Bosnia in 1996, his wife, Carrie, told their young daughter that he was protecting people around the world, just like Bambi's father protected animals in the forest. She said she is not sure what she will tell her daughter Dianna, now 7, and Dianna's younger sisters if he goes again.
"I have complete faith in him. He says he trusts the soldiers he is working with and he says they will be safe," she said.
Staff Sgt. Jacob Thomas said tackling terrorism is different from the Gulf War. "It's a little more personal," he said as he picked up ammunition pouches at an Army surplus store near Fort Hood.
At Fort Bragg, N.C., some 42,000 Army soldiers were back on a training schedule that was interrupted by last week's terrorist attacks.

Graphic

 
Photos by BOB JORDAN/The Associated Press * Lance Cpl. James Kenyon says goodbye to his infant son, Tommy, as his wife, Mitzy, fights back tears. Kenyon was preparing to leave Camp Lejeune, N.C., on Thursday for deployment to the Mediterranean. * Marine Staff Sgt. Reuben Long has a private moment with his 16-month-old daughter, Madison, as he says goodbye during preparations to leave Camp Lejeune, N.C.

Load-Date: September 21, 2001


End of Document