Mexico and US won't discuss immigration issues at NAFTA nation summit; Talks: Migration, NAFTA off agenda
El Universal (Mexico)
March 23, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 NoticiasFinancieras/Groupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 345 words
Body


Mexico and the United States will not discuss immigration issues at Wednesday's NAFTAnation summit, Interior Secretariat Santiago Creel said Tuesday in a sharp about-turn on his previous statements.
On Monday he said that he would put on the agenda legalizing undocumented Mexicans in the United States, but a day later he said that the talks will only be about issues that affect all three countries, Canada, Mexico and the United States.
Reaching an immigration deal with Mexico was a promise U.S. President George Bush made early in his first term. Five years later, while Bush battles U.S. Congress to get lawmaker support for his guest worker plan, illegal Mexican immigrants still wait for regularization of their status.
NO TRADE REFORMS
Immigration is not on the agenda as he meets Wednesday in Waco, Texas, with President Vicente Fox and Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin. Nor is the Free Trade Area of the Americas another early Bush promise that was supported by both his NAFTA partners.
Fox, however, is expected to speak about last week's perceived insult from C.I.A. Director Porter J. Goss, who said that Mexico may become unstable in the run up to 2006 presidential elections and referred to it as the United States' "backyard."
Foreign Relations Secretary Luis Ernesto Derbez, who is attending the summit, said that Fox calls the shots with regards to Mexico's official protest. "Whatever I say, whatever (Interior) Secretary Creel says, whatever (Economy) Secretary Canales says.... will simply reflect the instructions received from the president," he said.
While the Sept. 11 attacks pushed trade and immigration deals to the bottom of the NAFTA agenda, they have, however, pushed terrorism and security-related issues to the top of the summit's priority list.
TERRORISM CONCERNS
Derbez said Mexico is very worried about terrorism because it not only affects the United States, but does not recognize borders or nationalities. "We have a lot of foreign investment, not only from America, but from many other places, that could interest terrorists at any moment."

Load-Date: March 23, 2005


End of Document