Mexico to take Bolivia embassy dispute to The Hague
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 27, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 376 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The Mexican government announced on Thursday that it is appealing to a United Nations court to settle a dispute between the country and Bolivia.
In that sense, the organization recalled that the Mexican diplomatic headquarters is now sheltering former minister of the Presidency Juan Ramon Quintana; former ministers of Defense, Justice and Mining, Javier Zavaleta, Hector Arce and Cesar Navarro, respectively; former governor of Oruro, Victor Hugo Vasquez; former director of Electronic Government, Nicolas Laguna; and recognized Bolivian political communicator and analyst Hugo Moldiz.
Tensions began to rise again Monday when Bolivia sent about 90 police officers and soldiers to surround the embassy, compared with no more than 6 normally, Ebrard said.
Even during military coups of the 1970s and 1980s, governments respected the independence of embassies, Ebrard said.
A Bolivian official said his government is trying to protect the Mexican embassy but wants anyone who "committed acts of terrorism.to face justice".
Morales resigned as Bolivia's president on November 10, after conservative opponents staged demonstrations against alleged vote fraud in his attempt to win reelection.
Toronto rapper Bvlly killed in early-morning shooting in Oshawa, Ont.
Police are urging anyone with information about the shooting to contact the Durham Regional Crime Stoppers. Oshawa resident Amanda Alldread said she heard the gunshots as she was stepping outside for a smoke.
In his place, a conservative politician assumed the position as interim president.
Mexico's foreign ministry, in a statement, had accused Bolivia of intimidation of Mexican diplomats with increased police presence outside the Mexican embassy and official residence, calling it a flagrant violation of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
A group of Morales' allies have been holed up in the embassy since last month when they were granted asylum by Mexico.
He called for the worldwide community's help to resolve the "emergency". Days later, Bolivia's government said it had issued arrest warrants for four of them, he added.
"What is involved here is the integrity of a representation of Mexico". "Besides that, [the Bolivian government's actions] puts into question the rights of asylum".

Load-Date: December 27, 2019


End of Document