Mexico urges tighter USA gun control after deadly El Paso shooting
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
August 7, 2019 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 473 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


It quoted Mr Ebrard as saying Mexico's Prosecutor General's Office would determine if there were sufficient grounds to seek the extradition of Patrick Crusius, the 21-year-old white male arrested for the El Paso shootings.
Mexico's foreign ministry also condemned Saturday's shooting as a terrorist attack against Mexican and Mexican-American people. "It'll be the first investigative case of this significance in history concerning terrorism on US Territory".
They said his language played a part in encouraging the anti-immigrant feelings that reportedly motivated the suspect in the El Paso attack.
El Paso, Texas, Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation continue to investigate the crime scene of the Cielo Vista Mall Walmart shootingon August 6, 2019.
El Universal headlined its print edition "Mexico will accuse author of El Paso massacre of terrorism".
Meanwhile, following the shooting at a Walmart in El Paso that left at least 20 dead people dead,Mexico is considering legal action for what they are calling a terrorist attack, Complex reports. Many, like Ivania and Del Toro, are waiting for the adjudication of political asylum petitions filed when they were detained on the US side. Police Sgt. Robert Gomez says most of the victims were inside the store.
"We come to save money, but look what happened".
Marina de Santiago, an El Paso resident who was shopping with her daughter and four grandchildren, said her sister in Ciudad Juarez is reluctant to cross into El Paso right now.
British Airways IT problems cause flight cancellations and delays
British Airways passengers have reported delayed and cancelled flights due to IT issues with the company's check-in systems this morning.
"Despite the sorrow, we are not going to allow ourselves [Mexico] to be used in the [US] electoral process", the Mexican leader, who is known by the initials of his full name, AMLO, said.
"We have to get back to normal".
Venezuela's foreign minister issued a statement for citizens to postpone their travel plans to the US or take precautions when doing so "given the proliferation of acts of violence and crimes of indiscriminate hatred".
"We will definitely be presenting a case against the sale and distribution of assault weapons, since that's the weapon that took the lives of eight Mexican nationals and - up until now - the lives of 14 Americans", Ebrard said in Spanish.
Ramos, who works at a factory near the border, said she had never applied for a visa to visit the United States. "It will leave an impression that you'll never forget".
Her friend Carlos Franco, who recently graduated from college with a degree in global business, said the shooting had made him not want to travel to the United States.
Mexico's foreign minister offered support for victims of the attack as the families on both sides of the border begin to plan 22 funerals.

Load-Date: August 7, 2019


End of Document