Miami considered ripe for terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 19, 1991, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 1039 words
Byline: RICK BRAGG
Dateline: MIAMI
Body


Buses carrying Jewish children to school on Miami Beach have the name of the school or temple covered in black cloth or cardboard. Jewish community leaders say it is not a matter of alarm, only discretion.
 
    In Miami, no one talks about terrorism as if it came from the dark side of the moon.
 
  The mechanism of terrorism is already in place in wide-open Miami and has been for years, said an expert on terrorism and international security. The city is perfect for terrorists as a place to operate, as a target and as a place to hide, said M. Cohen, an Israeli who runs a security and anti-terrorism consulting firm in downtown Miami.
   Cohen doesn't mean that cells of revenge-minded terrorists are clustered in Miami, planning to maim and kill.
 
    He means that all the things that have made Miami the nation's drug clearinghouse for more than 10 years make it a prime potential terrorist destination: a true international airport, a busy commercial port that delivers everything from refugees to narcotics, a burgeoning illegal weapons market and people who will do anything for money.
 
    And as targets: one of the nation's largest, most politically powerful and vocal Jewish communities; the world's largest cruise ship industry; the Turkey Point nuclear power plant, already cited by Fidel Castro as prime real estate for terrorists; the always crowded, always bustling Miami International Airport; and though much less likely Homestead Air Force Base and Coast Guard installations.
 
    Cohen is a former Israeli military officer who specialized in covert operations and counter-espionage. His business is helping organizations and governments become more secure, and his clients are government intelligence agencies and corporations that need special security. He also furnishes sophisticated security hardware infrared sighting devices, listening devices, motion detection devices, the latest in bulletproof vests.
 
    If terrorists strike in South Florida, Cohen thinks they will avoid more obvious, heavily guarded sites and strike places where they can create maximum destruction with maximum attention.
 
    No dynamite-laden truck will ram a Coast Guard installation's main gate. It will be a bomb at the Bayside shopping center, Miami's most-visited tourist attraction. It will be a few grenades on the MetroRail train, or a man with a gun on a cruise to Bimini, he thinks.
 
    Cohen does not expect widespread attacks and hopes there are none at all. But a few well-placed, bloody acts should be expected in America, especially in South Florida.
 
    "The terrorist is saying, "See, I show you that you are vulnerable,"' Cohen said.
 
    Elsewhere in Florida are similar tempting targets. If Cohen were a terrorist, he said, he would "go for the Mickey Mouse (Disney World in Orlando), because it is a place the whole world knows about, … and the Super Bowl in Tampa."
 
    Cohen is not afraid that he is giving terrorists ideas. The terrorism network, he said, has always operated on the idea of doing the most harm for the least risk, the most carnage for the least trouble.
 
    The FBI and other law enforcement officials present a more soothing perspective.
 
    FBI spokesman Paul Miller said such terrorist acts are a "legitimate concern for the whole U.S. Anything can happen. But there is no reason right now to suspect anything will happen in Miami … other than the fact we are an international city and attract  a lot of media attention."
 
    It is only common sense the sort of common sense that led Jewish officials to black out the names on school buses to expect the worst.
 
    In Miami, terrorists are not as likely to come from halfway around the world as from Latin America, Cohen said, "in Salvador, Panama, Nicaragua, Colombia, … people who have a reason to hate the U.S." Those political and drug cultures have been waiting for years for a catalyst such as Saddam Hussein, he said.
 
    International terrorism networks will use those Latin contacts.  And where an Arab might draw attention in some airports, even Miami, one more Hispanic person among thousands will just melt quietly into the culture.
 
    "They won't be going to Washington, to the White House, where security is sure to stop them," he said. "They will not go to Kennedy airport, but they can go to a place like Bayside mall … do their damage and disappear."
 
    Cohen's family is still in Israel. He worries about them, of course, but at least he knows national security forces in Israel won't be caught napping. His country is one where pilots wait strapped into their jets to save the few crucial seconds it would take to buckle in, where planes are always in the air, where a package left unattended in a public place is immediately suspect.
 
    At home in Israel, he walks to the bus stop every day to make sure he knows the man or woman driving his children's bus.
 
    It isn't that precautions aren't being taken in South Florida and the rest of the nation. Miami's airport has increased its security personnel by a third; Coast Guard installations are sandbagging entrances; port security has tightened.
 
    But Cohen worries about a nation so alien to international terrorism. At the Miami airport, bomb-sniffing dogs are hard at work, but the bomb is almost an outmoded form of airport terrorism. Now, for maximum effect, a terrorist could walk freely through the front entrance, where there are no metal detectors, and kill dozens with an automatic weapon.
 
    Cohen said simple roadblocks and searches could stop it. The average terrorist is not a calm, cool professional, but a fidgety, sweating zealot, he said. A roadblock would uncover him, but that would mean incredible inconvenience at an airport used by thousands every day.
 
    Of particular concern to Cohen is Miami's large Jewish population. A strike against it could be particularly appealing to terrorists. But Miami's Jewish leaders are trying to take precautions without panicking. Some Jewish organizations offices, synagogues, even some businesses are locking doors during business hours and covering signs.
 
    "Someone said once," said Myron Brodie, executive vice president of the Miami Jewish Federation, "that discretion is the better part of valor."

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document