Miami Imam Will Plead Not Guilty to Aiding Terror Group, Lawyer Says
The New York Times
May 17, 2011 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 811 words
Byline: By DON VAN NATTA Jr.
Body


MIAMI -- The 76-year-old imam of South Florida's oldest mosque will plead not guilty to charges of financing terrorism in Pakistan, his defense lawyer said on Monday.
After a hearing in Federal District Court here, Khurrum Wahid, the lawyer for the imam, Hafiz Muhammed Sher Ali Khan, pleaded with the community not to prejudge his client.
Mr. Khan, the leader of the Miami Mosque in west Miami, was charged along with two of his sons and three other people with providing material assistance to the Pakistani Taliban from 2008 to 2010.
''The public may have preconceived notions,'' Mr. Wahid said. ''I would ask the public to keep an open mind, and remember that everyone is innocent until proven guilty in this country.''
As he sat in the jury box's first row in Magistrate Judge Barry L. Garber's courtroom, Mr. Khan, who has a long, snow-white beard and wears thick, black-rimmed glasses, appeared frail and confused (the proceedings were translated in Mr. Khan's native Urdu). On at least two occasions, Mr. Khan tried to say something to court personnel and he struggled to walk to the lectern to face the judge.
He suffers from a heart condition, failing eyesight and diabetes, his lawyer said. ''We're very concerned about his health,'' Mr. Wahid said.
One of Mr. Khan's sons, Izhar Khan, 24, the imam of a mosque in Margate, Fla., sat near his father in the jury box. Both men appeared in court for the first time since their federal indictment was unsealed late last week. Neither man entered a plea.The indictment says the defendants conspired to provide material support to a conspiracy to murder, maim and kidnap people overseas, including planning to funnel at least $50,000 to the Pakistani Taliban.
The Pakistani Taliban, which the State Department has named a terrorist organization, took responsibility for a suicide attack in Pakistan on Friday that killed more than 80 cadets from a government paramilitary force.
Of the 50 largest terrorism cases in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001, about 70 percent have involved financing or other support for terrorist groups, according to the Center on Law and Security at the New York University School of Law.
But in a number of high-profile cases, prosecutors have discovered that proving material support for terrorist organizations is a challenge, legal experts say.
Family and friends of the Khans have asserted that all money sent to Pakistan was intended to help poor family members and support a madrasa in northwest Pakistan.
But legal experts say the fact that cash contributions might have been intended for humanitarian purposes is no longer a defense to supporting terrorism because money is so easily transferred.
''The key difficulty in prosecuting cases under this provision is proving that the contribution was made 'knowingly,' '' said Victor Comras, a Fort Lauderdale lawyer and former State Department official who writes frequently about Al Qaeda and terrorism financing cases.
Mr. Comras said that in past cases against accused terrorism financiers, prosecutors have struggled to prove intent unless they have clear evidence like recorded statements.
According to the indictment, a tape-recorded phone conversation has Mr. Khan calling for an attack on the Pakistani Assembly similar to a suicide bombing of the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad, Pakistan, on Sept. 20, 2008.
Prosecutors say that in another phone conversation, Mr. Khan ''declared his wish that God kill 50,000'' American soldiers.
Mr. Khan's lawyer declined to discuss the specific charges.
In recent years, prosecutors have had mixed success in terrorism-financing prosecutions.
The prosecution in Dallas of the Holy Land Foundation, accused of supporting the Palestinian militant group Hamas, is one example. Several defendants were acquitted in 2007 at the first trial, which ended in a mistrial for others. During a retrial in 2008, prosecutors won guilty verdicts against the Holy Land Foundation and five individuals for giving more than $12 million to Hamas, which the United States designated as a terrorist organization in 1995.
Three of those indicted last week in Miami are still in Pakistan. The fourth is Irfan Khan, the 37-year-old son of Hafiz Khan who appeared on Monday in federal court in Los Angeles.
Since the charges were publicized on Saturday, the Miami Mosque, known as the Flagler Mosque, has received two telephone threats, said Nezar Hamze, the executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, in Pembroke Pines, Fla. On Monday evening, a van was parked in front of the mosque bearing a sign that said it should be burned down.
''This is the type of backlash that occurs,'' Mr. Hamze said. ''We are telling the community to remain on alert.'' The police have set up a 24-hour presence at both mosques, he added.
A pretrial detention hearing for Hafiz Khan and Izhar Khan is scheduled for May 23.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The Miami Mosque, whose leader, Hafiz Muhammed Sher Ali Khan, is accused of financing terrorism. The mosque has received threats since the charges were publicized on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE RAEDLE/GETTY IMAGES)                                              

Load-Date: May 17, 2011


End of Document