MIAMI READY TO ACT;
County officials detail roles, responses to terrorism threats
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 13, 2002 Saturday WARREN COUNTY EDITION


Copyright 2002 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: WARREN; Pg. 4B
Length: 311 words
Byline: Nancy Bowman Miami County Bureau
Body


TROY - Agencies in Miami County have been involved in terrorism-related education and training for a few years, but the activities didn't get much attention.
That changed Sept. 11.
The National Association of Counties took the opportunity this week to tell people how important their county agencies are in safeguarding their way of life during National County Government Week. The Miami County observance reflected that message with the theme Making Miami County a Better Safer Place to Live.
County Commissioner Ron Widener said heightened awareness of potential dangers is important with Interstate 75 cutting through the county and Wright-Patterson Air Force Base not too far away.
"We've always been real comfortable in this part of the country. We have a lot more trust and a lot more openness. We really take it for granted here," Widener said. "We are more sensitive now than we had been, even one year ago. We've been so fortunate, we don't dare become too lackadaisical."
Miami County this year was one of 25 in the state to receive a $50,000 federal homeland security grant for projects that will be identified once grant guidelines are received. Widener said he expects the money will go for training and equipment, such as protective suits for emergency responders.
Among topics discussed was communications between emergency agencies. Although Miami County has a central communications center for agencies, many do not, so the state is setting up a system to allow interagency communications. A simulation of a biohazard case, at a concert attended by people from across the state, also was held. The goal was to help agencies determine strengths and weaknesses; equipment that would be needed; specialized people who'd need to be called; and increase awareness that until resources from outside are available, the local agencies are on their own in responding.

Load-Date: April 16, 2002


End of Document