Michigan Gov. Whitmer calls Trump's latest attacks 'incredibly disturbing'
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 20, 2020 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 492 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"Trump's campaign, which uses the Twitter handle "Trump War Room" on Twitter, pointed out the clearly visible "8645" on a table beside Whitmer during an interview with NBC News hostChuck Todd on 'Meet the Press" Sunday morning, claiming it is an anti-Trump message encouraging the President's execution almost two weeks before the election.
Trump's daughter-in-law and campaign adviser, Lara Trump, sought to portray the incident as overblown and told CNN the president was "having fun".
GovernorGretchen Whitmer displayed an "86 45" sign during her TV appearance. Whitmer, with her nationally televised call to "86" our 45th president not only displayed her contempt for Trump but also for the more than two million MI voters who went for Trump over Hillary Clinton in 2016 and put the state in the Republican column for the first time since 1988.
'Whitmer is encouraging assassination attempts against President Trump just weeks after someone sent a ricin-laced package to the White House'. "86 can be shorthand for killing someone", the Trump campaign suggested. "Merriam-Webster defines eighty-six as a slang term synonymous with the following phrases: "to refuse to serve (a customer)', 'to get rid of", or 'throw out". The Trump representatives claim that "these are the standards she [Whitmer] set".
"Biden and the Democrats want to keep MI locked down and locked up and closed for business", Trump said. 8645. Nice plant, too.
Five more cases of Covid-19 in Leitrim
There were 107 cases reported in Galway on Saturday, the largest single day rise the county has seen in the pandemic. Limerick's 14-day incidence rate per 100,000 population stands at 249.4 which is below the national average of 261.7.
After the interview, Trump's campaign quickly seized on a single item that was spotted on a table in the background of Whitmer's interview: A pin with the numbers "8645" on it.
Michigan GovernorGretchen Whitmer said on Sunday (US time) that President Donald Trump is inciting "domestic terrorism" following "lock her up" chants at his rally in the state the night before. "And, in all fairness to people who listen to him, people think the president is important and what he says should be adhered to".
"It's incredibly disturbing", she said, "that the president of the United States - ten days after a plot to kidnap, put me on trial, and execute me - ten days after that was uncovered, the president is at it again and inspiring and incentivizing and inciting this kind of domestic terrorism". "It is wrong. It's got to end". During the Muskegon rally, the President said the Governor needs to ease up on her restrictions in Michigan, now being done with Orders from state departments to circumvent a series of stinging rebukes from the Michigan Supreme Court which nullified her virus-related Executive Orders.
"I am the Governor's Deputy Digital Director". He then resumed: "I guess they say she was threatened and she blamed me". "It just has to".

Load-Date: October 20, 2020


End of Document