MICHAEL LEE LARKIN; April 11, 1969-July 10, 2009
The Pendleton Record
August 6, 2009


Copyright 2009 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2009 The Pendleton Record


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 342 words
Byline: The Pendleton Record staff
Body


RADCLIFF, Ky. - Michael Lee Larkin, 40, of Radcliff, Ky., died there Friday, July 10,2009, after a motorcycle accident. Funeral services were held Wednesday, July 15 at Nelson-Edelen-Bennett Funeral Home in Radcliff. An Oregon memorial service is pending, to be held in Pendleton in September (call 541-932-4367 or 541-427-3073 for information on local services). Burial with military honors will be in Kentucky Veterans Cemetery-Central in Radcliff. He wished to be buried in Oregon.
Mr. Larkin was born April 11, 1969, in Pendleton. Upon entering the Oregon National Guard he was assigned to the 3/116th ACR in Milton-Freewater. He attended basic training and advanced individual training at Fort Knox. He later joined the active Army in 1989, attending additional training at Fort Knox and graduating asan M1 systems mechanic. He had attained the rank of sergeant first class.
His overseas assignments include two tours in Germany, Operation Joint Guard in Bosnia, Operation Able Sentry in Macedonia, Operation Iraqi Freedom II and Korea.
His awards include the Army Commendation Medal with three Oak Leaf Clusters, Army Achievement Medal with two Oak Leaf Clusters, Good Conduct Medal (6), National Defense Service Medal, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Korean Defense Service Medal, Armed Forces Service Medal, NCO Professional Development Ribbon, Army Service Ribbon, Overseas Service Ribbon (4), Army Reserve Component Overseas Training Ribbon and a NATO Medal.
Survivors include his wife, Mary Crain Larkin of Radcliff, Ky.; son Anthony Michael Larkin; daughter Brooklyn Rene Alexandria Larkin; fatherThomasE. Larkin of Ukiah; mother Martha Larkin of Nevada; brothers T.J. Larkin of Hawaii, Jerry Larkin of Washington and Eugene Donald Larkin of Oregon; sister Linda Larkin of Nevada; aunt Darlene J. Larkin of Mt. Vernon; and many cousins, nieces and nephews.
He was preceded in death by uncles Philip Negus and James L Hehn, and grandmother Corabell Larkin Negus.

Load-Date: November 15, 2009


End of Document