Michael Sheehan, Expert Who Flagged Bin Laden As Risk Early, Dies at 63
The New York Times
August 3, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Obituary; Pg. 13
Length: 1057 words
Byline: By ERIC SCHMITT
Body


WASHINGTON -- Michael A. Sheehan, a former top counterterrorism official for the State Department, the Pentagon and New York City, who sounded an early, and unheeded, warning about Osama bin Laden and the dangers of Al Qaeda before 9/11, died on Monday in Bethesda, Md. He was 63.
His death, at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, was confirmed by his wife, Sita Graham Vasan. He had multiple myeloma, a form of cancer, she said. 
  Mr. Sheehan, an intensely energetic man, started a counterterrorism career of more than three decades as an Army Green Beret, leading a clandestine hostage-rescue assault team in Panama in 1979. Fluent in Spanish, he later carried out antidrug and counterinsurgency missions in El Salvador, Colombia and Honduras.
  A year after retiring from the Army, he was named, in 1998, the State Department's chief of counterterrorism. Soon he was presciently raising alarms about Al Qaeda and its leader.
  In a secret memorandum written that year, after the bombings of two United States embassies in East Africa, Mr. Sheehan urged the Clinton administration to step up efforts to persuade Afghanistan and its neighbors to cut off financing to Mr. bin Laden and stop giving Al Qaeda sanctuary, according to an account in The New York Times.
  Mr. Sheehan's memo outlined a series of actions the United States could take toward Pakistan, Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen to persuade them to help isolate Al Qaeda. The document called Pakistan pivotal to the strategy, urged Clinton aides to work with the countries to curb terrorist financing, and recommended that the United States go public if any of the governments failed to cooperate.
  Mr. Sheehan's plan ''landed with a resounding thud,'' one former official told The Times.
  ''He couldn't get anyone interested,'' the official said.
  Mr. Sheehan pressed on.
  ''What's it going to take to get them to hit Al Qaeda?'' he asked colleagues in 2000. ''Does Al Qaeda have to attack the Pentagon?''
  After 9/11, the administration of President George W. Bush ultimately took the steps outlined in the Sheehan memo, but the Bush White House, too, was accused of having earlier ignored warnings about the threat of attack by Al Qaeda.
  After the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Sheehan spent two years as an assistant secretary general of the United Nations, overseeing 16 missions and 40,000 military and police personnel in peacekeeping operations around the globe.
  In 2003, Raymond W. Kelly, commissioner of the New York Police Department, tapped Mr. Sheehan to run the force's new counterterrorism bureau. In three years, he created one of the world's elite terror-fighting units, overseeing some 220 officers and investigators.
  ''The foundation of N.Y.P.D.'s counterterrorism program was built by Mike Sheehan,'' Michael O'Neil, one of his top police deputies at the time, said in a telephone interview.
  Mr. Sheehan was searingly critical of America's post-9/11 counterterrorism strategies. In ''Crush the Cell: How to Defeat Terrorism Without Terrorizing Ourselves,'' published in 2008, he argued that the United States was relying too heavily on bloated security bureaucracies instead of fighting terrorism primarily through the combined efforts of diplomats, commandos, spies and law enforcement.
  ''Most of the billions spent on new bureaucracies, defense and intelligence contractors, and thousands of new Washington staff officers after 9/11 were unnecessary, in my view,'' he told Harper's Magazine in 2008.
  Attack Qaeda and other extremists with targeted raids fueled by specific intelligence, Mr. Sheehan wrote, but avoid the terrorist trap of overreacting to the inevitable domestic strike.
  ''We must continue to crush their cells relentlessly for another generation, but not overreact to their occasional attacks in the interim,'' he told the magazine. ''Terrorists succeed when we overreact.''
  Colleagues recalled Mr. Sheehan's passion -- a soldier-statesman-scholar who described himself as ''a door kicker'' and ''a swamp drainer'' (of terrorists around the world).
  ''That sometimes made him the squeaky wheel or the cranky contrarian voice,'' said Nicholas Rasmussen, a former director of the National Counterterrorism Center. ''But his was a voice that carried unparalleled credibility with his peers in government.''
  In 2011, Mr. Sheehan was named an assistant secretary of defense overseeing Special Operations forces and military drone policy worldwide. After leaving the Defense Department in 2013, he became a fellow at the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point and lectured and consulted.
  Michael Andrew Sheehan was born on Feb. 10, 1955, in Red Bank, N.J., and grew up in Hazlet, N.J., the second of seven children of John and Janet (Purcell) Sheehan. His father was a construction engineer, his mother a kindergarten teacher.
  He entered the Special Forces after graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., in 1977. He received a master's degree in 1988 from the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service and a second master's, in 1992, from the Army Command and Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.
  The next year, while still on active duty with the Army, he joined the staff of his former Georgetown professor, Madeleine K. Albright, when she was United States ambassador to the United Nations; he focused largely on peacekeeping issues. (Ms. Albright was later secretary of state in the Clinton administration.) He retired from the military in 1997 as a lieutenant colonel.
  Mr. Sheehan's first marriage, to Maria Eitel, ended in divorce. In addition to his wife, of 18 years, whom he met on a blind date to play tennis, he is survived by a daughter, Alexandra Eitel, from his first marriage; a son, Michael V. Sheehan, from his second marriage; and his father, three brothers and two sisters.
  In his final weeks, friends and colleagues say, Mr. Sheehan was brimming with enthusiasm about a new e-textbook that he was writing for United States Military Academy cadets, an assessment on Afghanistan that he was writing for the State Department and a draft of a new security strategy for the 21st century.
  Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism scholar at Georgetown University, said of Mr. Sheehan, ''He was always looking for new angles and new perspectives to solve problems.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/02/obituaries/michael-sheehan-counterterrorism-expert-dies-at-63.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Michael A. Sheehan, center, as an assistant secretary of defense, on Capitol Hill in 2013. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLYN KASTER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)       

Load-Date: August 3, 2018


End of Document