MIDDLE EAST PEACE IS BEST WEAPON AGAINST TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 21, 1995, Friday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 637 words
Byline: Eviatar Manor
Body


AS Israel and the Palestinians put the finishing touches on an interim
agreement - which will be signed July 25 in Washington - preparations
are being made on the ground for a partial Israeli withdrawal from four
West Bank towns, the transfer of more civil responsibilities to the
Palestinian Authority, and for implementation of Palestinian elections
in late October.
But all of these preparations and the upcoming agreement will be at risk
if the U.S. Congress doesn't renew the Middle East Peace Facilitation
Act - a 1993 law which permits American contacts with the PLO. An
extension of the existing legislation has been issued until mid-August.
At issue is continued American aid to the Palestinian Authority in light
of its ability to control terrorist attacks.
To date, America has pledged $ 500 million to the Palestinian Authority,
about $ 100 million of which has been delivered. It is essential that
this money flow to the Palestinian Authority so that it can continue to
control the Gaza Strip and later the West Bank. It is a very small
investment to protect U.S. interests in the Middle East.
Without continued American involvement and aid, the negotiations would
almost certainly founder and the Middle East could plummet into another
circle of violence and war. In short, the peace process is the best
investment to ensure peace; and it is also the best way to fight against
terrorism.
Each day Israeli authorities are closely monitoring the Palestinian
Authority's performance. Of course, the U.S. Congress also has a right
to ensure that the Palestinian Authority limit terrorist attacks as much
as possible. It has a right to know where American taxpayer money is
going. The Palestinian Authority should be held accountable for its
actions and policies.
As the recent State Department report on the Palestinian Authority's
compliance indicated: "the Palestinian Authority and Mr. Arafat have
taken several important steps to prevent violence and to punish those
responsible for violence and terrorism."
In recent months, Yasser Arafat has gotten a handle on the surge of
terrorist attacks. For instance, there were fewer attacks against
Israelis in April than any month since the beginning of the intifada in
1987.  And statistics for May are likely to be even lower.  We hope that
this is the start of a sustained and consistent effort to reduce the
level of violence in the area. As part of his crackdown, Arafat has
repeatedly condemned terrorism in public. He has set up a military court
to try terrorists and some activists have already been sentenced to
lengthy prison terms.  He has evidently reached a deal with Hamas and
Islamic Jihad, but it depends on progress in the peace process.
Since Arafat has headed the Palestinian Authority, none of the
organizations loyal to him have been involved in terrorist attacks
against Israel.  The recent State Department report confirmed it: "We
have no information that any PLO elements under Arafat's control were
involved in terrorism during the period covered by this report [from
Dec. 1, 1994, to May 31, 1995].
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has said that "we are now seeing
the first buds of Palestinian authority and governance." The real test,
he added, will be if the Palestinian Authority will be able "to improve
the economic situation and welfare of the Palestinians."
In my opinion, an economically strapped Palestinian Authority won't be
able to fight against today's Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorists, and it
surely won't be able to prevent the rise of the terrorists of tomorrow.
If there is any hope of winning the battle against terrorism, it must be
done through strengthening Arafat and in improving the living
conditions. That will only come through continued American aid and
future economic development.
Manor is consul-general of Israel for the Mid-Atlantic region, based in
Philadelphia.

Load-Date: July 24, 1995


End of Document