Middle schoolers tackle homegrown terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 18, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 1
Length: 402 words
Byline: Stacey Becker , stacey.becker@thmedia.com
Body


Adelina Canganelli took a break from middle school classes to discuss homegrown terrorism.
The Eleanor Roosevelt Middle School eighth-grader understands that even teenagers can be recruited by terrorists.
"We need to focus a lot more on people who are being recruited," Adelina said. "It's really easy for people to get in contact with teenagers over social media, and it's really easy to radicalize them and make them think like the terrorists do."
About 100 Dubuque public middle school students used parliamentary procedure at the 23rd annual Young Citizens Forum on Tuesday to tackle prevention of recruitment of U.S. citizens by terrorists, promotion of relationships between youth and authority figures, and creation of international protocols to protect people from Ebola.
Students researched and discussed solutions before the forum, held at Northeast Iowa Community College Town Clock Business Center. They then worked in groups during the forum to create proposals with a preamble and action clauses that will be sent to local and state representatives.
"It's all about citizenship in action," said Cheryl Werner, talented-and-gifted coordinator with Dubuque Community Schools, which sponsored the event.
Adelina enjoys community involvement. While delving into the topic of terrorism, she said the use of social media by teenagers should be monitored.
Many students seemed to enjoy debating with others.
"You kind of get a voice and you get to share how you feel about things, really important things," said Vera Weis, a Thomas Jefferson Middle School eighth-grader who believes there should be more police communication with youth.
Billy Carpenter, a George Washington Middle School eighth-grader, said he wants to help address and fix problems that affect the international community.
"It's actually pretty fun and interesting," he said.
Zach Fromm, a seventh-grade social studies teacher at Washington, played the role of facilitator for the international topic.
"To see the democratic process in action is always exciting," he said. "To watch the kids be eager to get their points and voice heard is something you don't always see in the classroom."
The forum was started 23 years ago by Thom Determan, former equity director for the district, to engage and empower students. The man who was an inspiration to many died in July.
"He's no longer with us on earth, but we know he's still here in spirit," Werner said.

Load-Date: February 18, 2015


End of Document