MIDDLE EASTERN MOVIE HITS ON TERRORISM FOR FIRST TIME
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 15, 1994, Friday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P 3A
Length: 495 words
Body


CAIRO, Egypt - A radical Muslim smashes a jewelry shop and video
store in the name of religion, then is killed for questioning his
faith after he falls in love with the daughter of a wealthy family
"The Terrorist," Egypt's first movie with militant Islam as a
serious theme, is proving Egyptians and Arabs in some other countries
will flock to a film about Islamic terrorism despite fears of
reprisal.
In Egypt, where a two-year campaign of extremist violence has
taken 350 lives, the film is being shown in 18 theaters, all heavily
guarded by police amid rumors extremists will plant bombs.
"I'm not going to let them change my life," said Sahar Hosni,
31, lining up with her husband and friends to pass through a metal
detector.
Screenwriter Lenin al-Ramly said the film "broke the circle of
fear" among producers.
"Movie makers thought people wouldn't attend," he said.  "But
the public's attendance proved that people are not with the
terrorists, nor are they afraid of them."
In the movie, Ali, played by Egyptian superstar Adel Imam, 54,
is a radical Muslim who justifies violence in the name of Islam.
As he and his gang try to track down and kill a secular
writer, Ali is taken incognito into the home of some of the writer's
friends, a wealthy, modern Muslim family.
Ali considers the family infidels: The parents don't pray, a son
drinks whiskey despite the Muslim ban on alcohol, and one daughter
works as a model and wears revealing clothes.
But Ali falls in love with the other daughter, discovers her
sister is not so brazen and realizes one of their Christian neighbors
he had derided believes in God as strongly as he does.
Slowly, Ali begins to doubt.  Back with his extremist comrades,
he breaks a cardinal rule by challenging the group's leader, is
pronounced a non-believer and killed by his one-time allies.
Screenwriter al-Ramly explains: "I was trying to say that not
only the terrorist, but society should be more tolerant of different
views, because intolerance leads to terrorism."
Unfortunately, not all agree.  "The Terrorist" was banned in
Tripoli, Lebanon, after a religious leader charged it insulted
Muslims.  It is banned throughout Jordan.
But in Kuwait, the movie is drawing crowds back to cinemas that
had lost popularity to videos.
Mubarak al Adwani, a member of Kuwait's liberal opposition,
wrote in the daily Al Qabas that the film was "a sign of a
grass roots anti-terrorism movement in Egypt."
Egyptian audiences applaud the movie's criticism of violence,
but some protest that its Muslim family is hardly Muslim at all.
"This was not the example of a good Muslim family," said Tarek
Hanafi, 20, a civil aviation student.  "We don't need to go from one
extreme to the other."
"But the public's attendance proved that people are not with
the terrorists, nor are they afraid of them." Lenin
al-RamlyScreenwriter
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS CINEMA CRAZE: A Cairo cinema is showing an
Adel Imam film "The Terrorist." The film depicts a militant
Islamist who is rendered docile by a moderate family.

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document