Middle Tennessee State U. professor studies terrorism in Israel
University Wire
July 7, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Sidelines via U-Wire
Length: 483 words
Byline: By William C. Fancher, Sidelines; SOURCE: Middle Tennessee State U.
Dateline: MURFREESBORO, Tenn. 
Body


Karen Petersen, assistant professor of political science, was one of 45 academics selected from across the nation to attend a 10-day fellowship on terrorism in Israel.
"I didn't study terrorism in graduate school, so really I needed an introduction," said Petersen, whose classes in the next year will include a course on international conflict. "It's hard to justify a course on international conflict without terrorism nowadays."
The program was organized and paid for by the Foundation for Defense of Democracies. According to its Web site, the FDD is a non-partisan institute founded after September 11, 2001 and "dedicated exclusively to promoting pluralism, defending democratic values and fighting the ideologies that drive terrorism."
Prior to applying, Petersen said she was not familiar with the FDD. Neither was John Vile, chair of the Political Science department, who saw an advertisement for the program in an issue of The Chronicle of Higher Education, an trade magazine for college professors. Vile said he told three professors, including Petersen, about the program.
"She's our newest faculty member," Vile said. "One reason I thought of her is that she might pick up some valuable information that she might use for the next 30 years in her classroom."
The FDD Academic Fellowship on Terrorism lasted from May 27 to June 7. It involved lectures on terrorism and security from Israeli military personnel, and field excursions around the country, including a trip to a maximum security prison facility.
"Israel has dealt with terrorism for fifty-plus years, so they have refined their methods for doing so," Petersen said. Petersen admitted that being so close to the violence and those affected was, at times, overwhelming.
"We visited the Israeli settlement in the West Bank, and actually we were entertained in the home of someone who was the victim of a terror attack," she said. "His wife and son were killed in his car. After we were in his home, either one or two days later, they actually arrested two of the three people that killed his wife and son."
Still, Petersen said she would recommend the experience to other professors and students, noting that the FDD also holds a summer fellowship for undergraduates. "For better or worse, there's nothing like stepping into a situation like that for a short time and experiencing it, and they did a great job," she added. "They paid for everything, and I think they do the same for the undergrads as well."
Vile thinks the program is a good opportunity for Middle Tennessee State University professors to broaden their field experience that will help them as teachers, and saves money for the university.
"One of our problems at MTSU is that we don't have a lot of travel money for faculty members," he said. "To have someone else footing the bill to help educate one of our professors is a pretty good deal."
(C) 2006 Sidelines via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 7, 2006


End of Document