Middle East peace won't halt terror
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 1, 1996, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 645 words
Byline: John Hall
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton, who used to have little to do in the Middle East except bestow blessings on peace accords, now finds the going much trickier.
Clinton's meeting with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak at times sounded like a long apology for the Israeli election that brought Benjamin Netanyahu to the presidency.
"I know it's frustrating … for the people in Egypt and for the people indeed in all Arab states throughout the Middle East," Clinton said. "But a sort of hiatus here, a slowdown period, was inevitable because of the election. … I know it's frustrating but we just have to have - let a little of that time elapse. When you change governments like that, you can't expect people just to go on as if nothing has happened."
Mubarak is the Arab world's mildest and most moderate man. But after the Israeli election, he convened an all-Arab conference - the first in six years - to decide what to do about Netanyahu, the hard-liner who campaigned against the peace agreement.
In his face-to-face meeting with Clinton, there was no apology or explanation from Mubarak for why Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi was welcomed at the Arab summit. Clinton graciously didn't bring up the subject except to say that "we can't have any accommodation with Gadhafi" while he refuses to extradite the accused murderers in the Pan Am Flight 103 air disaster over Lockerbie, Scotland that killed 270 people in 1988. Not only didn't he criticize Mubarak, but he more or less praised the Arab summit.
"I thought it was terrific, bringing the people together, getting a common position from all the Arab states in the peace process," said Clinton.  Terrorism the topic
With the search for bodies continuing in the TWA Flight 800 explosion that claimed 230 lives, Clinton and Mubarak spent much time talking about how to combat terrorism.
They seemed to agree the Middle East peace process can bring a stop to world terrorism and that terrorists will continue to be active until a comprehensive settlement is reached.
The presumption was that unless the peace process can be continued more terrorism will be inevitable. But if the United States can get Israel back to the peace table and push the talks to completion, there might be less.
Mubarak advanced that premise without contradiction from Clinton.
The problem with this line of reasoning is that the peace process has become an alternative among European and Middle East allies to taking aggressive action against states that sponsor terrorism. Indeed, Mubarak spoke out against punishing countries like Libya and Iran for the actions of terrorists their governments support and finance. When economic sanctions are imposed, people "will get upset, get furious," he worried.  May not stop
But there is no reason to believe peace in the Middle East will quiet terrorists or their sponsors. Just the opposite occurred as Hamas and Hezbollah mounted suicide bombings against Israeli civilians after agreements were signed with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. They have made no secret of their objective - to wreck the talks.
When the bombings began, not only did the peace process collapse but confidence in the United States faded. As Clinton put it, Israelis saw "there was a limit to how much security we could provide, and the voters had a reaction to the violence they experienced."
At this nervous moment in history here and in the Middle East, the idea that peace talks must go on to stop terrorists from shedding more innocent blood may be a fantasy.
Mubarak may be more aware of this than he lets on. His country has paid a heavy price for its commitment to the peace process. Mubarak was a target of assassins and his predecessor, Anwar Sadat, was an assassin's victim after the Camp David accords. Stopping terrorism will require unprecedented international cooperation on a track entirely separate from the Middle East peace process.

Notes

JOHN HALL NATION WORLD WATCH

Graphic

 
SIGNATURE

Load-Date: August 3, 1996


End of Document