Middle East: Optimism gives way to extremism
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 11, 2014 Saturday


Copyright 2014 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 970 words
Byline: Ali O. Amar
Body


When chanting Iraqi crowds toppled Saddam’s massive statue in April 2003, I became overwhelmed with hope that finally the long Arab nightmare was beginning to end. My extraordinary feeling was amplified by a deep pride that my fellow Americans, members of the U. S. Armed Forces, were behind the end of Saddam’s bloody regime. Stunned by the rapid events in Iraq, I sometimes felt torn between my seemingly justified optimism for a brighter future for the Arab world, and a nagging fear that dark days were awaiting ahead.
Looking back to that fateful day, it all seems unbelievable now. My optimism proved short-lived, and all my fears have come true. Iraq is in chaos again, Syria is sinking to the abyss, violent extremists have created an “Islamic State,” armed Shia militants have taken over Yemen, pushing the fragile state closer to total failure, Libya is drowning in violent anarchy, and the U.S. is bombing Iraq, again.
 The Arab world is facing a new predicament unlike any it faced before. Religious radicalism, violent extremism, organized sectarianism, toxic tribalism and foreign interferences are bringing the region to the brink of a perfect collapse.
 ***
 It is hard to believe that only three years ago, the Arab Spring was in full swing, the region was in democratic transition, and the future looked promising, perhaps too promising. Long-ruling autocrats were toppled, free elections were held, new governments were formed and democracy was suddenly no longer a dream.
 What happened to the promises of the Iraq War? Where did the Arab Spring go? What is it about the region that keeps it spinning in the same pit of disappointment, incomplete missions, disillusionment and missed opportunities?
 Traveling through the region last week, I hoped to understand the unsettling chaos plaguing the Middle East. Instead, I was astonished by the sense of fatalism, hopelessness and profound disappointment that dominates the public conversation. “Look at us mindlessly killing each other in the name of a religion we don’t truly know, and we seldom really observe”, said a young university student in Rabat, Morocco.
 Expressing sadness and regret that Islam is being tarnished by the savagery of the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the young Moroccan added: “Innocent westerners are being beheaded in Algeria, Iraq and Syria in the name of Islam, while West Africans afflicted with Ebola are being treated by Christian missionaries from the West. ... Something is absolutely wrong with us!”
 ***
 Even in Morocco, a country geographically removed from the chaos by thousands of miles, the threat posed by ISIL is a worrisome preoccupation of the government — and a dominant story in the local media. In fact, stories about the arrest of young Moroccans from various cities trying to leave for Syria and Iraq to fight for ISIL — and the dismantling of dozens of cells of suspected violent extremists — have figured prominently in the Moroccan media for several months.
 Morocco has good reasons to fear ISIL. This past July, Interior Minister Mohamed Hassad told Morocco’s House of Representatives that the kingdom was a major source for ISIL’s foreign fighters, and one of its favorite targets. Morocco’s most senior law enforcement official gave chilling statistics about the Moroccans who joined ISIL: 1,122 were fighting, 200 were dead, and 128 have returned to Morocco. Furthermore, an estimated 1,500 foreign fighters from Europe come from the Moroccan Diasporas in France, Belgium, Holland, and Spain.
 Many of these fighters occupy leadership positions within ISIL and have not been shy about proclaiming their hostile intentions toward Morocco. Interior Minister Hassad warned Parliament that young Moroccans were joining ISIL “not only to fight at its side, but also to receive training with a view to staging attacks against the kingdom.”
 Minister Hassad was very prescient about ISIL’s plans for his country. Spanish authorities recently announced that nine terrorist suspects were arrested by the police in Spain and Morocco. The terrorist cell operated in the Spanish enclave of Mellilia and in the neighboring Moroccan city of Nador. The eight Moroccans and one Spaniard planned to carry out attacks in both Spain and Morocco. “The Cell Was Planning to Establish the Islamic State in Morocco” read the headline of Al-Massae, a leading Moroccan newspaper.
 ***
 Morocco is in the unenviable position of being a source, a target and a victim of terrorism. In 2003, simultaneous attacks rocked Casablanca, and in 2009 a suicide bomber blew himself up in the heart of the Marrakesh tourist district. The attacks had a lasting impact on the country’s vital tourism sector. Ever since, most Moroccans consider terrorism a clear and present danger to their lives and their livelihoods.
 As a result, the country devoted enormous resources during the past decade developing a multipronged anti-terrorism strategy based on human-development initiatives to eradicate poverty, faith-based de-radicalization and counter-extremism programs — as well as sophisticated security and intelligence operations targeting suspected terrorist cells and their leadership. Three weeks ago, the government proposed a new law that will criminalize the act and intent of joining international terrorist groups like ISIL.
 In an eye-opening and impassioned speech before the U.N. General Assembly, President Barack Obama described ISIL as a cancer and explained its rise in these words: “We have not confronted forcefully enough the intolerance, sectarianism, and hopelessness that feeds violent extremism in too many parts of the globe.” Morocco’s experience in this arena may be very helpful, and of great value to the Obama administration’s stated goal to degrade and defeat ISIL’s network of death.

Load-Date: December 18, 2014


End of Document