Mideast Analysis, Fast and Furious
The New York Times
June 18, 2006 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1121 words
Byline: By ROBERT F. WORTH
Body


WHEN an Iraqi insurgent group releases a new videotape or claims responsibility for an attack, Western reporters in Baghdad rarely hear about it firsthand. Nor do they usually get the news from their in-house Iraqi translators. 
  Instead, a reporter often receives an e-mailed alert from a highly caffeinated terrorism monitor sitting at a computer screen somewhere on the East Coast. Within hours, a constellation of other Middle East analysts has sent out interpretations -- some of them conflicting -- and a wealth of contextual material.
Terrorists have been using the Internet so heavily that the monitors often know as much or more about their communications as military or intelligence officers do. 
  The role that terrorists' Web sites can play in this war was clear on June 7, when several posted laudatory death notices for Abu Musab al-Zarqawi -- and in so doing laid to rest any doubt about reports from the American military that its troops had killed the leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq. 
  Journalists in Iraq are far too busy with the perils of on-the-ground reporting to sit at screens for hours browsing for terrorist Internet traffic. That is why the new array of online expertise has become an essential tip sheet for them. A whole new mini-industry of instantaneous translation and analysis has arisen, and it often erodes the traditional distinctions between credentialed foreign policy experts and mere amateurs.
  Some of the groups are well-known and generously financed outfits like the Middle East Media Research Institute, or Memri, whose primary function is to translate Arabic and Muslim media.
  But among the best informed are one-person shows -- a driven Arabist with a bedside computer. They gain access to terrorist Web sites, sometimes by posing as terrorists themselves, and translate jihadist communiques and chatter that would not otherwise be available. Others write blogs, translating and commenting on terrorism and politics in general. 
  Most of these analysts are unknown to the reading public. But that is changing. Last month, Rita Katz, founder of the SITE Institute, was profiled in The New Yorker. (A terrorist Web site that her group monitors promptly posted a link to the article.) 
  And Juan Cole, a University of Michigan historian with a blog about Iraq and the Middle East, became involved in a dispute about a translation of a comment by Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Many felt the comment was a direct threat to Israel, but Mr. Cole did not.
  For reporters, all this freelance sleuthing and interpreting is a welcome new resource. But like the 17th-century dragomans who were the first official translators between the Islamic world and the West, the analysts often disagree among themselves, leaving the journalists with their own interpretive challenges. 
  ''Now the problem is almost one of information overload,'' said Gregory Gause, the director of the Middle East Studies program at the University of Vermont. ''How does one choose among such a variety of interpreters?'' 
  While differences in translation can be an issue, the main disagreement among the interpreters is usually about selection: Which texts are worth highlighting? Which are significant?
  On this front, Memri, the largest translation service, may have drawn the most criticism. It was founded in 1998 by Col. Yigal Carmon, who had spent more than 20 years in Israeli military intelligence and later advised two Israeli prime ministers. Its 60 staff members scan Arab and Muslim media and send translations by e-mail to 100,000 subscribers, including journalists and officials. Critics have long said it focuses on translating the most dangerous-sounding material. 
  ''They say they highlight liberal voices along with the dangerous radicals, which is fine,'' said Marc Lynch, a scholar of Arab politics at Williams College who has criticized Memri on his own blog, Abu Aardvark. ''But what that conceals is the entire middle ground, where most of the political debate goes on in the Arab world.''
  Mr. Carmon, in a telephone interview, dismissed this criticism, noting that Memri has expanded its translations immensely over the years, and now highlights Arab reformist views. Some other analyst groups focus almost exclusively on terrorism. They include the Project for the Research of Islamist Movements, founded in 2002 by Reuven Paz, who is also an Israeli; the Virginia-based Terrorism Research Center, founded in 1996; and the Jamestown Foundation, founded during the cold war to study totalitarian societies but now focused on terrorism.
  Others are newer to the field -- insurgents, if you will. Ms. Katz, a former protege of the terrorism researcher Steven Emerson, founded the SITE Institute after the Sept. 11 attacks. In the last two years, as Iraqi insurgent groups increasingly relied on the Internet, she was often the first to locate and translate their communiques. Other researchers followed suit: Evan F. Kohlmann, who had worked for Ms. Katz, broke off and created globalterroralert.com. He also contributes to the Counterterrorism Blog, a site started in 2005 where other experts also post items. 
  While some older Middle East analysts say these freelance terrorist hunters can be alarmist and attach too much importance to chat rooms, the newer Internet analysts often say the government was not alarmist enough before Sept. 11. 
  Some of the sharpest disputes take place among bloggers, who tend to do less translation and more political analysis. Mr. Cole, a strong critic of the Iraq war and of the administration's grasp of the Middle East, has inspired a range of ferocious critics. Some, like the bloggers Martin Kramer and Tony Badran, maintain at times a virtual running account of their differences with Mr. Cole, under headines like ''Making Cole-Slaw of History'' and ''Juan-Cology.'' 
  Another influential Middle East blog, Syria Comment, has drawn similar criticism from bloggers who claim that its author, Joshua Landis, is too soft on the regime of Bashar al-Assad. Mr. Badran now writes a blog, Syria Monitor, that highlights the Syrian opposition and portrays Mr. Assad as a cruel autocrat. 
  How much does all this Babel of punditry affect the way the Middle East is perceived? It is hard to say. But some argue that more voices can only be a good thing. ''You can question what they choose to translate, or their politics,'' Mr. Gause said. ''But I think ultimately the more that gets put into the public realm, the better.''

Other sites mentioned in this article
Memri -- memri.org

Bloggers
Juan Cole -- Informed Comment
Marc Lynch -- Abu Aardvark
Martin Kramer -- Martin Kramer on the Middle East
Tony Badran -- The Syria Monitor
Joshua M. Landis -- Syria Comment


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: ''WEB SITES TRACKING TERRORISM''Terrorism Research Centerwww.terrorism.comBased in northern Virginia, the center was founded in 1996 and employs experts who track political violence as well as terrorism across the globe.SITE (Search for International Terrorist Entities) Institutewww.siteinstitute.orgFounded in 2001 by Rita Katz, an Iraqi-born Jew and former protege of the terrorism researcher Steven Emerson, SITE monitors jihadist Web sites and translates communiques for its subscribers.Project for the Research Of Islamist Movementswww.e-prism.orgFounded in 2002 by Reuven Paz, an Israeli terrorism researcher, Prism conducts research and publishes reports on radical Islam and Islamist movements.Jamestown Foundationwww.jamestown.orgThe foundation was established in 1984 to provide research on totalitarian societies, and since 2001 has focused more on terrorism.Counterterrorism Blogwww.counterrorismblog.orgThis Web log is a portal where counterterror experts post analyses of the latest events and trends.

Load-Date: June 18, 2006


End of Document