MIDEAST TENSIONS;
Ex-C.I.A. Official Says U.S. Ignores Syrian Terror
The New York Times
November 21, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Column 4;
Length: 928 words
Byline: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 20
Body


A former high-ranking Central Intelligence Agency official asserted today that the Government had applied a double standard to Middle Eastern sponsors of terrorism, berating Iraq and Iran while overlooking "really horrible" acts by a current ally against Iraq, the Government of President Hafez al-Assad of Syria.
The former official, Vincent M. Cannistraro, said the policy paralleled Washington's treatment of Iraq in the early 1980's, when the United States removed Iraq from an official list of terrorist nations despite what he said was evidence that Baghdad still harbored terrorist groups.
In a meeting with reporters today, Mr. Cannistraro called the failure of the United States to respond to that evidence "a terrible mistake," which "I am afraid we are repeating" in Syria.
 
State Department's Explanation
 A State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, denied that the United States had overlooked terrorist activity in either nation. He said the Government had removed Iraq from a list of nations sponsoring terrorism in 1982, "when their behavior improved," and reinstated it to the list this year because of growing evidence of its involvement in state-sponsored terrorism.
Syria remains on the list. Mr. Boucher said the United States had publicly criticized Syria for terrorist activities as recently as last month.
A Central Intelligence Agency spokesman, Mark Mansfield, said Mr. Cannistraro was "a retired Agency official who is entitled to express his own opinion."
Mr. Cannistraro, a veteran intelligence officer who worked overseas and in posts at the White House and Pentagon, was director of operations and analysis at the C.I.A.'s counterterrorism center for two years until September. He now is an expert on terrorism and intelligence at the National Strategy Information Center, a conservative Washington think-tank on intelligence issues.
Although some legislators and private experts have questioned American resolve against terrorists, Mr. Cannistraro is the first former official actively involved in recent efforts against terrorism to raise the issue. From October 1988 to September of this year, he oversaw the collection and analysis of American intelligence on terrorist groups and ran secret operations to disrupt terrorist acts.
 
No Role in Setting Policy
 He played no role in determining terrorism policy at the C.I.A. or in his jobs at the Pentagon and White House, where he monitored and coordinated covert intelligence operations.
In his session today, which was sponsored by the strategy center, Mr. Cannistraro urged the United States to more consistently and vigorously oppose acts of terrorism, whether or not its sponsors were important to American interests.
He contended that the State Department had "constantly undercut" C.I.A. accounts of Iraqi support for terrorism during the 1980's and this year, to avoid damaging a fragile diplomatic alliance against Iran.
"Unquestionably, we were too soft on Iraq," Mr. Cannistraro said in an interview. Iraq was dropped from the list of terrorist nations at a time when President Saddam Hussein was actively seeking Western aid. The action allowed Iraq to qualify for trade credits that it later used extensively.
At the time, Baghdad was headquarters of what American intelligence officials consider the Middle East's most notorious terrorist group, the Abu Nidal organization. It was later expelled, but Mr. Cannistraro said Iraq continued to harbor a maker of plastic explosives used in passenger airline bombings, known as Abu Ibrahim.
 
Declines to Specify Operations
 He also said it was clear that Syria "has been involved in a number of terrorist operations over the last couple of years," but he declined to name them, citing intelligence considerations.
Syria is home to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, which is believed to have been deeply involved in the bombing of a Pan American World Airways jumbo jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, two years ago. Syria also controls the Bekaa, the Lebanese valley that has been a training ground for terrorist groups.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d cited Syria's role in terrorism last month after a meeting with Mr. Assad in Damascus. He was accused of softening the American stance against terrorism by visiting Damascus, a charge Administration officials denied.
One leading Government expert on terrorism, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he believed that Mr. Cannistraro's charges, while overstated in some respects, had merit.
With regard to Iraq, he said, "I think we thought we saw an opportunity to work with Saddam, and put the carrot in front of him" by removing official condemnation of his sponsorship of terrorism.
 
Possibility of 'Same Mistake'
 "We may be making the same mistake with Syria," that official said. "It's an alliance of convenience, no doubt."
At his session with reporters today, Mr. Cannistraro said he thought there was a "very real" possibility that the Justice Department would acquire enough evidence to indict some of the people responsible for the Lockerbie bombing. The Federal Bureau of Investigation, the lead agency in the inquiry into that bombing, declined to comment on his statement.
Mr. Cannistraro said he believed that Iran's Government, including its leading moderate, President Hashemi Rafsanjani, had commissioned the bombing of the jet in the summer of 1988, when he was the Speaker of Parliament.
"We know who did it," he said, adding that while the authorities may not know all the details, "from an intelligence point of view, the case is solved."

Graphic

 
Photo: Vincent M. Cannistraro, a former C.I.A. official, said the United States Government had applied a double standard to Middle East sponsors of terrorism. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

Load-Date: November 21, 1990


End of Document