Mideast Actors Tackle New Roles
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 4, 1989, Wednesday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; Pg. 3
Length: 1201 words
Byline: George Moffett III, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Highlight: PROSPECTS FOR PEACE
Body


THE fledgling dialogue between the United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization is producing a hint of optimism among many Middle East observers.
But the optimism is tempered by the awareness that the fundamental issues separating Jews and Palestinians have not even begun to be addressed.
It is also tinged by the dark prospect that Arab or Jewish nationalists bent on controlling all of Palestine could sabotage steps toward political compromise.
''The situation is so finely balanced that it's a tempting target for extremists on both sides,'' a diplomatic source here says.
Several experts say any dramatic advance toward a negotiated solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will hinge initially on two factors.
The first is the PLO's ability to make good on its renunciation of terrorism. This is regarded as crucial to wooing Israel into the diplomatic game. The test will not be stone-throwing demonstrations but major incidents involving loss of civilian lives.
''If it becomes clear that the PLO is equivocating on terrorism, there is no chance for a reassessment of the Israeli position,'' says Schlomo Avenari, a former director-general of the Israeli foreign ministry and currently a professor of political science at Jerusalem's Hebrew University. ''On the other hand, if the PLO abandons terrorism, it will intensify the debate in Israel on talking to the PLO.''
The second is a transition period during which confidence-building measures would be carried out to create an atmosphere conducive to talks between Israelis and Palestinians.
One step could be some lifting of Israel's heavy hand in the territories, possibly including ending deportations and house demolitions, in return for Palestinians scaling back the uprising.
Another might be allowing elections in the territories, though agreeing on terms and conditions could prove difficult.
Israelis say elections would force Palestinians to demonstrate their commitment to peaceful change and would create a local leadership capable of negotiating with Israel.
Palestinians fear elections might be used by Israel to create an alternative to the PLO or to flush out leading activists who would then be arrested and deported. Elections, they say, would thus be practical only if held under international supervision and in consultation with the PLO.
Such confidence-building measures could lead to some kind of exploratory talks, possibly under superpower auspices, as a step toward full-fledged negotiations.
Preliminary moves will be contemplated against a background of political activity involving the key players:
*The United States. Washington's dialogue with the PLO is likely to get off to a slow start as both sides size each other up and as the Bush administration gets its diplomatic feet on the ground.
The face-to-face talks will initially provide a forum to discuss terrorism, a subject on which the US has laid down strong markers for the PLO, while Washington bends over backward to reassure Israel of unwavering friendship. But with the US now talking to both sides, it could eventually function as diplomatic intermediary.
The time is not ripe for major US diplomatic initiatives, several Israeli and Western sources say. Rather, Washington can play its most constructive role in the coming transition period by holding the PLO to its no-terrorism pledge while, if successful, cautiously prodding Israel to reevaluate its own pledges not to deal with PLO.
''The US cannot do the work for the PLO or for Israel,'' Professor Avenari says.
But faced with prolonged intransigence by either side, the US may weary of such a passive role.
''They will say enough is enough,'' Jerusalem Post editor David Krivine predicts. ''Eretz Israel must be split between the Israelis and the Palestinians, whether the Israelis like it or or not, whether the Palestinians like it or not.''
*The PLO. With a six-month public relations offensive crowned by the US decision to open a dialogue, Yasser Arafat is on a roll diplomatically. The peripatetic PLO chairman is likely to seek wider recognition of the Palestinian state (declared in November by the Palestine National Council) and perhaps establish a government-in-exile.
In particular, the PLO will concentrate on Europe. Several governments have proved eager to bring Israel and the PLO to the bargaining table.
Mr. Arafat's recent support for the idea of a joint Jordanian-PLO delegation is described by Palestinian sources as a tactic to woo moderate European opinion. He especially wants to prod Paris and Moscow, which have supported establishing a UN Security Council committee to prepare for an international Middle East peace conference.
Meanwhile, Arafat will have his hands full containing the centrifugal forces within his own organization and coping with the growing role of Muslim fundamentalists in the occupied territories. Should there be new outbreaks of terrorism, Western diplomatic sources say, Arafat will face the painful task of enforcing discipline within the PLO or expelling the perpetrators.
*Israel. The opening of the US-PLO dialogue could bring Israel to a long-postponed moment of truth: deciding whether it wants continued control over the occupied territories or is willing to trade territory for peace. There are risks either way.
Israel's new government has adopted a hard-line position. It opposes talks with the PLO and the establishment of a Palestinian state. Its forward diplomatic position is a backward glance at bilateral talks with Egypt called for in the 1979 Camp David agreement. These would lead to limited self-government for the West Bank and Gaza Strip - widely considered an anachronism in light of recent developments.
''Those who are speaking about autonomy don't know what the intifadah has been all about,'' says Madhi Abdul-Hadi, a West Bank intellectual. ''Autonomy is a dead document.''
There are small signs that Israel's initially angry reaction to the US decision to open contacts with PLO could change if terrorism ceases.
Israel's left-wing parties, a group of Labor Party doves and Israel's leading peace movement, Peace Now, are already calling for talks with the PLO. Even Labor leader Shimon Peres has refused to rule out talks with Arafat as long as ''he's not killing and shooting (and) if he seeks peace.''
''Arafat has created a divided house on the subject of negotiations with the PLO,'' one diplomatic source in Jerusalem says.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, who has scuttled two peace proposals in the past two years, will be content to wait for the PLO to violate its terrorism pledge - thus taking Israel off the hook - rather than come up with dramatic new initiatives, observers predict.
But good behavior on Arafat's part will increase pressures within the Israeli coalition that may eventually be impossible to contain. Under this scenario, the government would collapse, forcing elections that would be a referendum on whether to deal with the PLO.
''If it appears there is a chance for peace and people see it, then Shamir is out,'' says Clinton Bailey, a professor at Tel Aviv University.
''Israel is fighting a rear-guard action,'' concludes one source here. ''Eventually, it will have to adjust to new circumstances.''

Graphic

 
Picture 1, SEIR, ISRAELI-OCCUPIED WEST BANK: Defiant Palestinians have carried their uprising into its second year. BLACK STAR/SUAU; Picture 2, ISRAELI-OCCUPIED GAZA STRIP: Stones won't halt US-PLO talks. BLACK STAR/TURNLEY


End of Document