MIDEAST ACCORD: The Images;
P.L.O., Once Banned From Israel's TV, Is Now Getting Abundant Air Time
The New York Times
September 13, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 920 words
Byline: By JOEL GREENBERG,

By JOEL GREENBERG,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Sept. 12
Body


Yoni Ben-Menachem could not restrain himself. The first reporter to interview Yasir Arafat on camera for Israeli television, Mr. Ben-Menachem pumped the hand of the P.L.O. chairman eight days ago and blurted out, "This is a sign of peace."
"We'll meet in Jericho, God willing," Mr. Arafat replied with a broad smile, referring to the plans for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank town and in the Gaza Strip.
The scene, broadcast on national television on Sept. 4 from Tunis, powerfully illustrated the transformation that is taking place in Israeli perceptions of the Palestine Liberation Organization, a change most evident in the way it is covered by Israeli television and radio.
The coverage reflects the new political reality in which Israel is dealing directly with an organization long reviled as a murderous terrorist group. Apparently the broadcasts are playing an important role in shaping public attitudes, much as they did in creating excitement among Israelis after President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt visited Israel in 1977 in an overture that helped open the way for the peace treaty signed by Israel and Egypt in 1979.
 
Memories of Violence
 Unlike the reaction to the Sadat visit, however, many Israelis are finding the encounter with the P.L.O., and particularly with Mr. Arafat, hard to swallow. Searing collective memories of bloody Palestinian attacks -- including those that occurred today in Israel and the occupied territories -- haunt the spectacle of reconciliation. Such violence poses a formidable obstacle to P.L.O. representatives who have appeared in recent days on Israeli television screens.
P.L.O. officials in Tunis have gone out of their way to help arrange the Israeli broadcasts, which are now beamed live with the cooperation of Tunisian television. The media breakthrough has had a ripple effect elsewhere in the region. For the first time, the Israeli radio has a reporter in Amman, Jordan.
For more than a week, P.L.O. officials have been talking to Israelis in nightly television interviews in an effort to win over viewers.
In one interview shown in prime time on Sept. 3, nearly a week before the P.L.O. and Israel formally signed letters of official recognition in advance of a peace accord, Bassam Abu Sharif, a senior aide to Mr. Arafat, turned to the camera and said in English as Hebrew subtitles scrolled across the screen:
"I want to tell all the Israeli public, I assure them that we want to establish peace with Israel, that we want to establish our state in the West Bank and Gaza, and that we recognize Israel and its right to live in peace and cooperation with its Arab neighbors.
"Let me take this opportunity to tell the Israeli Government and the Israeli people, we renounced terrorism, we will be against terrorism, and we will cooperate to fight terrorism."
In another interview, Hakam Balawi, the P.L.O. diplomatic representative in Tunis, assured Israelis that Jewish settlements in the occupied territories would be safe during an interim period of Palestinian self-rule.
 
Using Hebrew Learned in Jails
 Faisal al-Husseini, the most prominent P.L.O. figure in the territories, was welcomed as a studio guest on a popular weekend news program. Speaking in Hebrew learned largely in Israeli jails, Mr. Husseini sought to allay Israeli fears about an armed Palestinian police force to be established under the self-rule arrangement.
"We're turning over a new leaf," he said. "This is a new atmosphere. If we're going to look at the future as if it were the past, we won't get anywhere."
Things were not always this way. A little more than a year ago, Mr. Husseini was barred from appearing on Israeli television's premier interview program. For years, Israeli radio and television reporters could not talk to P.L.O. officials, and for a time nationalist leaders from the territories were also boycotted.
The restrictions were imposed by the board of directors of the Israel Broadcasting Authority, whose members are chosen according to their political affiliation and in which right-wing representatives have had a majority in recent years.
The taboos began crumbling in the months after the Madrid peace conference in October 1991, at the same time as the veils separating Israel and the P.L.O. began to fall.
 
Ban on Contacts Revoked
 Israeli newspapers printed telephone interviews with Mr. Abu Sharif and other P.L.O. officials. After Parliament revoked a law banning contacts with the P.L.O. in January, newspapers sent reporters to interview Mr. Arafat. He was later interviewed by phone on Israeli television's Arabic-language service, and a Cabinet member, Environment Minister Yossi Sarid, recently took part in a televised phone conversation with Mr. Abu Sharif.
Even the army radio, which operates under stricter restrictions than its civilian counterparts, has broadcast an interview with Mr. Abu Sharif. Mordechai Kirshenbaum, director of the broadcasting authority, said such broadcasts "will influence both the peace process and the way it will be digested" in Israel.
"We who are in the region and reporting to our people are dealing with profound emotional difficulties," he said, "and there are many people who find it very hard to see a reporter for the national network shaking hands warmly with Yasir Arafat. This is a difficult mental process that we will all have to go through.
"The changing coverage reflects the maturation of a process of reconciliation between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples. There has been a shake-up here of biblical proportions."

Load-Date: September 13, 1993


End of Document