MIDEAST BEGINS NEW ERA ISRAEL, PLO ACHIEVE PEACE BREAKTHROUGH BY RECOGNIZING EACH OTHER'S LEGITIMACY; ARAFAT RENOUNCES TERRORISM AND VIOLENCE; SELF-RULE ACCORD SIGNING IS MONDAY IN;
U.S.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 10, 1993, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 1030 words
Byline: CLYDE HABERMAN, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


Enemies to the death for three decades, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization opened a new era in their blood-soaked history yesterday by recognizing each other's legitimacy and the rights of both to represent their people's dreams.
In a letter to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat said his group recognizes Israel's right ''to exist in peace and security,'' renounces ''the use of terrorism and other acts of violence'' and is ready to discipline any of its loyalists who break this pledge.
In a separate letter to Norway's foreign minister, who had served for months as an intermediary in secret talks between the two sides, Arafat called on Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip to begin ''the normalization of life.'' Israeli officials took that as an Arafat appeal to end the Palestinian uprising known in Arabic as the intifada, although that was not spelled out in the letter.
The Israelis said Rabin was adamant that the intifada be curtailed. It was a measure of Arafat's determination to reach an agreement that he yielded on this point, even though most Palestinians in the territories consider the uprising an indispensable tool to resist the Israeli occupation.
For his part, Rabin wrote a terse letter to Arafat saying that, in light of these Palestinian commitments, his government ''has decided to recognize the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people and to commence negotiations with the PLO within the Middle East peace process.''
The three letters were to be formally signed last night and this morning in Tunis, where the PLO is based, and Jerusalem.
They clear the way for yet another agreement on a plan to transfer authority in the territories from Israeli to Palestinian hands, beginning with a form of self-rule in Gaza and the West Bank city of Jericho.
That accord, the product of months of secret negotiations conducted mainly in Norway, is to be signed at the White House on Monday by high-ranking officials on each side. No names have been formally announced, but the Israelis said they would probably be represented by Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, and the Palestinians are expected to send Mahmoud Abbas, the PLO official who supervised the negotiations. Farouk Kaddoumi, the PLO foreign minister, has opposed the agreements.
No amount of protocol or formal language, however, could obscure the breathtaking change that has now swept across this land for which Jews and Arabs have fought and died across the last century.
For Israel, recognition of the PLO, formally endorsed by the Rabin Cabinet last night, means that it is prepared at last to come to terms with a detested Arab leader whose followers have taken countless Israeli lives and whose name is uttered by many Jews in the same breath as Hitler's.
For the PLO, it means that it has come at last to accept that Israel is here to stay, and that this fact will not be altered by killings, resistance or its 1964 covenant calling for Israel's destruction. In rejecting that part of the covenant now, Arafat acknowledges that if he is to obtain the state he hopes to lead in a few years, he must settle for the territories of Gaza and the West Bank and, despite his group's name, he is not about to ''liberate'' all the land that used to be called Palestine.
The leap that has been made is so large that the normally phlegmatic Rabin told members of his Labor Party yesterday that he had ''butterflies in my stomach.''
It does not mean that he likes dealing with the PLO, he said, and aides added that none of this means that the prime minister puts his trust in Arafat. But if there is to be peace with the Palestinians, the only negotiating partner available is the PLO, Rabin asserted.
Peres, who guided the secret talks in Norway and who met with a senior PLO official in Oslo last month, spoke more positively about the shift that has taken place, insisting that the government had remained true to longstanding principles and to its commitment to Israeli security.
''We haven't changed -- it changed,'' he said, referring to the PLO. ''Arafat is announcing that he opposes terrorism and will fight the terrorists. He recognizes Israel and its right to exist in peace.''
Interviewed on Israel television last night, Environment Minister Yossi Sarid, who had a secret meeting of his own with the PLO this summer, articulated the government position succinctly.
''The PLO has stopped being the PLO today,'' he said.
In Washington, Hanan Ashrawi, spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation at the Mideast peace talks, said, ''There are very few moments in history that are comparable to this moment.'' She said the agreement ''recognizes Palestinian national rights and allows for genuine reconciliation based on the rights of both peoples to live in the region.''
And on a visit to Cleveland, President Clinton added his endorsement, saying after a phone conversation with Rabin: ''This is a very brave and courageous thing that has been done.''
Still, as momentous as the breakthrough is, Israeli officials say with weary and somewhat nervous sighs that now will come the difficult part, including hammering out essential details for Palestinian self-rule and contending with hardline resisters on each side who threaten to sabotage the agreement.
Technically, Arafat must have more than just the approval of the PLO executive committee, which he received yesterday after days of delay caused by internal disputes over the wording of the mutual recognition accord with Israel. (PLO officials said the PLO's foreign minister, Farouk Kaddoumi, boycotted the meeting in protest.)
To alter the PLO charter on this score Arafat must also get a two-thirds' majority of the Palestine National Council, a parliament-in-exile for the Palestinians. That is likely to involve still more delays and bitter fights.
In Jerusalem, Rabin's 10-member inner Cabinet voted unanimously to approve the mutual recognition agreement, clearing the way for Rabin to sign.
Norway's foreign minister, Johan Jorgen Holst, who earlier had brokered the autonomy plan in secret meetings in Oslo, was to take the text agreed to by the PLO committee to Israel for signature.

Notes

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
PHOTO (4), In Tunis, PLO leader Yasser Arafat greets a visiting rabbi who came to express his support for the peace accord., Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin addresses his Labor Party caucus in parliament., Ahmed Azakir/Associated Press: Palestinian deportees march from their camp in southeast Lebanon through Israel's security zone, after Israel allowed them to return home yesterday., Jacqueline Arzt/Associated Press: Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres speaks to the parliament yesterday.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document