MIDEAST TURMOIL: INTERROGATIONS; Sharon Says Prisoners Implicate Arafat in Financing of Terrorism
 The New York Times
May 3, 2002 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1220 words
Byline:  By JAMES BENNET 
Dateline: JERUSALEM, May 2  
Body


After releasing Yasir Arafat before dawn from a monthlong siege, the Israeli government declared late tonight that other Palestinian leaders under Israeli interrogation had implicated him in financing terrorist attacks. 
     While the office of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon released a three-page statement outlining its charges, it did not describe a link between Mr. Arafat and any particular attack or produce additional documents to back up its accusations. But it said the interrogations supported its previous assertions that Mr. Arafat had approved money for operatives "with the knowledge that it would be used to finance terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians." 
 Mr. Sharon has repeatedly said that no peace would be possible with Mr. Arafat, and the release of the announcement, on the heels of Mr. Arafat's own release, suggested that the government was in no hurry to revise that view as the Bush administration and the government of Saudi Arabia have stepped up their efforts to end the conflict here.
Mr. Sharon's office did not provide transcripts of the interrogations or describe in what conditions the prisoners, who include Marwan Barghouti, a senior leader of Mr. Arafat's Fatah organization, are being held. An official in the prime minister's office said security officials could not provide further details tonight.
Some of the men cited as sources had in the past denied that Mr. Arafat had a role in preparing attacks. Other Palestinian officials have also denied any such role for the Palestinian leader, and they have accused Israel of forging documents or using information out of context.
In its statement, the Israeli government mocked claims that Mr. Arafat had tried to crack down on Palestinian violence, saying he had done " 'everything possible' -- but in the realm of 'terrorism promotion' rather than 'terrorism prevention.' " 
The Israeli government said it had also learned that explosives used in attacks had come from the weapons depots of the Palestinian Authority, which by treaty has limited power to govern Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
For his part, Mr. Arafat, though pale and seemingly frail, appeared among his people this morning with his broad smile and characteristic ambiguity intact, speaking of a commitment to peace and lashing out at the Israeli government over its military offensive into Palestinian-controlled territory in the West Bank.
Israeli forces raided the West Bank cities of Tulkarm and Hebron today, the army said, arresting several Palestinian men.  Early Friday, the Israeli Army entered Nablus, destroying a three-story building and killing a Palestinian policeman, The Associated Press reported. The Israeli military did not comment. 
The Bush administration has called for a halt to such raids, but Israel says they are necessary for its defense. Palestinians say the raids are intended to blur and ultimately to erase negotiated boundaries.
On a tour of Ramallah, Mr. Arafat stopped in a hospital parking lot to pray over an improvised grave for Palestinians who died during the Israeli offensive here, and he viewed damage to the city. "Unbelievable, what has happened," he said. 
The Israeli statement tonight came as Mr. Sharon was preparing to go to Washington for a meeting early next week with President Bush. A senior political adviser said that Mr. Sharon planned to present "specific and detailed proposals" that "could include short-term territorial concessions," provided that Palestinian violence completely halted. 
Mr. Sharon has indicated that he is willing to consider steps to provide the Palestinians with "territorial contiguity," that is, paths to move among the islands of territory now under their control without crossing Israeli-controlled land and army checkpoints. Mr. Sharon also plans to discuss with President Bush a possible regional summit meeting, the adviser said.
Though concerned by reports that Saudi Arabia pressured the Bush administration to assist the Palestinian national cause, Israeli officials believe that the United States is seeking to assuage Arab concerns while it prepares a possible attack on Iraq. They think that at least temporary quiet here would help that quest. 
Mr. Sharon ordered Israel's largest ground offensive in 20 years into the West Bank last month. Among other steps, he pinned Mr. Arafat into two buildings in his compound in Ramallah while soldiers occupied the rest of the buildings. 
After the army withdrew this morning, safes in the compound were seen to have been forced open. The Israeli government has described the offensive as an effort to capture or kill terrorists and destroy their bomb-making laboratories, but it also appears to have been a search for evidence. 
In Ramallah and elsewhere, the Israeli Army scoured the files in Palestinian Authority offices in an apparent hunt for proof of links to terrorism. Israel's internal security service is interrogating the hundreds of men arrested in the raids. Still, the evidence presented so far has not prompted the United States or any foreign government to cut ties to the Palestinian leader, who has publicly renounced terrorism.
The statement made clear that Mr. Sharon's government continues to regard not just Mr. Arafat but also the senior leadership of Fatah as committed to terrorism.
Among the men cited as sources of the information for Israel's accusation against Mr. Arafat was Mr. Barghouti, who is the senior Fatah leader for the West Bank and a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council. Israeli security officials in recent months have repeatedly accused Mr. Barghouti of masterminding Fatah terrorism and funneling money to Fatah militants, and Israeli forces arrested him last month in Ramallah.
In its statement, the Israeli government said that under interrogation Mr. Barghouti had said that he was "personally involved in directing terrorist attacks which resulted in the killing and injuring of scores of Israeli civilians." 
The Israeli government said "every operative requiring financing" had to fill out a "detailed requisition request" that Mr. Barghouti would then forward to Mr. Arafat, with his own recommendation and signature. It was not clear if the requests spelled out planned terrorist attacks. The Israeli government said Mr. Barghouti had said that "every expense" required Mr. Arafat's approval.
Mr. Barghouti, a Hebrew speaker and a public advocate of a two-state peace solution, has called himself a political leader rather than a military one. He has said he approved of attacks against Israeli soldiers and settlers in the West Bank and Gaza, the lands Israel occupied in the 1967 war, but that he opposed attacks in pre-1967 Israel. Israel rejects any such distinction.
The Israeli government said another militant leader, Nasser Abu Hamid, said under interrogation that Mr. Barghouti "was informed of the details of every operation carried out by himself and his men." It said Mr. Abu Hamid was responsible for several attacks, including attacks inside pre-1967 Israel.
Israel also said Ahmed Barghouti, a relative and close aide of the Fatah leader, had "personally dispatched suicide bombers to their terrorist missions, in which dozens of Israeli civilians were killed and hundreds wounded." It did not reveal the source of that information or specify the bombings.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Well-wishers mobbed Yasir Arafat yesterday after he left his compound for the first time since the Israeli siege there began more than a month ago. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times)(pg. A10) Map of Israel highlighting Ramallah: Israeli forces withdrew from Ramallah early yesterday morning. (pg. A10)      

Load-Date: May 3, 2002


End of Document