Mideast Insights Jar Favorite Fantasies
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
July 3, 1989, Monday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: IDEAS; Books; Pg. 13
Length: 721 words
Byline: Scott Pendleton. Scott Pendleton is the Monitor's Middle East editor.
Body


FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM
by Thomas Friedman, New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 513 pp., $22.95
 
IF ''The Satanic Verses'' whipped up a fanatical froth on Khomeini's lips, how will past and present leaders of Israel react to Tom Friedman's ''From Beirut to Jerusalem?''
Salman Rushdie's book, for all its alleged blasphemy, was fiction from the pen of an apostate in exile. Friedman's book strips the fiction from a tumultuous decade that he witnessed first-hand. What's left amounts to an endorsement of Palestinian nationalism, a denunciation of Israeli expansionism, a re-examination of the relationship between Israeli and American Jews, and a challenge to the United States government to ''play hardball'' when necessary.
A Jew from Minneapolis, Friedman had an early passion for Israel that developed into a broader fascination with the Middle East at Brandeis, American University in Cairo, and Oxford. He was posted to Beirut in 1979 by United Press International and again by the New York Times in 1982. After earning a Pulitzer Prize for his account of the massacre of Palestinian civilians by a private Christian Lebanese militia at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps, Friedman was sent to Jerusalem in 1984. He won a second Pulitzer in 1988 for his coverage of that country before returning to New York in January of this year to become the Times's chief diplomatic correspondent.
Award-winning journalist, Arabic-speaking Middle East expert, and mainstream American Jew (content in this country and affectionate toward Israel): These credentials are the lightning that makes his book positively thunder.
On terrorism, he writes: ''There is no question that these spectacular operations put the Palestinian cause on the news agendas of Israel and the world … In this sense, I believe that terrorism, while morally repugnant, was functionally relevant for the PLO at its takeoff stage.''
Friedman goes on to say that Palestinian terrorism took on a pointless life of its own. Yet his is the most authoritative voice - perhaps the first - to acknowledge that the Palestine Liberation Organization had little recourse but terrorism in its early days. He also credits the organization's sincerity in being motivated by politics, not race nor religion.
''Most of the PLO officials and guerrillas with whom I dealt regularly knew I was Jewish and simply did not care; they related to me as the New York Times correspondent, period, and always lived up to their claims to be 'anti-Zionist' and not 'anti-Jewish.'''
As for Israel, Friedman buried ''every illusion I ever held about the Jewish state'' when he obtained proof that Israel intentionally allowed the massacre at Sabra and Shatila.
Friedman savages then-prime minister Menachem Begin and his defense minister, Ariel Sharon. He likens Begin to Bernhard Goetz with an F-15. ''Begin loved the idea of Jewish power, Jewish generals, Jewish tanks, Jewish pride. They were his pornography.''
And yet ''the greatest threat to the Zionist revolution,'' as Friedman discovered after moving to Israel, was not Arabs, but America.
''America, with its bounty, its pluralism, and its burgeoning opportunities for Jews and other minorities was disproving the thesis of Israel's founding fathers.''
When Friedman left the Middle East in 1988, the primitive tribal passions displayed on all sides a decade earlier were just as much in evidence. Each was still ready to break the other's eye, as the Lebanese put it. (The word for eye in Arabic also means spring or well. Loved ones are called ''my eye,'' meaning precious or cherished.)
Yet he refuses to pronounce the region hopeless. ''Washington can still bring Arabs and Israelis the best of America's outlook, without being devoured by the feuds and passions that consume them,'' he argues.
Part of that effort involves jarring people out of their fantasies. The Arabs must realize that the Israelis are not just ''modern day Crusaders who will one day gather up their shields and swords and ride off into the sunset … they are home. But Israelis have to be told the same about the Palestinians … Israeli fantasies about transferring Palestinians to Jordan or getting them to acquiesce in a permanent Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, or getting them to drop the PLO as their representatives are just that - fantasies.''


End of Document