MIDEAST PEACE PROCESS KEY TO WAR ON TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 20, 2001 Thursday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 687 words
Byline: John Hall, John Hall is senior Washington correspondent of Media General News Service. E-mail jhall@media-general.com,  
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The road gets tougher for the American-led coalition in the war on terrorism. U.S. differences with European and Arab partners over the Middle East are coming to the fore. Grumbling over U.S. policy gets louder.
The war in Afghanistan now drawing to a close has to be counted as a huge success. But despite the impressive victory for U.S. power, the war on terrorism may be on a shakier footing than at any time since Sept. 11.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld was concerned enough about the deterioration of European support to stop in Brussels, Belgium, on the way home from the battlefield to remind the allies that European capitals could be targets of nuclear, biological and chemical attacks.
The alternative to a global campaign against terrorism: "Sit there and take the blow," he bluntly warned.
Some of the European anxiety is being stirred up by reports that Rumsfeld and other hawks in the administration were goading President Bush into a strike against Iraq.
While NATO invoked Article 5 of its treaty, declaring the Sept. 11 attacks to have been against the entire 19-member alliance, some Europeans thought the U.S. air campaign during Ramadan was unnecessarily ferocious. They'll get over it, particularly if Afghanistan is saved from a humanitarian disaster this winter by international aid, as now seems possible.
The global spread of the war on terrorism may already be under way in Yemen, where government forces have struck at a suspected al-Qaida compound. Sudan, Somalia and the Philippines are all potential targets in the next stage of the war. Little opposition is expected.
What threatens to drive a wedge through the alliance is the collapse of the peace process in the Middle East. European leaders fear that American leadership and neutrality is being undermined by an open tilt toward Israel.
Secretary of State Colin Powell is trying to correct this impression with a six-month suspension of Bush administration plans to move the U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. But the administration's treatment of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has jangled some nerves in the alliance.
And when Anthony Zinni, the special U.S. envoy to the region, was called home, fear grew that the message to Ariel Sharon's Israel was that he could deal with the Palestinians in whatever manner he saw fit.
Some of the complaining about Prime Minister Sharon seems misplaced.
Suicide bombings in Israeli public places that kill innocent people are seen as desperation tactics by oppressed people, while Israel's targeting of known individual terrorists is an act of provocation.
Arafat even suggested in a meeting with Europeans that Sharon had deliberately planned the latest Hamas assassination to provoke another suicide bombing on Israeli soil. No one appeared to have challenged him.
Nonetheless, as Sharon's conduct draws increased condemnation around the world, the United States has become more closely identified with it.
When Sharon broke off direct talks with Arafat, Bush said amen. Sharon warned Arafat that he would be held responsible for the Hamas terrorism. Bush agreed.
The isolation of Arafat and the attempt to emasculate him as the Palestinian leader now seems to be a joint U.S.-Israeli policy.
When Zinni was recalled to Washington at Bush's instructions, Arafat chose not to read the tea leaves that said he was toast. Instead, he decided to issue a strong statement redoubling his campaign against Hamas terrorists and trying again to get back on Washington's good side. That may have cost him heavily on the Arab street, where he is now accused of being a sellout.
Zinni, America's toughest general, was supposed to take Sharon to the mat and demand some diplomacy, along with the gunplay, from both him and Arafat. But Zinni was there only three weeks - hardly time to unpack his bags, let alone rassle.
Powell said Zinni would have returned for the Christmas holidays anyway; this was just a week early. But that's not how it's being read around the world. Sharon got the message: "Katie, bar the door."
If this is the war on terrorism, many American friends are not going to endorse or join it.

Load-Date: December 21, 2001


End of Document