MIDEAST ACCORD;
P.L.O. Chiefs Try to Resolve Charter Dispute With Israel
The New York Times
September 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 14; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Column 5;
Length: 988 words
Byline: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,

By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: CAIRO, Sept. 7
Body


Negotiators from the Palestine Liberation Organization searched today for treaty language that would assure Israel that the P.L.O. has clearly rejected its 29-year-old charter calling for armed rebellion against the Jewish state, even though they say they cannot yet revoke or change a single word of the document.
While trying to cobble together a formulation that will break a stalemate in talks over mutual recognition, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, and his Egyptian advisers insist that the charter, orginally written in 1964, is irrelevant. But they say they cannot revoke or amend it without first convening the organization's 600-member parliament in exile, a process that that would take weeks, provoke angry debate and bring the aborning peace process to a crashing halt.
The dispute over what to do about the charter has tripped up efforts to bring a quicker resolution to the peace talks, and cast doubt on United States hopes that the accords will be ready for signing Sept. 13 in Washington.
Israel demands that the Palestine leadership revoke its charter language describing the Jewish state as an illegal and racist Zionist entity, and calling for its liberation by armed force.
Arguing that he does not have the right himself to amend or change the 33-paragraph charter, Mr. Arafat huddled with Egyptian officials today on how to resolve the impasse.
 
Tied to Self-Rule Accord
 Mutual recognition between Israel and the P.L.O. has been tied to a larger and separate declaration of principle already initialed between Israel and the Palestinian leadership, which provides for limited self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho, near the border with Jordan.
The Egyptian Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, who met today with Mr. Arafat, refused to disclose details of the Israeli demands, or Mr. Arafat's proposals. In an interview, he said there were two or three points, mainly involving the P.L.O. charter, that needed careful drafting.
He described the differences between the two sides as "far but bridgeable," and predicted that agreement still could be reached within the next few days.
Mr. Moussa said it was important that the negotiations be concluded soon, adding, "We don't want to lose time."
He said Mr. Arafat had already won the support of nearly all the major Arab governments, an agreement on limited self-rule had been initialed, and the question of mutual recognition had traveled a long distance. "We have only a couple of kilometers left," he said.
In interviews with Egyptian newspapers published today and at a news conference with President Hosni Mubarak, Mr. Arafat appeared to embark on a kind of public campaign, suggesting that the P.L.O. cannot go as fast as some Israelis might like in renouncing its past.
 
Terrorism Long Renounced
 At the same time, he insisted that the charter was for all intents already irrelevant history. Mr. Arafat recalled today that he had renounced terrorism on behalf of the P.L.O. as long ago as 1988, when he appeared before the United Nations General Assembly in Geneva. More recently, in a television interview in France, he said the P.L.O charter was "caduc," using the French word for "lapsed" or "null and void."
He also suggested in a newspaper interview that any attempt to amend the document now would badly set back hopes of a quick settlement, since it can only be changed by a two-thirds vote of the Palestine National Council.
That process could take many weeks, since the council members are scattered around the world, and would provoke bitter public debate.
In Amman, a Palestinian official opposed to Mr. Arafat's initiative asserted tonight that Mr. Arafat has promised to call for an end to the uprising in the occupied territories as part of the mutual recongition accord. Tayseer Khaled, a member of the P.L.O. exeuctive committee, said he saw the appeal included in a six-point annex to the recognition accord, but his assertion could not be confirmed.
When a reporter suggested to Foreign Minister Moussa that the expected timing of a final agreement seemed to keep getting a bit later each day, like the due date of a baby, he replied: "What I want to assure you is, there is a baby. But when it will be born depends on so many things."
Mr. Arafat later left Cairo en route to Oman, the latest stop on a round of shuttle diplomacy aimed at selling his peace iniative to Arab governments.  On Wednesday, he will return to P.L.O. headquarters in Tunis, where he is to meet with the executive committee, some of whom are skeptical about his peace efforts.
 |||
|--------------------||

U.S. Plays Down Dispute
 WASHINGTON, Sept. 7 (Special to The New York Times) -- Senior Administration officials and a key Palestinian leader today played down the significance of the remaining differences between the Israelis and Palestinians in recognizing each other, expressing confidence that the two sides are on the verge of agreement.
"We are in the home stretch," said Nabil Shaath, a senior aide to Mr. Arafat. "We are just looking for a word or two, something that would allay Israeli fears but at same time not strike at the constitutional complications of changing a charter. The issues now are purely logistic, purely linguistic, not political at this stage."
"There are no second thoughts," he said in an interview.
Senior Administration officials confirmed that the major remaining issue to be resolved was the form in which the P.L.O. disavows portions of its charter. The officials added that they believed there were still other, less important issues to be resolved.
"The issue is not whether the P.L.O. disavows the wording of the charter, but how it does it," said a senior Adminsitration official, who added, without elaborating, "There are other issues that are probably not of the same weight."
Mr. Shaath disagreed, saying, "What remains is this issue only. Support for terrorism, Israel's right to exist, all of these have been ironed out."

Load-Date: September 8, 1993


End of Document