MIDEAST RISK-TAKING THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION WILL HAVE TO BE AGGRESSIVE TO RESOLVE SYRIA-ISRAEL IMPASSE /
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 15, 1994 Sunday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. C06; EDITORIAL
Length: 464 words
Body


Secretary of State Warren Christopher arrives in Damascus today to persuade Israel and Syria to end their state of war. The outline of a deal between the two nations is clear, but only U.S. mediation can bridge the remaining differences.
The central dilemma for Israel is: Can it commit to full withdrawal from the Golan Heights, long considered strategically essential? And the test for Syria is: Can it commit to the kind of peace and security guarantees that Israel demands?
The answers may be forthcoming. At a time when long-range missiles and terrorism are the greatest threats to Israel, many top Israeli generals believe that the Golan is no longer strategically important. And in Syria, the population is moving toward accepting the once-unimaginable idea that there could be an Israeli embassy in Damascus. Moreover, the separate deal signed between the Palestinians and Israel allows Syria to pursue its own interests without linking them to solving the Palestinian problem.
But only Washington can help these two sparring partners get past the issue of who blinks first. While he has been rightly criticized on many foreign- policy issues, President Clinton has established excellent relations with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad. Since the demise of Syria's previous patron, the Soviet Union, Mr. Assad has sought closer ties to the U.S. and wants the Americans deeply involved in negotiations.
Of course, only Israel can decide whether it feels safe in withdrawing from every inch of the Golan. The problem for Mr. Rabin seems to be more one of domestic politics than security; he has to sell the benefits of withdrawal to his people.
Mr. Christopher can be most useful in urging Mr. Assad to spell that out. The U.S. has many cards to play with him, not the least of which is the promise to drop trade embargoes imposed for previous Syrian involvement in narcotics trade and terrorism.
Whatever Syria's past sins, there is solid evidence that the regime has cracked down on the drug trade and has moved out of the terror business.
Pressure to get Congress to agree to drop Syria's name from the blacklist should be tied to progress on the negotiations track. For Israel, the U.S. can offer continued security cooperation and perhaps troops to patrol the Golan once an accord is signed.
Most importantly, the U.S. must offer its own suggestions to bridge Israeli-Syrian differences as the two sides edge closer, and quickly. Mr. Rabin has only two more years before he must call elections, and Mr. Assad is not in the best of health.
Success will depend on a commitment of American time, energy and political will of the magnitude that Jimmy Carter invested to bring about Israeli- Egyptian peace. But the rewards will be worth the risks.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document