MIDEAST BREAKTHROUGH; PLO AND ISRAEL AGREE TO MUTUAL RECOGNITION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 10, 1993, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 905 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, whose hatred of each other defined decades of bloody conflict, took a giant step toward peace Thursday by agreeing to formally recognize each other.  In Tunis, Tunisia, PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat announced Thursday night that he had just signed the document recognizing Israel. The announcement came right after the PLO's Executive Committee voted 8-4 to approve his moves.  In Jerusalem, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was to sign the document recognizing the PLO today (at 2 a.m. St. Louis time).  The historic agreement reshapes the political landscape of the Middle East, but it will stir bitter opposition among hard-liners on both sides. They have already denounced Rabin and Arafat as traitors.  But supporters hailed the agreement as a momentous turnabout that would bring social and economic cooperation between Israel and Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, occupied by Israel since 1967.  The mutual recognition will make possible a separate agreement, reached after months of secret PLO-Israeli negotiations, that would give Palestinians limited autonomy in the Gaza Strip and in the West Bank city of Jericho.  The pact is scheduled to be signed Monday at the White House in Washington.  Under the agreement spelled out in letters between Rabin and Arafat: Israel recognizes the PLO as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.  Israel pledges to begin open talks with the PLO on the Palestinians' future.  The PLO renounces terrorism and declares that sections of its 1964 founding covenant that call for the destruction of Israel "are now inoperative and no longer valid."
Arafat will plead with Arabs in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip "to reject violence and terrorism." Israeli leaders had sought a PLO declaration ending the intifada, or uprising, which began in 1987.  Arafat signed the recognition document behind closed doors in his office in Tunis.  Norwegian Foreign Minister Johan Joergen Holst, who shepherded the Israeli-Palestinian talks in Oslo, confirmed that Arafat had signed the letter to Rabin and said he himself was leaving for the airport to fly to Israel with the letter.  Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres is expected to travel to Washington for Monday's ceremony signing the accord on Palestinian self-rule.  The PLO statements recognizing Israel and forsaking terrorism prompted the White House to signal Thursday that it would reopen a dialogue with the PLO.  U.S-PLO talks were suspended in 1990 after a PLO faction staged an attack on an Israeli beach.  In Tunis late Thursday, Arafat won approval from the PLO's ruling Executive Committee on recognizing Israel, a senior member of the committee said.  In Jerusalem, Rabin's 10-member inner Cabinet voted unanimously to approve the mutual recognition agreement, clearing the way for Rabin to sign.  The Israeli-PLO agreements are expected to accelerate separate peace negotiations between Israel and Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.  Israeli Foreign Minister Peres said, "It's going to revolutionize relations between the Arab world and the Jewish world, between Palestinians and Israelis." And yet, mutual recognition and the self-rule plan offer few details of how relations between the former enemies will proceed and the scope of Palestinian rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho. Negotiators will continue on the future for 1.8 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.  "The signing of documents is only the beginning of a very difficult task and the daunting challenges that lie ahead," Palestinian spokeswoman Hanan Ashrawi said at a news conference in Washington.  She added, "There are very few moments in history that are comparable to this moment." She said the agreement "recognizes Palestinian national rights and allows for genuine reconciliation based on the rights of both peoples to live in the region." In Jerusalem, Shulamit Aloni, Israel's minister of science and culture, said, "At last there is peace. For me, after fighting so many years for this moment, I have to go and celebrate." The agreement on limited self-rule could eventually lead to a more comprehensive autonomy for Palestinians in the territories, perhaps in a confederation with Jordan, after a five-year interim period.  Norwegian Foreign Minister Holst called the agreement "a historical breakthrough, which was the result of the foresight, vision and courage of Chairman Arafat and the leadership of Israel." For Israel, recognition of the PLO means that it is prepared at last to come to terms with a detested Arab leader whose followers have taken countless Israeli lives and whose name is uttered by many Jews in the same breath as Adolf Hitler's.  For the PLO, the recognition means that it has come at last to accept that Israel is here to stay and that this fact will not be altered by killings, resistance, or its 1964 covenant calling for Israel's destruction.  In rejecting that part of the covenant now, Arafat acknowledges that, if he is to obtain the state he hopes to lead in a few years, he must settle for the territories of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Despite his group's name, he is not about to "liberate" all the land that used to be called Palestine.  Rabin told members of his Labor Party on Thursday that he had "butterflies in my stomach." "You don't make peace with friends," he said. "You make it with very unsavory enemies."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by Reuters - PLO leader Yasser Arafat (right) welcoming Rabbi Moshi Hiresh to his residence Thursday in Tunis, Tunisia. The Jewish leader came to express his support for the peace plan.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document