MIDEAST ACCORD;
Most Israeli Papers Endorse Peace Accord
The New York Times
September 13, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 11; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Column 4;
Length: 484 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN,

By CLYDE HABERMAN,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: JERUSALEM, Sept. 12
Body


Most major Israeli newspapers today praised the draft peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, and spoke hopefully of a new era now that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, will be together at the signing ceremony at the White House on Monday.
But there was considerable caution as well, reflecting widespread queasiness among Israelis about the prospect of their national leader possibly shaking hands with a man long reviled here as a sponsor of terrorism.
"The iron wall that separated the two people for five generations will fall," said Yediot Ahronot, the largest-selling daily here, which generally leans rightward. At last Mr. Arafat "understood that we are here forever," a commentary said. It added:
"Arafat understood that in exchange for terrorism, he will not get anything from Israel, but that in exchange for full political recognition, Rabin's Israel will not only give him mutual recognition but much more. Our heart will be wide and generous. Even a Palestinian state, a small and demilitarized state heading for peace, does not scare us so much any more."
Haaretz, a left-of-center independent daily, wrote in an editorial that while Mr. Rabin did not really want to go to Washington and yielded to United States pressure, his presence at the ceremony alongside Mr. Arafat will underscore "the revolutionary change in Israel-P.L.O. relations in the last 10 days" and also make it easier for Israelis to absorb this shift. Now, the newspaper said, it is reasonable to ask the entire Arab world "to recognize the State of Israel, accept it and make peace with the idea of its existence."
Davar, affiliated with Mr. Rabin's Labor Party, argued that Israel has little to lose in the peace agreement and that the Palestinians had much to lose had they said no. But the P.L.O. still had to prove it could "fight Hamas and the rejectionist organizations." And the right-leaning Maariv was more skeptical still, cautioning that "whoever would boast that he understands the new situation and all its implications is only fooling himself and others."
Openly hostile to the stunning changes of recent days was Hatzofeh, aligned with the right-wing National Religious Party. It called for bringing down the Rabin Government, and said the Prime Minister had lost "the last shred of his credibility" in making a deal with Mr. Arafat, "a pathological liar."
Also greatly troubled by the White House ceremony was The Jerusalem Post, a right-wing newspaper and the only English-language daily in Israel.
"It is difficult not to be repelled by what can only be described as an obscene spectacle: the Prime Minister of Israel shaking hands (will he be spared the kisses?) with one of the arch-villains of our time, a man responsible -- as Ariel Sharon has aptly put it -- for spilling more blood of Jewish civilians than anyone since the Nazi era."

Load-Date: September 13, 1993


End of Document