MIDEAST TERROR IRONY IS THAT ASSAD MAY LOSE MOST IN DERAILING OF TALKS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
July 21, 1996, Sunday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: COMMENTARY,; (ldb) COLUMN
Length: 738 words
Byline: John Hall; John Hall is Media General News Service's Washington bureau chief
Body


In the pursuit of peace, there is a tendency now to accept terrorism as almost an inevitable byproduct -- a weapon of the weak against the strong.
Tony Lake, the president's principal national security adviser, sounds almost fateful and resigned on this subject.
''Terrorism is not going to go away,'' he told a group of journalists the day after a jetliner blew up in the sky off Long Island. ''We can be on the offensive against terrorism as we have been . . . but you're not going to defeat it. You can push it back. You can win tactical victories. But this is a permanent part of the landscape for many years to come.''
Lake's point was that it is no good for the government to suspend normal operations each time one of these acts occurs. It must be seen to be operating normally. Otherwise the terrorists win.
''If every time there is an incident that was a terrorist incident, or might have been, we stop our business, then the terrorists win,'' Lake said. ''Not only should we deny them small victories, but we should be denying them changes in our pattern of behavior that would just encourage them to do it all over again.''
The corollary thesis is that terrorists live and breathe only for the interruption of the peace process, and will rejoice if they can shut it down through acts of violence. Thus, Dennis Ross, the State Department's principal negotiator in the Middle East talks, is going back to the area to see if he can rekindle the spirit kindled in the Oslo, Norway, talks.
The logic that talks must proceed so as not to reward terrorism may have made sense when Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat first became engaged with Israel.
Hezbollah terrorists later saw the Middle East talks as a knife to their throat and their guardian, Syria, and sponsor, Iran, feared isolation from the rest of the Islamic Middle East.
But with Israel's election, which brought the hard-liner Benjamin Netanyahu to the fore, that equation has been turned on its head. Netanyahu has abandoned the land-for-peace formula that produced these negotiations. And Syria's dream of regaining the Golan Heights probably went out the window with Netanyahu's election.
Terrorists -- both the Israelis who assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the Arab suicide bombers in Israel -- have already wrecked the peace process. A U.S. effort to put it back on track, at this moment, may look like a minor annoyance to them. In fact, the party to these talks who may be the most interested in resuming the negotiations on the Golan Heights is Syria.
Syrian President Hafez Assad dug in his heels in negotiations with Rabin and with his successor, Shimon Peres. He may wish now he had made a deal for the Golan when he had a chance.
Assad reaped rewards for talking to the Israelis. For one, he was treated as a legitimate player on the international stage by President Clinton. Clinton met with Assad even though Syria is officially listed by the State Department as a terrorist state which harbors the bloodiest of international thugs, including those who plotted the 1988 Lockerbie Pan Am bombing.
By contrast, Syria's partner in terrorism, Iran, faces isolation and an economic boycott, a policy that has not been successful because U.S. allies, including Germany and Russia, are choosing not to honor it.
Making distinctions between terrorist states who parley and those who don't remains the operating U.S. policy and there is no need to change it, both Tony Lake and Dennis Ross said.
''We have believed and do believe it is important we be able to talk to the Syrian government about the future of the region and about peace in the region,'' said Lake. Lake said Iran could end its isolation if it would agree to talks on terrorism and other issues as Syria has done.
''We have always made it clear that we were not, are not and will not be prepared to make concessions on the terrorism issue for the sake of the peace issue. Terrorism is terrorism and peace is peace. To refuse to pursue peace in the Middle East would be to give the terrorists a victory.''
But does Assad see it that way? Just as the United States believes he can control Hezbollah and the other terrorists in the Bekka Valley if he chooses to do so, Assad may see Israel as an easily malleable client of the United States. He may believe pressure must now be brought to bear on the United States to control its unruly client as the price for controlling the terrorists on his soil.

Load-Date: July 23, 1996


End of Document