MIDWEST MUST STAY ON GUARD, RIDGE SAYS;
 MANY FACTORS MAKE REGION A LIKELY TARGET FOR TERRORISM, EXPERTS SAY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 12, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1425 words
Byline: Philip Dine Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Midwesterners should not be complacent about the threat of foreign terrorism, warns Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge.
Ridge points out that the region's many assets -- its economic diversity, its key role in agriculture and food processing, its large urban centers and major transportation status -- including the hub position of Missouri and Illinois in the U.S. trucking network -- could make it a prime target.
"I just think it would be foolish for anyone to think it's just the eastern corridor or the West Coast that might be targeted for attacks," he said in an interview last week with the Post-Dispatch.
Among other factors that Ridge said suggest a need for vigilance by residents and officials in the heartland are:
* The unpredictable nature of terrorist attacks.
* The well-publicized beefing up of security measures at key sites in New York and Washington, which could lead terrorists to seek easier targets elsewhere.
* A desire by terrorists to show that no Americans, including those in the Midwest - the country's most-populated region - are secure from attack.
While much attention since the Sept. 11 attacks has focused on airplane security, experts have warned recently that the shipping of cargo offers terrorists ways to take a heavy economic and human toll through the use of explosives or the transport of hazardous materials.
Ridge said that rail and trucking activity and heavy barge traffic on the Mississippi River provide both potential targets and means of attack.
"One of the tactics I think we have to be prepared for is that a terrorist would take what we consider an economic asset - it could be a barge, a tanker car, a truck with hazardous chemicals of some kind - and use that against a community or a region," Ridge said.
Ridge isn't alone in his concerns.
Gov. Bob Holden sees Missouri as vulnerable because of its two major urban centers, two military bases (plus one in Southern Illinois), nuclear power facilities, the presence of "more strategic bridges than any state in the country" and Missouri's role as the "heartland of the nation's food supply."
Security experts such as Clifford May agree. May is president of the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, an anti-terrorism think tank.
"The conventional wisdom has tended to be that because the terrorists struck last time in New York and Washington, they'll strike in New York and Washington again," May said. "But it's entirely possible they will want to send a message that Americans are not safe anywhere.
"Looking at this situation through the terrorists' eyes, which we have to do, Missouri would be a natural target. If the terrorists want to hit us where we live, show us no place is safe, Missouri could easily be one of the places on their short list."
Plenty of targets
Missouri and Illinois have busy airports, but they also are the center of the nation's trucking industry. Some 250,000 Teamsters - one of every six of the union's 1.5 million members - live in the two states.
A recent report by the Brookings Institution cited trucks as a major risk, given their large numbers and frequent traversing of major population centers, plus reports of suspicious people applying for licenses.
Military expert Michael O'Hanlon, who wrote much of the Brookings study, also noted the Mississippi's commercial barge traffic. "Toxic chemicals on the Mississippi, especially around a city such as St. Louis, are as much of a threat as anything you can imagine anywhere in the country," he said.
The transportation situation also makes the region's bridges vital, particularly those over the Mississippi.
The region's industrial energy demands create other potential targets. For example, between them, Illinois and Missouri have 12 of the nation's 103 nuclear power plants.
Michael Scardaville, homeland security analyst at the Heritage Foundation, a Washington think tank, worries about "agri-terrorism" by contamination of the Midwest's food supply.
"You could use chemicals or biological agents to attack crops or livestock, by introducing a disease like mad cow," he said. "The economic consequences would be huge."
Ray Gruender, U.S. attorney for Eastern Missouri, heads the federal Anti-Terrorism Task Force for the area. He said that while "a lot of people think the Midwest sort of snuggles in between the targets, and we don't see it that way."
"Not only is eastern Missouri a hub of transportation, there are things people don't even think about that are potentially a bigger problem," Gruender said. "We are hubs of various computing facilities, we have a major center for the Federal Reserve, we have refining facilities, so there are plenty of things that could potentially be targets."
Kansas City is a model
Since Sept. 11, Missouri has led the pack in some ways on the domestic security front. The state was the first to appoint a homeland security adviser. Holden tapped retired Army Col. Tim Daniel two weeks after the attacks.
The Missouri Security Panel recently finished an audit that determined risks, including airports and farms, Web sites and high-technology parks.
The report identifies 65 to 70 facilities that state and local authorities need to "actively manage" to ward off a terrorist attack. Of ficials plan to release the report once the legislative session and budget are wrapped up, hoping to capture public attention for the anti-terrorism effort.
The findings already have been used in various aspects of anti-terrorism planning, such as nuclear plant protection and dividing Missouri into nine areas for emergency health response.
While any attack would be troubling, Daniel says the state could weather most.
"What we've got to do is avoid catastrophic terrorism," he said.
That involves the use of weapons of mass destruction such as bioterrorism or a radiological bomb, or an attack on a nuclear power plant. Such an act could "get at the fabric of the society" and threaten government's ability to maintain the confidence of residents.
"Those challenges are much harder," he said. "We're not as prepared as we'd like to be."
Later this month in St. Louis, Gruender's task force will gather several hundred sheriffs and police officers from eastern Missouri to train them in combating terrorism.
Within Missouri, Daniel said that while St. Louis' efforts are good, Kansas City "is almost a model for the nation" in terms of regional cooperation and planning.
While Missouri has made much progress, some states - Illinois, Georgia and New York among them - are now further along, Daniel said. Missouri needs to improve its preparation in rural areas and also its "surge medical capacity," or its ability to respond to situations requiring health care professionals.
Illinois set up a statewide anti-terrorism task force more than a year before the Sept. 11 attacks. That was sparked by several hate-crime sprees in the state, the experience of hosting national political conventions and the status of O'Hare as one of the world's busiest airports and Chicago as the nation's third-largest city, said Dennis Culloton, press secretary for Gov. George Ryan.
Psychology of terror
The terrorist network Al-Qaida and its allies want to inflict mass casualties and damage the economy but also spread mass fear, says Tim Lomperis, chairman of St. Louis University's political science department and a former intelligence officer in Vietnam.
"I think they understand that they have to bring about a psychological shutdown in the whole country," he said.
While Lomperis has observed much local nervousness, he's also heard "a lot of cynical humor in St. Louis, like 'Don't flatter yourself' - kind of an inferiority complex vis-a-vis Chicago, that al-Qaida wouldn't even go after St. Louis."
But Lomperis said he has a nightmare scenario, involving Fair St. Louis, the Fourth of July celebration drawing hundreds of thousands of Midwesterners to the Gateway Arch grounds along the Mississippi River.
"I really am worried about the Fourth of July being a smokescreen for mixing a radiological bomb in with all the noises and explosions," he said. "All of the confusion and distraction gives them an opportunity to not only pull it off but to escape."
Ridge says that the key for the Midwest is maintaining vigilance as intense as that in New York or Washington.
"My suspicion is that if you harden targets and take precautions in one area, the terrorists would head for areas where those steps have not been taken," he said. "So I would just say to anyone in the country, in St. Louis, in Missouri, in the Heartland, be prepared - terrorism is unpredictable."

Graphic

 
;Reporter Philip Dine:; E-mail: pdine@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880  

Load-Date: May 12, 2002


End of Document