MIKE EYES CAMERAS TO KO CITY TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
May 12, 2010 Wednesday
RACING FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 371 words
Byline: BY ADAM LISBERG DAILY NEWS CITY HALL BUREAU
Body


MORE SURVEILLANCE cameras on New York's streets and in the subways could deter terrorist attacks, Mayor Bloomberg said yesterday on a trip to London.
Bloomberg got a firsthand look at the huge network of security cameras in the Westminster station of London's Tube with Mayor Boris Johnson, holding them up as a model for New York.
London relies heavily on closed-circuit TV systems to maintain order, and used its 12,000-camera subway system to identify the terrorists who bombed the Tube and a bus in 2005.
"There is always the threat of terrorism," Bloomberg said.
"That's what really this is all about, in being able to deter, prevent - and, if God forbid something happens, apprehend - the people that caused it."
Bloomberg also met with London Police Chief Superintendent Alex Robertson and Transport Commissioner Peter Hendy on his brief visit there.
The NYPD's Lower Manhattan Security Initiative monitors 3,000 public and private surveillance cameras downtown for suspicious activity, trying to emulate the "Ring of Steel" system in central London.
That system, set up in 1997, has used 80 license plate readers at the 16 entry points into London's financial district to track suspicious vehicles - and quickly catch stolen or wanted cars.
Bloomberg and Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly want to set up a similar network for midtown.
Security cameras tracked only some of the movements of failed bomber Faisal Shahzad's bomb-laden SUV into Times Square this month.
"It's not clear that they would have helped in Times Square, other than if the perpetrator knew there were cameras, he might not have tried to come into Times Square," the mayor said.
"But certainly cameras help after the fact and they help as a deterrent."
alisberg@nydailynews.com
Graphic: Graphic: British Prime Minister David Cameron
Led his Conservative Party to their biggest vote in 13 years, but must now form a working majority with rival Liberal Dems.
At 43, the youngest British PM in nearly 200 years.
After getting packed off to boarding school at age 7, he was educated at Eton and Oxford, England's most elite schools.
Married to Samantha, with two children and a baby on way.
An avid cyclist, he is also said to enjoy indie rock and an
occasional Guinness.

Load-Date: May 12, 2010


End of Document