MILITARISM SPAWNS TERRORISM AND THREATENS OUR NATION
The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)
February 6, 2007 Tuesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A7
Length: 363 words
Byline: John Kaufman Wauwatosa
Body


Dear Editor: Meanwhile in Afghanistan, the U.S. now has 24,000 troops. NATO has another 20,000 stationed there.
We have been fighting in Afghanistan for more than five years. The Taliban, who fought the Soviets with our help for nine years before the Russians gave up, show no signs of giving up. Thousands of innocent Afghans, many killed by our weapons, have needlessly perished.
The invasion of Afghanistan was an attack of revenge and convenience; Americans needed someone to punish, and Afghanistan lacked both economic stature and military defenses. Consumed with militaristic patriotism after the events of Sept. 11, few questioned our bombing and invasion.
These days our politicians and journalists seem to believe that Iraq is the only violent quagmire we are stuck in. Even most anti-war activists have little to say about Afghanistan, as if a bit more freedom for women somehow justifies the violent means. It is simply arrogant to assume that democracy can best be exported through explosives.
Having so readily accepted that military action was the right way to counter terrorism, Americans were setting the stage for the Bush administration's long-planned invasion of Iraq. The "war on terror," which now includes Somalia, was a profound mistake from the start. Militarism and terrorism go hand in hand, and it would behoove democratic governments to lead by example and fear nothing but fear itself. Fear, of course, is the ruling principle of the political establishment, but there is no reason why the rest of us must play along.
We were frightened into invading Afghanistan and Iraq, and we are now told of the terrible things that will happen to us if we withdraw our troops from Iraq and lose our resolve in Afghanistan. Not surprisingly, the fearmongers insist that only escalation will save the day for democracy -- more troops, more bombs, more ships, more missiles. Perhaps Iran and Syria are next.
It is militarism, spawned by fear, that is the greatest threat to our nation. So it is time to confront the failure of war as a means of defense of anything that matters to us. We are going to have to discover a new kind of courage: the guts it takes not to kill.

Load-Date: February 7, 2007


End of Document