MILITIA LEADER CHARGED UNDER NEW TERRORISM LAW
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 18, 1997, Sunday,
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 317 words
Byline: DAVID SHARP, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MORGANTOWN, W.Va.
Body


A federal statute that makes it a crime to provide resources to terrorist groups has withstood its first test since it was approved by Congress three years ago.
A federal magistrate recommended against dismissing indictments against Mountaineer Militia leader Floyd ''Ray'' Looker and another defendant on grounds the law was unconstitutionally vague.
''A person who wanted to obey the law could understand the offense,'' Magistrate James E. Seibert ruled in federal court in Wheeling.
Looker and Clarksburg Fire Lt. James ''Rich'' Rogers are among seven men with ties to the Mountaineer Militia accused of plotting to blow up the FBI fingerprint center in Clarksburg last year.
Rogers and Looker are the first to be charged under the 1994 law, U.S. Attorney William Wilmoth said.
Resources identified under the law include money, lodging, safe houses, false documents, communication equipment, weapons, explosives, transportation and ''other physical assets.''
''I think that the law that Congress drafted is sufficiently clear to allow a defendant to know what he's being charged with, which is what the Constitution requires,'' Wilmoth said.
Defense lawyers contend the wording ''other physical assets'' is so broad people must guess its meaning.
Rogers is accused of making photograph copies of blueprints of the FBI center. Looker sold them to fictitious Middle East terrorists for $ 50,000, prosecutors said.
Assistant U.S. Attorney David Godwin conceded the wording is broad but said the law is specific. He said it targets those who provide resources knowing they will be used in a terrorist act.
The magistrate agreed.
''Don't give anything to a person who wants to use that object to commit a crime. I think it is clear and therefore not unconstitutionally vague,'' Seibert wrote in the ruling Wednesday.
It is up to U.S. District Judge Frederick Stamp Jr. to accept or reject the magistrate's recommendation.

Load-Date: May 20, 1997


End of Document