Militants' Twitter traffic drops amid U.S. efforts; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 10, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A3
Length: 564 words
Byline: By Bradley Klapper
Body


Messages critical of the Islamic State in Arabic script form the shape of a teddy bear in this image, part of a flood of online media from the U.S. and its allies that describe suffering and enslavement at the hands of the extremist organization.
WASHINGTON - The Islamic State's Twitter traffic has plunged 45 percent in the past two years, the Obama administration says, as the U.S. and its allies have countered messages of jihadi glorification with a flood of online images and statements about suffering and enslavement at the hands of the extremist organization.
Among the images: A teddy bear composed of messages in Arabic that say the Islamic State "slaughters childhood," "kills innocence," "lashes purity" or "humiliates children." A male hand covering a female's mouth, saying the Islamic State "deprives woman her voice." A woman in a black niqab or veil, bloody tears coming from a bruised eye, and the caption: "Women under ISIS. Enslaved. Battered. Beaten. Humiliated. Flogged."
U.S. officials cite the drop in Twitter traffic as a sign of progress toward eliminating propaganda they blame for inspiring attacks around the world.
When the U.S. formed an international coalition in September 2014 to fight the Islamic State, the administration outlined multiple goals: military action and cutting off foreign fighters and finances, confronting the group's extremist ideology and stemming the militants' growing popularity in the Arab world and beyond.
The messaging element of the campaign struggled early on. Much of the anti-Islamic-State content put online was in English, limiting its effectiveness. At the time, social media networks were only getting started with new technological approaches to the challenge of disabling accounts that were recruiting and radicalizing prospective Islamic State members.
These shortcomings have been fixed, American officials believe. Memes and images depicting the group's treatment of women, children and others are presented almost entirely in Arabic. Whereas the U.S. previously blasted the information out itself, it disseminates messages now through Muslim governments, religious leaders, schools, youth leaders and advocacy groups with credibility in local communities. Data show the proliferation of Islamic State propaganda decreasing.
"We're denying ISIL the ability to operate uncontested online, and we're seeing their social media presence decline," said Michael Lumpkin, head of the Global Engagement Center, which coordinates the U.S. government's approach to fighting extremist messaging. Using an alternate acronym for the group, he said "anti-ISIL audiences are increasingly vocal on social media. This only weakens ISIL's ability to recruit, a key aim of our messaging efforts."
Data show a 6-1 ratio of anti-Islamic-State content online compared with messages promoting the group - an improvement from last year.
Among social networks, the administration has primarily focused on Twitter. The platform has been most heavily used by the Islamic State to crowdsource supporters and potential attackers, though it also has used YouTube and Facebook.
Although the U.S. government has no formal arrangement with Twitter, its information campaign has dovetailed with new approaches by the company to identify and eliminate tweets supporting terrorism. Since mid-2015, the company has suspended more than 125,000 such accounts.

Load-Date: July 10, 2016


End of Document