Militiaman convicted under anti-terrorism law
USA TODAY
August 26, 1997, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 439 words
Byline: Dennis Cauchon
Dateline: WHEELING, W.Va.
Body


WHEELING, W.Va. -- A member of a West Virginia militia group was
convicted here Monday of trying to help terrorists blow up a 3,000-employee
FBI fingerprint-records complex in Clarksburg, W.Va.
The trial was the first in the nation under a controversial provision
of a new anti-terrorist law that expanded the definition of terrorist
activity. The law was passed after the bombing of the World Trade
Center in 1993 and expanded again following the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing.
James Rogers, 41, a firefighter from Clarksburg, W.Va., was convicted
of making 34 photographs of blueprints that detailed the $ 180-million
FBI complex. West Virginia Mountaineer Militia leader Floyd Looker
then sold them for $ 50,000 to an undercover FBI agent posing as
an explosives expert who worked for Middle Eastern terrorists.
In a tape recording played at Rogers' trial, Looker said of Middle
Eastern terrorists, "They have a better capability of knocking
out that place than we ever will. That installation is a threat
to national security. I don't care who knocks it out."
U.S. Attorney William Wilmoth said he believed the militia members
were serious about attacking a government building. "The defense
argued they never really planned to do anything," Wilmoth said
Monday. "Luckily, we got into the scheme early so we'll never
really know."
Defense attorney Gary Zimmerman said he expects to challenge the
anti-terrorism law on the grounds that it is too broadly written
to be constitutional. A final decision on whether to appeal, however,
will not be made until after Rogers is sentenced. Rogers, who
is free on bond, did not comment. He faces a maximum of 10 years
in prison.
He was convicted of providing resources to terrorists under a
section of the anti-terrorist law that makes it a crime to knowingly
provide money, lodging, weapons, explosives, "material support
and resources" and "other physical assets" to anyone planning
a terrorist attack. He was acquitted of a second charge of conspiracy.
Rogers' attorney argued at trial that the blueprints were commonplace.
Hundreds of copies had been given out to contractors, and others
were available to the public at Clarksburg's city hall.
Looker, the militia leader, was to go on trial with Rogers, but
he pleaded guilty the day before the trial started. He is in prison,
awaiting sentencing.
The FBI uncovered the plot two months after 168 people died in
the bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building in April 1995.
Seven militia members were arrested Oct. 11, 1996, but only Looker
and Rogers were charged under the terrorism law. The others were
charged with explosives violations. Two have pleaded guilty; three
await trial.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: August 26, 1997


End of Document