Military judge dismisses major terrorism case
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 5, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 355 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


GUANTANAMO BAY NAVAL BASE, Cuba (AP) - A military judge dismissed terrorism-related charges Monday against a prisoner charged with killing an American soldier in Afghanistan, delivering a blow to the Bush administration's attempt to try Guantanamo detainees in military courts. 
The ruling raised questions about whether the U.S. would have to further revise procedures for prosecuting prisoners, leading to major delays. 
The chief of military defense attorneys at Guantanamo Bay argued that the ruling could spell the end of the war-crimes trial system set up last year by Congress and President Bush after the Supreme Court threw out the previous system. But a law professor said it appeared the judge left open the possibility of filing new charges. 
A military prosecutor said the ruling would be appealed, and the U.S. military entity responsible for holding the military trials said it believed Congress intended to grant jurisdiction to try suspected Taliban and al-Qaida members and supporters. 
Canadian detainee Omar Khadr, who was 15 when he was captured after a deadly firefight in Afghanistan and who is now 20, will remain at the remote U.S. military base along with some 380 other men suspected of links to al-Qaida and the Taliban. 
The judge, Army Col. Peter Brownback, said he had no choice but to throw out the Khadr case because he had been classified as an "enemy combatant" by a military panel years earlier - and not as an "alien unlawful enemy combatant." 
The Military Commissions Act, signed by Bush last year, says only those classified as "unlawful" enemy combatants can face war trials here, Brownback noted during the arraignment in a hilltop courtroom. 
Later Monday, a lawyer representing the only other detainee charged with war crimes, Salim Ahmed Hamdan, asked another military judge to throw out that case, based on the Khadr ruling. 
Marine Col. Dwight Sullivan, head of the Guantanamo defense attorneys, said the dismissal in the Khadr case would have "huge" impact because none of the detainees held at this isolated military base in southeast Cuba has been found to be an "unlawful" enemy combatant. 

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document