MILITARY TO GET CIVIL DEFENSE ROLE ON TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 1, 1999, Monday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 924 words
Byline: BRADLEY GRAHAM, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Defense Secretary William S. Cohen has decided to seek presidential approval for a permanent task force, headed by a general officer, to coordinate the military's response to a chemical or biological attack on the United States, defense officials said.
While details have yet to be worked out, recent reports of the anti-terrorist group have alarmed civil libertarians and anti-government groups who say they are troubled by the prospect of military forces encroaching on areas these critics see as the responsibility of civilian emergency response, law enforcement and health agencies.
Attempting to dampen the brewing controversy, senior Pentagon officials, who briefed reporters on the plan Friday, portrayed it as a modest effort to prepare the Defense Department better for the demands likely to be placed on the armed forces for logistical, medical and enforcement assistance were the United States attacked.
"Frankly, we're not seeking this job," said Deputy Defense Secretary John Hamre. He acknowledged that "most Americans" are "apprehensive" about the military getting involved in domestic policing and crisis management. "But we know we're being asked to be involved because we do have the only part of the government that has resources that can be mobilized," he added.
Until recently, America's geographic isolation from most potential enemies allowed national security planners to assume there was little direct threat to U.S. civilian populations apart from intercontinental ballistic missiles. But this notion of America as a distant fortress has given way lately to mounting concern at the prospect of terrorist groups or enemy states attacking U.S. cities with biological or chemical-warfare agents that could cause tens of thousands of casualties and sow chaos.
Ultimate authority for responding to most such emergencies, defense officials said, would rest with civilian authorities. But given the Pentagon's ability to mass such things as cots, protective suits and decontamination equipment, and to marshal large numbers of medical units and other troops quickly, de fense officials expect to be called on to play important supporting roles.
Although the Pentagon already has a crisis response organization to deal with natural disasters such as hurricanes and floods, the group is limited largely to the Army. The new force, officials said, would have broader authority to draw resources from the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps and coordinate activities with overseas military commands and other federal agencies.
Faced with a similar problem in planning for the possibility of paralyzing attacks on the nation's computerized information systems, the Pentagon established a task force for computer network defense, putting a two-star general in charge.
Officials stressed that the anti-terrorism task force would not amount to a full-scale regional command on a par with the large bureaucratic structures headed by four-star officers with responsibility for defending U.S. interests in Europe, Asia, the Middle East and elsewhere. Most likely, they said, the task force would be subordinate to the U.S. Atlantic Command in Norfolk, Va., which already has nominal responsibility for homeland defense issues.
But by assigning a senior officer and a new staff the job of planning for a terrorist attack in the United States, defense officials hope to provide for a more systematic and coordinated approach to the problem. They expect that any troops, at least for the military's initial response teams, would be drawn from National Guard and reserve units.
A program set in motion last year calls for creation of 10 Guard teams known as Rapid Assessment, Identification and Assessment - each with a geographic area of responsibility and with the mission of reaching the scene of a chemical or biological attack within four hours to help civilian responders.
Defense officials plan to present details of the new task force to President Clinton for approval as early as this summer. The initiative comes against the backdrop of a variety of steps being taken by the Clinton administration to bolster defenses against terrorist attack and improve federal coordination efforts, including the appointment last year of a national courter-terrorism coordinator on the National Security Council staff.
 
As part of his budget proposal for fiscal 2000, Clinton has put forward a $ 2.8 billion package to strenghten domestic defenses against attacks by terrorists.
Plan encounters criticism
WASHINGTON - The notion of a homeland defense commander has struck some critics as a violation of the American tradition of keeping the military out of civilian enforcement matters.
However well-intentioned the Pentagon may be, these critics argue, there is the danger of "mission creep" and the risk that the task force's power could expand to threaten individual rights.
"The Pentagon ought not to be doing any of this work," said Gregory Nojeim, legislative counsel in the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "There's no reason that the Department of Health and Human Services or the Federal Emergency Management Agen-cy couldn't be given the resources to deal with it."
Other outside experts have welcomed the proposal.
"Only the armed services have the managerial and logistical capabilities to mount the all-out defensive effort called for by the enormity of these threat contingencies," said a report last month on defending the United States by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington research group.

Load-Date: February 2, 1999


End of Document