MILITARY DISPATCHES
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 10, 2006 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 2
Length: 581 words
Byline: RICHARD LARDNER, , rlardner@tampatrib.com
Body


By RICHARD LARDNER
rlardner@tampatrib.com
Navy Goes Under Sea In Terror War
The submarine is the ultimate stealth weapon, and the Navy plans to make greater use of these undersea platforms in the global war on terrorism.
Vice Adm. Chuck Munns, commander of the Navy's submarine forces, last month established the Cell for Submarine Counter-Terrorism Operations to ensure the submarine's "inherent capabilities of stealth, agility, endurance and firepower" are maximized against al-Qaida and other threats, according to a news release March 29.
The cell will be led by Rear Adm. Mark Kenny, commander of Submarine Group TWO in Groton, Conn.
The cell's creation is the latest step in a broader Navy effort to become more involved in a campaign against an enemy not known for operating on the open waters.
In July, then-Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Vern Clark called for a series of moves intended to expand the Navy's counterterrorism role. These actions include improving the service's intelligence capabilities and establishing "riverine" squadrons to patrol narrow waterways and coastlines looking for terrorists.
Ron O'Rourke, a national defense specialist with the Congressional Research Service in Washington, said as the Navy bolsters its counterterrorism role, it can't ignore other demands.
"This is one of several initiatives by the Navy in recent months to increase its ability to participate in the global war on terrorism," O'Rourke said Friday. "The [terror war] is not the Navy's only priority, however; it also needs to pay attention to things like China's naval modernization."
U.S. lawmakers also should examine whether the Navy's actions are "motivated in part by concerns about its perceived relevance to current threats or by a desire to secure a portion" of funding from the war on terrorism, O'Rourke said.
Socom Chief's Stay Extended
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld has asked Army Gen. Bryan Brown, head of U.S. Special Operations Command at MacDill Air Force Base, to stay on the job for at least another year, according to InsideDefense.com, an online news service in Washington.
Brown agreed to Rumsfeld's request, made informally in a telephone conversation between the two, the news service reported.
Sen. George Allen, R-Virginia, had recommended a controversial Army general to replace Brown, whose normal three-year stint as Socom chief would have ended in September.
But Allen's choice, Lt. Gen. William G. "Jerry" Boykin, was sharply criticized by Allen's Republican colleague from Virginia, Sen. John Warner, who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
Boykin, the Pentagon's deputy undersecretary for intelligence, drew criticism in 2003 after making church speeches in which he described the war on terrorism as a Christian fight against Satan and suggested that Muslims worship idols. He later apologized for the characterizations.
Centcom General Retires
Army Maj. Gen. James Comstock, director of reserve forces at U.S. Central Command, retired last week after 37 years of military service.
Comstock, a Michigan native, was assigned to Centcom in 2002. He was the principal liaison between Centcom chief Gen. John Abizaid and the military branches on reserve issues.
Send military news to Richard Lardner, military affairs reporter, The Tampa Tribune, 200 S. Parker St., Tampa FL 33606; e-mail rlardner @tampatrib.com; or fax to (813) 259-7676.
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

MILITARY DISPATCHES

Graphic

 
The submarine is the ultimate stealth weapon, and the Navy plans to make greater use of these undersea platforms in the global war on terrorism.

Load-Date: April 12, 2006


End of Document