Militarism Only Results In Permanent Warfare
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
February 21, 2011 Monday


Copyright 2011 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 9
Length: 363 words
Byline: Letters
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


TO THE EDITORS:
It is constructive to read President Eisenhower's farewell address on the Internet to learn about the military man's concern about the possible disastrous growth of the military-industrial complex.
"In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist.
"We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes. Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper."
There is a national citizens movement under way calling for the reduction of the military budget that now exceeds 50 percent of the discretionary spending of income tax dollars. If paying taxes for perpetual wars troubles you, consider the options you can find on the website 1040forPeace.org.
The growth in defense spending, adjusted for inflation, is dramatic. In approximate round numbers, spending in 1962 was $400 billion. In 2006, it grew to $800 billion and, in 2010, to $1.2 trillion.
Congress is about to cut the budget by eliminating good programs from 16 percent of the budget, but big government and the huge deficit are the result of militarism. All of our elected officials, from both parties, get into office based on huge contributions from the very industries that are profiting greatly from perpetual wars.
The president and Congress have the constitutional prerogative to be in charge of the military, but they have been coopted by the military-industrial complex.
Terrorism is a threat as it has been since the beginning of time. Terrorism has been used by the weak to attack the strong. David of old, by this definition, could be considered a terrorist. He used a stone and a sling shot to kill Goliath.
The U.S. today, with its military might, is the Goliath challenging the whole world. And I, for one, feel this military might is making me less safe and secure than ever.
Paul Leatherman
Manheim Township

Load-Date: February 21, 2011


End of Document