Militant group rivals al-Qaida
Chicago Daily Herald
April 3, 2011 Sunday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2
Length: 832 words
Byline: By Kathy Gannon Associated Press
Body


ISLAMABAD — Created by Pakistan to wage a proxy war against India, the Lashkar-e-Taiba terror group has moved its jihad onto the global stage and could match al-Qaida in strength and organization, according to officials, experts and group members.
Blamed for the 2008 Mumbai massacre, Lashkar-e-Taiba has developed its own distinct networks worldwide, found global funding sources and established links with groups that refused to hook up with al-Qaida, fearing Osama bin Laden's group would hijack their causes, say analysts who have followed the organization.
Analysts, intelligence officials and anti-terrorism investigators on three continents say the group, also known as LeT, could be poised to expand its reach beyond South Asia.
U.S. court documents and an internal Indian government dossier on the Mumbai massacre show that Lashkar-e-Taiba operatives have turned up in Australia, Europe, East Asia and the United States.
They have plotted to blow up sites in Australia, recruited from existing terrorist groups in European capitals and have become the greatest source of inspiration for radicalized Muslims living in the West, say intelligence officials in the United Kingdom and France.
Juan Carlos Zarate, a top counterterrorism official in the administration of President George W. Bush, said his "fundamental concern is that LeT could not (only) serve as the flash point for a broader South Asia conflagration but could also evolve into an alternate international jihadi platform for global terrorism."
Lashkar-e-Taiba, which means Army of the Pure, belongs to the Salafist movement, an ultraconservative branch of Islam similar to the Wahabi sect, the main Islamic branch in Saudi Arabia from which al-Qaida partly emerged. The organizations operate separately but have been known to help each other when their paths intersect.
Former and current members interviewed by the AP denied the organization has ambitions beyond India and fighting to reunite the disputed territory of Kashmir.
If LeT does have aspirations of becoming a global terrorism force, whether it acts upon them may depend on whether it is willing to strain its relationship with Pakistan. Despite being officially banned, it operates with relative freedom there — even doing charity work using government money.
Last month its leader, Hafiz Saeed, addressed a rally of thousands demanding the hanging of CIA contractor Raymond Davis, who had been arrested for killing two Pakistanis. Davis was released after blood money was paid to the family in accordance with Pakistani law.
Details of how several LeT members plotted mayhem and murder from nondescript locations in the United States and their hide-outs in Pakistan were outlined in a 35-page plea agreement struck by David Coleman Headley, a Pakistani American who aided in the Mumbai assault.
In those meetings they gave detailed instructions on how to deliver, place and detonate explosives, according to the Illinois District U.S. court document. They plotted the Mumbai attack that killed 166 people and discussed blowing up the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten to protest publication of offensive cartoons depicting Islam's Prophet Muhammad, the document said.
Headley is awaiting sentencing, having exchanged his cooperation for a sentence other than the death penalty.
Analysts and terrorism experts agree that Pakistan's intelligence agency, known as the ISI, is still able to control LeT, though ISI denies it. Fears have spiked that pressure has been building within LeT to break free, become even more ferocious and attack targets outside India — possibly in the United States.
"Its literature has always been about attacking the West. It is building the network that allows them to attack," said Christine Fair, assistant professor at the Center for Peace and Strategic Studies at Georgetown University in Washington. "The fact that they haven't struck out against the West proves to me in itself that they are still being controlled by the ISI."
When Pakistan tried to control some of the groups following its alliance with the United States in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks, it lost control of some who turned against their former patrons, and found itself also dealing with homegrown extremists. LeT has so far refused to turn against the government and attack inside Pakistan.
Hundreds of Pakistanis have died in scores of suicide bombings throughout the country, in mosques and at shrines. More than 3,000 Pakistani soldiers — more than the U.S. and all the NATO countries in Afghanistan combined — have died in a six-year-old war in the tribal regions against another militant group, the Tehrik-e-Taliban.
A former Pakistani government official with close ties to the military and ISI said LeT appeared to be fracturing on the issue of expanding its activities. He said some LeT commanders want to carry out more international and daring attacks, but the senior leadership believes the time is not right and that a broader campaign would hurt Pakistan.

Graphic

 
Associated Press/Feb. 5, 2011 Hafiz Saeed, center, the leader of banned Islamic group Jamaat-ud-Dawa, an alias of the Lashkar-e-Taiba terror group, sits with religious leaders Hafiz Hussain Ahmed, right, of Jamiat-ul-Islam and Liaquat Baluch of Jamat-i-Islami, during a rally against India and the United States in Lahore, Pakistan.

Load-Date: April 6, 2011


End of Document