Military site shootings crystallize FBI terrorism concerns
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 19, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 648 words
Byline:  Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON • The deadly shootings at military sites in Tennessee illustrate the threat that FBI officials have warned about: violence directed against a vulnerable government target by a lone gunman with apparent terrorist aspirations.
The FBI has not detailed a motive, but Thursday's attacks that killed four Marines and one sailor are under investigation as a potential act of terrorism, with authorities combing through the gunman's past to look for travel, contacts and online writings.
The Marines killed in Thursday's attack are Lance Cpl. Squire K. Wells of Cobb, Ga., Gunnery Sgt. Thomas Sullivan of Hampden, Mass., Sgt. Carson Holmquist of Polk, Wis., and Staff Sgt. David Wyatt of Burke, N.C. The military did not identify the latest victim, but family members have previously said that Petty Officer 2nd Class Randall Smith, 26, was among the injured and was in critical condition. Smith had lived in Paulding County, Ohio, before joining the service.
The two surviving wounded are an unidentified Marine recruiter, who was shot in the leg; and Chattanooga police Officer Dennis Pedigo, who was shot in the ankle.
The rampage unfolded as the federal government has raised alarms about the online spread of terrorist propaganda, including repeated exhortations by groups such as Islamic State for sympathizers to target police officers and military installations.
It came two months after two men opened fire outside a Prophet Muhammad cartoon contest in Texas before being killed by police, and during a year when several dozen people in the United States have been charged with supporting terrorism.
"This is the new normal," said Will McCants, a terrorism expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington. If a terrorist group is looking to influence public opinion and generate fear, he said, "this kind of tactic has a lot going for it."
One federal law enforcement official said investigators did not immediately find an extensive online presence involving the gunman, Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez, 24, or evidence that he was directly influenced or inspired by Islamic State. The official was not authorized to discuss an ongoing investigation and spoke on condition of anonymity.
But the line between inspired and directed is blurred in an age of pervasive social media, where anyone with a computer or smartphone can be exposed to what FBI Director James Comey has called "poison" propaganda from terrorist organizations.
Law enforcement officials describe an ongoing challenge in distinguishing those who merely consume and share messages and those actually motivated to commit violence. Authorities say there's no question that social media platforms, coupled with the small-scale plots being devised, have made terrorist ideology more accessible than a decade ago. It can be easy for those who read messages, but do not post their own thoughts, to avoid law enforcement scrutiny.
"They have now spent a year, maybe a little longer, investing in this strategy," Comey told reporters last week, in a reference to Islamic State. "And what you're seeing now is proof that it works. Americans all over the place responding to this constant push and feed and buzz."
The Kuwait-born gunman, who was killed by police, was not on the radar of federal law enforcement before the shooting, officials have said. He had visited Jordan last year, a U.S. official said Friday, and investigators will review those overseas travels for potential contacts with militants.
Abdulazeez received an engineering degree from the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga in 2012 and worked as an intern a few years ago at the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Federal officials have warned that today's terrorist sympathizers can be difficult to track and predict, in part because their plans are often spontaneous, poorly formed and lack the sophisticated execution that has defined al-Qaida and its operatives.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this July 17, 2015 file photo, an FBI investigator investigates the scene of a shooting outside a military recruiting center in Chattanooga, Tenn. The deadly shootings of Marines at two Tennessee military sites illustrate the threat FBI officials in recent months have warned about: violence by a lone gunman with apparent terroristic aspirations against a vulnerable government target. (AP Photo/John Bazemore, File)  A photo of Skip Wells is posted next to a traditional fallen comrade table at a memorial outside the JROTC office at Sprayberry High School where Wells attended, Friday, July 17, 2015, in Marietta, Ga. Wells was one of four Marines killed in Thursday's shooting in Chattanooga. (AP Photo/David Goldman)  Members of Teen Challenge, gather for a memorial service at River Park Saturday, July 18, 2015, in Chattanooga, Tenn., for the victims of the Tennessee shootings. Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez, of Hixson, Tenn., attacked two military facilities on Thursday, in a shooting rampage that killed four Marines and one U.S. Navy sailor. (AP Photo/Mark Zaleski)  Teen Challenge member, Carol Parker, center, becomes emotional during a memorial service at River Park Saturday, July 18, 2015, in Chattanooga, Tenn., for the victims of the Tennessee shootings. The U.S. Navy says a sailor who was shot in the attack on a military facility in Chattanooga has died, raising the death toll to five people. (AP Photo/Mark Zaleski) 

Load-Date: July 20, 2015


End of Document