Militant Islam vs. the world
University Wire
March 16, 2004 Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Daily Forty-Niner via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 666 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Daily Forty-Niner; SOURCE: California State U.-Long Beach
Dateline: LONG BEACH, Calif. 
Body


A series of nearly simultaneous terrorist strikes in Madrid claimed 200 lives on Thursday. The early focus on Basque separatists as suspects and the present concentration on Islamic extremists serves as an important reminder of why the Islamist movement is the most dangerous threat extant.
In our quest to understand terrorism, we are understandably transfixed by the image of Islamic fundamentalism. Even the most educated among us, frustrated in our search for comprehension, occasionally assume that Muslim terrorists must be crazy. But this glib label hinders our comprehension of the threat before us. To gain true insight into the scourge, we should first look at some other manifestations of terrorism around the world.
The figurehead of the Basque separatist movement, the ETA, has been in existence since 1959 and first employed terrorism in 1968 when it killed a police chief in San Sebastian, Spain. The Basque movement is ideologically secular. Its drive for a single Basque state in the northeast of Spain and the southwest of France is based mostly on a sense of national distinctiveness founded upon a unique language.
In Ireland, the (Catholic) Irish Republican Army has engaged in terrorism against Protestants on and off since the 1920s. Protestants have to a far lesser degree also engaged in terrorism. The island is currently divided between Northern Ireland, which is claimed by Great Britain, and the Republic of Ireland. The IRA's aim is to reunite the island via strikes against Northern Ireland's Protestant majority.
In Colombia, the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) and their right-wing paramilitary opponents have terrorized and butchered civilians while fighting each other. Both of these groups also have secular motivations.
All of these groups have similarities. All target civilians and political leaders. All are fighting for land or changes in government. Two are primarily secular and two are primarily religious. But only members of the Islamist movement are routinely tagged as "insane."
Why should this be so? The biggest reason -- and the reason it is the greatest threat -- is that Islamic fundamentalism is the sole viable force of international terrorism. All other terrorist movements are content to wage their battle with one regional foe.
Neither the ETA, nor the IRA, nor the FARC attack countries that have relations with their home government. The United States, for example, is directly involved in Colombia's military affairs, but no Colombians have infiltrated America to engage in terrorist activities.
Islamists, on the other hand, strike at any perceived partners of the West. Since Sept. 11, attacks have taken place in Iraq, Indonesia, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, India, Pakistan and Kenya. A terrorist cell was allegedly uncovered in Britain and now the attacks in Spain seem to be the latest example of militant Islam's willingness to move against the entire world.
So, radical Islam presents the same difficulties as terrorism that is regionally isolated, only on a far grander scale. The primary difference is that unity among the nations of the world is essential to defeating the problem.
Such a global alliance cannot only be committed to military and police pressures. It must more fully cultivate a sense of equality among nations. It must give all partners an equal say and must have elements that develop bonds that are not directly related to combating terrorism.
From this type of community will spring the social and economic progress necessary to mobilize the broad support of the populace within the respective countries.
From this type of community will spring the opposition necessary to make terrorism unpalatable to the disaffected masses.
From this type of community will spring the spirit needed to isolate terrorists and the states that harbor and support them both directly and tacitly.
From this type of community will spring the forces that can defeat a shadowy and formidable enemy.
(C) 2003 Daily Forty-Niner via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 16, 2004


End of Document