MILITARY IN ARGENTINA IS ACCUSED OF KILLING 2 LEFT-WING PERONISTS
The New York Times
May 19, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 811 words
Byline: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, May 18
Body


Argentine political leaders and human rights activists charged today that military authorities assassinated two left-wing Peronists over the weekend in an attempt to intimidate the opposition.
The charges, which appeared to amount to the harshest accusations yet against the military Goverment of President Reynaldo Bignone, were made in separate statements.
The politicians and human rights activists said hard-line military factions were seeking to end demands for investigations of what happened to the more than 6,000 Argentines who disappeared in the military's campaign against leftist terrorism in the 1970's.
 
Threat to Elections Seen
Political groups from the Federal Party on the right to the Communists on the left charged also that the intimidation was designed to undermine the elections that have been scheduled for October.
BUENOS AIRES, May 18 - Argentine political leaders and human rights activists charged today that military authorities assassinated two left-wing Peronists over the weekend in an attempt to intimidate the opposition.
President Bignone denied that the Government had anything to do with the deaths. Later he supported the official police statement that the two men were killed by policemen in a gun battle in Rosario, a grain-exporting river port 170 miles northwest of here, after a car chase on Saturday afternoon.
The police said they would turn the bodies over to the families shortly.  Emilio Mignone, president of the Center for Legal and Social Studies, the most authoritative Argentine human rights group, was one of many to say, as he phrased it, that the deaths ''demonstrate that the repressive apparatus still exists.''
 
'Cowards' in the Ministry
Vicente Saadi, the head of the leftist wing of the Peronist party, said he and other political leaders had sought in vain to meet with Interior Ministry officials to discuss the deaths. He said the ministry was headed by ''cowards.''
''The only thing that still exists under this military dictatorship,'' he said in a statement, ''is a permanent state of criminality.''
Antonio Troccoli, a leader of the centrist Radical Party, said the deaths of the two Peronists were part of ''an absurd, violent repression.''
The two men were Osvaldo Cambiaso, a 42-year-old organizer for Mr.  Saadi's Peronist faction, the Intransigence and Mobilization Movement, and Justo Javier Correa, said by the police to be a 33-year-old former member of the Montoneros, a leftist terrorist band. Mr. Cambiaso was jailed in the early 1970's on charges of having participated in terrorist-related crimes.
Newspapers, human rights groups and Peronist leaders said Sunday, citing reports by witnesses, that the two were seized by five armed men in a bar Saturday morning and shoved into a pickup truck.
 
Italy Seeks Answers
The Italian Embassy has been inquiring into the incident because Mr. Cambiaso also held naturalized Italian citizenship. The incident followed a call last week by the military commander of the Rosario area, Maj. Gen. Eduardo Esposito, for tightened controls over former political prisoners in his region.
The deaths of the two Peronists were described by human rights activists as the most serious incidents since the disappearances of Argentines ended in 1980.
The activists noted that dozens of judges, journalists, politicians and human rights leaders who demanded inquiries into the fate of those who disappeared had reported that they had been harassed in recent months. They said several had said they had been kidnapped and beaten.
There are no reliable numbers on the incidents, but the human rights leaders say the intimidation has grown more intense since a Government report on terrorism was widely denounced three weeks ago on the ground that it did not explain the fate of those who have disappeared.
No proof has been presented that the anonymous groups are linked to the military. But the intimidation appears identical to that used by military-related groups in the 1970's.
 
Vote Promised for October
The sudden political confrontation over the deaths is regarded here as critical because the military has promised to hold elections in October and to step down in January. But the unknown fate of those who disappeared still hangs as an explosive issue as the military seeks to avoid future prosecution. The politicians make no promises.
The police explanation of the deaths of the two Peronists has been denounced by political and human rights leaders. Adolfo Perez Esquivel, the Nobel peace laureate, who is in his ninth day of a fast to protest the disappearances, called the report a ''farce.''
The Permanent Assembly for Human Rights said in a news conference held with leaders from many major parties Tuesday night that it had a ''high-ranking source'' who said the deaths were a planned kidnapping and murder led by ''an officer named Pati and police captain named Alcantar.''


End of Document