Militant group in Pakistan seeks dialogue Opposition party has already called for an end to operations against insurgents in another area.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 25, 2008 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 428 words
Byline: By Robert H. Reid the Associated Press
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan 
Body


Taliban-style militants battling government forces in northwest Pakistan said Sunday they wanted dialogue with the winners of parliamentary elections and urged the new leadership to abandon President Pervez Musharraf's war on terrorism.
The party of slain opposition leader Benazir Bhutto, which will lead the new government, called for an end to military operations against autonomy-minded insurgents in another restive area - the southwestern province of Baluchistan, where the U.S.-backed Afghan government believes the Taliban leadership may be hiding.
Opposition parties trounced Musharraf's allies in Feb. 18 parliamentary elections - widely seen as a public repudiation of Musharraf's policies, including his alliance with Washington in the war on terrorism.
The election results have fueled calls for Musharraf to step down, both inside and outside Pakistan. Two U.S. senators on Sunday urged a "graceful exit" from power for the unpopular president but stopped short of supporting efforts to remove him from office.
"I firmly believe if they do not focus on old grudges - and there's plenty in Pakistan - and give him a graceful way to move," then it could happen, said Joe Biden, a Democrat from Delaware who chairs the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas, echoed the sentiment. Both spoke on ABC television's "This Week" after meeting with Musharraf.
Maulvi Umar, spokesman for the Islamic militants Tehrik-e-Taliban, said his group welcomed the victory of anti-Musharraf parties and was eager to talk with them about ways to bring peace to northwestern tribal areas.
"We hope after the government comes into power, they will not make the mistake of continuing the existing policies and will bring peace to the people of tribal areas," the spokesman said by telephone Sunday. "We want peace and are looking for dialogue with those who got elected."
U.S. and Pakistani officials have blamed the leader of the Tehrik-e-Taliban, Baitullah Mehsud, for masterminding Bhutto's Dec. 27 assassination. Her Pakistan People's Party finished first in last week's vote.
More than 80,000 Pakistani soldiers have been battling Islamic extremists in the mountainous northwest but have failed to crush the insurgency. A unilateral cease-fire called by the militants this month has reduced the level of fighting.
However, violence continues, and a suspected militant attack late Saturday on a government checkpoint near Peshawar, in northwestern Pakistan, killed two paramilitary soldiers and one policeman, local police official Zulfikar Khan said.

Load-Date: February 25, 2008


End of Document