Military Bill On Spending Is Approved By Congress
The New York Times
December 16, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 304 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- Congress passed a $662 billion military spending bill on Thursday after months of wrangling over how to handle captured terrorism suspects without violating Americans' constitutional rights.
The Senate passed the measure 86 to 13, sending it to President Obama for his signature. The House approved the measure late Wednesday, on a vote of 283 to 136.
The White House had initially threatened to veto the legislation but dropped that warning late Wednesday, saying last-minute Congressional changes meant that the legislation no longer challenged the president's ability to fight terrorism.
The legislation authorizes money for military personnel, weapons systems, actions in Afghanistan and Iraq, and national security programs in the Energy Department for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
Among other steps, the measure:
Imposes tough new penalties on Iran, targeting foreign financial institutions that do business with the country's central bank. The president could waive those penalties if he notifies Congress that it is in the interest of national security.
Freezes $700 million in financing for Pakistan until the defense secretary provides Congress a report on how Islamabad is countering the threat of improvised explosive devices.
And requires the contractor of the troubled F-35 Joint Strike Fighter aircraft program, Lockheed Martin, to cover extra costs on future purchases of the aircraft. The Pentagon envisions buying 2,443 planes for the Air Force, Marine Corps and Navy, but the $1 trillion price could make it the most expensive program in military history.
The legislation is $27 billion less than Mr. Obama wanted and $43 billion less than Congress gave the Pentagon this year, a reflection of deficit-driven federal budgets, the end of the Iraq war and the reduction of forces in Afghanistan.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 16, 2011


End of Document