Millennials reflect on terror history
The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
May 14, 2011 Saturday


Copyright 2011 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 491 words
Byline: Dave Eisenstadter, The Keene Sentinel, N.H.
Body


May 14--For those too young to remember when the Twin Towers came down 10 years ago, the name Osama bin Laden has been synonymous with terrorism and evil.
While news of the al-Qaida leader's death produced a mix of emotions in many, perhaps none was as affected as the generation that grew up during the age of the "war on terror."
Ross Orsucci, a local 8th-grader, doesn't remember the 9/11 tragedy, but he remembers learning about it after the fact and thinking, "How could people do this?"
He tied the attack to conflicts in the Middle East.
"When bin Laden was found and killed, it was a huge load off the country's back and I'm thinking things are going to get better from here," Ross said.
Ross has talked about the news event in social studies classes. Most of his classmates agreed that attacking bin Laden was the right choice, but some were skeptical bin Laden was a good target, Ross said.
Gus Bittenbender, 14, of Alstead is home-schooled, and also doesn't remember 9/11. When he heard about bin Laden's death, he thought it was a good thing for the most part, but he also believes that assassination is wrong.
Jen Fishman was in 6th grade at recess when the Twin Towers went down. Her school was located next to an Army base, and plane after plane flew overhead, and no one knew why.
Now 20 years old and a junior at Keene State College, Fishman recalls how bin Laden was characterized to her as she grew up.
"He was always associated as evil or the enemy and that we had to get him," Fishman said.
When she heard bin Laden had been killed, she was happy at first, but then feared there would be retribution.
"I'm honestly kind of nervous about what is going to happen next," Fishman said. "Everyone had this idea that if we got Osama that all of our problems would be gone and terrorism would be gone, but it's only going to, I think, make things worse at this point."
Allanna Johnson, 23, of Jaffrey agreed.
"People were celebrating his death, yet I feel as though the celebration was a slap in the face for others," Johnson said.
"There is some relief, but there are more terrorists out there, and this could be causing more of an uprising."
Johnson was in middle school when the Twin Towers fell. In her school, many of her peers accused then-President George W. Bush of using the attack to start a war.
Sarah Harmon is 17, and grew up in Keene hearing about how bad bin Laden was, but the reaction among many Americans at the news surprised her.
"It's weird to celebrate someone's death," she said.
Dave Eisenstadter can be reached at 352-1234, extension 1432, or deisenstadter@keenesentinel.com
To see more of The Keene Sentinel, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.sentinelsource.com/. Copyright (c) 2011, The Keene Sentinel, N.H. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: May 15, 2011


End of Document