Miller Unveils Anti-Terror Plan
New York Sun (Archive)
March 26, 2003 Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: HOME FRONT; Pg. 2
Length: 490 words
Byline: By JULIA LEVY, Staff Reporter of the Sun
Body


City Council Speaker Gifford Miller proposed an intensive new inspection regime yesterday to keep terrorists away from New York City's bulk fuel storage facilities, laboratories, and skyscrapers.
"We live in a world where there's a constant threat of terrorism and terrorist activity," he said. "We ought to be making sure that every building is inspected."
The new program would require the Fire Department to oversee anti-terror inspections in high-rise buildings throughout the city - especially the highest and most prominent buildings, which are the most susceptible to terrorist attack.
The inspectors would check traditional terrorist targets like fuel-storage facilities and places where chemicals are stored to make sure they're not vulnerable to terrorist attack.
They would also review building plans and make recommendations to safeguard their structural integrity as well as conducting anti-terrorism seminars for building owners and occupants.
Mayor Bloomberg questioned Mr. Miller's proposal.
"The law already requires inspections," he told reporters. "The Fire Department already does have inspections."
He said it seems like the "essence of Speaker Miller's plan...is that he'd like to charge for [the inspections] and use it as another source of revenues."
Although he said he's not opposed to getting more revenues for the city, which is saddled with a multi-billion dollar deficit, he said, "I don't know if this one is one we can really charge for."
The Fire Department charges $210-an-hour for fire safety inspections. Mr. Miller said he anticipates that building owners would be charged at a similar rate for anti-terrorism inspections.
Mr. Miller denied that the anti-terrorism inspection program would be designed to generate revenue for the city.
"We're not trying to make more money off of this," he said.
But at the same time, he said the city doesn't have the cash to give building owners free anti-terrorism inspections - and he said his proposed program would be self-financing.
"We think it will pay for itself," he said. "We know that it's not going to be a revenue loser."
The city's fire commissioner, Nicholas Scoppetta, predicted the department would "probably need more resources" if it were to impose a new terrorism inspections.
He said the department would "take a look at everything that's proposed," but he didn't go as far as calling Mr. Miller's proposal a good idea.
The senior vice president of the Real Estate Board of New York, Marolyn Davenport, said it seems like Mr. Miller's idea would "increase the cost of doing business."
"I don't really understand it," she said. "They make annual inspections now."
Ms. Davenport said she didn't know how Mr. Miller's idea would make New York a safer place to work and live - pointing out that buildings ramped up security after the September 11 attacks, and that the Police Department has started training building owners about what to do in case of a terrorist attack.

Load-Date: March 26, 2004


End of Document