Millennium sparks worries about terrorism- Officials fear that 2000 may incite domestic incidents
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 26, 1998, Wednesday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2C
Length: 848 words
Byline: LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


PUYALLUP, Wash. - With fewer than 500 days left before 2000, law
enforcement officials are increasingly concerned that widespread
paranoia about the millennium could touch off a clash between the
government and domestic terrorists.
"I worry that every day something could happen somewhere," said
Robert Blitzer, section chief of the FBI's domestic terrorism unit.
Recent attacks on U.S. embassies in Africa have raised concerns about
foreign terrorism, but the potential for violence from within the
United States has also increased.
At any given time, Blitzer said, his agents are working nearly 1,000
cases of potential domestic terrorist activity, a workload that has
grown as the end of the century nears.
The cases, spread around the country, range from a single threatening
letter mailed to Washington to the unsolved theft this summer of 25
tons of ammonium nitrate from a West Virginia farm supply business.
The amount of stolen fertilizer is more than 12 times the quantity
used in the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City that
killed 168 people in 1995.
Regarding the ammonium nitrate theft from Bruceton Farm Services in
Preston County, FBI Special Agent William Crowley in Pittsburgh said
today, "We've not gotten one credible lead as of today regarding a
sinister purpose."
However, "We have not ruled out and will not rule out that it was
stolen for such a purpose until we recover it or account for it."
Crowley said the FBI is still actively looking for the stolen
chemical, "reviewing information we received in the initial phase of
the investigation. We're still pursuing any leads we get in."
More than 50 agents initially worked on the case, Crowley said. The
agency still has more than 10 people, including analysts, working on
it, he said.
"We have not ruled out going back down there, if we get a substantial
lead based on the analyses we've received," he said.
In that case as well as others, federal officials are working with
local police agencies to investigate terrorist activity.
"As we get closer to 2000, we'll probably see more people coming out
of the woodwork," Blitzer said. "Some of these groups have an
apocalyptic vision, and they may go violent."
Many have already come out of the shadows. At a three-day
"Preparedness Expo" here to plan for the coming clashes,
conventioneers sold books and pamphlets, hawked camping equipment and
survivalist gear and offered up ammo cans, hunting knives and the
newest rage: blowguns that fire poisoned darts.
All of it, they say, represents the basic necessities for outlasting
the millennium, when many who were here believe that the government
will attack American citizens. Others predicted that 2000 will see the
takeover of the United States by a "new world order" of foreign
despots.
Still others claimed that the projected Y2K, or Year 2000, computer
meltdown is government hokum to enslave the people.
All of them - anti-government militias, hate groups, white
supremacists, right-wing Christian zealots - warned that it is time
for a second revolution to take back America.
"Who is the Antichrist? It's Uncle Sam hiding behind the American
flag, and all we can see are his eyes," said Tom Halverson, who drove
1,600 miles from Guthrie, Minn., to sell airtight canisters that he
said can keep perishable food safe even in the event of the end of the
world. "I believe that we are coming into a time of worldwide
martyrism."
To gauge the potential threat represented by these predictions,
Blitzer said, the FBI early next year will launch an ambitious
nationwide assessment to determine what to expect on, before and after
Jan. 1, 2000.
The threat of domestic terrorism has been on the mind of West
Virginia's public safety experts ever since the bombing of the federal
building in Oklahoma City, said Otis Cox, state Public Safety
secretary.
"April 19, 1995, was a rude awakening," Cox said.
The Mountaineer Militia's plans for a bombing at the FBI Fingerprint
Center in Clarksburg in 1996 also heightened awareness of the threat
of terrorism.
A number of the departments - from the State Police to the National
Guard to the Division of Corrections - incorporate anti-terrorism
activity into their training and programming.
Cox expects now that security at the Capitol has come under his
purview, an even greater emphasis will be put on awareness of the
terrorism threat.
"It will most certainly have that focus," Cox said. "I want to make
everyone in state government aware of this.  Everyone needs to have
a watchful eye."
For authorities, the threat comes in two forms, and both are difficult
to track.
The first lies behind closed doors, most likely from within some
Christian compound like those that have arisen in areas around the
Ozarks, the desert Southwest and the Pacific Northwest. There, members
practice guerrilla war tactics, are often heavily armed and study
under the spell of self-styled prophets who warn of a coming
confrontation with the federal government.
These fortresses are often impregnable to law enforcement undercover
agents. And the militancy of the rhetoric of such extremists becomes
clear only when they choose to expose themselves to the outside
world.

Load-Date: August 28, 1998


End of Document