Million Join March Against Basque Terrorism in Spain
The New York Times
July 15, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 391 words
Byline: By The New York Times 
Dateline: MADRID, July 14
Body


Crowds estimated at more than a million marched in central Madrid and Barcelona tonight in a demonstration against terrorism after the funeral of a town councilman who was killed over the weekend by Basque separatists.
The street protests, now in their fifth day, are believed to be the largest in years and certainly the biggest against E.T.A., the Basque separatist group whose initials stand for Basque Homeland and Liberty in the Basque language.
"The protests will probably accelerate a solution to the terrorist problem," said Francisco Barranco, a spokesman for the General Workers Union, one of the labor unions that sponsored a 10-minute work stoppage to protest the killing. The union estimated that millions of workers observed the stoppage here beginning at noon.
Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar has been at the head of demonstrations in the last few days in Madrid and Bilbao that officials insisted were spontaneous protests. He cautioned that the violence may not be over yet. "We will win this battle," he predicted, "but we will live many difficult moments."
The slain councilman, Miguel Angel Blanco, 29, was little known outside of his village of Ermua, in northern Spain, until last Thursday when he was kidnapped by the Basque separatist group.
The rebels' threat that they would execute Mr. Blanco by Saturday unless their demands were met galvanized the nation. The Government rejected their demand to transfer Basque separatist inmates to jails in northern Spain. The councilman was shot in the head on Saturday and died on Sunday.
Crown Prince Felipe de Borbon y Grecia and Mr. Aznar led the dignitaries attending the councilman's funeral at the Santiago Apostol Church in Ermua today.
In the northern Basque region, which the rebels want to convert into an independent state, large crowds of protesters joined the march, calling the separatists assassins. The demonstrations have been particularly tense outside the local offices and social clubs of the Popular Unity political party, which is linked to the separatists.
On several occasions since Thursday, Basque regional police in riot gear have stepped in to protect the Popular Unity offices. But the protests nationwide have been mostly free of violence.
The Basque rebels have killed more than 800 people since 1968. Mr. Blanco was the 10th to die at their hand this year.

Graphic

 
Photo: In Madrid, protesters jammed the Puerto del Sol to demonstrate against terrorism after the slaying of a town councilman by Basque separatists. (Reuters)
      

Load-Date: July 15, 1997


End of Document