MILLER LITE! Big shoes to fill in NYPD post Crony of commish
Daily News (New York)
January 3, 2014 Friday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 604 words
Byline: BY JOSEPH STRAW, THOMAS TRACY and LARRY McSHANE NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Rocco Parascandola and Jennifer Fermino
Body


THE NYPD's new point man in the war on terror once sat face-to-face with Al Qaeda chief Osama Bin Laden - for a network television interview.
Now ex-CBS News senior correspondent John Miller is responsible for guarding the nation's No. 1 terrorist target from plotters around the globe.
Miller, 55, was appointed Thursday as the department's deputy commissioner of intelligence, replacing the departing David Cohen.
During Cohen's 12-year reign, the city foiled 16 terrorist plots in the wake of the World Trade Center attacks.
Respected broadcast veteran Miller, who first worked for Commissioner Bill Bratton as the NYPD's chief spokesman in 1994-95, starts his new job Monday.
"He will be working closely with the intelligence entities in the department," Bratton announced Thursday. "But he will be more than that. He will also be one of my key advisers in many respects."
Bratton noted that Miller is a friend of more than 20 years, and praised his long career in both television news and law enforcement.
"John's been in the inner sanctums of government on issues of gathering intelligence analysis," said Bratton. "He's going to be a phenomenal addition to this department and city security."
For Miller, the move from on-camera reporter to face of the NYPD's daily fight against terrorism sounds stranger than it is.
Miller, originally from Montclair, N.J., served as head of the Counterterrorism and Criminal Intelligence Bureau under Bratton with the Los Angeles Police Department from 2003 to 2005.
He then joined the FBI as a spokesman before moving to the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, eventually becoming deputy director of its Analysis Division.
His national intelligence responsibilities included providing the feds with cutting-edge technology to ensure collaboration and communication between the spy agencies. The agency was founded in response to the 9/11 attacks, and Miller's job was created due to U.S. intelligence failures in Iraq.
Miller's oft-touted sitdown with Bin Laden came in 1998, when most of the world remained unaware of the bearded bomb-plot mastermind's role in international terrorism.
The journalist was also renowned during his time in New York for coverage of mob boss John Gotti.
A former colleague said Bratton unquestionably made the right move.
"It's a great pick," said LAPD Deputy Chief Michael Downing, who worked with Miller in Los Angeles. "Miller has great institutional knowledge, is a master communicator, and understands the inner workings of both state and local police. His optic is not just of North America. He has an optic that expands to the other side of the world."
NYPD retired deputy chief John Cutter agreed: "He's very intelligent. He's a very quick study. I think he'll be able to get up to speed fairly quickly."
Miller lacks the credentials of Cohen, who spent three decades in intelligence before joining the NYPD with Commissioner Raymond Kelly in 2002. Cohen did five years as the CIA associate director for intelligence, dealing directly with the White House.
Many New Yorkers were unfamiliar Thursday with Miller, who started his journalism career earning $2 an hour for the since-disappeared WNEW-TV.
But Christopher Smith, 59, of the Bronx, said he was optimistic about the hiring.
"I thought with his background, he could bring something to the table and hopefully bring more money to the city," said Smith. "He knows his way around D.C."
Brooklynite Jessica Rodriguez wasn't convinced.
"I'm not comfortable with him," said the 32-year-old Bushwick resident. "He's really a journalist. He's only reported on terrorism. How do we know if he's lived it?"

Graphic

 
John Miller (second from right) with Commissioner Bill Bratton and his wife at Elaine's in 1995, joined by NYPD crimefighting pro Jack Maple (r.). At right, Miller interviews Osama Bin Laden in 1998. Miller (at left) as Bratton's anti-terror chief with the LAPD in 2004. PHOTOS (ABC, DAMIAN DOVARGANES/AP)

Load-Date: January 3, 2014


End of Document