Minimizing terrorism losses;
Assessing building design is key: Expert
Business Insurance
July 12, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. 17
Length: 1015 words
Byline: By MARIA KIELMAS
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Managing the risk of terrorism presupposes one can control the event -- and no business has such control, a loss adjuster says.
''Control rests very firmly with the terrorist, whereby invariably at his whim targets are chosen,'' said Roy Murray, managing director of loss adjuster Thomas Howell (Midlands) Ltd., who has spent years investigating terrorist damage in Northern Ireland.
Because of that lack of control, businesses must develop a detailed plan for coping with such a disaster if it strikes, Mr. Murray said at a seminar, ''Managing Terrorism Risk, an Update,'' sponsored in London earlier this month by the Institute of Risk Management.
The disaster plan must be reviewed periodically to incorporate any changes to the business or to personnel, he said. Ideally, the contingency plan should include detailed specifications and drawings of the premises at risk and a major inventory of the facility's contents, Mr. Murray said.
Analyzing the safety of a building so potential weaknesses can be corrected is also critical, he said.
Another speaker said U.K. companies that take steps to minimize their exposure to terrorism damage should earn lower premiums.
Clive Richardson, associate director of consulting engineering firm RT James & Partners, said that effective risk management should be rewarded with lower property insurance premiums.
''Insurance premiums have risen in the wake of (the April 24 bombing at) Bishopsgate, and building owners and managers should be given the opportunity to negotiate premium reductions if they can demonstrate good blast-resistance of their buildings,'' he said.
Currently, U.K. insurers do not provide credits for security and risk management procedures designed to minimize terrorism losses.
Managers should ask themselves three things, Mr. Richardson said:
* How can bombs be kept away from buildings?
* What are the most vulnerable parts of a building and how can they be protected?
* Where are the strong points of the building for mustering occupants in the event of an attack?
Each building should be considered individually, Mr. Richardson said, offering tips on what to look for in analyzing a building's safety.
Ductile materials such as steel and reinforced concrete respond better than brittle glass, timber and unreinforced masonry to a bombing.
Windows, doors and service openings, such as loading docks, are vulnerable points for external blasts to penetrate, Mr. Richardson said.
And the bigger the blast, the more likely the structure itself will be affected. ''All buildings can sway sideways, walls bounce in and out, and floors can be momentarily lifted. Blast pressures can also damage equipment and travel to the heart of plant rooms via air ducts,'' he said.
Mr. Richardson explained that an explosion is a very fast chemical reaction producing transient pressure waves. These blast waves can be magnified when they are resisted or reflected, he explained. He recalled the aftereffects in a London club after its lobby was bombed: ''We found that the blast had gone out through the ground-floor windows, bounced off the opposite buildings and returned to push in the first-floor windows.''
Window breakage is a main concern from an explosion because of the potential for appalling human injury, for documents being sucked into the street and for general loss of weather-tightness. Research has led to a new generation of blast-resistant windows, which are both affordable and conventional-looking.
Once the strong and weak points in a building have been identified, a ''safe haven'' must be determined and a safety drill established, Mr. Richardson advised.
After a terrorist attack, building owners should not rush into repairs before obtaining a structural survey to detect such damage as loosened beam ends and brick hearths, upward failure of floors, and the reversal of stress on the truss, he said.
Graham Trapnell, head of group insurance risk management at Standard Chartered Bank in London, cited his company's experience from the Bishopsgate bombing in late April. The bank's offices sustained approximately 1 million pounds ($ 1.5 million) in damages from the blast, and it will take about one year before the offices are fully repaired an reoccupied, he said.
Without the benefit of anti-shatter filming on windows, the losses could have been between 5 million and 10 million pounds ($ 7.52 million and $ 15 million), Mr. Trapnell said. The cost of fitting the anti-shatter plastic was about 40,000 pounds ($ 60,160), he said.
The worst effects of the blast were felt in open offices. ''There is no question that internal separation in the form of full-height partitioning -- and obviously the more solid the better -- will diminish the effect of the blast,'' he said.
Mr. Trapnell also said that a ''clean desk policy'' should be strictly enforced, to prevent the scattering of vital documents.
Companies should appoint an emergency team to look for casualties and survey the damage after a blast. The team should be equipped with suitable clothing, footwear, gauntlets, hard hats, face covering and eye protection to guard against the worst of buried glass splinters.  Eyes have been injured from fine glass dust particles being blown into people's faces.
Also, Mr. Trapnell advocates in-house security teams.
''It is fashionable currently to contract out matters of security to external agencies, and this may provide some financial justification,'' he said. But then the security arm does not have a sense of being part of the corporate team with loyalty to their colleagues, Mr. Trapnell said.
Like Mr. Richardson, Mr. Trapnell also believes that all such contingency measures should be taken into account when insurance premiums are calculated.
''What we should expect from Pool Re is recognition and consideration to companies that take all possible measures to mitigate the effects of terrorism and who have sophisticated contingency and business recovery planning in place, who invest in plastic anti-shatter filming of all windows, and as a result achieve a significant mitigation of their potential loss,'' Mr. Trapnell said.

Graphic

 
Photo, A terrorist bombing in London earlier this year caused heavy damage.  AP/Wide World Photo


End of Document