MINNESOTA'S CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION;
Capture will turn the tide of terrorism, legislators agree
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 14, 2003, Sunday, ,


Copyright 2003 Star Tribune
Section: SPECIAL; Pg. 7A
Length: 543 words
Byline: Greg Gordon; Kevin Diaz; Staff Writers
Dateline: Washington, D.C.
Body


Saddam Hussein's capture is a major blow to Iraqi insurgents and should diminish guerrilla attacks on U.S. troops in the war-torn Persian Gulf nation, joyous members of Minnesota's congressional delegation predicted today.
        When insurgents "see what vile conditions he [Saddam] had to endure in order to just keep himself in play, I think they will all likely turn away from terrorism . . . or guerrilla warfare," Democratic Rep. Jim Oberstar said.
     Sen. Norm Coleman, R-Minn., said Saddam's capture is "a pivotal step in ensuring peace in Iraq and the Middle East. Saddam's deadly shadow of fear _ the fear of his return _ is over. Now is the time to move forward to build a safer Iraq and a safer world."
      Republicans and Democrats hailed the capture and agreed it is a major victory for President Bush, who has faced harsh criticism from many Democrats and world leaders for the invasion of Iraq and U.S. flaws in planning the postwar reconstruction effort.
       "This is a great day for the Iraqi people and freedom-loving people around the world," said Republican Rep. Jim Ramstad. "Credit for Saddam's capture goes to our brave troops, who have pursued him tirelessly. I believe Saddam's capture will provide greater impetus to turn the governance of Iraq over to the Iraqi people on or before June 30th."
        Oberstar said the development "makes the job of reconstruction in Iraq immensely easier.
        "People were afraid to come forward and participate and cooperate. Now, with the leader of the evil past in hand, they will not fear for their lives as they have done up until now. This really changes the entire structure on the ground. There might be sporadic guerrilla warfare, but it's likely to dry up."
        Democratic Rep. Martin Sabo said that "clearly, it's a big plus" for Bush.
        "At least the conventional wisdom has been that the uncertainty of where [Saddam] was and what his future might be helped create chaos. This should be a significant step forward in settling things down."
         Saddam's capture also will be a huge morale boost for U.S. troops, whom Oberstar described as "sitting ducks" for insurgents' attacks up until now.
         "On our forces, of course, it will have a euphoric effect," he said. "Those troops that have been stationed there . . . have been saying, 'Why are we here? What is this for?' I think this will give troop commanders an opportunity to say, 'Your mission's succeeded. We said we'd catch him, and we caught him.' It will translate into a safer environment for the troops."
        Oberstar said it's more difficult to say whether the arrest will give the administration enough momentum to win support from skeptical foreign countries that have resisted repeated U.S. requests for military support in Iraq. That could happen eventually, he said, if other countries see that "the situation does ameliorate and guerrilla warfare is mitigated."
        Sabo said he hopes the administration will take steps to unify the country by ensuring that Iraqi's Sunni Muslims, who were part of Saddam's ruling class, are "treated fairly . . . as they move from being in the ruling class to being in the minority."
The writers are at ggordon@mcclatchydc.com and kdiaz@mcclatchydc.com   

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: December 16, 2003


End of Document