Minnesota's talking ...;
… about terrorism;
Postscript from participants in statewide conversation on terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 2, 2003, Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2003 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Minnesota's talking … // OP EX; Pg. 10AA
Length: 517 words
Byline: Jeremy Iggers; Staff Writer
Body


On Jan. 22, more than 600 Minnesotans met around the state to talk about how America should respond to terrorism. All who participated in the conversations, organized by the Star Tribune and Twin Cities Public Television, were invited to share their ideas with the Star Tribune. A few of the more than 120 responses we received are excerpted here; the rest can be found on the Star Tribune Web site by following the link at http:// 
www.startribune.com/terror. 
_ Jeremy Iggers
     Each of us is responsible for the actions of our country's leaders. I can and will do what I can in terms of reducing MY dependence on oil and in becoming more politically active.
       As a country, we have values. It is clear to me that George W. Bush does not know what those values are. Perhaps we should help him find them.
_ Miriam G. Simmons, Stillwater.
.
     I am particularly persuaded that U.S. policies in the Middle East continue to fuel terrorist responses, both in the region and elsewhere in the world. The clearest example is our lack of balance in the quest for a just resolution of the Palestine-Israel conflict.
_ Charles P. Lutz, Minneapolis.
      We as a nation stood by passively while our own president hijacked the war on terror, and now he is steering our country on a dangerous course toward Baghdad. With each passing day, we drift ever closer to war with Iraq, a country that had nothing to do with the Sept. 11 attacks and has no proven ties to Al-Qaida. Clearly the time has come for America to rethink its response to terrorism.      
     If we truly want the world to be free of terror, then we must find alternatives to war.       
_ Carl Schroeder, student, St. Olaf College, Northfield.
     Terrorism is like an ugly sore that won't heal. You can't put a Band-Aid on it and expect it to get better. You need to determine what is causing the underlying infection. In order to find a solution to the complexities of terrorism, it is critical that we look beneath the outward ugliness of terrorist acts and broaden our perspective.
     We need to understand   not only how we view other countries but, more important, how other countries view us.
_ Maggie Menk, Edina.
     Actions taken under the aegis of homeland security seem to have made us no more safe or secure and often to be counterproductive. Civil rights in the homeland and human rights worldwide continue to be set aside. Nowhere is this more obvious than in what feels like the orchestration of a march to war in Iraq, which we can ill afford. Minnesota's talking. Is anyone listening?
_ Moira Heffron, Minneapolis.
     America needs to respond aggressively to terrorism in order to dissuade the terrorists. This should not always be done with unilateral military attacks. Military attacks should be done in combination with media exposure of terrorist organizations, education about terrorist groups in order to distinguish them from other people within the same ethnicity, and political pressure that would encourage countries to stop supporting terrorism, and ending foreign aid to countries that don't.
_ Harlan Brand, Minneapolis.

Load-Date: February 3, 2003


End of Document