Minnesota mall stabbing's potential terrorism raises fears
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 20, 2016 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 343 words
Byline:  By JEFF BAENEN and AMY FORLITI Associated Press  
Body


ST. CLOUD, Minn. - The stabbings of nine people at a Minnesota mall look to be the work of a "lone attacker," officials said Monday, and federal authorities are looking at whether it was a potential act of terrorism in an immigrant-rich state that has struggled to stop the recruiting of its young men by groups including Islamic State.
"We haven't uncovered anything that would suggest other than a lone attacker at this point," St. Cloud Police Chief Blair Anderson said at a news conference with Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton. "If that changes, we will be transparent about that."
A young Somali man dressed as a private security guard entered the Crossroads Center mall Saturday wielding what appeared to be a kitchen knife. Anderson has said the man reportedly made at least one reference to Allah and asked a victim if he or she was Muslim before attacking. The man was shot dead by an off-duty police officer. None of the injured suffered life-threatening wounds.
The motive of Saturday's attack is unclear, but FBI Special Agent in Charge Rick Thornton has said it is being investigated as a "potential act of terrorism." Islamic State claimed responsibility, but it wasn't clear whether the attacker was radicalized. Authorities were digging into his background, looking at social media accounts and electronic devices and talking to his associates, Thornton said.
The attack in St. Cloud, a city of about 65,000 people about 65 miles from Minneapolis, began shortly after an explosion in a crowded New York City neighborhood injured 29 people. Hours before that, a pipe bomb exploded in Seaside Park, N.J., before a 5K race. But President Barack Obama said Monday that authorities saw no connection between the New York area explosions and the Minnesota stabbing.
Leaders of Minnesota's large Somali community have condemned the stabbings, saying the attacker - identified by his father as Dahir A. Adan, 22 - did not represent them and expressing fear of backlash.
Ahmed Adan said his son was born in Kenya but was Somali and had lived in the U.S. for 15 years.

Graphic

 
 Somali-American leaders hold a press conference Sunday, Sept. 18, 2016, in St. Cloud, Minn., to address the stabbing and shooting incident that happened Saturday at Crossroads Center Mall. A man in a private security uniform stabbed nine people at a Minnesota shopping mall Saturday, reportedly asking one victim if they were Muslim before an off-duty police officer shot and killed him in an attack the Islamic State group claimed as its own. (Dave Schwarz/St. Cloud Times via AP)  People stand near the entrance on the north side of Crossroads Center mall between Macy's and Target as officials investigate a reported multiple stabbing incident, Saturday, Sept. 17, 2016, in St. Cloud, Minn. Police said multiple people were injured at the St. Cloud shopping mall on Saturday evening in an attack possibly involving both shooting and stabbing. The suspect is believed to be dead, St. Cloud Police Sgt. Jason Burke told the St. Cloud Times. (Dave Schwarz/St. Cloud Times via AP)  Jaylani Hussein, executive director of the Center for American-Islamic Relations Minnesota, talks with reporters during a press conference Sunday, Sept. 18, 2016, at Lake George, in St. Cloud, Minn., expressing the Somali-American community reaction to the Crossroads Center attack. (St. Cloud Times/Jason Wachter via AP)  St. Cloud, Minn., Police Chief William Blair Anderson and other officials hold a press conference Sunday, Sept. 18, 2016, giving updated information on the Crossroads Center incident at the St. Cloud Police Department. A man in a private security uniform stabbed nine people at a Minnesota shopping mall Saturday, reportedly asking one victim if they were Muslim before an off-duty police officer shot and killed him in an attack the Islamic State group claimed as its own. (Jason Wachter/St. Cloud Times via AP) 

Load-Date: September 27, 2016


End of Document