MISSILE HITS SUSPECTED LAIR IN PAKISTAN'S TRIBAL AREA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 17, 2008 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 487 words
Byline: BASHIRULLAH KHAN AND LAUREN FRAYER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MIRAN SHAH, Pakistan 
Body


Missiles that witnesses say came from an unmanned drone flattened a suspected militant safehouse yesterday in Pakistan's tribal area along the Afghan border. State television said the strike killed about 20 people.
Witnesses said a drone dropped seven missiles on the sprawling, mud-brick compound about three miles outside Wana, the main town in South Waziristan. Only U.S.-led coalition forces in Afghanistan are known to operate unmanned drones in the region, and they have launched attacks over the Pakistani border before.
Osama bin Laden and other senior al-Qaida and Taliban leaders are believed to be hiding out somewhere in the rugged, lawless tribal regions along the Afghan-Pakistan border.
Anger over U.S. attacks on militants in the area, which often have tacit approval from President Pervez Musharraf's regime, helped carry the president's opponents to victory in parliamentary elections last month. The new parliament convenes today.
Many Pakistanis believe Mr. Musharraf's friendship with the U.S. and tactics in fighting al-Qaida and Taliban militants have only fueled terrorism at home.
Witnesses, state TV and intelligence officials said the destroyed building belonged to a local militant leader and Taliban sympathizer who goes by the single name Noorullah.
State-run Pakistan Television said about 20 people were killed. It was unclear whether Mr. Noorullah was among them.
Rahim Khan, a local tribesman who went to the site, said the huge, fortress-like compound was known as a hub for visiting foreign militants. Eight of those killed were foreigners, two intelligence officials said on condition of anonymity because of the nature of their work. They did not elaborate.
The Pakistani military said there were five or six explosions that caused casualties.
Maj. Chris Belcher, a U.S. military spokesman, said coalition forces conducted an operation yesterday just across the border in Afghanistan's Paktika province. But he said he had no information about the Pakistan strike and doubted the two incidents were related.
The U.S. has pressed Pakistan to crack down on militants who harbor al-Qaida and Taliban fighters along the country's border with Afghanistan.
"The whole world is passing through a crisis of terrorism and we are in the center of focus," Mr. Musharraf told Geo TV in an interview broadcast yesterday. "We have to fight terrorism."
Many Pakistanis, however, believe Mr. Musharraf's approach to fighting militants has hurt the nation since 2001. The president's popularity has plummeted amid an ailing economy and domestic terrorism on the rise.
A day after the latest attack in Islamabad, police fanned out yesterday and foreign embassies scrutinized their security. A bomb struck an Italian restaurant popular with foreigners on Saturday, killing a Turkish aid worker and wounding at least 12 other people -- including four FBI personnel and a staff member from the British High Commission.

Load-Date: March 17, 2008


End of Document