MISSOURIAN IS WORKING LONG HOURS IN PENTAGON TO COMBAT TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 7, 2001 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B4; PROFILE; J.D. CROUCH
Length: 1036 words
Byline: Philip Dine Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: ARLINGTON, VA.
Body


A year ago, J.D. Crouch was honored as Missouri's reserve deputy sheriff of the year for pulling an unconscious teen-ager from a fiery car wreck in southwestern Missouri.
When he wasn't helping out the sheriff's department in Christian County, Crouch was at Southwest Missouri State University teaching defense and strategic studies, a field in which he'd acquired a national reputation.
Today, Crouch has a broader mission: He's assistant secretary of defense for international security and works at the Pentagon, where he's heavily involved in the nation's war against terrorism.
His sphere includes NATO, Europe and the former Soviet Union. Since terrorists attacked the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept. 11, Crouch has been among those active in seeking the support of such key countries as Uzbekistan in the anti-terrorism campaign.
The former Soviet republics are critical because of their proximity to Afghanistan, whose Taliban rulers have long harbored suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden.
Attacks bring change
The attacks ended the sense of many Americans that "these things happen to other people, but don't happen to us," Crouch, 43, said in an interview at the Pentagon. "Day to day, I would hope that Americans would realize we need to get back to normal economic enterprise and patterns of life, with the understanding that there are sacrifices we all will have to make to this campaign."
The public should be reassured, he said, by the fact that "the government is very focused on protecting people here at home."
Crouch oversees a staff of 130 people, including four deputy assistant secretaries of defense, whose areas consist of NATO and European policy, the former Soviet Union, negotiation policy on arms control and policy on nuclear forces and missile defense. He also supervises a deputy undersecretary of defense responsible for technology, security and export controls.
When the hijacked plane crashed into the Pentagon, killing 189 people, Crouch was in Moscow meeting with Russian officials to help design a new framework for U.S.-Russian relations. Since then, his staff says, Crouch's workdays have expanded to 6:30 a.m. to 9 p.m., as he meets continually with U.S. officials and his counterparts from nations helping in the campaign against terrorism. He's also on a Pentagon team examining the campaign's broad strategy, and he helped prepare Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's current trip to countries involved in the U.S. effort.
Life in Missouri
Moscow, and the Pentagon, are a long way from Nixa, Mo., where Crouch lived before starting his defense job in August, or from Columbia, Mo., where Crouch spent a good deal of his youth. Among his favorite childhood memories were fishing, country fairs and spending time at the restaurants his father ran, Jack's Coronado and Haden House. His father also had a farm.
Crouch earned a doctorate at the University of Southern California's School of International Relations, focusing on defense issues and Soviet foreign policy. In the mid-1980s, he and one of his professors, William Van Cleave, wrote an article on the international-range nuclear force for the Chicago Tribune.
Henry Cooper, an official with the old U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, saw the article, brought Crouch in for an interview and hired him.
Crouch later went to the Senate Armed Services Committee, before working for Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush at the Pentagon. But after a few years inside the Beltway, Crouch and his wife, Kristin, sought a quieter life for their two young children.
Van Cleave, who'd transferred to Southwest Missouri State University, had a faculty opening and urged Crouch to return to Missouri. Crouch spent the past nine years there, until President George W. Bush asked him to serve as assistant secretary of defense.
"I was surprised, but I think the main reason I wanted to come back was the team that Secretary Rumsfeld was building, and the entire national security team that the president was building," Crouch said. "It was very exciting to work with that caliber of people."
Nomination hearing
The Council for a Livable World, an arms-control group in Washington, has criticized Crouch as too hard-line on North Korea, Cuba, nuclear testing and international treaties. But the group didn't actively oppose him.
"There was no point in fighting him unless there were senators willing to lead the fight, and that didn't happen," said council president John Isaacs.
The April 17 nomination hearing, however, did feature tough questioning on Crouch's published views by Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich. For example, Levin challenged Crouch's views that it had been a mistake for President George Bush to remove tactical nuclear weapons from South Korea. Levin also took issue with Crouch's writings skeptical of nuclear test freezes and the value of economic sanctions.
Crouch replied that world conditions have changed since his statements in the mid-1990s, and that he supports current administration policy. In the Post-Dispatch interview, he said he takes "a conservative approach to defense" because a strong U.S. military promotes stability. "America is a force for good in the world," he said.
At the hearing, Crouch was strongly endorsed by Missouri's two senators, Republican Christopher "Kit" Bond and Democrat Jean Carnahan, who praised his defense expertise and his community service in Missouri. Bond, a senior member of the Senate defense appropriations panel, said that Crouch "has been a valuable adviser informally to me on defense matters."
Earlier this year, Crouch ran the successful campaign of Christian County Sheriff Joey Matlock. The two men are close friends and, before Crouch moved to northern Virginia, their children were playmates.
"He's been so dad-gum busy I haven't heard much from him," Matlock lamented. "We kind of miss him -- but I'm glad we've got people like him there."
===
PROFILE: J.D. Crouch, who spent much of his youth around Columbia, Mo., has spent the last nine years teaching studies at Southwest Missouri State University.  This year, he returned to Washington after President George W. Bush appointed him to be assistant secretary of defense for international security.

Notes

J.D. CROUCH; Reporter Philip Dine:; E-mail: pdine@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880; Washington bureau reporter Philip Dine covers the Pentagon for the Post-Dispatch.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; PHOTO by R.D. WARD / DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE - Assistant Secretary of Defense J.D. Crouch answers questions from reporters during a media roundtable held at the Pentagon on Aug. 28.

Load-Date: October 7, 2001


End of Document