MISSING BRAINPOWER;
AMERICANS HAVE BEEN IN AND OUT OF THE HOODWINK MODE MANY TIMES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 4, 1993, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 654 words
Byline: ALBERT CROSS
Body


The headline in last Sunday's local newspaper read, ''U.S. Cruise Missiles Hit Baghdad.'' Monday, headlines read: ''Clinton Calls Iraq Attack a Success.'' ''U.S. Seeks Support for Baghdad Strike.'' Other than that -- silence -- except for a few observations by the Iraqi ambassador to the U.S., the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, and some commentators.
What was there to say? The attack on Baghdad was the first dramatic military action by the United States, acting alone and on its own, since the Clinton administration took office. Coming from a president attuned to words rather than warfare, the action appears more designed for political public relations in this country than the solving of a nagging international problem.
The air strike was intended, the president said, to send a message to the Iraqis. The message would appear to be basically the same one that the United States, along with its allies, delivered two years ago in Operation Desert Storm: ''We are stronger than you are.'' The response from Saddam Hussein, up to now, has been: ''So what?''
Desert Storm, at least, had some clear-cut motivations. Iraq had invaded a neighboring country, Kuwait, and refused diplomatic efforts to force its departure. Although the United States, as the leading world power, bore the brunt of the ensuing military effort, this country was joined by other nations including some Muslim countries.
Saddam's invaders were forced out of Kuwait, which had been the U.N. objective, and open warfare ended. However, the conflict itself continues to this day. The Iraqi turn to terrorism is a more difficult tactic to deal with because it is harder to define than open warfare. But it is unlikely that sending a few cruise missiles to blow up an empty building in Baghdad will do much other than increase Saddam's stature in Iraq.
The plot to assassinate former President Bush which triggered the attack on Baghdad may well have been planned, but outrageous as that was, it did not occur. Perhaps unfortunately, the American people have been in and out of hoodwink mode several times through World War II, the Bay of Pigs and the Gulf of Tonkin. As a result, they are much more skeptical than they were in 1898 when an unexplained explosion on the battleship Maine was used by the war- mongering crowd to hurry this country into the Spanish-American war. Today's attitudes tend more toward ''wait and see.''
So far, details of the plot on Bush and its tie to Iraq's intelligence agencies rests on the word of the administration. Details of how it was exposed and why it failed have not been fully explained.
The explanation before the United Nations Security Council by U.S. Ambassador Madeleine Albright opened more questions than it answered. Iraq has reported that eight were killed and 12 wounded around the shelled Iraqi intelligence complex. The chances are high that the 20 were innocent bystanders.
None of this in any way clears Saddam and his skulking horde, inasmuch as they have demonstrated repeatedly that they do not consider themselves bound to the strictures of civilized conduct. My question is how effective will it be to answer covert terrorism with naval missiles? Conspiracy has been a way of political life in the Middle East for centuries, and a few missiles are not likely to change it.
How much more military power will the U.S. be willing to apply to crush Saddam? Predictions are impossible, but one can hardly imagine this president who, as a young man, worked so feverishly against Vietnam-in-the-jungle leading a nation into a Vietnam-on-the-sand!
The guess here is that the precipitate cruise-missile attack on Baghdad will have little positive effect on world terrorism, and that it will only offer a rallying point for Muslim nations that have been split apart by Operation Desert Storm and are frustrated by Bosnia. In its wake, the threat of international terrorism will increase, not decrease.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document