Mississippi-based NVision's REACT product gets DHS approval
Mississippi Business Journal (Jackson, MS)
August 6, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 Dolan Media Newswires   All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 290 words
Byline: Wally Northway
Body


NVision Solutions Inc. is pleased to announce that the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) recently designated the company's REACT (Real-Time Emergency Action Coordination Tool) as a "Qualified Anti-Terrorism Technology" through the DHS SAFETY Act.
NVision formerly marketed the tool in conjunction with other partner technologies as "HazNet. "
The SAFETY (Support Anti-terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies) Act encourages the development and rapid deployment of anti-terrorism technologies by giving liability protection from lawsuits to vendors, customers, and users of qualified technologies.
REACT is a crisis management information system combining geographic information systems mapping and analysis with the DHS-mandated reporting and organizational requirements of the National Incident Management System (NIMS).
NVision based REACT on lessons learned from multiple disasters and exercises. First responders used REACT for hurricanes Ivan, Katrina, Gustav and Ike. Multiple agencies currently use REACT for the Deepwater Horizon oil disaster. NVision and its partners routinely use REACT for exercise control in emergency response exercises around the nation.
Socorro Harvey, NVision president, said, "REACT is becoming an important part of our nation's homeland security framework. "
REACT is the result of seven years of NASA-funded research through the Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) program, the NASA Dual-Use Technology Transfer Program and the NASA Innovative Partnership Program.
Current REACT users include: all NASA centers throughout the country; Hancock County; St. Tammany Parish, La.; Mississippi National Guard; National Center for Spectator Sports Safety and Security; and, Center for Asymmetric Warfare.

Load-Date: August 13, 2010


End of Document