MITCHELL ADVOCATES PATIENCE IN U.S. FIGHT AGAINST TERRORISM
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
September 20, 2001 Thursday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT; Pg. 9A
Length: 530 words
Byline: BART JANSEN Staff Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Renewed calls for a cease-fire between Israeli and Palestinian forces following last week's terrorist attacks against the United States provide a "glimmer of hope" for peace in the Middle East, according to former Maine Sen. George Mitchell. In an interview Wednesday, Mitchell mourned the casualties from the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"Obviously, my first thought, like most other people, is one of sorrow for the tremendous loss of life. Thousands of children now without parents face an uncertain future," he said.
But Mitchell, the former Senate majority leader, said the Bush administration is laying the groundwork to identify and retaliate against the terrorists, while dealing with broader concerns of Middle East peace.
On Tuesday, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat told his security forces to hold their fire, even in self-defense, and Israel said it would refrain from offensive action. The moves came a year after the two sides began the latest round of negotiating for a lasting peace.
"That's a glimmer of hope," said Mitchell, who headed an international commission under the Clinton administration that recommended a framework for peace. "We all should be cautious about this latest effort because so many previous efforts have not succeeded. But one of the consequences of this horrible atrocity may be a new dynamic in the Middle East."
In May, a report from Mitchell's commission - including former New Hampshire Sen. Warren Rudman, Spanish diplomat Javier Solana, former Turkish President Suleyman Demirel and Norwegian Foreign Minister Thorbjorn Jagland - said the immediate goal for Israel and the Palestinian Authority is to end the violence that has killed hundreds and injured thousands in the past year.
The report urged the Palestinian Authority to make clear that terrorism is unacceptable.
President Bush, who had campaigned last year on proposed changes in education and medical care, has said ridding the world of terrorism is now his top priority.
Osama bin Laden, cited by Bush as the prime suspect in the attacks, has been at odds with governments in countries such as Saudi Arabia, his homeland, and Egypt. That could help Bush achieve his goal of assembling a broad coalition of governments to combat terrorism.
"I think the administration is handling it in the right way, methodically investigating to determine who is responsible, while preparing a multilateral coalition and a broad scope of options," said Mitchell, a Democrat who antagonized Republican Bush's father as Senate leader a decade ago.
"I think we have to be patient and persevering. That will be the real test. This will not be easy or quick. The national spirit of today has to be sustained over a long period of time."
Mitchell said the choices include diplomatic, financial, legal and military tactics to attack the terrorists.
"It must involve much more than the military response. It's clear this must involve many nations besides the United States," he said. "The American people are resilient. I think that can be done. I think we can meet this challenge without surrendering our liberty."
Staff Writer Bart Jansen can be contacted at (202) 488-1119 or at:
bjansen@pressherald.com  

Graphic

 
George Mitchell

Load-Date: September 20, 2001


End of Document