Mitigating the impact of a natural disaster; Ask SCORE: What to do to mitigate the financial impact of a natural disaster
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 4, 2017 Monday
2 Edition


Copyright 2017 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH; Pg. 2D
Length: 466 words
Byline: GRAY POEHLER Special correspondent
Body


Ask SCORE
QUESTION: Given the disastrous effects of the two most recent hurricanes on both individuals and businesses, what can one do mitigate the financial impact of a natural disaster?
 ANSWER: In addition to hurricanes, financial impacts can come from tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, mudslides and forest fires. There also are man-made disasters such as riots, civil commotions and terrorist attacks.
 The most obvious way to mitigate the financial effects is to purchase insurance. But most homeowner and business owner policies do not automatically cover all these happenings. Generally, these policies do not cover flood damage.
 The National Flood Insurance Program offers flood and mud flow coverage up to $250,000 for a homeowner and $500,000 for a business. This insurance must be purchased 30 days in advance of a flood. Visit: www.floodsmart.gov.
 Likewise, windstorm coverage is excluded from these policies in some states and must be purchased separately from a state-sponsored windstorm pool.
 Earthquake coverage is generally available as a supplemental coverage to your standard homeowners, renters or business policy. It is sold through private insurers, so contact your company or agent for more information.
 Under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, only businesses that buy optional terrorism coverage are covered for losses arising from terrorist acts. The exception is workers' compensation, which covers injuries and deaths due to acts of terrorism
 For the business owner, buying business interruption insurance is a must. This covers your loss of income from a covered property damage claim.
 While adequate insurance is important, it also is critical that the business have a backup plan that considers the following:
 Develop an operational contingency plan: Assess the feasibility of operating out of nearby rented office space, storefront or even your home. Determine what equipment and other resources will be needed to continue operations.Ensure the safety of employees and customers: Develop an evacuation plan that includes access to shelters, hospitals and other emergency services. Keep emergency telephone numbers clearly posted, and maintain up-to-date emergency contact and essential medical information for all employees.Perform a safety inventory: Regularly clean and test smoke detectors. Make sure you have several first aid kits and all fire extinguishers are charged. Purchase portable generators for emergency power and make sure the fuel is fresh and safely stored.
 Gray Poehler is a volunteer with the Richmond Chapter of SCORE, Counselors to America's Small Business. To ask a question or request free and confidential business counseling, go to Richmond.score.org/mentors. Learn more about SCORE's workshops on the website or by calling (804) 350-3569.

Graphic

 
Gray Poehler P. Kevin Morley Gray Poehler P. Kevin Morley

Load-Date: December 7, 2017


End of Document