Modern tech fuels ancient hate; Amplified by social media, old myths drive attackers in a wave of anti-religious terrorism
The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 5, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K8
Length: 1275 words
Byline: BY MARC FISHER, ROXANA POPESCU AND KAYLA EPSTEIN
Body


ABSTRACT
Amplified by social media, old myths drive attackers in a wave of anti-religious terrorism
Inspired by the devastating impact of the 9/11 terrorist attacks and enabled by the largely unchecked freedoms of social media, individual extremists have launched a steady series of assaults on religious institutions around the world, the latest at a California synagogue.
Chabad of Poway, where a shooter left one woman dead and three people injured last weekend, joins a list of places of worship that have become symbols of the growing ability of lone actors and small groups to kill people, sow fear and leave law enforcement, tech companies and governments looking helpless.
In the most recent wave of assaults attackers have targeted Jews as they worshiped at Pittsburgh's Tree of Life synagogue in October and at the Chabad of Poway near San Diego during the end of Passover; Christians at Easter services in Sri Lanka; and Muslims praying in Christchurch, New Zealand.
The nature and frequency of these attacks have raised urgent questions about how to fight extremism in a time of political polarization, largely unregulated social media and diminished trust in community organizations, including religious and political institutions.
"The main culprits are social media and the total collapse of any sense of bipartisanship about how to fight hate in America," said Rabbi Abraham Cooper, director of global social action at the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Jewish human rights organization. "Evildoers around the world learned from the 9/11 terrorists that you don't need the backing of a state or a mass movement. And then individuals who are probably psychiatric cases are inspired to do these things because social media spreads a culture of hate in the most public ways, and encrypted communications allows them to go private to discuss the how-tos."
The suspect in the Poway shooting, a 19-year-old nursing student who was arrested and identified by police as John T. Earnest, apparently published a manifesto online, an increasingly common way for assailants to spread their ideologies and offer their versions of an explanation for the unthinkable. This one is a lengthy, rambling document markedly similar to the one posted by the avowed white supremacist who was charged with killing 50 people in New Zealand in March.
In the manifesto published in April under the name John Earnest, the writer said he attacked the synagogue to "help the European race" defend itself against "international Jewry." Much of the statement is a litany of conspiracy theories about Jews that have been at the heart of anti-Semitism for the past two millennia: killing Jesus, controlling finance and the media, "promoting race mixing."
In Poway, a suburb of 50,000 people northeast of San Diego that bills itself as "the city in the country," the shooting seemed to many like a violent injection of the political poison they had so far experienced mainly through the news media.
"It feels so close," said Kadie Nagy, as she and her 3-year-old son, Sky, nestled a small bouquet in honor of the shooting victims near a light post piled high with flowers and cards. She said she didn't know the victims and is not Jewish, but she felt a connection to those who worshiped at Cha-bad, an Orthodox denomination that is part of the highly observant Hasidic movement.
The manifesto claimed to eschew political ideology and lashed out in several directions. The writer quoted extensively from the New Testament - a common tactic among the new crop of terrorists, who often use religious justifications for their violence.
"They attack symbols that are sacred and held dear," said Jonathan Greenblatt, chief executive of the Anti-Defamation League (ADL). "It's a way of attacking a broader community."
The shootings and bombings at places where people go to feel unified, comforted and inspired are, in one sense, nothing new. Religion, one of history's most powerful uniting forces, always has served as a source of contention and bloodshed. From the Crusades to the Holocaust, nations, leaders and movements have waged war against people because of what they do or don't believe.
But the nature of the violence inflicted on people because of their faith has changed sharply in recent years, swerving from nations deploying armies to individuals and small groups mounting seemingly random attacks against noncombatants.
That pivot has taken place at a time when popular attitudes toward people of other religions have actually softened in much of the world, according to public opinion surveys. In the United States, for example, there's been a sharp decline in anti-Semitic attitudes during the past half-century, according to ADL studies.
"Anti-Semitic attitudes have been historically low, but it's difficult now to feel anything other than alarm," Greenblatt said. "Society is just more complicated - technology has empowered individuals and has disempowered states."
Greenblatt said the surge in anti-Semitic crimes - up 37 percent in 2017, according to the FBI, a sharper rise than crimes against any other group - is a leading indicator of hate crimes against many others as well. "Although this typically starts with the Jews, it never ends with the Jews," he said. "It's like a disease that engulfs the broader population."
"The president needs to put out the tweet that this kind of behavior and this kind of language is outside the acceptable," Cooper said.
President Trump opened a political rally in Wisconsin last weekend with a strong statement of exactly that kind. "We forcefully condemn the evil of anti-Semitism and hate," he said. "It must be defeated. We will all get to the bottom of it."
Cooper noted that although the Islamic State, a chief ideological enemy of the United States, was defeated on the battlefield, "they were untouched, unchallenged in their online marketing."
"What we're seeing are the old hatreds, dusted off and supercharged through social media," Cooper said. "It'll cost them a few pennies, but we need the big boys - Twitter, Facebook, Google, Instagram, YouTube - to make sure this weapon they've created isn't inspiring this phenomenon to multiply."
Chabad synagogues generally operate on a principle of radical openness to Jews of all denominations and to non-Jews. The shootings had some members wondering how to maintain that openness given the threat of violence.
"We have an open-door policy; there's always strangers showing up," said Dobie Thaler, who runs a Chabad house on the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee campus with her husband, a rabbi. "But are we supposed to start questioning everyone that walks in?"
From earliest history, religions preached the idea of a single human community, a universal order. But from the start, people have faced off against one another according to the nature of their worship. Nations put religious symbols on the flags their armies carried into battle and claimed new lands in the name of their faith and their deity.
Now, in a time when national governments in many parts of the world struggle to retain authority and trust and the Internet allows individuals to construct their own communities of interest and affinity, the ability of lone extremists to wreak havoc is greater than ever before.
"If you're a young person and you want to change history, it can seem so simple now," Cooper said. "If you have the notion that you need to save white Christian America, then the targets are going to be the Muslims and the Jews. If we're going to stop that, we're going to have to change the nature of social media, and we need clarion voices to insist on the fundamentals of truth and justice."

Load-Date: May 5, 2019


End of Document