Mohamed Video Free Speech, Filing Says
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 12, 2008 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company
Section: METRO; Pg. 5
Length: 362 words
Byline: ELAINE SILVESTRINI, The Tampa Tribune
Body


DEFENSE ASKS TERROR CHARGE BE DROPPED
By ELAINE SILVESTRINI
The Tampa Tribune
TAMPA - Ahmed Mohamed's YouTube video was protected under the First Amendment, his attorneys say.
The former University of South Florida student, an Egyptian, is charged with trying to help terrorists by making a video in which he demonstrates how to use a remote-controlled toy to detonate a bomb.
Defense attorneys are asking a judge to dismiss the charge on the grounds it criminalizes speech and because the allegations are vague. They say the charge does not specify which, if any, terrorist groups would benefit from the video.
Mohamed and Youssef Megahed also are charged with illegally transporting explosives. The two were arrested Aug. 4 in South Carolina after they were pulled over for speeding and deputies found what they said were pipe bombs in the trunk of the car. The nature of the devices has been questioned, with the prosecution saying they were explosive materials and the defense maintaining they were homemade pyrotechnic rockets to be used as fireworks.
The explosives charge is set to be the center of a trial scheduled for April 28. Mohamed's terrorism-related charge is scheduled for a separate trial to begin May 12.
Mohamed's attorneys have filed a motion asking a judge to order prosecutors to give specific information about the terrorism-related charge, including the identity of the terrorists he is accused of trying to help.
In their 30-page motion to dismiss the terrorism-related charge, attorneys cite the prosecution's description of what was said on the video:
"Instead of the brethren going to, to carry out martyrdom operations, no may [God] bless him, he can use the explosion tools from distance and preserve his life, [God] willing, the blessed and exalted, for real battles."
The defense motion states, "There is no incitement here. The audience exists only in theory."
Further, the motion states, it appears the video was posted only briefly on the Internet.
Reporter Elaine Silvestrini can be reached at (813) 259-7837 or esilvestrini@tampatrib.com
Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: March 26, 2008


End of Document