Mohamed Terrorism Trial To Be Separate
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 7, 2008 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company
Section: METRO; Pg. 5
Length: 410 words
Byline: ELAINE SILVESTRINI, The Tampa Tribune
Body


U.S. SENATOR PROBING HIS VISA APPROVAL
By ELAINE SILVESTRINI
The Tampa Tribune
TAMPA - A U.S. senator is asking questions about the background of a former University of South Florida student arrested in South Carolina last August.
Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, speaking Wednesday night on the floor of Congress, said he had learned that Ahmed Mohamed had been arrested in Egypt and disclosed the arrest on his visa application when he came to this country early last year.
The senator gave no details about the arrest.
Grassley complained that he had requested copies of Mohamed's visa application and other documents, but the U.S. State Department and Department of Homeland Security "have thus far refused to comply."
A federal judge on Thursday ordered two trials for Mohamed. The first, scheduled for April 28, will involve a charge against Mohamed and fellow former USF student Youssef Megahed that they illegally transported explosives.
The second trial, scheduled for May 12, will center on a charge that Mohamed tried to help terrorists by teaching or demonstrating the use of explosives in a video posted on the Internet site YouTube.
U.S. District Judge Steven D. Merryday granted a severance motion by Megahed's attorneys, who argued it would be unfair to require Megahed to be judged by a jury hearing evidence in a terrorism-related charge that didn't involve him.
Merryday, however, denied motions by Megahed's attorneys that he reconsider his denial of bail for Megahed and require potential jurors to fill out detailed questionnaires to determine whether they are biased.
The bail motion hinged on an FBI report that the defense says shows that devices in the trunk of the men's car when they were stopped in South Carolina on Aug. 4 were fireworks, not explosives. The prosecution maintains that the defense misrepresented that report.
Merryday noted that the FBI lab analysis describes "forceful explosion of smoke/gasses." The judge wrote that Megahed's arguments "affect only marginally, if at all, the issue of his danger to the community."
The judge gave no explanation in his order denying the request for jury questionnaires.
"We're disappointed regarding detention and were pleased regarding the issue of severance, and we look forward to having a trial in the not too distant future," said Megahed's attorney, public defender Adam Allen.
Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

COURTS

Load-Date: March 20, 2008


End of Document