Money and terrorism: Tracing the ties
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
February 29, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6E
Length: 3118 words
Byline: Sam Roe, Laurie Cohen and Stephen Franklin, Chicago Tribune
Body


JIDDAH, Saudi Arabia - Muslim forces were gathering near a small town in Bosnia, and commanders were moving fighters to the front. The man in charge wanted the very best soldiers available, so he handpicked six of his favorites and ordered them to the area immediately.
The mission was indisputably military, but the man calling the shots was not a captain with the army or a general back in command headquarters. He was the person helping finance the battle: Adel Batterjee, a wealthy Saudi businessman aiding the operation 2,000 miles away from his home in Saudi Arabia.
This was not the only battleground in which Batterjee played a major role. During the past two decades, he has financed Muslim fighters in some of the world's most volatile areas, including Afghanistan, Chechnya and Sudan. And he has done so with the help of U.S. citizens, establishing a major charitable operation in suburban Chicago to collect donations to fulfill his dream of creating Islamic states and spreading Islam around the globe.
Batterjee stands at the forefront of one of the great religious movements of our time. Since Saudi Arabia's oil boom in the 1970s, wealthy Saudis have poured billions of dollars into Islamic causes worldwide. They have constructed hundreds of mosques, funded thousands of Islamic schools and distributed millions of Qurans.
Admirable goals, questionable practices
Much of what the Saudi money has done in the name of the world's fastest-growing religion is admirable and within the bounds of mainstream philanthropy.
But in the aftermath of Sept. 11, 2001, with 15 of the 19 hijackers proving to be Saudi citizens, questionable practices by Saudi charities have come to light - practices such as Batterjee's use of charitable dollars to fund Islamic military operations.
Also of concern, and not only to Westerners, is the ultraconservative brand of Islam that the Saudis embrace and often seek to export. Some Muslim organizations have gone so far as to refuse Saudi money, on the grounds that they do not accept the Saudi version of Islam.
The United States has frozen the U.S. assets of two Saudi relief organizations, including Batterjee's, because of suspected links to terrorism. Even Saudi Arabia, a highly insular society, has publicly cracked down on its 240 charities.
For decades, the Saudis sent money abroad with little oversight, but after Sept. 11 and subsequent terrorist attacks on its own soil, the kingdom has taken unprecedented steps to rein in charitable donations and other activities that might be linked to terrorism.
The Saudis have arrested 600 terrorism suspects, removed dozens of preachers for extremism, restricted the flow of donations overseas and even banned a tradition central to Saudi identity: the collection of alms in mosques.
Today, the practices of the charities remain largely mired in ambiguity, with extensive investigations by U.S. authorities finding only sketchy evidence of wrongdoing and no proof that Saudi money financed the Sept. 11 hijackings. For many Muslims, the inquiries are just further indication that America's war on terrorism is unfairly targeting Islamic groups.
Drawing on court, charity and intelligence documents, the Tribune has detailed the rise and fall of Batterjee's charity, Benevolence International Foundation, providing insight into how Saudi charities work, the power they wield in spreading Islam and how one used its assets to wage war.
The tale of Batterjee's organization, which closed in 2002, spans 20 years, four continents and many battlefields.
At Batterjee's side was Enaam Arnaout, a passionate and shrewd man whose job was to run the day-to-day operations of the charity without tipping off authorities. In pursuit was star federal prosecutor Patrick Fitzgerald, who had vowed not to personally try a case for a year but changed his mind and went after Batterjee's charity.
Batterjee, who declined to be interviewed for this article, advocates armed confrontation in the name of Islam - not just to defend the religion but to spread it as well.
In a book published in 2002, portions of which were translated by the Tribune, he writes that "the pinnacle of Islam" is jihad, which he defines as use of force for religious purposes. Muslims, he states, are in a "vicious confrontation" with their "enemies, including the Jews, the Christians, the Hindus and idol worshippers from the East and West."
Such views are controversial among Muslims, reflecting the growing debate over Islam's place in the modern world and the role of militants in shaping the religion.
Religion, more than anything, defines Saudi life. The country is home to Islam's two holiest sites, Mecca and Medina, where Islam's prophet, Muhammad, lived in the seventh century. Muslims face Mecca when they pray, and a basic tenet of Islam is that all Muslims should try to make a pilgrimage to Mecca at least once.
Islam is not just the dominant religion in Saudi Arabia; all others are banned. Most Saudis follow the orthodox teachings of Muhammad ibn Abdel-Wahhab, an 18th-century religious reformer who wanted to cleanse Islam of impurities and return to the "true" teachings of the prophet. This called for no drinking, dancing or music.
For much of the past 100 years, the people of Saudi Arabia and their religious practices attracted little notice in the world. The nation was a vast desert, with few paved roads, or homes with electricity, or goods to trade, except for camels and dates.
Then, in 1938, oil was discovered - the largest known reserves in the world.
The Saudis launched a major modernization effort, constructing schools, highways, apartments and hotels. Entire towns rose from the desert, and by 1973, Saudi Arabia was synonymous with wealth. That year, it and other Arab nations imposed an oil embargo that doubled oil prices and plunged the West into an energy crisis.
But even as the Saudis were being recognized - and reviled - in the West as the world's new power brokers, they were quietly pursuing another path to influence: They were using their newfound wealth to spread Islam around the world.
In the Chicago area alone, the Saudis were helping to build mosques in Northbrook, Ill., and Bridgeview, Ill., and helping to establish the American Islamic College and the East-West University in Chicago.
But it was in Afghanistan where Saudi money had a profound global impact. When Soviet tanks rolled into the Muslim nation in the winter of 1979, the Saudi government began funneling billions of dollars to the front to repel the communist invaders.
A wealthy Saudi businessman named Osama bin Laden also aided the Muslim fighters, as did the U.S. government, which contributed several billion dollars in weapons. President Ronald Reagan called the Muslim soldiers "freedom fighters."
The Batterjee name was well-known in Jiddah, as the family owned a wide variety of businesses: health-care companies, a computer firm, an ice cream factory. One business, Saudi German Hospitals, was on a long boulevard called Batterjee Street. The family was also politically connected. Adel Batterjee's uncle was Hisham Nazer, the Saudi planning minister who would go on to become the country's influential oil minister.
Like many wealthy Saudis, Adel Batterjee left home as a teenager to study in the United States. He enrolled at the University of Kansas and graduated in 1968 with a math degree and a C average. He then returned to Saudi Arabia, where he worked in the burgeoning oil industry before branching out to other fields, including banking and technology.
He also became interested in one of the great Muslim causes of his day: the Afghan-Soviet war. For generations, Muslims had suffered devastating military defeats, but the war offered an opportunity to recapture past glories by waging jihad, or the armed struggle against oppressors of Muslims.
The charities were busy aiding the thousands of war refugees streaming into the city, but they were also helping to train, house and transport the Muslim fighters, or mujahedeen. Batterjee's charity, which had dozens of employees, was no different. In fact, Abdullah Azzam, the inspirational leader of the Afghan jihad, had hailed Batterjee's organization as being "at the forefront" of the jihad movement, according to a report Azzam wrote for an aid group he operated.
Politics encroaches on religious requirement
The financial system that allowed Saudi philanthropists such as Batterjee to do their work was vast, complex and extremely well-funded.
Billions of Saudi charitable dollars changed hands, with the money originating from a variety of sources, including the king himself, thousands of members of the royal family, numerous millionaires and millions of average Saudis. Most of these people donated for religious reasons, fulfilling the Islamic requirement that Muslims give 2.5 percent of their annual net worth to charity.
But for the oil-rich Saudi royal family, the motives for giving were also political. Donating generously to Islamic causes abroad not only increased the kingdom's stature in the world but also helped win allies against periodic threats to the Saudi crown.
The Saudis feared that the Soviets would encroach on Middle East oil fields; that the push for a secular, pan-Arab nation in the 1960s would spell the end of monarchies; that the revolution sweeping Iran in the 1970s would hurt Saudi Arabia's bid to become Islam's worldwide voice; and that religious zealots within the kingdom would try to overthrow the Saudi government.
To gain control over the mounting charitable donations, Saudi government officials became heads of some of the charities. Other groups, such as Batterjee's, remained private ventures.
No one knows how many billions given
When the money was distributed abroad, it often went to needy Muslims in nations at war. But some funds went to those who simply asked. When a Muslim student organization in the United States wanted to save a financially strapped mosque in Gary, Ind., the group appealed to the Saudi king and secured the necessary aid.
The Saudis would eventually help establish at least 1,500 mosques abroad. They would also aid 2,000 Islamic schools, sponsor summer camps for children, supplement the salaries of many prayer leaders and spend millions of dollars on Muslim research centers and endowed teaching positions at some of the world's top universities, including Harvard and Oxford.
So much money went out, from so many Saudi sources, that even Saudi leaders did not know how much was spent and exactly who was on the receiving end. Estimates on the total would be put in the tens of billions.
Others would assail the Saudis for publishing hate-filled books. One religious encyclopedia, published by a Saudi charity, called Jews "humanity's enemies; they foment immorality in this world."
Over time, the Saudis' freewheeling spending and strident beliefs made the kingdom vulnerable to criticism that it was systematically encouraging Islamic extremism.
And that made someone like Batterjee an increasingly logical target.
When a despondent Batterjee left Afghanistan, it was by no means the end of his support for jihad. From 1992 to 2000, his charity collected twice as much in donations, opened offices in 10 nations and moved into several regions where Muslims were at war.
Bosnia-Herzegovina was the focus of this rapid growth, with Batterjee taking on a clear military role.
Beginning in 1992, after Bosnia declared independence from Yugoslavia, Serb nationalists started expelling and killing Bosnian Muslims and Croats in what became known as ethnic cleansing. Newspaper photographs of starving Muslims in concentration camps evoked images of the Holocaust and sparked worldwide outrage.
Like other Islamic charities, Batterjee's group helped Muslim refugees and orphans. But it also provided boots, uniforms and walkie-talkies to units of the Bosnian army, including the Black Swans, an elite Islamic fighting force that prayed daily and barred alcohol and swearing.
On one occasion, U.S. government filings state, Batterjee handpicked six fighters and ordered them transported from Croatia into neighboring Bosnia.
Overseeing the charity's operations in Bosnia was a familiar figure: Enaam Arnaout, Batterjee's right-hand man. He helped transport many Arab men pouring into the Balkans to join the fight. Some injured fighters were flown all the way to Jiddah to be treated at Saudi German Hospitals, run by the Batterjee family.
With Batterjee's charity growing, he increasingly looked to the United States for money. In 1992, he decided to open a fund-raising office in the Chicago area, home to several hundred thousand Muslims. He filed state incorporation papers and changed the name of his charity to Benevolence International Foundation.
But with rapid growth came problems, some of them ominous.
In the spring of 1993, as part of a wider crackdown on extremists, Saudi authorities brought Batterjee in for questioning and closed his charity's headquarters in Jiddah.
Exactly why the Saudis were concerned about Batterjee remains unclear, but Sudan appeared to play a role. The African nation had become a haven for Osama bin Laden, by now one of the biggest critics of the Saudi royal family. And Batterjee had opened an office in Sudan shortly after bin Laden had moved there.
Gap apparent between stated mission, activities
About the same time he was questioned in Saudi Arabia, Batterjee removed his name from the charity's U.S. paperwork. Arnaout went to Chicago to manage the entire charity from there, working out of a rented office in Palos Hills, Ill.
With Arnaout now officially in charge, Batterjee was forced to oversee operations from behind the scenes, U.S. government documents and interviews show. Arnaout kept him abreast of developments, faxed him important documents and instructed employees not to offer outsiders information about the Saudi financier.
Charity officials also became uneasy about the increasing gap between their stated mission and their actual activities.
While the charity's public literature implied that it was strictly a relief group, one internal record said that "from its first day, [the charity] aimed to support jihad and mujahedeen." Another said the mission was "to make Islam supreme on this Earth."
One top charity official, Suleman Ahmer, feared that the organization was misleading donors. In a 1999 e-mail message to director Arnaout, he complained that the group was claiming that 100 percent of a special fund was going to orphans when the figure was actually much lower.
The statement was dishonest, he said, and he did not agree with what Batterjee had "taught" Arnaout about such practices. "May Allah forgive him," he wrote.
Despite the concerns, Batterjee's charity continued to prosper, collecting $ 3.3 million in donations in 2000 - more than ever before.
Then came Sept. 11.
Patrick Fitzgerald had just arrived on a flight from New York to Chicago when the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were struck. He hurried to his hotel room, turned on the television and watched the second tower fall.
Fitzgerald was only one week into his job as the U.S. attorney for the Northern District of Illinois. He had earned a reputation in New York as an aggressive federal prosecutor with a superb memory and a fierce work ethic. After helping to win convictions in the 1993 World Trade Center attack and the 1998 African embassy bombings, he was viewed by many as the nation's top expert on Islamic terrorism.
As much as Sept. 11 horrified him, he said he would not personally try a case in Chicago for a year so he could focus on his administrative duties. But in the ensuing weeks, with the nation's attention increasingly focused on terrorism, he decided to take on Batterjee's organization.
High-profile charges and a plea agreement
With the heat on Muslim militants, managers at Batterjee's charity started scrambling.
One e-mailed Arnaout in November 2001 to say that about half the charity's expenditures in Bosnia were not on the books and that he feared authorities would find out.
Arnaout decided to handle the problem in person, but shortly after he left for Bosnia, federal agents raided his home in suburban Justice, Ill., and the charity office in Palos Hills.
He flew back to the United States, and soon after, Bosnian agents raided his apartment and several other homes there.
On April 30, 2002, Arnaout was arrested.
That fall, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft flew to Chicago to announce terrorism charges against Arnaout - the first time in a decade that an attorney general had come to the city to announce an indictment.
Before a packed news conference at the Dirksen Federal Building, Ashcroft and Fitzgerald said Arnaout had spent at least 10 years funneling charity money to bin Laden's terrorist network, al-Qaida, and to other armed groups.
Ashcroft pointed to "an archive of incriminating documents," including a purported list of donors and fund-raisers for Afghan fighters. The name appearing most on the list of fund-raisers was bin Laden. Next was Batterjee.
But for now, authorities named Batterjee only as an unindicted co-conspirator.
When Fitzgerald began piecing together the evidence, he saw a charity that had many contacts with alleged members of al-Qaida's network. One alleged member once headed the charity's office in Chechnya; another traveled to Bosnia under the guise of being a charity director.
But as the court case progressed, it became increasingly clear that Fitzgerald was having trouble connecting the dots.
One link Fitzgerald cited involved Mohammed Jamal Khalifa, the friend of Batterjee's who participated in the Afghan-Soviet war. In a news release, Fitzgerald pointed to an FBI affidavit that linked Khalifa to the 1993 World Trade Center bombing and other terrorist plots.
The main evidence the prosecutor offered tying Khalifa to Batterjee's charity was that several years before, someone in the charity's Palos Hills office called a telephone number that was, according to the affidavit and news release, "associated" with Khalifa.
While Fitzgerald viewed this example and others as solid evidence, the judge handling the case did not. She made several rulings that indicated the case was not going in the prosecutor's favor.
Fitzgerald decided to cut a deal. Arnaout agreed to plead guilty to a racketeering charge, admitting he had defrauded donors by diverting almost $ 316,000 to fighters in Bosnia and Chechnya. In return, prosecutors dropped the terrorism count - ending the only U.S. terrorism charge brought against a top official of a Saudi charity.
Arnaout was sentenced to 11 years in prison. At a news conference afterward, Fitzgerald did not mention the man who was truly in charge of the charity: Batterjee.

Load-Date: March 2, 2004


End of Document