Monstrance, statue visit canceled over fears of terrorism
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
December 30, 1999, Thursday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 363 words
Byline: Karen Herzog
Body


Concerns about international terrorism and security have prompted the cancellation of a scheduled visit to the United States of a jewel-adorned monstrance and statue of Our Lady of Fatima from Portugal, said the Rev. Roger A. Syenk of Center.
 The statue and monstrance, a receptacle in which the consecrated Host is exposed for adoration, were due to be brought to western North Dakota over the New Year's holiday as part of a 'Pilgrimage for Peace 2000' worldwide. Authorities at the Fatima Shrine in Portugal have decided not to release the monstrance for its worldwide travel during the year 2000.
However, Catholic churches that were planning prayer services as an opportunity for pilgrimage over the New Year's will continue with those pilgrimage services as planned.
 Although the cancellation is disappointing, the Most Rev. Paul A. Zipfel, Bishop of the Bismarck Catholic Diocese said, he has requested that services go on, as the focus of any pilgrimage is always on Jesus Christ.
 'Our faith does not depend on sacred objects,' Syenk said. 'Pilgrimages are used by the faithful as a means of stirring up our faith. When we disrupt our life's routine to focus on Jesus in a different way, like making a pilgrimage, it may bring forth new perspectives on life.'
 On this New Year's Eve, the place of pilgrimage will be at the Cathedral of the Holy Spirit in Bismarck, where Bishop Zipfel will consecrate the Bismarck Diocese to the Sacred Heart of Jesus and the Immaculate Heart of Mary. This consecration is a spiritual moment, Syenk said, when the bishop will offer to the diocese to Jesus as an instrument to spread the gospel message to the people of western North Dakota during the third millennium.
 Catholics and non-Catholics are welcomed to make a pilgrimage to the site nearest them, Syenk said.
 Sites include:
 n Today, St. Joseph's Parish, 115 Third St. N.E., Beulah, noon MST to 6 a.m.
 n Friday, Christ the King Parish, 505 10th Ave. N.W., Mandan, noon CST until 5 p.m.
 n Friday, Cathedral of the Holy Spirit, 519 Raymond St., Bismarck, 6 p.m. until 9 p.m. CST, with Bishop Zipfel presiding.
 n Saturday, Sts. Peter and Paul Church, Strasburg, 10:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. CST.

Load-Date: December 31, 1999


End of Document