Montana town sees opportunity in Gitmo's closing
The Salt Lake Tribune
May 30, 2009 Saturday


Copyright 2009 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 624 words
Byline: By Matthew Brown The Associated Press
Body


 
Hardin, Mont. » On Capitol Hill, politicians are dead-set against transferring some of the world's most feared terrorists from Guantanamo to prisons on U.S. soil. But at City Hall in this impoverished town on the Northern Plains, the attitude is: Bring 'em on.
Hardin, a dusty town of 3,400 people so desperate that it built a $27 million jail a couple of years ago in the vain hope it would be a moneymaker, is offering to house hundreds of Gitmo detainees at the empty, never-used institution.
The medium-security jail was conceived as a holding facility for drunks and other scofflaws, but town leaders said it could be fortified with a couple of guard towers and some more concertina wire. Apart from that, it is a turnkey operation, fully outfitted with everything from cafeteria trays and sweat socks to 88 surveillance cameras.
"Holy smokes -- the amount of soldiers and attorneys it would bring here would be unbelievable," Clint Carleton said as he surveyed his mostly empty restaurant, Three Brothers Pizza. "I'm a lot more worried about some sex offender walking my streets than a guy that's a world-class terrorist. He's not going to escape, pop into the IGA (supermarket), grab a six-pack and go sit in the park."
After Hardin's six-member council passed a resolution last month in favor of taking the Guantanamo detainees, Montana's congressional delegation was quick to pledge it would never happen.
Notwithstanding the reputation of Montanans as Second Amendment-loving gun owners, they said that putting terrorists on Montana soil could invite attacks from the detainees' sympathizers.
"These Gitmo guys, they're a scary bunch," said Sen. Jon Tester, a Democrat. "You've got to realize what you're getting into."
Democratic Gov. Brian Schweitzer said this week that it is every state's obligation to do its part in addressing terrorism. But he dismissed Hardin's jail as not up to the task.
A White House spokesman on Thursday declined to comment on Hardin's proposal and said there has been no decision on what to do with the detainees.
The jail's No. 1 promoter, Greg Smith, executive director of Hardin's economic development agency, said the Two Rivers Detention Center could easily be retrofitted to increase security. And while the town hasn't had its own police force since the 1970s, Smith said the jail's well-armed neighbors would constitute an "unofficial redneck patrol."
While some townspeople welcome the idea as a way to produce jobs and put the jail to use, others worry that it would be too dangerous.
One of the jail's neighbors, Bill Eshleman -- a 72-year-old retired postal worker who said he keeps his .30-06 hunting rifle loaded and ready -- said the detainees would invite trouble, and he would rather see them sent back where they came from.
But he joked that his rifle was "very accurate," and backed up the claim by pointing to a pronghorn antelope head propped along his fenceline, a trophy from last hunting season.
Hardin -- about an hour's drive from Billings on the edge of the Crow Indian Reservation, not far from the Little Bighorn, where Custer made his last stand -- is beset with high unemployment and a poverty rate double the national average. It built the 464-bed jail on spec -- that is, with no contracts lined up ahead of time to take prisoners.
Attempts to bring offenders, out-of-state criminals and federal inmates to Hardin have all failed, and the bonds issued to pay for construction are now in default.
Some prison agencies, including the Montana Corrections Department, have said the jail does not meet their design and security standards, in part because of its dormitory-style rooms and lack of an exercise yard. Others said they had no need for the jail or selected a competing proposal.
 

Graphic

 
The Two Rivers Detention Center in Hardin, Mont., has sat empty in the two years since it was built, and Hardin officials have proposed that it house the terrorism detainees now being held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
The Two Rivers Detention Center in Hardin, Mont., has sat empty in the two years since it was built, and Hardin officials have proposed that it house the terrorism detainees now being held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

Load-Date: June 1, 2009


End of Document