More Muslims should denounce terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
April 4, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8
Length: 982 words
Body


More Muslims should denounce terrorism
Your recent front-page article "Our Kids Are Not Terrorists (and we don't want them to fall prey to terrorists)" was a very appropriate and important reminder that most Muslims are good people that just want their children to be successful like all of the rest of us do.
A reader couldn't help but feel sympathy for Muslim parents and their kids who face a very tough problem. Anybody who has worked with Muslims and has been to Muslim nations knows that the vast majority of Muslims are good people who just want to lead good lives. But obviously, there are also radical Muslim terrorists that are killing innocent people around the world in the most barbaric ways possible.
The solution for the majority of good Muslims to reduce the public's distrust is to publicly and aggressively denounce radical Muslim terrorists and their distorted version of Islam. President el-Sissi of Egypt, who is a devout Muslim, bravely laid out that road map by declaring that Muslims need to essentially declare war on those radical Muslim terrorists and their evil ways.
As el-Sissi said, Muslims need to be respectful of all faiths and not impose their faith on anyone. If the vast majority of good Muslims took the lead in denouncing radical Islamic terrorists, they would dramatically enhance the respect and trust in their communities, and their neighbors would know that we are all on the same side.
Randy Rossi
Grayslake
Let governments file for bankruptcy
Illinois should enact legislation like that proposed by Rep. Ron Sandack, a Downers Grove Republican. It would enable such Illinois governmental units as municipalities and school systems to file for bankruptcy.
Among the chief benefits flowing from this ability would be a strengthening of the governments' hand during their negotiations with public sector unions.
Private sector unions' demands are typically constrained by awareness of the need for their employers to remain competitive and solvent. If the employer doesn't and files for bankruptcy, union members' wages, benefits, pensions, working conditions, and jobs themselves are placed in serious jeopardy.
Illinois' public sector unions, however, operate in an environment that prevents their employers from filing for bankruptcy. There's no price, consequently, for unions and their members to pay if their employers can't deliver what the unions have negotiated, often with legislators and boards they were themselves instrumental in electing.
The only recourses for the governing body are slashing social services and capital improvements to infrastructure, borrowing beyond the ability to repay, and/or taking more money from taxpayers.
Each of these is counterproductive, making the governmental unit a less desirable place to live in and ultimately eroding the tax base — the classic death spiral that brought down Detroit.
Bob Foys
Inverness
Support law on GMO labeling
I would like to honestly ask why genetically engineered foods are not labeled in the United States.
We already have all the ingredients listed, as well as the nutritional facts on our products. Why aren't GMOs labeled?
The purpose of labels is to educate and inform the public on what they're eating — it's simple. I read about a bill in the Illinois Senate that would put a label on all GMOs. I don't know how more information and education is bad for the public — so I am totally supporting this law.
Please join me and tell your elected officials to vote "yes" for GMO labeling. I would like to know what's in my food, wouldn't you?
Danijela Cebic
Barrington
Jail time in order for GOP senators
I wish I could say that I was shocked by the actions of 47 Republican senators who signed a letter to the leaders of Iran. But, I'm not shocked. The Republican Party has gone off the rails. They are in some very strange place. It's a place where being loyal to our own country no longer matters.
These 47 Republican senators, led by a freshman Tea Party senator, have done something never done before in the history of our country. They are guilty of breaking a federal law that prohibits anyone from interfering with our government's foreign policy. The law they have broken is the Logan Act. It's been on the books for a very long time. Some say others have broken this law, too. This claim does not hold up when you examine the record.
Others have not broken this law. Some point to former speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, and say that she broke the law when she visited Syria in 2007 and met with their leader Assad. But she cleared that visit with the George W. Bush White House. She was briefed on what to say while she was there by the Bush White House. So, Pelosi was not disloyal to our country or to the sitting president.
What these Republican senators have done is both disloyal to our president and our country and it's most likely a violation of the Logan Act.
Our own Mark Kirk is one of these Republicans. All of them should be arrested, charged with breaking the law and tried in a United States court of law, and if found guilty, they should be sentenced to the maximum time of three years in prison and fined the maximum amount. What they have done is a disgrace to our nation.
Bill Sarto
Carpentersville
What qualifies her to be president?
We keep hearing how Hillary Clinton is leading the pack for the Democrats, can someone please tell us what qualifies her to be president?
The wife of a past impeached president. No. The Secretary of State that posted the most miles taken on tax payer money accomplishing nothing. No. Maybe it was her failure when that 3 a.m. call came in on Benghazi. No.
Oh, maybe you condone her privacy from us all with her own server in her home. No.
I know Obama lowered the bar to where anyone can now be president. But do we want to continue this insanity?
I am open to hearing Hillary Clinton's qualifications to be president.
Carl Palash
Carol Stream

Graphic

 
Bob Foys

Load-Date: April 6, 2015


End of Document