More cash for 9/11 fams in bill
Daily News (New York)
November 19, 2019 Tuesday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2019 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 7
Length: 285 words
Byline: JOHN ANNESE   With News Wire Services

New York Daily News
Body


Lawmakers reached a bipartisan deal Monday night to include more funding for 9/11 widows and children in a must-pass government budget bill, Sen. Chuck Schumer announced.
The announcement came ahead of Tuesday's expected House vote on a temporary government-wide funding bill as a midnight Thursday deadline looms.
The provisions of the budget bill - hashed out by House and Senate leaders Monday - include "improvements" to the U.S. Victims of State Sponsored Terrorism Fund that would put more money into the pockets of Sept. 11 families, Schumer said.
"For widows and kids, just compensation will never replace the loved one they lost, but it will make a difference in living a life to the fullest, paying for college, raising a family, all the things these courageous Americans would have done alongside their beloved family member," Schumer said.
The fund comes entirely from penalties on states like Iran that sponsor terrorism, Schumer said.
The bill clarifies that Sept. 11 widows and children can access the fund, as can a new group of Tehran hostages. The fund will also be split in half, between Sept. 11 victims and non-Sept. 11 victims of terror, to prevent any tension among victim groups.
The bill would also increase the overall family cap for 9/11 victims, reopen the application period for new claims, and extend the fund until 2030.
The stopgap bill, sponsored by House Appropriations Committee Chairwoman Nita Lowey (D-Westchester), pushes back the fight over funding for President Trump's border wall, which led to a 35-day partial government shutdown last winter.
Sen. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said the Senate would pass the bill by Thursday, and Trump has indicated he will sign it.

Load-Date: November 20, 2019


End of Document