MORE Y2K WORRIES: TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
December 21, 1999, Tuesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1999 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion,; Editorial
Length: 541 words
Body


The real threat this holiday season may not be the Y2K computer bug but two-legged insects from inside and beyond our borders who would threaten our national security. Don't cancel any celebrations or travel plans you may have on your calendar, but stay alert to signs of trouble. 
The coming of the new year has generated the expected amount of hand-wringing by doomsdayers who believe the end of the world is finally upon us, not to mention an inordinate amount of attention to the Y2K computer problem.
History tells us the doomsday crowd was there when the calendar turned to year 1000, too, but the world kept spinning. As for the Y2K bug, we may never know for sure until Jan. 1. But it appears that most government agencies, businesses and people have done a pretty good job of preparing.
A malfunctioning automated teller machine is one thing; a terrorist trying to smuggle bomb material into Seattle is quite another.
The arrest of Algerian Ahmed Ressam as he tried to slip across the Canadian border has put government security agencies on alert. On Sunday, White House National Security Adviser Sandy Berger warned Americans at home and abroad to ''be vigilant'' in the weeks ahead. The U.S. government is trying to determine whether Ressam was acting at the behest of Osama bin Laden, a wealthy Saudi radical who is wanted for allegedly ordering the bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania last year.
There is no evidence to link Ressam to bin Laden -- at least, none that has been disclosed. But the concern by Berger and others is that the end of the Muslim holy season of Ramadan corresponds with celebrations marking the end of the century and the second millennium of Christianity. That convergence may entice extremists.
So, what does this mean for people here in Madison and southern Wisconsin? It seems improbable that bin Laden or any other terrorist from the Middle East would have Middle America on his prime target list. We're simply harder to reach.
But there are others, mostly from within, who might use the coming of the millennium to showcase their apocalyptic beliefs. The homegrown Heaven's Gate and Branch Davidian cults come to mind.
Again, no one should panic or anything of the sort. People should simply be aware of their own safety and take precautions in open areas where large groups have gathered.
As Berger said Sunday, ''If (people) see something suspicious, or see packages or activities they think are unusual, they should obviously let law enforcement people know.''
Then again, some of the most unusual activities on New Year's Eve will be planned celebrations -- including in Seattle, the apparent target of bomb-parts smuggler Ressam.
Having survived the World Trade Organization meetings, Seattle is now ready to celebrate by parading flaming papier-mache figures of farm animals, four horsemen and a giant egg through the streets. Mayor Paul Schell said the idea is based on centuries-old fire festivals in Valencia, Spain.
''We believe it will be the most unique millennium celebration in the country,'' he boasted.
So, if the people of Seattle aren't willing to be scared into submission, why should we? As the millennium approaches, put it all in perspective. Celebrate . . . and keep your eyes open.

Load-Date: December 22, 1999


End of Document