More terrorism funding urged   Panel recommends $2.1M for city
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
February 13, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Arundel; Pg. D1
Length: 499 words
Byline: By JEFF HORSEMAN Staff Writer
Body


Warning that what makes Annapolis special also makes it a target, a city panel has recommended spending $ 2.1 million over the next four years to prepare for terrorism and similar calamities.
The city should also hire a director of emergency management to coordinate a response to terrorists, natural disasters and other catastrophes, a transition team appointed by Mayor Ellen O. Moyer said in a report released yesterday.
Headed by retired Rear Adm. Ronald F. Marryott, a former Naval Academy superintendent, the team spent weeks examining the terrorism threat facing Annapolis and how it could be addressed.
The team took into consideration the city's present emergency plans, Adm. Marryott said. Besides being a part of the county Emergency Operations Plan, the City Police Department after Sept. 11 assigned an officer to gather intelligence on terrorism and other criminal activities.
Adm. Marryott's team concluded that the academy, the State House and other high-profile institutions make the city a tempting venue for terrorist acts ranging from car or boat bombings to the poisoning of the water supply.
"In fact, the team considers Annapolis to be one high-value target," Adm. Marryott said, noting that Annapolis is vulnerable to Sept. 11-like attacks because it's close to four airports.
While praising the work of city police and firefighters, the report said more needs to be done to protect the city.
Its chief recommendation was to hire an emergency management director to plan and direct the city's response to terrorist acts, as well as emergencies such as hurricanes and snowstorms.
The 16-member team suggested a $ 90,000 annual budget for the director's office.
Other recommendations included:
Creating a network linking all city departments with other levels of government in times of crisis.
While the lines of communication are good between city police and firefighters, that was not the case with other city departments or with the state, county or federal governments, the report said.
"One major reason is the proverbial fear of revealing intelligence sources," the report said. "Another reason … is the lack of secure communications between agencies."
Conducting emergency drills on an annual basis.
Increasing security, including using undercover police, at major events such as the fall boat shows.
Creating an electronic Neighborhood Watch program for residents to report suspicious activities.
In all, the team is requesting $ 240,000 be spent on emergency preparedness next fiscal year. The city should spend an additional $ 1.9 million over the next three fiscal years, the team suggested.
Kathleen M. Nieberding, who is overseeing the mayor's 13 transition teams, said the city has applied for state and federal grants to fund anti-terrorism measures such as safeguarding the water plant.
In a memo to the team, Ms. Moyer said she'd work to create an emergency management di rector position and meet the equipment needs outlined by the report.
___jhorseman@capitalgazette.com  

Load-Date: February 13, 2002


End of Document