More policy changes needed to limit terrorism losses: ISO
Business Insurance
February 11, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 996 words
Byline: MEG FLETCHER
Body


Risk managers with commercial property in the 30 jurisdictions using standard fire policies can take comfort from the fact that most direct fire-related losses from terrorism are generally still insured under their basic policies-at least for now.
This particularly applies if a policyholder's coverage is underwritten using a typical standard form approved by those states' legislators-or regulators in Texas and Washington-for admitted insurers' use. A few states, however, also require surplus lines insurers to use the same form.
Because 70% of the premium volume for property insurance nationally requires adherence to those minimum coverage standards, those laws substantially reduce the effectiveness of new terrorism exclusions that seek to cap insurers' exposure for losses, according to a working draft of a position paper by the Insurance Services Office Inc.
Such coverage may be lost, however, if ISO is successful in encouraging insurer trade associations to lobby states to eliminate the near-uniform coverage in those 30 states in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, which caused the industry's largest-ever loss.
Although no insurer trade associations have signed on so far, ISO's proposed plan would be its latest step to help protect insurers' financial stability, said Carole J. Banfield, executive vp of Jersey City, N.J.-based ISO.
Without a federal backstop plan in place, insurers are grappling with their radically altered perceptions about the potential magnitude of future unanticipated losses (BI, Dec. 24/31, 2001). Terrorism is not a traditional insurance problem, but ''a social problem,'' Ms. Banfield said.
At the same time, state insurance regulators are concerned that future losses may overburden insurers' resources to pay claims as well as reduce their appetite to write coverage (BI, Jan. 14). Diminished capacity already is creating availability and affordability problems for risk managers.
Several observers-including New York Insurance Superintendent Gregory V. Serio-question, however, whether ISO's proposed campaign could ever eliminate minimum fire protection standards that the majority of states have had in place for at least the last 60 years. Such a move could be seen as diminishing commercial policyholders' protection at a time when they face availability and affordability problems.
''I don't think there is any likelihood that (coverage) is going to change, and I don't think that the department would support that,'' said Mr. Serio.
However, discussing ISO's proposed legislative campaign ''is very helpful, because it has escaped notice among risk managers, until now,'' said Michael D. Phillipus, vp-external affairs for the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.
He plans to ask the New York-based organization's government affairs team to monitor ISO's proposed campaign and track legislative developments nationally so they can be reported to local chapters and members, said Mr. Phillipus, who also is risk manager for Pennzoil-Quaker State Co. in Houston.
His company, however, is not affected because its manuscripted policy does not duplicate the minimum coverage form that often is used in the policies of some smaller companies, he said.
The concept of a standard fire policy had its roots in late 19th century coverage disputes.
Various groups-including the predecessor of the National Assn. of Insurance Commissioners-tried over time to resolve the problem by developing uniform policy language. Most current policies and court interpretations are based on the 1943 New York policy form, according to ISO.
The coverage typically protects a policyholder from most direct losses or damage by fire and lightning, as well as removal from premises. according to ISO.
It does not apply to potentially related losses, such as business income or extra expense coverage. In addition, the standard policy excludes war-related risks, but courts have generally interpreted that provision conservatively and ruled that it applies only to conflicts between sovereign nations, not terrorists, ISO said.
Given these limitations, ISO filed two types of terrorism exclusions, depending on whether the state had a standard fire policy law. Regulators in nearly all jurisdictions subsequently approved insurers' use of those forms, except for California, Florida and New York.
''The existence of the standard fire policy in the 30 states simplifies the applicability of terrorism exclusions because of the guaranteed coverage required by the standard fire policy language,'' said John Dearie, a New York-based insurance attorney with Edwards & Angell L.L.P.
In the jurisdictions without such standard fire policies, though, terrorism exclusion filings do not include coverage for fires following terrorist attacks.
From a consumer's perspective, risk managers in standard fire policy states may seem to have some temporary advantage because of the guaranteed coverage, said Brad Kading, senior vp and director of state relations for the Reinsurance Assn. of America in Washington. Over the long haul, however, having such standardized coverage ''limits innovations in the marketplace,'' which is a disadvantage to risk managers, he said.
In addition, risk managers in states with standard fire policies still have a need for terrorism coverage because they still face the possibility of losses from nonfire hazards, said Don Griffin, assistant vp-business and personal lines for the National Assn. of Independent Insurers in Des Plaines, Ill.
In any case, risk managers need to review their risks and the wording of current policies protecting their companies' property and plug gaps that may exist as insurers and reinsurers try to tighten terms and conditions in renewal policies.
With ISO's development of terrorism exclusions, ''all we did was provide a tool to work within the current distressed environment, but it is not the solution,'' said Ms. Banfield. ''The solution is a federal backstop for the insurance industry,'' she said.

Load-Date: February 14, 2002


End of Document