MORE FREEDOM FOR THE F.B.I. CAUSES SOME CRITICS TO WORRY
The New York Times
March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 959 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Justice Department officials say they foresee no significant increase in domestic security inquiries as a result of new investigative standards issued last week. But clearly, in some areas, the department's revised guidelines would permit an expansion of activities by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Even though the rules take effect in eight days, they may be slightly modified in the next few months to take account of concerns expressed by members of Congress and critics outside the Government.  Roger S. Young, a spokesman for the F.B.I., said the agency welcomed the efforts to help ''clarify'' the guidelines, and he added, ''We can't expect our critics to assume we'll do everything right.''
WASHINGTON - Justice Department officials say they foresee no significant increase in domestic security inquiries as a result of new investigative standards issued last week.
The guidelines give the bureau somewhat greater latitude to look into the activities of groups that use, or advocate the use of, violence to ''achieve political or social change.'' The rules were revised because there seemed to be a perception among some Federal agents and conservative members of Congress that political activism immunized groups against investigations of suspected criminal behavior.
Senator Jeremiah A. Denton Jr., a conservative Republican from Alabama who heads the security and terrorism subcommittee, concluded after hearings that the F.B.I. had ''little or no useful intelligence'' on groups that advocate violence, terrorism and subversion. Even if such organizations have not yet committed a terrorist or subversive act, he said, they ''may represent a substantial threat'' to the safety and security of the country.
The bureau had good reason to be skittish about investigating such groups. Disclosures that the agency spied on dissenters in the 1960's and 70's tarnished the bureau's carefully burnished image and led to restrictions on its operations, as well as lawsuits against many agents.
One of the most hotly debated provisions in the new guidelines says that Federal agents may take steps to ''anticipate or prevent crime'' by investigating statements that advocate criminal activity or ''indicate an apparent intent to engage in crime, particularly crimes of violence.'' In the abstract, such standards may sound academic. But two hypothetical examples show the importance of such rules. Could the F.B.I. open an investigation of someone who urged a crowd of 300 college students to resist draft registration requirements? Could the bureau investigate a political party that advocates revolutionary change at some time in the indefinite future?
''For people who are concerned about First Amendment rights, this is a benchmark test of our society,'' said Jerry J. Berman of the American Civil Liberties Union. ''The question is: How free and open is the marketplace of ideas?''
Thus, the significance of domestic security cases is greater than their numbers would suggest. William H. Webster, Director of the F.B.I., reported last August that the bureau was conducting a total of 38 domestic security investigations, including full investigations of eight groups and 10 individuals. Four of the eight groups, including the F.A.L.N., seek independence for Puerto Rico. The four others were the Communist Workers Party, the Jewish Defense League, the Arizona chapter of the Ku Klux Klan and the May 19th Communist Organization, several members of which have been linked to the Brink's robbery and slayings in New York.
If the activities of a terrorist group transcend national boundaries or are undertaken on behalf of a foreign power, they may be investigated under separate rules known as the Foreign Counterintelligence Guidelines.
For seven years, the investigation of domestic security cases has been subject to the rules issued by President Gerald Ford's Attorney General, Edward H. Levi. Under those guidelines, the bureau says, it ''incorrectly'' opened 10 security investigations based on nothing more than the ''advocacy of violence,'' and those cases ''were ordered closed by F.B.I. headquarters.''
Under the new guidelines, it is not entirely clear whether the advocacy of nonviolent illegal acts, by itself, is a proper subject for investigation. Nor is it clear what circumstances justify the use of informers and infiltrators in the preliminary stages of an investigation.
Resources May Limit Inquiries
The revised guidelines, issued by Attorney General William French Smith, say that such ''highly intrusive'' techniques may be used in preliminary inquiries where there are ''compelling circumstances,'' but they do not define the circumstances. The modified rules would seem to loosen the standards in this area.
But a Senate committee that investigated the Abscam operation recommended a tougher standard. When a Government agent or informer infiltrates a political or religious organization, it said, there should be ''probable cause to believe that the operation is necessary to detect or to prevent specific acts of criminality.''
F.B.I. officials say that budget limitations, as well as administrative guidelines, force them to be highly selective in investigating dissident groups. ''We have rather limited resources,'' Mr. Webster has said. ''We quickly run out of people.''
The Attorney General's new guidelines embody many of the principles that the Carter Administration tried to write into law as part of a statutory charter for the bureau. The Reagan Administration has shown no interest in reviving that massive task. But Mr. Young, the spokesman for Mr. Webster, said the F.B.I. Director ''has always supported the idea of a charter'' and would welcome Congressional efforts to write one along the lines suggested by the bureau.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of an FBI badge


End of Document