MORE TERRORISM AHEAD, D.A. SAYS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 20, 1995, FRIDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Dayton Daily News
Section: METRO TODAY,
Length: 388 words
Byline: Janice Haidet Morse; DAYTON DAILY NEWS
Body


One of the scariest things about the Oklahoma City bombing: Public officials ''expect similar things to occur during the next five to six years,'' said Paul R. Anderson, an Oklahoma district attorney.
''Since the bombing, we've been finding out about so many different groups of people who are separatists, who see government as evil - and there are more of them than you ever would imagine,'' Anderson said at an anti-violence conference in Dayton on Thursday.
In the seven months since the April 19 explosion at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building killed 168 people, Anderson said, ''There's not a day where I don't run into somebody that will have some story about the blast.''
Anderson's talk was part of a two-day conference, ''We the People: Responding to Violence,'' which aims to not just talk about the problems but explain what can be done to combat them.
Jeanette Adkins, director of the Greene County Prosecutor's Victim-Witness Division and a member of the national crisis response team that helped in Oklahoma City, spoke about the importance of having a local response team assembled before tragedy strikes.
''Hopefully, we won't experience something of the magnitude of Oklahoma City,'' she said. ''. . . But still we need to ask ourselves, 'Who could possibly be affected by that shooting at the university, that robbery at the bank or that bombing downtown?' and have a plan in place for dealing with it.''
The Oklahoma tragedy presented unique challenges because it was both a disaster and a crime, noted Anderson and Adkins. They talked to a group of about 50 people, mostly professionals in law enforcement, victim advocacy and child care, at the Salem Church of God, 6500 Southway Road, Randolph Twp.
Dan Appenzeller, an organizer of the conference, which is being sponsored by the National Organization of Parents of Murdered Children Inc., said he had hoped more people would attend, but he was pleased that those in attendance ''seem to have a firm commitment to taking action.''
The conference, which continues today, will feature a presentation on ''restorative community justice,'' a plan for ensuring that the justice system makes criminals accountable for their actions. That plan will be discussed by Marlene A. Young, executive director of the National Organization for Victim Assistance in Washington, D.C.

Load-Date: October 22, 1995


End of Document