More involved in air base shooting?
Chicago Daily Herald
December 8, 2019 Sunday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NATION_; Pg. 2
Length: 545 words
Byline: By Brendan Farrington Associated Press
Body


PENSACOLA, Fla. — The Saudi student who fatally shot three people at a U.S. naval base in Florida hosted a dinner party earlier in the week where he and three others watched videos of mass shootings, a U.S. official told The Associated Press on Saturday. Officials investigating the deadly attack were working Saturday to determine whether it was motivated by terrorism, as both President Donald Trump and Defense Secretary Mark Esper indicated that they would review policies governing foreign military training in the United States. 
Family members on Saturday identified one of the victims as a 23-year-old recent graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy who alerted first responders to where the shooter was even after he had been shot several times. "Joshua Kaleb Watson saved countless lives today with his own," Adam Watson wrote on Facebook. "He died a hero and we are beyond proud but there is a hole in our hearts that can never be filled." The shooter opened fire inside a classroom at Naval Air Station Pensacola on Friday, killing three people and wounding two sheriff's deputies, one in the arm and one in the knee, before one of the deputies killed him. Eight others were also hurt. Both deputies were expected to survive. The official who spoke Saturday said one of the three students who attended the dinner party hosted by the attacker recorded video from outside the classroom building while the shooting was taking place. The official spoke on condition of anonymity. Two other Saudi students watched from a car, the official said. The official said 10 Saudi students were being held on the base Saturday while several others were unaccounted for. The official also said the FBI was examining social media posts and investigating whether he acted alone or was connected to any broader group. The U.S. has long had a robust training program for Saudis, providing assistance in the U.S. and in the kingdom. About two hundred students from countries outside the U.S. are enrolled in training at the Pensacola base, said Base commander Capt. Tim Kinsella. "This has been done for many decades," Trump said. "I guess we're going to have to look into the whole procedure. We'll start that immediately." Naval Air Station Pensacola is one of the Navy's most historic and storied bases. It sprawls along the waterfront southwest of the city's downtown and dominates the economy of the surrounding area. Kinsella said the base would remain closed until further notice. The shooting is the second at a U.S. naval base in one week. A sailor whose submarine was docked at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, opened fire on three civilian employees Wednesday, killing two before taking his own life. The shooting has shined a spotlight on the sometimes rocky relationship between the United States and Saudi Arabia. U.S. officials at a security forum in California were careful not to draw any broader conspiracy or terrorism-related links to the shooting. Adm. Michael Gilday, the chief of naval operations, was asked about unspecified reports that the Saudi shooter may have been part of a "sleeper cell." He said he had not seen any such reports. He said the shooting was under investigation, and "at this point it is too early, in my opinion ... to draw those types of conclusions."

Load-Date: December 9, 2019


End of Document