More funding sought for response to terrorism Local officials tell Rockefeller federal funds not available

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
February 18, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P4D
Length: 347 words
Byline: DEANNA WRENN
Body


DAILY MAIL STAFF
Senator Jay Rockefeller, D-WV, met with local law enforcement officials today, asking what they needed from the federal government to better guard against terrorism.
The answer?
Local funding, training and cooperation.
Although the federal government spends billions of dollars on police and fire department training, local officials see very little of that money, said Charleston's emergency services director, Mark Wolford.
"It seems like 96 percent of it stays at the federal level," he said. "Then there is less to the state and even less to the cities."
That's a problem, Wolford said, because local law enforcement agencies would be the first ones to arrive on the scene in the case of an emergency.
"We have the same firefighters, the same police officers, the same emergency medics who respond to fires, car wrecks and murders now responding to bioterrorism," he said. "We need to look at the local level. You need to go back to Washington and plead our case."
Chief Deputy Kevin Quinlin suggested taking a regional approach to funding and training. Not all areas of the state need a bomb squad, he said.
But if several counties worked together, they could afford to staff and equip a squad that could still respond quickly to all areas in those counties.
Others suggested better communication between federal and local law enforcement officers.
Charleston Police Chief Jerry Riffe said his police department gets along well with the local branches of national agencies like the FBI or ATF, but that federal officials in Washington should be quicker in disseminating information to local agencies.
"There's no rationale for people not sharing information within a state," Rockefeller said.
Rockefeller said about half the police departments in West Virginia don't have Internet access, which was also a problem in trying to combat terrorism.
He also said West Virginia doctors need training to help identify bioterrorism.
"Are we prepared (bioterrorism)?" Rockefeller asked. "No, we're not."
Writer Deanna Wrenn can be reached at 348-1796 or by e-mail at dwrenn@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: February 20, 2002


End of Document