More countries fighting terrorism Officials say many countries still have a long way to go

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 31, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5B
Length: 762 words
Byline: THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON - In the three months since President Bush insisted that countries around the globe choose sides in the war on terrorism, several nations closely connected with terrorist violence have taken tentative steps toward cooperation.
Sudan shared intelligence and began restricting the financing of terror networks. Yemen stepped up its cooperation in the investigation of the USS Cole bombing and sent security forces in search of al-Qaida members. Even Syria, a haven for several terrorist groups, has done "some helpful things," a senior Bush aide said.
Administration officials remain cautious, acknowledging that the commitment behind these contributions to the anti-terrorist cause is untested. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell spoke earlier this month in terms of "opportunities," while another top foreign policy official said a better measure will come when the countries are asked to do more.
"In some cases, we've gotten doors wide open, like Pakistan. In other places, the door seems to be more open, as in Yemen. In other places, there are cracks in the door, and now we'll see whether we can exploit that further," the official reported. "We're still not at the point of asking people to do very difficult things."
As the hunt for al-Qaida leaders and the battle against global terror networks spread beyond Afghanistan, U.S. officials are searching for the right blend of warnings and promises to win support from reluctant regimes. Foreign governments, in turn, are appraising the risks and rewards in their own political worlds while assessing the Bush administration's capacity and willingness to wage a sustained fight.
The attacks Sept. 11 accelerated a trend under way in several countries that were tired of chilly relations with the West and eager to be removed from the State Department's list of state sponsors of terrorism. Notably, Sudan and Libya offered valuable intelligence about al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden's operations, according to U.S. officials.
Sudan, which had harbored bin Laden until 1996, began discussing counterterrorism with the United States in mid-2000. The government in Khartoum has arrested suspected militants and begun moving against extremist organizations based in Sudan, although Hezbollah and the Egyptian Islamic Jihad continue to have "a small presence" there, a U.S. counterterrorism official said.
"The cooperation level is serious," said a high-ranking U.S. official, who reported that information-sharing by African intelligence services has never been so extensive. Since Sept. 11, Sudan has offered hundreds of intelligence files, as well as reports on flows of money and people.
"It's opportunistic. They've wanted to get themselves right with the West, and particularly with the United States," the official said, adding that any significant improvement in relations is likely to hinge on Sudan's ability to deliver a just end to its civil war.
Similarly hopeful of improved relations, Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi condemned the attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center as "horrific" and endorsed U.S. retaliation - a notable development by a onetime militant anti-American targeted in 1986 by U.S. bombs.
Gaddafi, whose intelligence services were implicated in attacks against Western targets, has been distancing himself from the terrorism business for at least two years, sharing information with other Arab governments about Islamic militants, particularly Arab Afghans - Arabs who fought against Soviet forces in Afghanistan - said Ray Takeyh, a Libya specialist at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Shortly after Sept. 11, William J. Burns, assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, met in London with Musa Kusa, a top Libyan intelligence official. The stated purpose was to discuss Libya's role in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, but administration officials said it was also a chance to seek intelligence. The meeting reportedly went well.
Even so, U.S. policy-makers say Libya must come clean on its role in the Pan Am 103 bombing and address other issues before Gaddafi can expect the U.S. trade embargo to be lifted and Libya's name to be removed from the State Department terrorism list.
"Libya has been moving in a more positive direction with respect to its activities," Powell said in an interview. "But until we get through the Pan Am 103 problem, there will be limits to what we can do with Libya. There is also no question that Libya continues to dabble in weapons of mass destruction development, so I'm not sure how we give them a very high mark."
-30-

Load-Date: January 3, 2002


End of Document