More on Quakers' View Regarding Terrorism 
 The New York Times
January 13, 2002 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 14WC; Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 337 words
Body


To the Editor:
As one of the three Quakers featured in "Private Crises of Conscience, (Dec. 30), and the author of the "Minute of Concern" on terrorism approved by all representing the 10 Quaker congregations in Westchester, Putnam and Fairfield Counties quoted in part in the article, it may be important to explain the original intent for your readers, otherwise the bland statement loses its meaning.
     When we called for all religious leaders to announce their clear disapproval of terrorism, -- violence targeting women, children and other civilians -- it was intended particularly to include Muslim clerics. Other religious leaders have been very forthright. Muslim religious and political leaders, even at the United Nations, have too often obfuscated or even supported terrorism, particularly in the Middle East. The Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, has been very direct in the words we quoted, that there is no cause, that there is no grievance that can justify terrorism. 
 If the unbelievable atrocities of Sept. 11 are not to grow into decades of nightmares around the world, the unparalleled worldwide compassion and revulsion of those events must be used to build a dream of no more terrorism. 
Along with the clear need to eliminate grinding poverty, all nations of the world must refuse to give in fact or even to give the appearance of offering concessions, compromises or other rewards to terrorists. To fail in this simple policy will be to invite destruction of civilization in many parts of the world, even in the United States.
As indicated in the article, Quakers revel in their individuality but unite on the original 17th century Friends' principles: "There is that of God in all men" (and women) and that Friends must act, "to take away the occasion for violence." All other social and personal testimonies of the Religious Society of Friends come out of these basic principles.

BOB K. BOGEN
Member, Chappaqua Friends
Clerk, Purchase Quarterly Meeting
Ministry and Counsel Committee

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 13, 2002


End of Document