More U.S. troops will be based near Afghanistan; General says forces can be deployed quickly to warzone.; RESPONSE TO TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 13, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A10
Length: 316 words
Byline: By Lolita C. Baldor
Body


U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter (left) and Afghan President Ashraf Ghani end their news conference at the Presidential Palace in Kabul, Afghanistan, on Tuesday.
BAGRAMAIR FIELD,AFGHANISTAN - The top U.S. commander in Afghanistan said Tuesday that "some hundreds" of U.S. forces - in addition to the 8,400 that President Barack Obama announced would stay in the country last week - will be based outside Afghanistan, but will be ready to quickly deploy into the warzone if needed.
The decision to place troops outside the country raises questions about the actual reduction in troop totals, since any number of the hundreds could be moved quickly in and out of the country on any given day.
Army Gen. John Nicholson told reporters that about 400 of the forces deployed outside Afghanistan will be part of the U.S. commitment to the NATO advise-and-assist mission.
"I'm very comfortable with them being where they are and we can call them forward if necessary, and we can reach back for support," Nicholson told reporters at a briefing during Defense Secretary Ash Carter's visit to Afghanistan Tuesday. "I'm very comfortable that we're going to be able to accomplish both of those missions with this level of manning. And it provides me all the capabilities that I need to get the job done."
Allies who have troops in the country, including Germany and Italy, and U.S. military leaders had pressed the U.S. to continue to provide the security and logistics support they get now. They are concerned that Obama's plan to reduce current troop levels of 9,800 to 5,500 by the end of the year would reduce that support too much.
Those concerns played a role in Obama's decision to keep 8,400 in the country.
Nicholson told reporters he will have about 3,000 U.S. troops working as advisers in Afghanistan, roughly 2,150 troops carrying out counterterrorism missions and 3,300 working in supporting roles.

Load-Date: July 13, 2016


End of Document