MORE TERRORISM FOLLOWS MURKY BOMBING OF HOTEL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 23, 2008 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-3
Length: 526 words
Byline: SAEED SHAH AND JONATHAN S. LANDAY, MCCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan 
Body


More extremist attacks shook Pakistan yesterday on the heels of a devastating bomb attack on the capital's best-known hotel. Gunmen took the Afghan consul-general hostage after killing his driver, and suicide bombers killed nine policemen at a checkpoint in the Swat Valley, northwest of the capital.
The bombing of Islamabad's deluxe Marriott hotel, in which at least 53 died and more than 260 were wounded, was still shrouded in mystery. A little-known terrorist group called Fadayeen Islam -- "Islamic Commandos" -- took responsibility in a tape given to a Dubai-based television news channel, and claimed that there had been 250 U.S. Marines and NATO officials at the hotel. Security experts said it was highly unlikely that U.S. forces would be stationed at so vulnerable a location.
Whoever was behind the bombing, it appeared to signal a new phase in the militants' war against the Pakistani state, with a strong sense in the country that it was sliding toward chaos.
"Pakistan is teetering on the brink," said Farzana Shaikh, an associate research fellow at the Royal Institute of International Affairs, a policy-research organization in London. "There is a weak and deeply divided government and a disoriented army with no clear strategy."
Pakistan's President Asif Ali Zardari, who took office only this month, arrived in New York yesterday, where he will hold talks with President Bush today. Analysts think Mr. Zardari will have to try to persuade Washington to ease the pressure on his government, which is being sharply criticized at home for following former President Pervez Musharraf's lead and drawing close to the United States.
In Washington, U.S. officials said they thought al-Qaida or extremists allied with the terrorist group were responsible for the Marriott attack, and that the hotel was hit because it was a "soft target." The motive, they said, may have been retaliation for cross-border strikes that U.S. forces have conducted in Pakistan's tribal areas, along the border with Afghanistan.
The Pakistani government claimed that the bombing came close to claiming the entire Pakistan political and military leadership, which was supposed to have dined Saturday at the Marriott. Rehman Malik, the powerful chief of the Interior Ministry, said a dinner hosted by the speaker of the parliament for the government and military top brass was supposed to have occurred at the Marriott, but that security fears led to a late change.
"At the eleventh hour, the dinner was shifted to the prime minister's house, which saved Pakistan's entire military and political leadership," Mr. Malik said. "Perhaps the earlier information of the dinner was leaked to the militants, and therefore they hit the Marriott hotel."
The Marriott management said, however, that no such booking had been made. U.S. officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they weren't authorized to speak to journalists, were skeptical of Mr. Malik's assertion.
A recent wave of U.S. missile strikes in Pakistan's tribal area and a ground assault by U.S. commandos earlier this month have stoked a wave of anti-Americanism in the country, destabilizing the government.

Load-Date: September 23, 2008


End of Document