More Afghan fighting as U.S. says threat grows
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 25, 2006 Thursday
0 Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A
Length: 422 words
Dateline: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN; MANCHESTER, ENGLAND; WASHINGTON 
Body


KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN - Fighting in southern Afghan mountains killed at least 24 militants and five Afghan forces, while the U.S. military acknowledged Wednesday that the Taliban have grown in "strength and influence" in recent weeks.
The violence came after a week of some of the deadliest violence since the Taliban regime's ouster in 2001. As many as 336 people have died, mostly militants, according to Afghan and coalition figures.
The Afghan military commander for southern Afghanistan, Gen. Rehmatullah Raufi, said up to 60 rebels had died in the latest fighting in Uruzgan province, which involved ground forces and a U.S. airstrike. The U.S.-led coalition, however, said 24 militants had died.
The fighting erupted after militants hiding in a mountain compound in Tirin Kot district fired small-arms, rocket-propelled grenades and mortars at a joint Afghan-coalition patrol late Tuesday, according to two U.S. military statements.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military expressed regret for the deaths of a reported 16 civilian villagers Monday in U.S. airstrikes.
"We never wanted this to happen," Col. Thomas Collins, a U.S. military spokesman, told journalists in Kabul. "The ultimate cause of civilians being injured and killed was that the Taliban knowingly and willingly chose to occupy homes."
Britain makes 10 arrests in sweep targeting terrorism
MANCHESTER, England - Ten people were arrested Wednesday in a sweep targeting support for terrorism outside Britain, police said.
Police served warrants at a number of addresses before dawn in an operation involving about 500 officers, authorities said.
Greater Manchester police said three people were arrested under the Terrorism Act, five were arrested under immigration laws, and two others were released within hours.
Deputy secretary of state appears ready to resign
WASHINGTON - Robert B. Zoellick intends to resign as deputy secretary of state, the department's second in command, after barely 15 months in the job, the New York Times reported Wednesday, citing aides and associates.
From his first days at the State Department, Zoellick has chafed at his subordinate position, frequently remarking that he was finding the adjustment difficult after running his own office during four years as U.S. trade representative.
In addition, Zoellick had at times felt marginalized at the State Department, where his subordinates, including R. Nicholas Burns, an undersecretary of state, manage most of the major issues, including matters related to Iran, Iraq, North Korea and the Middle East.

Load-Date: May 26, 2006


End of Document