Morning Views
The New York Times Blogs 
(Op-Talk)
August 15, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 975 words
Byline: HANNA KOZLOWSKA
Highlight: Opinions on abusive police tactics in Ferguson, the U.S. strategy against ISIS, the &#8220;death tax&#8221; in Washington state, Saudi Arabia&#8217;s commitment to fighting terrorism and Airbnb in Canada. 
Body


After a "night that startled the nation with images of police overkill," higher authorities "wisely stepped into" Ferguson, Missouri, says an editorial in The New York Times. The St. Louis suburb was rocked by an incident last Saturday, when a police officer shot Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old. Residents held protests since the shooting, and were  "countered by aggressive street policing by officers outfitted in war gear who too often veered toward provocation more than protection." 
The local authorities have refused to identify the police officer who shot the teenager. "Residents have a right to know whether the officer has a record of reckless behavior," and whether the officer lives in the community. Missouri Governor Jay Nixon said the protesters should be given the right to demonstrate, and that Ferguson "would become known 'as a community that pulled together to overcome' violence." Bringing back a "sense of justice" will not be easy in the town where the majority of residents are black while the leadership is white, the editorial says. The authorities are warranted in responding "forcefully" to violence, but the "unyielding use of military tactics and abusive behavior" have widened the gap between them and the town's residents. "Once the tear gas has dissipated, Mr. Nixon and Mr. Obama have an obligation to ensure that a real dialogue begins in Ferguson and other racially segregated areas, in hopes of keeping armored vehicles off the streets of America."
Other significant viewpoints from around the world:
The limited U.S. military engagement in Iraq has achieved its goals thus far, the Washington Post says in an editorial. The ISIS siege of a mountainous area occupied by the Yazidis was broken Thursday and American airstrikes stopped the militants' march on Kurdistan. "The U.S. mission nevertheless remains both open-ended and lacking in clear strategic objectives," the editorial says. President Obama "gave no indication of a broader campaign to reduce the reach of the Islamic State." The limited character of United States' military action makes "little sense in the context of this extremist entity and the interconnected conflicts across the region." It is crucial to protect the Yazidis and the Kurds, but what about "the Syrians and Lebanese under threat of massacre by the Islamic State," the Washington Post asks. "The Islamic State cannot be defeated unless it is attacked" in both Iraq and in Syria. The United States should focus on defeating ISIS, but that should not be "contingent on a solution to Iraq's sectarian divisions, which are part of a broader regional conflict." The notion that "Iraqis will somehow solve these problems independently of Syria and with minimal U.S. support is a convenient but dangerous illusion."
After a last working family farm in Washington state's city of Issaquah had to be sold due to a high inheritance taxes, The Seattle Times writes about "the subtle ills" of the state's tax system in an editorial. The state's death tax "forces many farm families and business owners either to liquidate their assets, or go through enormous and costly gyrations to avoid it." The case of one family that couldn't afford to pay taxes associated with inheritance shows that "the death tax really isn't a whack on the wealthy," as they can "afford accountants and lawyers to preserve wealth for the next generation." The Seattle Times writes that Washington state's tax is "especially punitive" with a rate of up to 20 percent, on top of the federal 40 percent. A bill to repeal estate tax "already has enough signatures for passage in the U.S. House and deserves consideration." The state itself "might be a nice place to live, but if you are a business owner who wants to leave something for your heirs, it is a terrible place to die."
Many countries have repeatedly announced their commitment to fighting terrorism, but few have taken "as many tangible steps as Saudi Arabia, who Wednesday announced a $100 million donation to the U.N. to help it fight the growing threat," begins an editorial in Lebanon's The Daily Star. The Saudis have donated generously to the Lebanese army, the editorial says, and the "the U.N. gift shows that the kingdom is leading the fight against terrorism in the region, despite often coming under criticism for not doing enough." Saudi Arabia's effort should provide an example for other countries, The Daily Star says. "Terrorism knows no religion, and no creed, even though it might often claim to." Combating these threats requires a "cohesive approach" that involves a "myriad group of players." Terrorism cannot be "confronted through prayer or through statements," the editorial says.  "Governments across the globe must work together, and pool resources, to create an honest, transparent and focused anti-terrorism effort."
Airbnb is here to stay, and cities should deal with the new challenges it poses, The Montreal Gazette states in an editorial. These issues include tracking income earned through the service, raising awareness that "tenants who sublet their dwellings without the consent of their landlords are violating the rules in their leases." What is perhaps "the biggest issue for the general taxpayer," the editorial claims "is that Airbnb in Quebec does not currently collect any of the room or sales taxes that traditional hotels charge. It should." The Gazette cites the example of Portland, Oregon which recently negotiated a tax arrangement with the company. "The sharing economy - be it for room accommodation or taxi rides - is a game-changer that should not be wished, fined or legislated out of existence. But it must not be left to operate in black-market conditions." It's not about "strangling" newcomers with "bureaucratic red tape," but about "sharing a percentage" of such services with the "public purse."

Load-Date: August 15, 2014


End of Document