Morocco: Combating Terrorism With Opportunity
Inside Vandy: Vanderbilt University
May 15, 2013 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ONLINE FEATURES; Pg. 1
Length: 437 words
Body


-While some think of North Africa as a region of turmoil and unrest half a world away, one nation has emerged as a leader, demonstrating a commitment to cooperation and regional security that can ultimately benefit the interests of the U.S.
Morocco, under the leadership of King Mohammed VI, recently deepened its ties in Africa and underscored the country's commitment-and the king's personal dedication-to strong relationships among countries. Such relationships, it's believed, can sow the seeds of economic and social development and help to thwart the rise of radical ideologies and terrorism.
Resources and Health Care
For example, in Senegal, King Mohammed VI and President Macky Sall presided over the signing of agreements on mining, hydrocarbons, electricity and renewable energies as well as increasing cooperation on international transport of goods and persons. Together, they also dedicated the Mohammed VI ophthalmologic clinic and a medicine production plant to improve local health care.
Investment and Training
In Côte d'Ivoire, the King and President Alassane Ouattara chaired the signing of agreements that strengthen cooperation between the foreign ministries, promote and protect investments, encourage fisheries and aquaculture, support vocational training in tourism, and improve Moroccan-Ivorian disaster management.
Safety and Technology
In Gabon, King Mohammed VI and President Ali Bongo Ondimba chaired the signing of cooperation agreements, including an agreement by Morocco to help develop the National Gabonese Institute for Training, Health, and Social Action; another to work together on civil efforts to prevent and manage risks to public safety and the environment; an agreement for technical cooperation; and another establishing a framework for strategic partnership in information technology and systems.
All three presidents praised King Mohammed VI for his leadership in promoting democracy, economic and social development, and human rights in Morocco.
"Today," said the president of Gabon, "Morocco can rightfully boast to be giving to the world the image of an innovating and modern Kingdom where the will of the people is respected."
The African leaders also reaffirmed their countries' support for Morocco's autonomy plan for Western Sahara, which aims to resolve a three-decade-long dispute that threatens stability, much-needed economic cooperation, and security in the region and beyond.
This information is provided by Beckerman on behalf of the government of Morocco. Further information is available at the U.S. Department of Justice.
On the Net:North American Precis Syndicate, Inc.

Load-Date: January 18, 2018


End of Document