MOROCCO REPORTEDLY FOILS SYNAGOGUE ATTACK
The New York Times
September 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 649 words
Byline: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27
Body


Morocco recently arrested a team of Palestinian terrorists who were preparing to bomb a synagogue in Casablanca on the Jewish New Year next weekend, according to Administration officials.
The officials said neither the affiliations nor the goals of the team were known. They cautioned against linking the incident with any of a recent series of terrorist attacks against Jewish or Western targets.
''We don't know how this fits in, or whether it fits in at all,'' an Administration official said.
Moroccan security forces have been on alert since July, when King Hassan II met Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel in the Moroccan resort of Ifrane. In August the Moroccan Government arrested four Arabs - a Palestinian, two Tunisians and a Lebanese Palestinian - on terrorism charges.
Administration officials said the latest arrests was made in the last week.
Details about the arrest were sketchy. According to Administration officials, the Palestinians were carrying explosives and a plan for one of the synagogues in Casablanca.
Officials said it appeared that the assualt was being planned for next Saturday, when members of the congregation would have gathered to celebrate Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year and one of the holiest days on the Jewish calendar.
Ahmed Bourzaim, a counselor at the Moroccan Embassy here, said he was not aware of the arrests. He said, however, that his country had been bracing for possible terrorist attacks since King Hassan and Mr. Peres met.
Morocco has begun demanding that visitors from some Arab countries obtain visas before they arrive. ''We are trying to protect ourselves as best we can,'' Mr. Bourzaim said.
There has been open talk in the Arab world of reprisals against King Hassan for taking part in any talks with the Israelis. The Syrian daily Al Baath, for example, warned that the King would be punished for his actions.
Mr. Bourzaim said 15,000 to 20,000 Jews live in Morocco, most of them in Casablanca, a city of three million people. Although many Moroccan Jews have emigrated to Israel, the country's Jewish population is nonetheless viewed as the largest and most influential in the Arab world.
In recent Moroccan history, Jews have been well treated, and Jewish old-age homes, clubs, synagogues and schools continue to flourish. Some are underwritten by the Government.
Early in World War II, when Morocco was officially loyal to the Vichy Government of France, King Hassan's father, Mohammed V, did not allow Jews to be deported to concentration camps.
The planned attack against the synagogue comes less than a month after two gunmen attacked a synagogue in Istanbul with machine guns and grenades during a sabbath service.
Administration officials who monitor terrorism said the attack on Sept. 6, which left 21 worshipers and 2 gunmen dead, had been carefully planned. Israeli and American officials said there were indications that the operation was carried out by forces linked to Abu Nidal, a Palestinian who broke away from Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. His real name is Sabry al-Banna. Neil C. Livingstone, president of the Institute on Terrorism and Sub-National Conflict, said the Istanbul attack suggested a trend toward terrorism against unguarded targets like synagogues.
''The bad guys are going after soft targets,'' he said. ''A synagogue is a soft target. You can't turn it into an armed camp, particularly in an Arab country.''
Also in early September, armed gunmen seized a Pan American World Airways flight in Karachi, Pakistan, and took the passengers hostage. The incident ended with the hijackers killing 21 and wounding scores.
American officials, including Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, have said there is evidence that Abu Nidal was involved in this attack as well. But Administration officials say Pakistan has also been slow to provide information that would confirm this.


End of Document