MOROCCO TRIES FRENCHMAN ON TERRORISM CHARGES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 18, 2003 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 473 words
Byline: ELAINE SCIOLINO, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: PARIS
Body


To prosecutors in Morocco, Pierre Richard Antoine Robert is the leader of a dangerous Islamist group and should be put to death for plotting terrorist acts against the state.
 To his lawyers, he is a young, hapless Frenchman, the victim of a deeply flawed judicial system, guilty of nothing more than converting to Islam and eking out a living selling used cars from his home in Tangiers.
 In any case, a verdict is expected today for the 31-year-old "emir with the blue eyes," as he has been labeled by the Moroccan and French press, along with four Moroccan defendants. They have been given sweeping, swift trials as part of a major Moroccan offensive after the terrorist attacks in Casablanca in May that killed 45 people, including 12 Moroccan suicide bombers.
Robert is being tried not for involvement in the May attacks but, like his co-defendants, on charges of preparing terrorist acts against commercial and tourist installations and plotting the overthrow of the Moroccan monarchy. If convicted, he could be sentenced to death.
 French intelligence officials largely embrace the Moroccan line, even though France, which opposes the death penalty, would be required to oppose the sentence officially.
 They call Robert, who is also known as Abou Abderrahmane, a small-time crook and compulsive liar who headed a group of Islamic militants that trained in the woods near Tangiers for possible terrorist operations. Moroccan newspapers, citing unnamed officials, said he and his accomplices were looking at a variety of targets, including dams and bridges.
 During his trial, Robert, the product of a middle-class family from Saint-Etienne in the Rhone Valley, contended that he had worked for both the Directorate for Territorial Surveillance, France's counterintelligence service, and the General Directorate for External Security, the French equivalent of the Central Intelligence Agency. French authorities have denied his claims.
 "In my department, I am absolutely sure, we have never worked with this boy," Pierre de Bousquet, director of the counterintelligence agency, said in an interview. De Bousquet described Robert as "a small-time thug" but theorized that even a small-time thug could win followers.
 By contrast, Vincent Courcelle-Labrousse, Robert's French attorney, insists that prosecutors have not proved their case.
 "They didn't find any arms or documents, and they didn't present any material proof, only the testimony of others," Labrousse said in a phone interview. "When you see who Pierre Robert is, you have to ask whether he could possibly be the head of a terrorist network. He doesn't have the air of a tough guy." He called his client "an emir without troops."
 During his testimony, Robert maintained that he had been tortured and raped by his jailers, and signed whatever was put in front of him as a result.

Load-Date: September 18, 2003


End of Document