MOROCCAN CALLS ARAB PLAN A MOVE TO 'NONBELLIGERENCY'
The New York Times
September 11, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 966 words
Byline: By WILLIAM E. FARRELL, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: FEZ, Morocco, Sept. 10
Body


King Hassan II of Morocco said today that the Arab League peace plan adopted here Thursday night represented a first step by the Arab world toward reaching a state of ''nonbelligerency'' with Israel.
The Moroccan leader, who was host of the four-day conference of Arab leaders, fell short of acknowledging Israel's right to exist as a state. But his remarks at an hourlong news conference in his summer palace here reflected the tacit admission of the existence of the Israeli state that proponents of the Arab League plan assert is contained in it.
A crucial part of the eight-point Arab League proposal calls on the United Nations Security Council to guarantee peace ''among all states of the region.''
FEZ, Morocco, Sept. 10 - King Hassan II of Morocco said today that the Arab League peace plan adopted here Thursday night represented a first step by the Arab world toward reaching a state of ''nonbelligerency'' with Israel.
Asked whether this point represented Arab recognition of Israel, the King replied that the Arab leaders were engaged in a two-step process: first, reaching a state of nonbelligerency with Israel, with a second step, normalization of relations and diplomatic ties, far off in the future.
 
Israel 'Before 1967'
''For the time being, we have given ourselves the task of reaching a state of nonbelligerency,'' King Hassan said. ''If we reach this result, we will have made an enormous step forward'' toward achieving a Middle East peace.
''To be sure, I am talking about Israel in its territory before 1967,'' the King said, referring to the demand in the Arab League plan that Israel give up control of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, all of which were captured in the 1967 war.
Viewed within the complex welter of Arab national differences and attitudes, the plan was described by some Arab analysts as having a positive historical dimension. They noted that it was the first time that the Arabs in a unified way had sought something other than a military option to resolve the Middle East crisis.
When the conference convened, many delegates and analysts expected its final statement to contain some harsh words about the United States because of its continued support of Israel in the wake of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon.
But the statement contained no such chiding, and reports circulated here today that there were officials in Washington who had expected a rap on the knuckles and who were unexpectedly pleased at that development.
 
Hassan Predicts New Terrorism
At his news conference today, King Hassan did have harsh words about the Israeli invasion itself, saying the rout of the Palestine Liberation Organization from Beirut would spawn a new generation of terrorism.
''Israel has killed the souls of thousands of children,'' he said, ''and we will unfortunately pay in the 1990's for what Israel has done.''
''I foresee in the 1990's an outburst of blind terrorism without limits or ideology because no one stopped the genocide which Lebanon and the Palestinians suffered,'' the King said. ''I fear that the war in Lebanon will give birth to a blind youth.''
''It is for this reason that I launch an appeal, even to Israel, to tell her that the Arab world without renouncing its rights'' had decided ''to open a new page of history,'' he said.
 
'An Immense Step'
The King called the proposal put together by all but two of the often-f@euding elements in the 22-member Arab League, which includes the P.L.O., an ''immense step.'' Libya boycotted the Fez conference; Egypt was suspended from the league because of its peace treaty with Egypt. 
Asked whether the Arab League resolution would make it easier to talk with the Reagan Administration, which has put forward a milder peace plan already rejected by Israel, King Hassan said, ''Absolutely.'' He said he hoped that the plan would be ''a bridge between the Arab world and the United States'' and that a ''dialogue will begin between the two.''
He said that seven leaders of the Arab League, including Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the P.L.O., would undertake a series of missions to Washington and to European capitals to promote the plan.
In response to a question about whether it was feasible for Mr.  Arafat to go to Washington since the Administration has refused to recognize the P.L.O., the King said it was not necessary for all seven leaders to be part of each mission. He said this topic had been discussed at the conference.
 
'Other Means of Pressure'
The King was asked if the Arab nations in the league planned any economic sanctions, presumably oil boycotts, if the United States rejected the Arab plan out of hand. ''I think we have other means of pressure than economic blackmail,'' he replied.
The members reportedly on the committee to promote the plan abroad are Saudi Arabia, Syria, Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia, the P.L.O. and Chedli Klibi, the Secretary General of the Arab League.
A number of bitterly feuding Arab leaders gathered for the meeting here and a great show of amity was made, although there are those who doubt it was much more than cosmetic given the intense rivalries and clashes between countries such as Syria and Iraq.
King Hassan said it had been agreed that two foes, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, would meet within the next two months in the presence of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia in an effort to settle their deep differences. The two Arab leaders made news here when they ate publicly together at a lavish pageant staged by King Hassan to entertain the Arab leaders.
At the news conference in a glittering salon scented with fresh flowers from the many gardens on the palace grounds, the King, dressed in a blue-gray business suit, spoke softly and puffed on a cigarette as he fielded questions in Arabic, English and French.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of King Hassan II


End of Document