MOSCOW IS IGNORING SOUTH AFRICA REPORT OF CAPTURED RUSSIAN
The New York Times
September 2, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 423 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MOSCOW, Sept. 1
Body


South Africa's statement that its forces have killed and captured Soviet soldiers in Angola drew no immediate reaction from Moscow today, but Soviet press organizations maintained their sharp criticism of the raid and also of the United States for supporting what they called ''international banditry.''
Moscow has never officially acknowledged sending military advisers to Angola, and Western diplomats said the number of Soviet advisers there was probably fairly low. Moscow has only referred to ''assistance'' given by the Soviet Union and Cuba to various African countries and guerrilla movements without mentioning troops or arms.
South Africa's statement that its forces killed and captured Soviet soldiers in Angola draws no immediate reaction from USSR
In its dispatches criticizing the United States for vetoing a United Nations Security Council resolution yesterday that denounced the South African raid, Tass ignored the American arguments that Cuban troops and Soviet advisers were also to be blamed for fomenting insecurity in Angola. The Sov iet reports focused instead ondepicting the United States as a military and political ally of South Africa, as a ''proponent of international banditry and terrorism and an inspirer of aggression.''
 
U.S. Support Called Crucial
 
Soviet commentaries repeated an argument th at South Africa would not have risked the raid ''had it not been ce rtain that its aggressive plans would be supported by the fo rces of imperialism and racism, above all by the Administration of th e United States.''
Since the South African raid into Angola began last week, Soviet news outlets have carried extensive reports of official Angolan versions of the fighting, rejecting all South African reports of withdrawal as lies. Today's Tass dispatch accused the South Africans of using chemical weapons and of pursuing ''scorched-earth'' tactics by heavy bombings of Angolan villages.
Some of the sharpest language, however, has been aimed at the United States for vetoing the Security Council resolution.
 
'Aggravating War Psychosis'
''The actions of the Pretoria authorities are a result of the allround support from the U.S. Administration, which is aggravating war psychosis throughout the world and encouraging international terrorism,'' Tass said.
The Soviet Union's bonds with Angola were formalized in a 20-year friendship treaty signed in 1976, but it offers no pledge of Soviet military assistance in the event of war. So far, the Soviet press has printed nothing to suggest a direct warning to South Africa.


End of Document