MOSCOW BLAST REIGNITES TERRORISM FEARS WHILE PUTIN URGED CAUTION IN AFFIXING BLAME, HE SPOKE OF AN "ENCLAVE OF TERRORISM," MEANING CHECHEN REBELS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 10, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION


Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 592 words
Byline: Dave Montgomery, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


Muscovites said yesterday that they feared Tuesday's deadly bomb explosion might signal the start of another terror campaign, like the series of bombings a year ago that killed 300 people and created near-panic in Moscow.
Several Russian officials blamed Chechen terrorists for the blast in a crowded underground walkway in downtown Moscow, but Russian President Vladimir V. Putin said it would be wrong to "brand a whole people" for the act.
Authorities said the explosion Tuesday under Pushkin Square, less than a mile from the Kremlin, killed seven people and injured 93, including two Americans of Russian descent and three children. Russian news agencies earlier had reported that an eighth victim had died, but the Health Ministry said the report was a mistake.
Putin urged Russians to remain calm, saying "hysteria and disorganization [would be] the best gift for terrorists."
Although Putin urged caution about blaming Chechens for the blast, he said Russia had "allowed an entire enclave of terrorism inside this country," an obvious reference to the breakaway republic of Chechnya, where rebels are fighting for independence from Russia. "The state will not let them go unpunished," he said in a Kremlin meeting that was aired on nationwide TV.
Experts said renewed terrorism in Russia could prompt Putin to abandon efforts to negotiate a settlement in Chechnya and instead escalate Moscow's 11-month-old effort to crush the separatists.
Some Russians said in sidewalk interviews that it would be wrong to blame Chechens without adequate evidence. Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov has denied Chechen involvement in the blast.
Recent polls show that more Russians are growing weary of the war as Russian casualties mount. On Tuesday, a remote-controlled bomb killed two Russian policemen in Chechnya, and at least nine Russian checkpoints came under rebel attack.
Nikolai Patrushev, head of the Federal Security Service, or FSB, the main successor agency of the KGB, called the Moscow explosion a "terrorist act." Without giving details, he said investigators disrupted 11 similar attacks last month in the Russian republics of Chechnya and Dagestan and the cities of Volgograd, Nizhni Novgorod and Tula.
"International terrorists and illegal armed-formations are still active in Chechnya," he said, echoing the Kremlin's claim that militant Islamic groups are aiding the Chechens. "They have opted for the tactics of subversive and terrorist acts."
In the central Russia city of Saratov, FSB agents arrested three Chechens suspected of plotting an attack similar to that in Moscow, the Interfax news agency reported. Investigators confiscated 7 ounces of plastic explosive, an electric primer, a portable army radio, and a Makarov pistol.
Interfax also reported that a bag containing TNT was found yesterday in a lost-luggage section of Moscow's Kazansky railway station. Officials at a major Moscow bank evacuated the building after a bomb scare.
Police inspected cars and trucks entering the city yesterday and increased patrols of subway terminals. Earlier in the day, they questioned and then cleared two men who they said were from the north Caucasus region, which includes Chechnya. People across the city volunteered for sentry duty at their apartment buildings.
"I was badly shaken, and of course, I mourn those who were killed," said Nelya Burnova, a teacher and free-lance journalist. "Unfortunately, I think there will be other attacks. We all have to pull ourselves together and be very attentive."
Dave Montgomery's e-mail address is dmontgomery

Graphic

 
rwashington.com

Load-Date: February 4, 2002


End of Document