Mosques in Turkey told to condemn terrorism
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
November 24, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 341 words
Byline: PAMELA SAMPSON, Associated Press writer
Body


ISTANBUL, Turkey -- The Turkish government on Sunday ordered the nation's mosques to deliver an anti-terrorism message as authorities pieced together evidence to determine who was behind a string of suicide bombings that killed 57 people and wounded hundreds more.
The Directorate for Religious Affairs, which controls all mosques in Turkey, said the anti-terrorism sermon should be preached today, the first day of a three-day Muslim holiday marking the end of Ramadan.
"Terrorism, violence and anarchy have nothing to do with Islam," the sermon reads. "Our duty is to love one another, and to live like brothers in unity."
Separately, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan suggested the attacks occurred in Turkey because the nation is a democracy with strong ties to the West.
"It is meaningful that Turkey was targeted," Erdogan told the British Broadcasting Corp. "Turkey is a model country that has merged the culture of Islam and democracy together."
The prime minister linked his country's efforts to join the European Union with the fight against international terror, suggesting it would improve the image of the West among Muslims while aiding global law enforcement.
"Terrorism has an international, a global structure and the fight against it should also be global and we must do it all together," he said.
Erdogan also said officials have not yet confirmed al-Qaida's participation in the attacks, but believe the orders for the attacks came from abroad. "Unfortunately, four Turkish citizens have been used in this incident as part of this group, which has international connections," he said.
Three groups with purported al-Qaida links have claimed responsibility for the bombings Thursday at the British Consulate and a London-based bank, which killed 30 victims and the two bombers. On Nov. 15, attacks on two synagogues killed 23 victims and the two bombers.
Police and government officials have been reluctant to confirm reports of the investigation, saying leaks to the media after the synagogue attacks hampered the capture of suspects.

Graphic

 
Hundreds of Turks holding their national flags chant slogans Sunday as they protest the terrorist attacks during a demonstration in Erzurum, eastern Turkey.

Load-Date: November 24, 2003


End of Document