Mosque members: No signs of extremism; Alexandria-area mosque cooperated with authorities
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
December 12, 2009 Saturday
Final Edition


Copyright 2009 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-04
Length: 444 words
Dateline: ALEXANDRIA 
Body


 The five young Americans detained in Pakistan as part of a terrorism investigation were wholesome kids who never exhibited signs of religious extremism, according to the youth director at a mosque where they worshipped.
 "I never observed any extreme behavior with them," said Mustafa Abu Maryam, who served as a volunteer youth director at the Islamic Circle of North America's small chapter mosque in a residential neighborhood a few miles south of the Capital Beltway.
 "I hope all of this is not true, and that this is not what it seems to be," said Abu Maryam, who spoke yesterday at a news conference after the mosque's midday prayer services. "I never became suspicious that they were planning to harm anyone."
 The men's families, all of whom are among the mosque's membership of 60 to 80 families, reported them missing Dec. 1. Pakistani officials took the men into custody Monday and said they acknowledged trying to connect with militant groups there. The State Department says it is not yet clear whether the men have broken any Pakistani or U.S. laws.
 FBI agents have questioned some of the five as U.S. investigators gather evidence that could lead to a conspiracy charge against them, an American official and another person familiar with the case said yesterday.
 Abu Maryam said youth activities at the mosque focused on keeping kids busy through sports and other activities. Religious discussions centered on basic issues, such as prayer and fasting.
 "Our group discussions never talked about politics... never talked about fighting against anyone," he said.
 Dr. Essam Tellawi, a gastroenterologist who gave yesterday's sermons, said in an interview that the men attended colleges in Washington, Richmond and northern Virginia, including George Mason University in Fairfax. One was a dental student at Howard University in Washington.
 Mosque leaders said they teach a moderate form of Islam. Relatives became alarmed when the men disappeared and they discovered a video that a national Muslim leader who viewed it described as a disturbing farewell message. The families contacted authorities at the mosque's urging.
 "This is our country. We respect the laws of this country," Tellawi said. "We have been very cooperative with the law-enforcement community."
 Mahdi Bray, a spokesman for the Muslim American Society Freedom Foundation, said the cooperation has paid off. While Bray has been critical of other federal terrorism investigations, he said in this case the FBI had not jumped to conclusions.
 "It has been handled in a very respectful way," Bray said. "It could have been infinitely worse" if the families and the mosque had not come forward.

Notes

FIVE AMERICAN MUSLIMS DETAINED

Graphic

 
PHOTOS

Load-Date: February 27, 2010


End of Document