Most Clinton critics support assault on terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 21, 1998, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; U.S. TARGETS TERROR; Pg. 10A
Length: 553 words
Byline: KATHERINE PFLEGER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Most of President Clinton's harshest critics retreated, even for a little  while, on Thursday to endorse his decision to attack terrorist training camps  in Sudan and Afghanistan.
Rep. Bill McCollum, a Longwood area Republican who has criticized Clinton's  statements on the Monica Lewinsky matter, said the president responded  appropriately to information about terrorist activity that the United States  has had for several years.
As for the proximity of the strikes, which could boost the president's  public image, to his statement concerning his liaisons with Lewinsky, McCollum  called the timing coincidental. "I don't put any stock in it."
CONGRESSREAX
Rep. C.W. Bill Young, an Indian Rocks Beach Republican who has been  generally silent on the Lewinsky situation, said he believed the strikes were  long overdue.
"I really am tired of seeing Americans come home in coffins from some  vicious terrorist activity," said Young, a member of the House Select  Intelligence Committee. "It's time the anti-American terrorists understand  that we are not going to take it any longer."
Though Young and Select Intelligence Committee Chairman Porter Goss,  R-Sanibel, conceded that terrorists could retaliate for the bombings, both  Florida lawmakers agreed that Osama bin Laden, whose campuses for terrorism  were targeted Thursday, had plans in the works to harm Americans.
"I hope this is not going to be a one-shot deal," Goss said. "This is a  war. . . . We have a lot further to go. The terrorists have raised the ante."
Republicans in Florida and around the country agreed.
"This was the right thing to do at the right time," House Speaker Newt  Gingrich, R-Ga., told reporters. "It's very important that we sent the signal  to countries like Sudan and Afghanistan that if you house a terrorist, you  become a target."
Even so, a handful of Republicans were quick to question why the unilateral  action happened three days after the president's grand jury testimony,  particularly if the United States has known about these groups for years.
Sen. Dan Coats, R-Indiana, suggested all of the president's actions are  suspect.
"The president in his statement indicated that these were groups that had  attacked Americans before, so then why did we wait until now to do  something?" he said. "Once the president has broken the bond of trust with  the American people . . . it raises questions about everything he does or does  not do."
Rep. Joe Scarborough, R-Pensacola, who sits on the National Security  Committee, thought some "disturbing questions" about the timing of the  strikes "must be answered," spokesman Rick Finch said.
Rep. Bob Ney, R-Ohio, said that alone made it unlikely.
"The White House had to know this would be speculated on," Ney said. "I  don't think the president would be foolish enough to do a Wag the Dog."
Rep. Jim Davis, D-Tampa, a member of the House International Relations  Committee, said he wasn't surprised by the commander-in-chief's decision. In  the past year or so, he said, the committee has discussed ways of mounting  more effective counterstrikes against terrorists.
Florida Republican Sen. Connie Mack issued a general statement in support  of the airstrikes.  - Times staff writer Richard Danielson contributed to this report, which also  includes information from the Associated Press.

Load-Date: August 21, 1998


End of Document