MOST FBI ANTI-TERRORISM CASES AREN'T PROSECUTED, RECORDS SHOW;
 SENATORS SEEK EXPLANATION FROM BUREAU, ASHCROFT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 17, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 512 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The FBI has been seeking prosecution of international terrorism cases at six times the rate that it did before Sept. 11, but more than half of those cases considered by federal prosecutors never made it to court, Justice Department records show.
In the year before the attacks on New York and Washington, FBI agents sent 10 international terrorism cases a month to U.S. attorneys for prosecution, according to the records obtained by Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse. In the first six months after the attacks, they sent 59 a month.
The records reflect the intense FBI focus on anti-terrorism investigations after Sept. 11. But they also show that prosecutors declined to file charges in 60 of the 98 FBI anti-terrorism cases they considered from last October through March. The prosecutors did not reach a decision during the period on all of the more than 350 cases referred to them.
In half the cases not prosecuted, U.S. attorneys said there was a "lack of evidence of criminal intent" or no evidence that a federal crime had been committed.
Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, say they are troubled by both the high rate of declined prosecutions and the reasons that prosecutors cite for not pursuing the cases.
The lawmakers asked Attorney General John Ashcroft and FBI Director Robert Mueller in a letter Friday to explain why so many FBI terrorism referrals are not being prosecuted.
FBI officials say the referral of a case to a U.S. attorney is not the equivalent of an FBI recommendation for prosecution. In anti-terrorism cases in particular, the officials said, much of the effort to prevent terrorist attacks does not result in prosecutions.
Bill Carter, an FBI spokesman, said the exhaustive investigative effort to unravel the Sept. 11 plot may have contributed to the large number of international terrorism referrals that federal prosecutors chose not to pursue.
"Did we open cases that went down blind holes? Probably," Carter said in an interview. "But I don't have any direct knowledge of that."
Despite assertions by Ashcroft and Mueller that the FBI was focusing more on terrorism prevention, the records show that bank robberies, drug violations and bank frauds accounted for more than a third of all FBI referrals in the first six months after Sept. 11. That is roughly the same level as in the previous five years.
Leahy and Grassley said in their letter that the FBI's continuing focus on bank robberies, drug violations and bank fraud raises "troubling questions about whether the FBI and Department of Justice are devoting sufficient resources to counterterrorism efforts."
They asked the FBI and Justice Department to provide a detailed breakdown of their bank robbery and drug enforcement cases since Sept. 11.
The Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse obtained the records after winning a two-court battle with the Justice Department over the Freedom of Information Act. The records come from internal administrative data on criminal and civil cases.

Load-Date: June 17, 2002


End of Document