MOTHER TESTIFIES IN SON'S DOMESTIC TERRORISM TRIAL
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 24, 1997, Wednesday


Copyright 1997 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: B section; Pg. 5
Length: 534 words
Byline: By JOHN K. WILEY ; Associated Press writer
Body


SPOKANE, Wash. -- Prosecutors have used relatives to implicate a Sandpoint, Idaho, man on federal bombing and bank robbery charges.
The mother of Brian Ratigan testified Tuesday that her son was "at war" with the government and had warned her not to cooperate with authorities. Ratigan's father-in-law also was called to the stand.
Ratigan, 38, is being tried for conspiracy, destruction of a building, armed bank robbery and use of a firearm in a crime of violence. Conviction on the bombing and bank robbery charges carries a penalty of mandatory life imprisonment.
Jane Tillotson of Cohoes, N.Y., told jurors she handed her son's letters over to FBI agents and agreed to testify for the government "because I was asked to and thought I should."
"He was at war, fighting Yahweh's war or something," Tillotson said when asked to explain the contents of letters her son wrote from the Spokane County Jail. She admitted being "very uncomfortable" about testifying. Ratigan's father-in-law, Gene Lovasco of Fenton, Mo., testified that his daughter and her husband visited him in August 1996 for the first time in 10 years and took their children to the Six Flags theme park.The prosecution called Lovasco to buttress its claims that Ratigan, who was unemployed, somehow had enough money for a cross-country trip and visit to an expensive amusement park.
Prosecutors allege Ratigan was the fourth man who participated in the pipe bombing of a Spokane Valley Planned Parenthood clinic and subsequent armed robbery of a nearby U.S. Bank branch on July 12, 1996.
Three other Sandpoint, Idaho, men -- Verne Jay Merrell, Robert Berry and Charles Barbee -- were convicted earlier this year of more than a dozen felonies stemming from pipe bombings and bank robberies in April and July 1996.
Tillotson said her son's letters from the jail expressed anger at his family and the FBI. "He was just an angry person," she said, noting Ratigan felt "Yahweh would stand by him."
Ratigan is a devotee of Christian Identity, a theology that says northern Europeans are the true Israelites of the Old Testament. The government contends Ratigan was a Phineas priest, a secretive order of white separatists opposed to homosexuality and mixed-raced unions.
Several anti-Semitic passages and a line referring to patriot militias were blacked out in copies of the letter given to the jury because they were considered too inflammatory."Mom, the only thing that is stopping the New World Order from total completion is the Israelites and Christians of the free world," Ratigan wrote in a June 6, 1997, letter that also warned his mother not to cooperate with investigators and offered tips on testimony to avoid incriminating him or herself.
In the letter shown to jurors, Ratigan claimed the government was trying to frame him for the crimes because of his unorthodox religious beliefs.
"That's why,anyone who tries to expose the evil and treasonous acts of our Babylonian Baal government, will be murdered or silenced or imprisoned," Ratigan wrote.
"Being an criminal is a matter of perspective," Ratigan wrote. "If you live by God's laws and ways, you will be an criminal to man. If you live by man's ways and laws, you are an criminal to God,"

Load-Date: September 24, 1997


End of Document