Mountain State Britons take terrorism in stride
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 8, 2005, Friday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A
Length: 649 words
Byline: Christine Simmons
Body


Related stories, 1A
csimmons@wvgazette.com  
Hurricane resident Brendan Murphy was horrified early Thursday when he heard his native country had been attacked by terrorists.
"My first reaction was to pick up the phone and see if everyone is OK," said 33-year-old Murphy, who still has many relatives and friends in the London area. "I was very concerned."
He soon learned that everyone he knew in London was safe. After that, his reaction to the attacks seemed to mirror several West Virginia residents who used to live in the British capital.
"Terrorism is something that's been around for a while. It's kind of been expected a long time in London," Murphy said. "It's a horrible thing, but you just got to deal with it and go on."
Murphy was confident the attacks wouldn't pull down England's spirits, as was Paul Saville. The retired doctor and London native lives on Capitol Street, where he and his wife, Ann, own Taylor Books.
"Things will carry on as they did before. This is truly minor coming from London," said Savillle, referring to World War II air raids. "Everything will settle down. It's not a matter of hope, it's [a] matter of certainty."
Maury Reishman, owner of Around the World Travel in Charleston, said nobody has called her travel agency canceling plans to visit the United Kingdom.
She said terrorist attacks don't seem to frighten people as much as they did a few years ago.
"I think, after 9/11, it's just the times we live in now," she said. "People are just booking and doing what they normally do."
Charleston resident Brian Glasser has plans to visit London in early August, and Thursday's terrorist attack has "not in the least" influenced him to sell his tickets.
"The odds of being hurt are slim," he said. "And the benefit of terrorists is immense if everybody decided not to go."
Brian's brother, Michael, and Michael's fiancee, Jennifer Fahey, are on vacation in London. The two are safe, but experiencing a frenzied environment, Brian Glasser said.
"[Jennifer] said it's just chaotic," he said.
Sean Collins, a Marshall University student, sensed the excitement 87 miles away at Oxford University.
"I heard about the attack by word of mouth on my way to class this morning . . . and it seemed that everyone knew more about the incident than I did," he wrote in an e-mail. "Everyone was anxiously checking the Internet for the latest information."
Dr. Patrick Conner, head of the West Virginia University Press, is in London researching a book. He was walking to a library near the bus that was destroyed, according to WVU.
"Lots of people walking very fast on sidewalk and road between King's X and Euston . . . I remember thinking, can that many people be late for work?" he wrote.
Conner only learned what caused the frenzy after he checked Internet news in the library, where he was told to stay.
"The library people told us not to leave. So I sit here," he wrote during the lockdown.
"The number is now 37 confirmed dead, and they expect more to die in the hospital. That is indeed tragic. But London is still going on. As we left the Library, we noted that a nearby pub was open . . ."
Like Murphy and Saville, Collins said the British remain positive.
"After receiving the Olympic bid for 2012, London was full of enthusiasm, and only some of it seemed to die down with today's tragedy," he wrote. "Most of the reports of those in London say they are defiant and want to show whoever is responsible for the attack that this incident did not shut down the city."
Collins is one of nine Marshall University students studying in Britain through the Yeager Scholars program. All of them are "safe and sound," said Bill Bissett, spokesman at Marshall's South Charleston campus.
All 10 students from West Virginia University studying in London this summer are safe, too, according to WVU spokeswoman Janey Cink.
To contact staff writer Christine Simmons, use e-mail or call 348-5100.

Load-Date: July 9, 2005


End of Document