Mountaineer's mission: Build schools for peace; His 'Three Cups of Tea' tells how
USA TODAY
December 20, 2007 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. 1D
Length: 449 words
Byline: Bob Minzesheimer
Body


A surprise best seller this season is a non-fiction book, set in Pakistan and Afghanistan, that was published 21 months ago to limited notice.
Three Cups of Tea by Greg Mortenson and David Oliver Relin  has climbed the lists, thanks to word-of-mouth recommendations and a tireless author with an inspiring story.
Tea describes how Mortenson, an American mountaineer, found a new cause: building schools, mostly elementary and especially for girls, in 1993 during a failed attempt to climb the K2 peak on Pakistan's border.
In a Pakistani village, the former U.S. Army medic met children without paper or pencils. He promised to build them a school.
His book, written with Relin, a journalist, describes how he did that and more in the belief that "education can overcome the despot leaders, dictators and clergy who use illiteracy to control impoverished society."
The non-profit foundation (ikat.org) he started in his hometown of Bozeman, Mont., has contributed to the construction of 58 schools in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Via e-mail on his way to Pakistan, Mortenson, 49, says he pushed to have the book's subtitle changed. In hardcover, it was One Man's Mission to Fight Terrorism ... One School at a Time. In paperback, it was revised to One Man's Mission to Promote Peace.
"The public is interested in peace, just as much as fighting terrorism," he says. "So far, no politician seems to have their finger on that pulse."
In hardcover, the book rose no higher than No. 164 on USA TODAY's Best-Selling Books list, then quickly fell off. In paperback, it hit No. 73 in March and is now No. 24. Publisher Penguin reports 1.1 million copies in paperback.
His publisher credits the author's personal appeal: He has visited 123 cities to promote the book and his foundation.
"What championed the book were women's groups, book clubs and independent stores," Mortenson says.
After he visited Bodine High School in Philadelphia, teacher Cecilia Ramirez said, "I have honestly never received so much positive feedback from students."
Mortenson is planning a sequel, but first, "I'm negotiating with my wife on a way to strike more balance in our lives. ... For the last 14 years, I've been gone from home about half the year and missed many precious moments parents cherish." (Their children are 11 and 7.)
He says he has been approached by Hollywood for the film rights but so far isn't interested. Producers seem to have "little integrity and genuine sincerity to make a film that would strive to show that we want to promote peace, rather than fight terrorism." He says he has received death threats from mullahs and post-9/11 hate mail from Americans, and he doesn't "need Hollywood to contribute to that." 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color
PHOTO, Color, Penguin

Load-Date: February 13, 2008


End of Document