MOURNERS RAGE AT ISRAELI SETTLER'S FUNERAL SETTLERS VOWED TO BAR ARAB CARS IN RETALIATION. NO OFFICIAL SANCTIONS WERE PLANNED, HOWEVER.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 21, 1994 Monday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A10
Length: 278 words
Byline: Jeffrey Heller, REUTERS
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Hundreds of mourners chanted "Death to Arabs" at the funeral of a pregnant Israeli settler killed by guerrillas, but leaders shied away yesterday from tough action at a time of sensitive talks with the PLO.
An Israeli cabinet minister announced that he expected the PLO's chairman, Yasir Arafat, would take up residence in May in Jericho, the West Bank city slated to come under Palestinian self-rule.
Police detoured cars bearing numbered plates issued to Arabs in the occupied lands around the southern Israeli town of Ashkelon, where the funeral of the slain settler, Zippora Sasson, was held.
Jewish settlers said they would bar Arab vehicles from traveling for two hours this morning. A settler statement said: "If Israeli vehicles can't travel the roads safely, Arab vehicles will not be allowed to travel either."
Environment Minister Yossi Sarid, speaking a day after Palestinians in the West Bank had killed Sasson, 30, as she traveled in a car, said Israel expected Arafat and a new Palestinian police force to keep peace when self- rule began.
"I hope very much that Arafat understands this well - that if he and his people do not bring down the level of terrorism, terrorism will bring them down," Sarid told reporters after the weekly Israeli cabinet meeting.
"According to the current progress in the negotiations with the Palestinians . . . it can be estimated - it is my estimate at least - that Yasir Arafat will arrive in Jericho and establish residence there at the end of May," Sarid said.
Arafat is not known to have set foot in the occupied territories since early 1968, when the Israeli army cracked down on his Fatah movement and activists fled to Jordan.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document