Mourners of Slain Spanish Politician Protest Basque Terrorism
The New York Times
August 31, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 557 words
Byline: Agence France-Presse 
Dateline: MADRID, Aug. 30
Body


Shouts of "Justice! Justice!" greeted Spain's prime minister, Jose Maria Aznar, as he led mourners today at the funeral of a young politician, the latest victim of Basque terrorism.
Angry mourners also held up placards denouncing the Basque separatist guerrilla group, E.T.A., as Mr. Aznar and Interior Minister Jaime Mayor Oreja arrived at the funeral of Manuel Indiano Azaustrea, a 29-year-old Basque councilor gunned down on Tuesday in an attack that the police attributed to the rebels.
Mr. Aznar was joined by leading politicians from all parties at the ceremony at the Church of San Isidro in Madrid, the victim's birthplace.
Simultaneous silent protests against E.T.A.'s campaign of violence took place in front of city halls in major cities across Spain.
Also today, about 150 Spaniards living in Brussels, joined by the president of the European Commission, Romano Prodi, held a silent protest against E.T.A. violence.
Some participants at the Madrid ceremony shouted for solidarity across party lines to fight terrorism, but Rafael Hernando, spokesman for Mr. Aznar's center-right Popular Party, said afterward that he regretted the absence of moderate Basque nationalists at the ceremony.
Mr. Mayor Oreja had earlier told the Spanish radio that such solidarity would be difficult as long as the moderates would not clearly separate themselves from E.T.A.
Mr. Indiano, the third councilor from the Popular Party to be killed this summer, was shot on Tuesday in the northern town of Zumarraga. His killers shot him at point-blank range several times in the chest and abdomen in his confectionery shop.
At the funeral, Mr. Aznar, visibly moved, offered his condolences to Mr. Indiano's weeping parents. He himself survived a car bomb attack in April 1995, when he was leader of the opposition.
In the northern city of Vitoria, Juan Jose Ibarretxe, head of the Basque regional government, joined anti-terrorism protesters. He was joined by members of his cabinet.
In Madrid, flags flew at half-staff outside the city hall and local council buildings as several hundred people observed five minutes' silence.
There were similar demonstrations in front of town halls in Barcelona, Seville, Bilbao and San Sebastian. The protests were called by the Spanish federation of local authorities.
Of the 12 people killed in attacks claimed by or attributed to E.T.A. since the group ended a 14-month cease-fire in December, three were elected Popular Party figures in the Basque region. In all, 10 Popular Party officials have been assassinated since 1995.
E.T.A., which stands for Basque Homeland and Freedom, has denounced Mr. Aznar's conservative party as a symbol of Spanish nationalism and the legacy of Franco, the late dictator.
But the party won 20 percent of the most recent vote in the autonomous Basque region of Euskadi in October 1998 -- the first time it did better than E.T.A.'s political wing, Euskal Herritarrokis -- and was second only to the more moderate Basque Nationalist Party.
The killings of politicians is the result of a change in terrorist strategy, an academic specialist in Basque affairs said today.
"They are frustrated," he said. "E.T.A. began to realize that the Spanish government could tolerate killings against the military and the police. For that reason, it decided to attack politicians and those in leadership positions."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 31, 2000


End of Document