Mr. Shultz's strategy on terrorism - and arms
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
May 1, 1986, Thursday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Column; Pg. 21
Length: 675 words
Byline: JOSEPH C. HARSCH
Body


OVER on the right side of the Reagan political constituency, where ''new conservatives'' and ''neoconservatives'' are separate groups and where old conservatives have all but disappeared, there is again great unhappiness about US Secretary of State George Shultz.
They are unhappy because they suspect that Mr. Shultz's much-publicized leadership of the ''bash Qaddafi'' brigade during the run-up to the strike on Libya was due not to true inner conviction but was rather a shrewd political maneuver to cover his suspected main purpose, which the ''news'' and ''neos'' think is to preserve and protect observance of the SALT II limits on strategic arms.
Knocking out Colonel Qaddafi is important among the coalition of groups over on the right side of Mr. Reagan, but the highest priority is the liquidation of controls on American weapons which are incorporated in the SALT II treaty limits and would be perpetuated if anything came of all the arms control talks going on at Geneva or from a second and third Reagan-Gorbachev summit.
Arms control of any kind is central to US relations with the Soviet Union. To favor keeping arms control is to assume that a tolerable modus vivendi can be achieved between the United States and the Soviet Union.
To oppose arms control is to believe in the impossibility of a tolerable and managed condition of peaceful coexistence. Those who oppose arms control start with a conviction that the present regime in Moscow is the true ''source of all evil'' in the world, that no satisfactory deal can be made with the Soviets, that they will violate any agreement we make, that an agreement would merely tie American arms and hands to American disadvantage.
Mr. Reagan was committing an ultimate heresy among the ''news'' and ''neos'' by his first summit in Geneva, last November. They hoped it would not happen. They do all they can to dissuade him from ever meeting with Mr. Gorbachev again. They fear, with reason, that another summit could lay the groundwork for a new agreement on strategic arms control, which would inevitably restrict the number of new weapons to be built.
The new conservative agenda calls for a forward or interventionist American strategy toward the existing pro-Soviet regimes in Cambodia, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Angola, Nicaragua, and - of course - Libya.
Mr. Shultz is not a doctrinaire or ideological ''new conservative.'' He is known among the new conservatives as a ''pragmatist.''
They lament the departure of Jeane Kirkpatrick from the inner councils of the administration. She was one of them, and a powerful and effective voice for their foreign policy. It is noteworthy that the first Reagan-Gorbachev summit took place only after Mrs. Kirkpatrick had left the administration.
Mr. Reagan has just given arms control a renewed lease on life by agreeing to scrap two of the old Poseidon submarines to make way for the commissioning of the latest new Trident submarine without breaching the SALT II limits.
But those who argued against Mr. Shultz on scrapping the submarines cannot effectively call him a wimp, an appeaser, or soft on communism. He has gained some immunity from them by having taken the lead for the military strike on Qaddafi.
Now we come to the key question about Mr. Shultz. Did he favor bashing Qaddafi because it could buy him immunity from the attacks of the new conservatives and leave him free to continue to work toward new arms controls and a new relationship with the Soviets? Or does he favor bashing Qaddafi because he truly believes that terrorism must be answered?
Among those who work with Mr. Shultz regularly, there is uncertainty about the answer. One fact reported from among his top advisers is that during the discussions that preceded the strike, he did not welcome or listen to discussions about Arabs and how they might react to a military strike. When his advisers tried to explain possible consequences, they ''ran into a cliche.''
Is that because Mr. Shultz thinks about Arabs in ''cliche'' terms - or because he is a very shrewd political operator?

Graphic

 
Illustration, no caption, TOM HUGHES


End of Document