Mr. Shultz Understands the Politics of Arafat
The New York Times
December 8, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 319 words
Body


To the Editor:
Poor George Shultz. First the hypocrites at the United Nations pan him and now The Times for denying Yasir Arafat a visa to speak at the United Nations (editorial, Nov. 29).
In the face of this negative reaction, let's not lose sight of the fact that the United Nations has invoked the rule of law to justify the presence of the leader of a terrorist organization committed by covenant, in violation of the U.N.'s own Charter, to the destruction of a U.N. member-state. This is not only illogical, but a clear violation of Article 4 of the U.N. Charter, which limited participation in the U.N. to ''peace-loving states.''
This can be explained if one understands that the General Assembly is primarily an arena for waging conflicts, not for resolving them. And it follows the initial decision, more than a decade ago, to welcome Yasir Arafat and his cohorts.
In 1974 the United Nations reacted to the new scourge of international terrorism by embracing its perpetrators and treating them with full honors and privileges. In return, the Palestine Liberation Organization promised to abandon terrorism. Clearly it has not kept its word. In the last 14 years the P.L.O. constituents established an international terror network, and they have been involved in more than 300 terrorist atrocities on land, at sea and in the air.
George Shultz is the only foreign minister to have the guts to publicize this outrage. He understands that if Yasir Arafat really wanted peace, he would follow the example of Anwar Sadat and go to Israel. When Mr. Arafat comes to the United Nations, it is to wage political warfare. George Shultz is the first to say that 14 years is enough time to give the P.L.O. and to perceive that if the P.L.O. cannot be trusted on this issue, it cannot be trusted on any other. He is the first to say no to terror.
 
HARRIS O. SCHOENBERG
Director, B'nai B'rith International
  New York, Nov. 29, 1988


End of Document