MR. SHULTZ'S BALKAN SALVOS
The New York Times
December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL
Length: 459 words
Body


George Shultz's wrath in Belgrade expressed America's frustration with terrorism. The Secretary of State was justifiably provoked when his Yugoslav hosts offered a mealy excuse for failing to hold the presumed plotter of the Achille Lauro hijacking. Traveling through Eastern Europe, Mr. Shultz was also right to hold Rumania accountable for the mistreatment of its people, notably a non-conforming Christian minority.
Realism compels the United States to deal sympathetically with the Europeans under Soviet dominion. But distinctions are important. This was underscored by the Secretary's stopover in Hungary, which defers to Moscow on foreign affairs but allows a fair degree of freedom at home. In his careful praise of Hungary's Communist leader, Janos Kadar, Mr. Shultz showed an appreciation of his deft struggle for wriggle room in the Soviet bloc.
By contrast, Communist Yugoslavia claims nonalignment and has long survived outside the Kremlin's embrace. There is no Russian-made excuse for giving craven haven to Palestinian terrorism. Mr. Shultz's table-thumping was in order when Yugoslavia's foreign minister cleared the P.L.O. of responsibility for the seizure of the Italian ship and urged that in any case ''when speaking of terrorism, one must also view the causes that lead to it.''
As Mr. Shultz angrily replied, hijacking of ships and planes, and murder and torture of their passengers ''is not justified by any cause that I know of.'' So also says the United Nations. Tardily but unanimously, the Security Council now condemns all acts of hostage-taking and calls on every nation to punish perpetrators.
Nor can Rumania evade responsibility for its repressions. President Ceausescu's nepotistic tyranny is indigenous, and so harsh that a police permit is required to own a typewriter. Rumania persecutes tiny Christian sects so ferociously that it jeopardizes its most-favored trading rights, which Congress approved in 1975. By saying as much, Mr. Shultz was giving human rights precedence over Rumania's value as an anti-Soviet irritant, an uncommon priority in this Administration.
Rumania condemned the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia, refused to join the Soviet bloc in severing ties with Israel and defied a Soviet boycott of the Los Angeles Olympics. Under American pressure, it has also allowed many Jews to emigrate. But Rumania's independent maneuvers are not favors to the United States; they represent cold calculation of national interests.
Mr. Shultz's sharp words mark a mature turn in American policy in Eastern Europe. The policy of looking only for gradual cracks in the Soviet dominion is reaffirmed. But it is augmented by a firmer demand that each Communist nation bear responsibility for actions that are clearly its own.


End of Document