MR. GEPHARDT CAVES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 12, 1999, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. D16
Length: 355 words
Body

 
POLITICS
RICHARD A. Gephardt's decision to withdraw the nomination of an American Muslim to a congressional counter-terrorism commission wasn't terribly courageous nor was his explanation terribly convincing.
The House Minority Leader announced last Thursday that he would withdraw the nomination of Salam Al-Marayati to the commission that will review national policies against terrorism. Mr. Al-Marayati is executive director of the Muslim Public Affairs Council in Los Angeles and is considered a moderate Muslim leader.
Mr. Gephardt claimed it would have taken too long to obtain a security clearance for Mr. Al-Marayati. But he appeared to be caving to the vociferous criticism from Jewish groups.
The strident Zionist Organization of America led the attack, accusing Mr. Al-Marayati of excusing terrorism against Israel and failing to denounce Hamas and Hezbollah. The group cited a 1997 press release from the Muslim Public Affairs Council stating, "Because the Palestinian people have no avenues to redress their grievances, some of them have been pushed beyond the margins of society and have adopted violent reactions to express their despair and suffering."
Some Jewish leaders in Los Angeles came to Mr. Al-Marayati's defense. His defenders noted that Mr. Al-Marayati is a naturalized American citizen who came to the United States at age 4 after his family had been persecuted in Iraq. In addition, Mr. Al-Marayati had condemned the bombings of bus stations in Tel Aviv and U.S. embassies in East Africa in addition to the death sentence for novelist Salman Rushdie.
Soon, however, other prominent Jewish organizations joined in the criticism, including the conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations. Mr. Gephardt responded as would almost any politician hoping for a future. He found an escape hatch.
The question about Mr. Al-Marayati's suitability for a terrorism commission was valid. But Mr. Al-Marayati got a summary execution without much of a chance to defend himself. American Muslims are left feeling marginalized and wondering if bias against them is one prejudice Americans still are blind to.

Load-Date: July 12, 1999


End of Document