MRS. CLINTON ASSAILS ATTEMPT TO LINK HER TO TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 29, 2000, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 455 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ITHACA, N.Y.NEW YORK; SENATE SEAT; CAMPAIGN; DEMOCRAT; FIRST LADY; DESTROYER COLE INCIDENT
Body


Hillary Rodham Clinton said Saturday that she was "outraged" that New York Republicans had linked her to the terrorist bombing of the destroyer Cole in phone calls to voters.
"I believe the Republican Party and Congressman (Rick) Lazio owe an apology to the families of the sailors who died in the terrorist bombing of the USS Cole," Clinton said.
Clinton called the phone calls "unacceptable" and said, "Everyone should be condemning it."
The blast Oct. 12 in Yemen killed 17 U.S. sailors and injured 39 others.
The state Republican Party refused to apologize and said Saturday that the calls would continue.
Rep. Rick Lazio, Clinton's opponent in the New York Senate race, said New York Republicans did not need "any instructions or lessons from the Arkansas political machine" surrounding Clinton.
"We don't need any advice from (Clinton adviser) Harold Ickes and Hillary Clinton on how to run campaigns in New York - people who are now forced to return $ 50,000 to people who associate themselves with terrorism and violence in the Middle East," Lazio said.
This past week, the Clinton campaign returned $ 50,000 that came from a Boston fund-raiser sponsored by a group that supports the Palestinian organization Hamas. The Clinton campaign denied knowing the group was involved with the fund-raiser.
Lazio also charged that Clinton's campaign had hidden a $ 1,000 donation from a Hamas supporter, listing it as coming from the American Museum Council instead the American Muslim Council.
The Clinton campaign has said the Museum-Muslim discrepancy was a typographical error. Clinton spokesman Howard Wolfson said Saturday that Lazio's charge was a smokescreen to cover his role in the GOP phone calls.
"Instead of more insults and finger-pointing, he should apologize to the families of the murdered sailors and stop the calls," Wolfson said.
Lazio spoke after a rally at a Long Island junior high school. Clinton made her comments as she arrived in Ithaca to begin a three-day bus trip across upstate New York.
Setting her off were newspaper reports Saturday that the New York State Republican Committee was calling voters to say that Clinton accepted money from an Arab organization that "openly brags about its support for a Mideast terrorism group, the same kind of terrorism that killed our sailors on the USS Cole."
Other calls also began going out in recent days to Jewish voters in which the state Republicans do not mention the Cole bombing, but do dwell on Clinton's dealings with Palestinians and her acceptance of contributions from Arab-Americans.
A New York 1 News statewide poll out Thursday had Clinton leading Lazio, 50 percent to 43 percent, and running close to the congressman from Long Island in upstate New York.     

Graphic

 
PHOTO Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Hillary Rodham Clinton signs an autograph while campaigning with Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., on Saturday in Elmira, N.Y.

Load-Date: November 2, 2000


End of Document