Mubarak, Terrorism And Their Tie
The New York Times
February 26, 2011 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15; ABOUT NEW YORK
Length: 734 words
Byline: By JIM DWYER
E-mail: dwyer@nytimes.com
Body


The blind sheik in charge of blowing up New York City had invited reporters to interview him one evening in 1993, so 57 of us stood in his bare living room. The floor shuddered every time another person or camera crew squeezed in. Then, for more than half an hour, the sheik, Omar Abdel Rahman, spoke at a dead sprint, in Arabic. The translators panted. From the sound of things, they apparently were able to render only about one phrase in English for every three he spoke in Arabic.
There were two words, though, that the sheik uttered dozens of times, virtually spitting them across the room, and which needed no translation:
''Hosni Mubarak.''
The press had come to ask Mr. Rahman about a group of his followers who had just been arrested for planting an enormous bomb in the basement of the World Trade Center that exploded around noon on Feb. 26, 1993, killing six.
The sheik waved off questions about the bombing. All he wanted to do was rage against Hosni Mubarak, who became president of Egypt in 1981 and was chased out of office two weeks ago by a mass popular uprising.
During his years as president, Mr. Mubarak -- as a symbolic pincushion for a fanatical strain of Islamists, and as a surrogate for American foreign policy -- was entwined in the life of New York like almost no other foreign leader.
A moment then, on the 18th anniversary of the 1993 bombing, to consider the large footprints Mr. Mubarak has left in a city where many people might not have been able to name him before the recent uprising.
Mr. Mubarak rose from vice president to president in 1981, after the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat, an act plotted by a group for which Mr. Rahman served as emir. Though word of the conspiracy had leaked, and hundreds of Islamists, including the sheik, were rounded up, enough remained free to carry out the killing.
Those directly implicated in the assassination, or thought to be in league with the killers, were housed in a dungeon built in the 12th century. Over the years, most were set free, and Mr. Rahman moved to the United States. He had come to see it as the duty of Muslims to set off attacks against the ''edifices of capitalism'' because of the West's alliance with Mr. Mubarak.
When Mr. Rahman met with reporters in 1993, he was pressed about his connection to the trade center bombers, who had attended his sermons. ''This kind of question is not known except for the interrogation in Egypt,'' he said.
The prisons of Mr. Mubarak were, he said, designed for degradation.
''Prisoners are tortured with electric shock,'' the cleric said, ''with hungry mad dogs and with a hot iron that is used on their skin and hanging them from the ceiling from their hands and feet and hitting them with sticks and wires and sexually abusing the prisoners.''
The brutality of the Mubarak prisons was a growing scandal for human rights watchers, but it did not close the circle to kill six innocent people in the trade center basement at lunchtime on Feb. 26, 1993: Monica Smith, Stephen Knapp, William Macko, Robert Kirkpatrick, Wilfredo Mercado and John DiGiovanni.
BEFORE long, the sheik was convicted of plotting new attacks, the assassination of Mr. Mubarak when he came to the United Nations, and blowing up the tunnels into New York. These schemes were discussed in earshot of a wired informant.
As one threat seemed to vanish, the Egyptian prison system remained an open sore. The movement that included Mr. Rahman gave way to one led by Osama bin Laden and his top collaborator, an Egyptian doctor, Ayman al-Zawahiri.
After the assassination of Mr. Sadat, Mr. al-Zawahiri spoke in court about the efforts to get him to confess. ''They shocked us with electricity,'' he said. ''And they used the wild dogs!''
In ''The Looming Tower,'' a Pulitzer Prize-winning history of terrorism leading to 9/11, Lawrence Wright argued that humiliation in the prisons nurtured a violent rage. ''Egypt's prisons became a factory for producing militants whose need for retribution -- they called it justice -- was all-consuming,'' Mr. Wright wrote. Even after 9/11, the Egyptian authorities were used by the United States to carry out interrogations and acts that would have been illegal for United States agents.
The coils of history are wound too tightly to imagine that a world without Mr. Mubarak would have spared New York City its worst moments. At least we can hope that they are all behind us.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 26, 2011


End of Document