MUBARAK WARNS U.S. ON TERRORISM< HE ALSO AFFIRMED HIS BELIEF IN THE MIDEAST LAND-FOR-PEACE FORMULA.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JULY 31, 1996 Wednesday SF EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 410 words
Byline: FROM INQUIRER WIRE SERVICES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Clinton traded notes on fighting terrorism with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak yesterday and cautioned that Americans should prepare for "a long, hard struggle."
Mubarak said he has believed for a decade "that terrorism is going to spread out all over the world." The Egyptian knows firsthand about the problem; he became president when Anwar el-Sadat was assassinated in 1981 by a militant Islamic group.
The TWA disaster, the Olympic bombing, and the deaths of 24 Americans in attacks in Saudi Arabia in November and June have put antiterrorism at the top of the nation's agenda. At a joint news conference with Mubarak, Clinton called terrorism "a threat that both our nations know too well."
The two leaders talked at length in the Oval Office and over lunch in Clinton's residence about terrorism and the Middle East peace process.
The Clinton administration has endorsed a land-for-peace formula, which Mubarak yesterday identified along with the political rights of the Palestinians as "the core" of the peace process. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has rejected that formula and has called for talks without any preconditions.
Like Clinton, the Egyptian president said that Netanyahu had not yet had time to implement the peace accords, adding: "I hope he could continue to implement this agreement, for it is very important at least to give the people a good signal that Israel respects . . . and honors its commitments."
Clinton said that "a slowdown period was inevitable" after Israel's election. He expressed concern about reports that Israel was planning an ambitious road project linking Jewish settlements on Palestinian-controlled lands.
Clinton said he would reserve judgment until he saw if the plan was carried out. "I don't want to blame them for something they haven't done yet," he said. Mubarak said that if Israel built roads in territory occupied by Palestinians, "it's going to complicate the whole process."
In private, Mubarak told Clinton that Egypt would sign a proposed international treaty banning nuclear test explosions, administration officials said. Egypt, an important voice in the Middle East, had not made a commitment, and the administration believes its support could be influential with other nations in the region.
The White House meeting came against the backdrop of an eight-nation meeting in Paris about terrorism and negotiations on Capitol Hill on Clinton's proposals for new antiterrorism legislation.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO (1)
1. President Clinton looks on as Egypt's Hosni Mubarak answers a question at their White House news conference. Mubarak says he has believed for a decade that terrorism would spread worldwide. (Associated Press, GREG GIBSON)

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document