MUCH HINGES ON ARAFAT STEMMING THE VIOLENCE / CLINTON AND NETANYAHU INSIST HE DO MORE. BOTH ARAFAT'S WILLINGNESS AND ABILITY TO STOP TERRORISM ARE SUBJECT TO QUESTION.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 1, 1997 Friday SF EDITION


Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A09
Length: 658 words
Byline: Peter Slevin, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


As Israelis bury their dead and President Clinton's foreign-policy team scrambles for answers, the latest Middle East crisis may turn on Yasir Arafat's efforts to stop the recent fits of violence.
Bombs targeted at Israeli shoppers Wednesday focused attention on the Palestinian leader, who broke off security cooperation with the Israeli government four months ago. Clinton and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Arafat must do more.
Yet as Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright met with top White House advisers yesterday to map a response, including a possible trip to the Mideast, the difficulty of repairing the peace process was clear in ways great and small.
One question is Arafat's ability to crack down on terrorism and less-violent forms of protest. Another is his willingness to do so.
"It's possible to exaggerate what Arafat can do," said Anthony Cordesman, a specialist in Middle Eastern security issues. "Hamas and the Islamic Jihad use a very small cadre of people organized in cells. They are able to recruit and train suicide bombers very quickly."
The militant groups are sworn to derail the peace and destroy the State of Israel. But as Palestinian faith in negotiations has evaporated, Arafat himself has been widely suspected of using violence to pressure the Israelis.
"He appears to feel the controlled use of low-level violence is a legitimate tactic, given that he doesn't have many tactics to use," said Yossi Alpher, director of the Jerusalem office of the American Jewish Committee.
Alpher said the Palestinian leader's apparent endorsement of violent protest is "a means of sending a message to the Israeli public that 'you're going to suffer if you don't make progress on the peace process.' "
Arafat has denied he has instigated or condoned any acts of violence. Yet Palestinian police stood by in recent weeks as Arab youths rioted. Other allegations are more treacherous: Israel issued an arrest warrant yesterday for Brig. Gen. Ghazi Jabali, chief of the Palestinian police, accusing him of dispatching police to shoot Jewish settlers.
"Israel's government has no right even to think about arresting me," Jabali told reporters. "If they come here to Gaza or anywhere else to catch me, they will never return."
There is a precedent for joint crackdowns and mutual cooperation. Following a series of four bombings last year by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, which left 63 people dead, Arafat ordered a crackdown. Palestinian authorities detained hundreds of people believed connected to opposition groups.
This year, Palestinian authorities worked with Israeli security to break the Hamas military cell responsible for three Israeli deaths in the March bombing of a Tel Aviv cafe, as well as eight deaths in other attacks.
But the formal Israeli-Palestinian security partnership fell apart in March after the Netanyahu government began building a Jewish settlement on an East Jerusalem site known to Israelis as Har Homa and to Arabs as Jabal Abu Gheneim.
After two suicide bombers killed 13 Israelis in the Jerusalem market Wednesday, Clinton and Albright called on Palestinian authorities to stop the violence.
"Chairman Arafat has made some efforts in security cooperation," said national security adviser Samuel R. Berger. "They have been uneven. We have said that to him in the last 24 hours."
Netanyahu went further, threatening to send forces into territory controlled by Palestinians if Arafat does not go along.
Cordesman cautions against banking too much on Arafat's ability to curb angry protest or to stop terrorists sworn to destroy the peace process - and, if it were only possible, the State of Israel.
"There is a false argument on the Israeli side," Cordesman said, "or at least a terribly unreasonable set of expectations."
As Albright told reporters after the bombing: "Arafat said he would make a 100 percent effort to get the security situation under control, but he can't guarantee 100 percent results."

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document