Mudslinging out of place in elections
University Wire
November 3, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 The Daily Campus via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 689 words
Byline: By Heather Needelman, The Daily Campus; SOURCE: U. Connecticut
Dateline: STORRS, Conn. 
Body


With the congressional elections around the corner a lot of tension has been put on many candidates. One would think candidates would focus their campaigns on the issues at hand affecting our country through domestic and foreign policy. Sadly enough, many candidates have succumbed to political mudslinging. Instead of telling people what they stand for and what they plan on accomplishing, they are regressing back to schoolchildren by saying nasty remarks about their opposition. I see politicians using this strategy because they think the American public pays more attention to negativity and lies instead of to the reasons why these people are running for office in the first place.
I know mid-term elections have an enormous affect on whether the Democrats take control of Congress. For this reason the Republicans are probably a bit nervous because according to the CNN polls, over 50 percent of people they interviewed said they are not pleased with the decisions of President Bush in Iraq. With this in mind, voters probably aren't any more pleased with the job the majority Republican-run Congress has been doing in allocating funds for this war. However, I believe that being nervous is not a reason to manipulate and scare the American public to vote for your party.
According to the CNN article, "GOP terrorism ad sparks Democratic furor," Republicans are dedicating their campaigns to telling the American people that if they vote for Democrats, it will only be a matter of time before there is another terrorist attack. I find it pathetic to use this as their only platform because Democrats are just as concerned about terrorism. The advertisement, which is available on the Republican National Committee web site, features al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden and his top lieutenant, Ayman al Zawahiri, talking, but the only sound in the commercial is a ticking clock, signifying that it is only a matter of time before the next attack. This vibrant commercial also includes bin Laden saying, "With God's permission we call on everyone who believes in God ... to comply with His will to kill the Americans." Basically, the Republican Party wants to use terror to get people to vote for them. Democratic National Committee Communications Director Karen Finney said, "Once again we see that the GOP will truly do and say anything regardless of whether or not it's true, they are so desperate to hold onto power." Not only are they lying about the agenda of the Democrats if they win the elections, but they are using the tragedy of 9/11 to get them votes, which I see as sickening.
Those who support these commercials purposely left out the fact that violence in the Middle East has increased significantly due to the immense presence of United States forces. Also, by giving these terrorist organizations so much media time, they are increasing the number of those involved in terrorism. A CBS report said, "The White House has been seeking to rebut a recent intelligence report that suggests the Iraq war has helped recruit more terrorists and journalist Bob Woodward's new book, 'State of Denial,' suggests the Bush administration has not been completely upfront about the severity of the security situation in Iraq." With this in mind, how can they create commercials that suggest they are truly keeping all Americans safe when even Americans express in polls that they do not feel safe with this administration calling the shots in Iraq?
If Republicans have a valid argument as to why they should keep power of Congress they should use it. However, if they are using fictitious arguments to scare people into voting for them, I deem that as a weak and invalid argument. Some Republican candidates are even going as far to say that Democrats support terrorism which is outright ridiculous. Instead of focusing on what they plan on doing to solve this problem they created in Iraq they are just calling their names. When a political party starts to use fear strategies as advertisements for their campaigns, I see it as an enormous red flag. Something is absolutely wrong with this picture.
(C) 2006 The Daily Campus via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 3, 2006


End of Document