MUGABE SAYS 'WELL DONE' ON SANCTIONS BILL PASSAGE
The New York Times
October 3, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 963 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 2
Body


Prime Minister Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe congratulated the United States today for the passage by Congress of sanctions on South Africa.
''I say, well done to the people of the United States,'' Mr. Mugabe said when a reporter interrupted a news conference here with the information that the Senate had overridden President Reagan's veto of the sanctions bill.
He added, ''Leaders come and leaders go, but the people live forever.''
Some of those in the room, who included African delegates as well as reporters, applauded the news. The civil rights activist Jesse Jackson, who was also present, called the veto override ''courageous and correct, the real America standing up.''
Mr. Mugabe dismissed arguments that sanctions would hurt Zimbabwe more than South Africa and warned that if Pretoria imposed sanctions against his country ''we will block the payments of dividends and, if necessary, nationalize.''
While South Africa has investments in Zimbabwe, he said, Zimbabwe has no investments in South Africa.
Mr. Mugabe said his country would never serve as a puppet of the United States to keep American aid flowing. ''We would rather be poor and eat grass but remain sovereign,'' he said.
Relations between Zimbabwe and the United States have been severely strained since Washington announced that it was cutting off economic aid after a Zimbabwean Cabinet minister made anti-American remarks at a Fourth of July celebration at the United States Embassy.
 
'State Terrorism' Charged
In his remarks to the General Assembly today, Mr. Mugabe accused the United States of ''state terrorism'' for helping rebels seeking to overthrow the Angolan Government.
He said that support of the rebels of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola ''must surely have the effect of undermining the possibility of a quick and peaceful resolution of the conflicts in our region.''
He said that instead of collaborating with South Africa, the United States should isolate it.
The Prime Minister, who is also the current chairman of the movement of countries professing nonalignment, called on the international community to adopt a package of concrete measures against South Africa until mandatory economic sanctions are imposed.
''Only positive and concerted action by the entire international community, not pious resolutions, will break the obduracy of the apartheid regime,'' he told the Assembly.
Mr. Mugabe also condemned South Africa's continuing occupation of South-West Africa, or Namibia.
''Even as we are here gathered,'' he said, ''the racist occupation forces are not only exploiting that territory and its people, they are also massively militarizing it into a formidable launching pad for aggressive acts of state terrorism and military destabilization against neighboring states, especially Angola.''
Other ministers praised the Senate's overriding of the veto. Foreign Minister Bolaji Akinyemi of Nigeria said, ''We applaud and welcome the Senate decision and hope it will send a strong signal to South Africa.''
Almost every world leader who has spoken before this Assembly has spoken of the increase in terrorist acts as a global scourge that can only be combated together.
Foreign Minister Jacques F. Poos of Luxembourg in his speech said:
''I am convinced that we will not end this scourge by keeping our arms crossed and without concerted, unreserved international cooperation. All nations of this planet must be aware that whoever attacks defenseless people or looks to sow confusion and anarchy inside sovereign states does not deserve refuge or indulgence.''
Foreign Minister Enrique Iglesias of Uruguay also called for international cooperation ''with the purposes of eliminating, or at least reducing, the tragic consequences of this plague, whose expansion, dimensions and frequency are transforming it into a version of war.''
But the absence of any new proposals on how countries can work together indicates just how difficult the problem is. A number of speakers have even been reluctant to single out terrorist attacks in their own countries.
In his speech Monday, Pakistan's Foreign Minister, Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, deleted a reference to the hijacking of a Pan Am jet in Karachi last month. And today, Turkey's Foreign Minister, Vahit Halefoglu, made no mention of an attack by Arab terrorists on a Sephardic synagogue in Istanbul in which 21 worshipers were killed.
He said Turkey was a country that ''has been denouncing the scourge of terrorism from this rostrum for more than a decade'' and added, ''The recent tragic events and the proliferation of terrorist acts finally led us to the awareness that no country is immune to terrorism and that only an effective international cooperation can combat it.''
 
Link to Drug Traffic Seen
Mr. Halefoglu, like other speakers before him, linked terrorism with international drug trafficking, another problem that has figured prominently in many of the speeches.
Communications Minister P. L. D. K. Pengiran Bahrin of Brunei pointed to his country's anti-drug programs as an example of what can be done domestically, but added that regional and global programs were needed.
A number of speakers stressed concerns close to home. Fouad Turk, Secretary General of Lebanon's Foreign Ministry, deplored the recent attacks against the United Nations peacekeeping troops in the southern part of his country and demanded an Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon so that the force could deploy along the border.
Today's other speakers were President Manuel Pinto da Costa of Sao Tome and Principe; Saleh Farah Dirir, the chief Djibouti delegate; Mongolia's Foreign Minister, Mangalyn Dugersuren; Foreign Minister Abdul Aziz al-Dali of Southern Yemen; Foreign Minister Leandre Bassole of Burkina Faso and Foreign Minister J. Bernard Blamo of Liberia.


End of Document