Mujahedeen Strive for Democracy in Iran
The New York Times
September 24, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 28; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Column 4;; Letter
Length: 391 words
Body


To the Editor:
The People's Mujahedeen Organization of Iran, the principal opposition to the mullahs' theocratic rule, is an Islamic, patriotic and profoundly democratic movement that has striven for 27 years against two dictatorial regimes to establish democracy and human rights.
A group calling itself the Forum on American-Iranian Relations, in the interests of the Khomeini regime, ran an advertisement in The Times on Aug. 28 that was a blatant bid to undercut 219 members of the United States House of Representatives who had condemned the rights abuses and terrorism of the mullahs and supported the Iranian people's struggle for democracy.
The group's accusations against the People's Mujahedeen are identical to those fabricated by the regime responsible for the execution of more than 100,000 Iranians for political reasons -- to say nothing of the imprisonment of American and European hostages or the bombing of the marine barracks in Lebanon.
In January the United Nations special representative on Iran reported that "the number of executions has increased week by week, with no sign of any reduction." These and other crimes have prompted condemnations, including that of the U.N. Human Rights Commission in February and subcommission in August.
In 1989 and 1990 the European Parliament and Council of Europe issued statements calling for efforts "to expel this medieval regime from the United Nations, and to ensure that the Iranian people are represented by the Iranian National Council of Resistance." More than 600 antigovernment demonstrations throughout Iran in support of the Mujahedeen since last year have shaken the Rafsanjani regime.
In any case, the Iranian National Council of Resistance coalition, while again condemning terrorism in any form, denies the accusations published by the Khomeini regime's agents. The council's program envisions a provisional government for six months after the overthrow of the regime, during which free elections will be held.
The national council's program also urges respect for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; a free market economy; regional stability; autonomy for Iranian Kurds, and the abolition of discrimination against women and ethnic and religious minorities.
 
ALIREZA JAFARZADEH
Washington, Sept. 9, 1992
 
The writer is U.S. spokesman for the People's Mujahedeen of Iran.

Load-Date: September 24, 1992


End of Document