MUKASEY'S VIEWS ON TERROR FORGED IN COURT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 23, 2007 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-13
Length: 487 words
Byline: ADAM LIPTAK, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body


On Jan. 17, 1996, after a nine-month terrorism trial and a rambling 100-minute lecture from a blind sheik found guilty of conspiring to wage war against the United States, Judge Michael B. Mukasey had had enough.
With a few terse, stern and prescient remarks, he sentenced the sheik, Omar Abdel-Rahman, to life in prison. Judge Mukasey said he feared the plot could have produced devastation on "a scale unknown in this country since the Civil War" that would make the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, which had left six people dead, "almost insignificant by comparison."
Long before most Americans had given deep consideration to the terrorist threat from radical Islam or to whether the criminal justice system is the right forum for trying people accused of terrorism, Judge Mukasey received an intensive education on those topics.
The vivid lessons Judge Mukasey took away from the trial -- notably that the urgency of the threat requires tilting toward protecting national security even at some cost to civil liberties -- have echoed through his speeches and writings. Now, as President Bush's choice for attorney general, he is poised to put those lessons into practice.
Sheik Abdel-Rahman and nine other men were convicted of plotting a "day of terror" that would have included blowing up the United Nations building, the George Washington Bridge and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels.
The trial, which remains the longest and most complex international terrorism case ever presented in a U.S. court, involved almost the entire array of national security issues that Judge Mukasey would face if confirmed as the Bush administration's third attorney general.
In his writings, Judge Mukasey has made clear that, although the issues are difficult ones, he is inclined to favor security, intelligence and secrecy over the competing values.
Although Judge Mukasey's handling of the trial received praise from the appeals court and from some -- but hardly all -- of the lawyers involved, his writings and public remarks show that the case left him shaken and skeptical about the ability of civilian courts to try people accused of terrorism without compromising national security.
Ronald L. Kuby, a defense lawyer in the case, said he did not know if the trial shaped Judge Mukasey's thinking. But he said it certainly illuminated the judge's approach.
"He was violating the rights of Arabs before it was popular," Mr. Kuby said. "It was very much like trying a case with two prosecutors, one of whom was wearing a black robe and who was considerably more intelligent than the one hired for the job."
Mr. Mukasey removed Mr. Kuby from the case over what the judge said were conflicts of interest. Other defense lawyers generally praised Mr. Mukasey's handling of the case.
"He ran the tightest ship you ever saw," said Roger L. Stavis, another defense lawyer. "He's a very kind, generous man, but also a tough law-and-order guy."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman in 1993 (Photo, Five Star Edition)

Load-Date: September 25, 2007


End of Document