Mukasey times two
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 21, 2007 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B2
Length: 716 words
Body


It now seems clear that Michael B. Mukasey will be confirmed as the nation's 81st attorney general (and President George W. Bush's third), probably by the end of the month. In two days of confirmation hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee last week, Mr. Mukasey easily split the difference between senators concerned with the problems created by former Attorney General Alberto Gonzales and those who favor wide latitude for the president in prosecuting the war on terrorism.
"He's at least answered the questions, which is better than his predecessor," said Judiciary Chairman Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt. Mr. Leahy's committee could vote to confirm Mr. Mukasey as early as Thursday, with the full Senate voting the following week.
That would mean the Justice Department would be in adult hands for the final 14 months of the Bush presidency, a period that will include the 2008 elections.
One of the problems Mr. Gonzales and his cadre of "loyal Bushies" created at Justice was political interference in the 2006 elections, hiring and firing U.S. attorneys based, at least in part, on their willingness to bring cases that helped Republican candidates and hindered Democrats.
Mr. Mukasey vowed that political meddling "can't have anything to do with the jobs of the people in the Justice Department today" and said, "Partisan politics plays no part in either the bringing of charges or the timing of charges."
Mr. Gonzales came to grief for his willingness to accede to administration excesses, not just in politics but also in the surveillance, interrogation and prosecution of terrorism suspects. On those issues, there seemed to be two Mr. Mukaseys: the hard-nosed, strict-constructionist former federal judge who testified Wednesday, and the advocate of supposedly inherent executive powers who testified Thursday.
On Wednesday, Mr. Mukasey said that the now-infamous "torture memo" of 2002, the one in which the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel claimed it was legal for the administration to, among other things, ignore the Geneva Conventions, "was worse than a sin. It was a mistake. It was unnecessary."
Asked what he would do if the president ignored his advice and took actions that he thought violated the Constitution, Mr. Mukasey replied, "That would present me with a difficult but not complex problem. I could either try to talk him out of it or leave."
But on Thursday, Mr. Mukasey was less assertive - or, perhaps, more legalistic - on that subject. Asked by Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., whether the practice of "waterboarding" was constitutional, Mr. Mukasey played it coy.
"I don't know what is involved in the technique," he said, suggesting he may be the last man in Washington not to have heard of the practice of strapping a suspect to an inclined board, covering his face with a cloth and pouring water on him to make the subject feel as though he's drowning. The Army has outlawed it as torture. The Justice Department's latest secret memo appears to approve it for CIA interrogators.
"If waterboarding is torture, torture is not constitutional," Mr. Mukasey said.
His views on the proper uses of executive power also seemed to broaden between Wednesday and Thursday. There may be times, he said on Thursday, that the president, in his role as commander-in-chief, can ignore laws that Congress passes, which is what Mr. Bush did with respect to the 1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act when he authorized warrantless electronic surveillance.
"The president doesn't stand above the law," Mr. Mukasey said. "But the law emphatically includes the Constitution. It starts with the Constitution."
Sen. Leahy called that "a loophole big enough to drive a truck through."
Here's the loophole: When a president defines the struggle against terrorism as a "war," he asserts the right to suspend the Constitution that Lincoln asserted when he suspended habeas corpus during the Civil War and Franklin Roosevelt asserted when he ordered the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II. But it could take decades to end terrorism, if it can be ended at all.
We are not sold on Mr. Mukasey's views of civil liberties, but he clearly is a man of principle and intellect who can restore the Justice Department's independence and integrity. The Senate should confirm him.

Notes

 OUR VIEW | JUSTICE DEPARTMENT OPINION 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Michael B. Mukasey 

Load-Date: October 21, 2007


End of Document