Mumbai attack suspect gets bail; Ruling by Pakistani court sparks outrage in India
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 19, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 30
Length: 346 words
Byline: Tim Craig and Annie Gowen

The Washington Post
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan  
Body


 A Pakistani court granted bail Thursday to a key suspect in a deadly 2008 assault in Mumbai, sparking outrage in India and further muddying perceptions about Pakistan's resolve to combat terrorism.
The judicial decision, made over objections from government lawyers, comes as Pakistani leaders vow major crackdowns on militants after Taliban gunmen killed 148 students and teachers in an attack in the northwestern city of Peshawar on Tuesday.
Does Pakistan not think of the Mumbai terror attack as a big thing? said Ujjwal Nikam, the public prosecutor in the 2008 assault, which began with commando-style strikes and culminated with a siege at the city's landmark Taj hotel, killing 166 people.
At a hastily arranged news conference in Mumbai, Nikam accused Pakistan of following two standards.
One policy to deal with Taliban's terror, another when groups are targeting India, he said.
Hours earlier, a judge in an anti-terrorism court in Rawalpindi granted Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi, an alleged leader of the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba militant group, a $10,000 bail.
Lakhvi's attorney, Rizwan Abbasi, said there was no substantial evidence against his client other than claims that he was a commander of the Lashkar-e-Taiba group.
This charge can't prove he was involved in the Mumbai attack. And it also couldn't be proved that he was commander of the group, he said.
Calling the situation unfortunate, India's minister of home affairs, Rajnath Singh, demanded that Pakistani leaders appeal Lakhvi's release.
In the 2008 attacks, 10 gunmen from Lashkar-e-Taiba entered Mumbai from the sea via Karachi and waged a campaign of terror over two days, Armed with explosives and automatic rifles, they launched a coordinated attack on the Taj Mahal Palace & Tower hotel as well as a synagogue and educational center. About 300 people were wounded.
One of the Pakistani terrorists linked to the attacks, Ajmal Amir Kasab, was arrested by the police during the attack and hanged in 2012. But Pakistan, which has fought three major wars with India, refused to hand over the additional suspects.

Load-Date: December 19, 2014


End of Document