Mumbai Attack Strengthened Indo-U.S. Ties: FBI
RTT News (United States)
March 12, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 357 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The unprecedented level of cooperation between the investigative agencies of India and the United States following last November&apos;s Mumbai terror attack has strengthened Indo-U.S. ties, America&apos;s premier investigative agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) said Thursday.
Testifying before a Congressional subcommittee, James McJunkin, deputy assistant director, counter-terrorism division of FBI, said the co-operation between the investigative agencies of the two countries have added a new dimension to the Indo-U.S. relationship.
The unprecedented collaboration we developed with our Indian law enforcement and intelligence counterparts in this investigation has strengthened our relationship with the Government of India, he added.
One key lesson of the Mumbai attacks have reinforced is the importance of international partnership, he said, though the principal lesson of the attacks remain that a small number of trained and determined jihadists with relatively unsophisticated weapons can do a great deal of damage.
He cited last week&apos;s attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team in Lahore as another example of a low-tech, but potentially high-impact operation.
McJunkin said the FBI was concerned about the possibility that other terrorist groups, including the Al-Qaida or its affiliates will take note of these attacks and attempt to emulate them.
He said the FBI would continue to work with its Indian counterparts in New Delhi and around the world, to bring the perpetrators of these attacks--which also killed a number of Americans--to justice and to prevent further attacks.
Referring to the statements made by the FBI Director Robert Muller during his recent trip to India and Pakistan, he said terrorism is not an issue for one country alone as all are fighting against the menace.
The house committee on homeland security subcommittee on transportation security and infrastructure protection had convened the hearing on "The Mumbai Attacks: A Wake-Up Call for America&apos;s Private Sector."
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document