MURDER AS A PRO-LIFE TACTIC
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
August 3, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Editorial-Commentary; Pg. A8
Length: 406 words
Body


Paul J. Hill, a former clergyman, developed a theological excuse for killing doctors who perform abortions. To his mind, such killings would be biblically justifiable homicides committed to save the lives of unborn children. Friday he put his ideas into practice.
When Hill gunned down Dr. John B. Britton and a protective escort, James H. Barrett, in the parking lot of a Pensacola, Fla., women's clinic, he committed deplorable wrongs on two counts. First, he presumed to commit murders in the name of God. Second, he defied the law. A civil society cannot tolerate either without running the risk of collapsing into anarchy.
The United States does not stand on the brink of a collapse of civil order because of fanaticism over abortion, but events in Pensacola, where two doctors have been slain by anti-abortion protesters in the past 15 months, are cause for grave concern. Events in Pensacola have been the worst in terms of bloodshed, but anti-abortion campaigners have resorted to arson and other forms of terrorism elsewhere. This violence cannot be condoned.
The most zealous of anti-abortion crusaders will reply that abortion is murder and it must be stopped at any cost. Essentially, that is Hill's argument.
Many thoughtful Americans agree with Hill to the extent that they believe abortion is the wrongful taking of human lives and is morally reprehensible. As a matter of personal conscience or religious faith, that position must be respected.
But Americans who hold that view and fervently wish to see abortion ended on moral or religious grounds must part company with extremists like Hill when they attempt to justify deliberate killings of their own. Once abortion opponents cross the line into advocating life-threatening violence, they have abandoned any claim to moral superiority and have descended into the depths of lawlessness, terrorism and murder. Such a false strategy mocks the name of a movement that calls itself pro-life.
In practical terms, violence doesn't make sense, either. People who advocate murder in the furtherance of a moral crusade inevitably turn public opinion against themselves and their cause.
As a matter of both principle and pragmatism, then, responsible leaders of the pro-life movement must denounce the killings in Pensacola and all other lapses into terrorist tactics. That some in the pro-life leadership have stopped short of categorically deploring Hill and his actions is a disgrace.

Load-Date: April 17, 1995


End of Document