Murder in Pensacola
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 12, 1993, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 399 words
Body


With the shooting death of a doctor outside a women's medical clinic in  Pensacola, the extremists' crusade against abortion has taken its ugliest  turn.
The cold-blooded murder of David Gunn, an Alabama physician who often had  to elude harassers by varying his routes to the clinics he served, is an act  of terrorism that many principled opponents of abortion have stepped forward  to denounce.
Yet the most visible anti-abortion zealots haven't been able to bring  themselves to make an unconditional denunciation of Gunn's murder at the hands  of an apparently disturbed anti-abortion protester. Instead, they have  responded with more of the violent rhetoric that has the effect of  rationalizing murder in the name of the pro-life movement.
PENSACOLA
After the shooting Wednesday, Operation Rescue founder Randall Terry  expressed grief for Gunn's family and then said, "We must also grieve for the  thousands of children that (Gunn) has murdered." At a rally the weekend  before in Melbourne, Terry had revved up his followers by saying, "We've  found the weak link is the doctor. We're going to expose them. We're going to  humiliate them."
This is the sort of leader who exhorts his faithful followers to cross the  line between civil disobedience and terrorism. Not too many days earlier,  Terry was challenging "Christians to rise up against" government officials  involved in the standoff at a Waco, Texas, cult compound. While even most  abortion rights advocates recognize the anti-abortion movement's right to  
 
peaceful protest, the murder of a doctor who performs abortions is hardly  different from the Klan's murders of civil rights workers in the 1960s.  
Abortion protesters have escalated their fight over the years, torching  clinics, harassing women at clinic entrances, stalking abortion providers,  making death threats against doctors. State and federal authorities have not  taken the onslaught seriously enough to prevent many abortion providers from  giving up their practices. The result is that women's access to a legal  medical procedure is becoming more and more restricted.
The murder in Pensacola leaves the wildest abortion opposition more  isolated than ever before. People of good will, whether they oppose abortion  or favor a woman's right to choose, now have a common bond. In their reaction  to David Gunn's violent death, all sane Americans can be pro-life. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, CLAY BENNETT; At a pro-life rally, a woman holds a sign saying PRO-LIFE and a mongrel-looking man beside her holds a sign saying OR DEATH

Load-Date: March 18, 1993


End of Document