Murder threat shows PLO still uses terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 7, 1989, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; COLUMNS; Pg. 14A; COLUMN
Length: 718 words
Byline: A. M. ROSENTHAL
Body


Consider the following sequence of events.
 
     1. On Dec. 15, Yasser Arafat, the head of the Palestine Liberation    Organization (PLO), renounces terrorism.
 
     Within hours, the United States announces it is ready to talk with    the PLO.
 
     2. On Dec. 29, Elias Freij, mayor of Bethlehem and one of the most    respected Arab officials in the West Bank, suggests a one-year truce in    the intifada, the Palestinian uprising in the West Bank, provided that    Israel releases about 2,000 Palestinian prisoners.
    The Israelis quietly make it known they are ready to talk about the    deal - seriously.
 
     3. On Jan. 2, Arafat broadcasts a murder threat: "Any Palestinian    who proposes an end to the intifada exposes himself to the bullets of    his own people and endangers his life. The PLO will know how to deal    with him."
 
     4. On Jan. 3, Mayor Freij withdraws his suggestion and says it is    up to the PLO to make all decisions. He decides it is best not to be    seen for a little while.
 
     In this episode lies the answer to questions that puzzle so many    people around the world who are not hostile to Israel.
 
     Why does the Israeli government, including conservative and liberal    members, refuse to follow the United States' lead and negotiate now    with the PLO? After all, if you are looking for an end to a conflict,    isn't it logical to talk with your enemy? And isn't the PLO supported    by most Palestinians? And if Israel will not talk with the PLO, is    there any hope for a solution?
 
     Arafat's murder threat against the mayor of Bethlehem shows that    the PLO still relies on terrorism, not only against Israelis but    against any Palestinian who dares step out of line and make an    independent suggestion for dealing practically with the Israelis.
 
     The threat to the mayor is totally in line with a policy the PLO    began when it was founded in 1964. That is to use terror to ensure that    no other organization or movement has a chance to build support among    Palestinians opposed to Israeli occupation, but who might favor a    solution not based on the PLO and its covenant.
 
     The covenant calls for elimination of the Israeli state. The PLO    might not have a monopoly if Palestinians had a decent period without    PLO terror.
 
     Terror has been an essential weapon of the PLO - against Israelis    at home and abroad, against Palestinians, against non-Israeli Jews in    foreign synagogues and against American and other Western planes, ships    and embassies.
 
     Arafat sometimes took "credit" and sometimes blamed PLO groups he    said he could not control. Assuming for the moment he really cannot    control all the PLO terrorists, why on earth should the Israeli    government recognize Arafat and his uncontrollable PLO as its    negotiating partners?
 
     The Arafat murder threat also shows why so many Israeli officials    pay more attention to what the PLO says to Palestinians and other Arabs    than what it says to American diplomats in Geneva or American Jews in    Stockholm. In broadcasts and interviews aimed at Palestinians and other    Arabs, PLO spokesmen make it plain that the establishment of a small    Palestinian state is only the first step toward a much larger state in    what is now Israel.
 
     Not only Israelis believe the PLO has yet to put terrorism behind    it. King Hussein of Jordan is not taking any chances either. The PLO    tried to kill him before. He knows it would try again if he suggests    Israeli-Jordanian talks about a union between parts of the West Bank    and his own largely Palestinian country - an idea he once thought    entirely sensible.
 
     One day that may be the solution, because it is ethnically and    strategically logical. Yitzhak Shamir and other members of the Likud    party who are reluctant to give up any territory are not fond of the    idea. But they do not kill Israelis who suggest it.
 
     The United States decided to deal with the PLO on the basis of    Arafat's word that the PLO renounced terrorism and any hopes of   
 eliminating Israel - without waiting one day for proof.
 
     The murder threat by Yasser Arafat helps answer the question of why    Israel declines to take the same step and risk its existence.
 
 New York Times News Service       

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document