Murphy will plead not guilty in case of alleged terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 12, 1993, Saint Paul Edition


Copyright 1993 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 1B
Length: 393 words
Byline: Paul Gustafson; Staff Writer
Body


An attorney for John P. Murphy said Friday that the West St. Paul man will plead not guilty to 35 charges in connection with his alleged campaign of terrorism against Ramsey County court officials.
 In Murphy's first court appearance since his extradition from Arizona, Rice County District Judge Gerald Wolf set his bail at $ 700,000. Prosecutor Pete Conners had asked that it be kept at the $ 1.5 million set by an Arizona judge after Murphy's arrest in Phoenix last month.
Conners, an assistant Hennepin County attorney acting as a special prosecutor for the Ramsey County attorney's office, said the higher bail was justified by Murphy's prior run-ins with the courts. His record includes four felonies, and nine misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors.
 The 35 new charges he faces stem from an elaborate war that Murphy, 43, is alleged to have carried out against judges, prosecutors, probation officers and others involved in previous criminal cases against him.
 Murphy "has gone to war with the system of justice" and is a threat to the community, Conners said. His incentive to flee is great because he "is aware that the position of the state is to maximize sentences and hopefully have him sentenced to life in prison," Conners said.
 The prosecutor also charged that Murphy fled Minnesota in January after he learned that police were looking for him in connection with three acts of vandalism against court officials and the placing of a fake bomb in one judge's mailbox.
 It took law enforcement officials four months to determine that Murphy was in Arizona and 45 more days to find him in Phoenix, in part because he is adept at altering his appearance, Conners said.
 Allan Caplan, the attorney representing Murphy, argued that none of the allegations about Murphy's terroristic attacks on court employees should be considered in setting bail because none of them has been proved.
 After yesterday's court appearance, Caplan said Wolf showed courage in reducing Murphy's bail in a case where the alleged victims are fellow judges and court officials.
 Murphy will be pleading not guilty to the charges, especially in view of the prosecution's stated goal of putting Murphy in prison for life, Caplan said.
 He added that it will be "difficult, if not impossible" for Murphy to get a fair trial in Ramsey County, given the nature of the charges against him.

Load-Date: June 13, 1993


End of Document