Murray Miron, expert on terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 30, 1995, Sunday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; OBITUARIES; Pg. 3A; OBITUARY
Length: 357 words
Dateline: SYRACUSE, N.Y.
Body


Dr. Murray Miron, 62, an expert on terrorism who advised law enforcement  agencies on the Unabomber, Branch Davidians, Patty Hearst and Son of Sam, died  Wednesday of pancreatic cancer.
Dr. Miron gave the FBI four separate analyses of the written and spoken  words of David Koresh in the final 10 days of the standoff between federal  agents and the cult at its compound near Waco, Texas, in 1993. A calculation  central to the decision to proceed with the final tear-gas attack by the  federal agents on the compound was that Koresh was not likely to respond by  harming himself.
Compiled from Times WiresOBITUARIES
During weeks of analyzing him, a team of experts - some from the FBI's  Behavioral Science Unit - drafted a profile of him that all but ruled out  suicide. Later, Dr. Miron said: "We felt this was an individual who was  extraordinarily vain and very fearful of physical injury."
     
 
   WALLACE C. STEINBERG, 61, the chairman of Healthcare Investment Corp., the  largest venturecapital fund devoted to health care, died Wednesday. He died in  his sleep at his home in Rumson, N.J., said James H. Cavanaugh, the company's  president. Mr. Steinberg was willing to risk millions on untested futuristic  notions that nonetheless held the promise of revolutionizing medicine. He was  among the first to promote gene therapy and to invest in the study of animal  organs for transplanting in human beings. At Johnson & Johnson, Mr. Steinberg  developed the idea for the Reach toothbrush, following his hunch that he could  succeed in marketing a brand-name toothbrush made to help remove plaque, even  though the president, vice president and chairman of the company thought the  idea would not work. Not only did he succeed, but Reach became the  best-selling toothbrush in the world. Mr. Steinberg attributed his success in  part to what he said was his way of thinking with "simple clarity." He  worked Monday through Thursday at his company's offices in Metro Park, N.J.,  spending long weekends playing tennis and going dancing at night with his  wife, Maria.
Local obituaries and the Suncoast Deaths list appear in regional sections.

Load-Date: July 31, 1995


End of Document