MUSEUMS STRUGGLE WITH RISING COSTS OF TERRORISM INSURANCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 29, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 941 words
Byline: Diane Toroian Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


* The St. Louis Art Museum learned last month that its insurer would no longer cover acts of terrorism. Other museums and institutions are facing the same problem as a result of Sept. 11: fewer policies at bigger prices.
An ancient Greek statue or a lush Monet landscape may seem unlikely targets of terrorist rage, but insurance companies aren't taking any chances.
Across the country, prestigious art institutions like the St. Louis Art Museum are facing growing insurance costs. The trend -- another consequence of the attacks on Sept. 11 -- is forcing museums to rework budgets and rethink what work they present.
"Art museums have great concentrations of value. What 9-11 highlighted to underwriters is that you could have a catastrophic loss," said Robert Salmon, president of Fine Arts Risk Management, a leading insurance broker for museums and galleries.
"Every corner of the insurance world has been effected by 9-11. You'll have a commercial gallery owner in California say, 'What does 9-11 have to do with me?' It has everything to do with everybody."
The St. Louis Art Museum learned that lesson last month when its insurer announced it would no longer cover acts of terrorism, or, as the museum's policy puts it, misdeeds that "attempt to intimidate or coerce a government or to further political, ideological, religious, social or economic objectives."
Museum officials were braced for the news. The insurance industry, reeling from the terrorist attacks and the general downturn in the economy, had started excluding terrorism from policies last winter.
"Still, we weren't sure what would happen because we are in St. Louis," said Art Museum Registrar Jeanette Fausz.
Now museum officials must find additional coverage for what a year ago might have been unthinkable.
"The idea of the St. Louis Art Museum - any art museum - as a target is scary," said museum spokeswoman Kay Porter. "An art museum is symbolic of so many things. Some may perceive it as a symbol of wealth. In our mind it is more a symbol of humanity."
Terrorism insurance for art is much like homeowner's insurance. Rates are based on the collection's worth, its location, how much coverage a buyer wants and the buyer's track record caring for such valuables. But unlike homeowners who can pick among a number of companies, museums are served by only a handful of fine art insurers. Those businesses, like all insurance companies, can expose themselves to only so much risk. The result: fewer policies at bigger prices.
How much bigger? Fausz won't guess, though the total figure for its permanent collection and loaned works could reach beyond tens of thousands of dollars - adding significantly to the approximately $200,000 the museum pays each year for other kinds of insurance.
And such policies would not include extra insurance for touring shows. Take, for instance, the upcoming exhibit of work by Orazio and Artemisia Gentileschi, father and daughter painters of Baroque Italy, set to open June 14. Though the Art Museum applied for and won federal indemnity insurance to protect the show, it still had to purchase $35,000 in supplemental terrorism insurance. An institution that operates a $23 million budget can absorb such costs.
But bigger, more valuable shows would be impossible for some institutions. For instance, Museum Director Brent Benjamin said the Art Museum would be unable to produce last year's acclaimed exhibit "Vincent van Gogh and the Painters of the Petit Boulevard" today. That show consisted of more than 100 pieces from lenders across the globe. Today, it may not have been able to find a policy.
"We are currently managing the situation, but if we had been organizing van Gogh this year, we would not have been able to do it," Porter said.
The art world has started to respond to the crisis by accepting a higher level of risk. In February, the Association of Art Museum Directors recommended that lending museums not require borrowers to procure terrorism insurance for artworks or exhibits.
Museums have welcomed the policy.
"The only way to deal with it is if nobody requires it. The few policies available are prohibitive," said AAMD executive director Millicent Hall Gaudieri, who recently sent the AAMD resolution to the European community. While museums are struggling to manage the higher costs, Gaudieri said she is unaware of any exhibitor who has, thus far, had to cancel an exhibit.
Fausz says the art museum already has borrowed an object from a private collection invoking the new resolution.
"The hope is it (terrorism insurance) is something people live without," Fausz said.
Art museums are not the only institutions threatened by rising expenses, says Rebecca Buck, chairwoman of an American Association of Museums committee devoted to the problem. She said any institution that collects one-of-a-kind artifacts is feeling a pinch.
"Science museums, history museums, libraries - they all have collections of great value," Buck said. "This is a major concern for many institutions, and right now it's a mess."
For instance, the Missouri History Museum is anticipating a 20 percent to 25 percent increase in its premiums to about $40,000 a year. The St. Louis Zoo's policy will continue to cover acts of terrorism, but it now limits how much it pays out. The St. Louis Science Center will learn in November when it renews its policy whether terrorist acts will be excluded from its coverage plan.
Missouri Historical Society President Robert Archibald said that, so far, the increase will not alter what shows it presents or what it loans. "Yes, there is that threat no matter where you are, but business has to go on," Archibald said.

Load-Date: April 29, 2002


End of Document