MUSHARRAF DISAVOWS TERRORISM, BANS TWO EXTREMIST GROUPS;
 SPEECH IS EFFORT TO DEFUSE TENSION WITH INDIA
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 13, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 490 words
Byline: Robert H. Reid The Associated Press
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN
Body


President Pervez Musharraf declared Saturday that Pakistan would not be a base for terrorism, and he banned two extremist groups whose members were accused of attacking India's parliament.
Before the speech, police raided religious schools and mosques and arrested more than 300 suspects.
Musharraf sought to defuse a crisis between Pakistan and India over the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir that has pushed the neighboring nuclear powers to the brink of war.
India had no immediate reaction. But an Indian defense analyst, C. Rajamohan, told Star Television News in New Delhi that the speech was "quite a courageous effort, especially in relation to Kashmir."
He said, "The sense of it is that no one will be allowed to promote terrorism in the name of Kashmir. I think it comes very close to India's demand."
But others were cautious, saying they wanted to see whether Musharraf's remarks would lead to a reduction in violence in Kashmir.
Secretary of State Colin Powell hailed Musharraf's "bold and principled stand." Powell said he believed the basis now existed "for the resolution of tensions between India and Pakistan through diplomatic and peaceful means."
In his hourlong address to the nation, Musharraf vowed that "no organization will be allowed to indulge in terrorism behind the garb of the Kashmiri cause. … We will take strict action against any Pakistani who is involved in terrorism inside the country or abroad."
Crackdown on extremists
Musharraf also announced a crackdown on religious extremists who had supported Afghanistan's Taliban rulers and Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida movement. In addition to banning the two Kashmiri groups, he banned three Pakistani Muslim organizations, one of which sent members to fight alongside the Taliban in Afghanistan.
Musharraf spelled out new regulations for mosques and religious schools - long considered a breeding ground for religious extremism. He also announced plans to review the status of foreign teachers and students at Pakistani religious schools.
"If in any mosque there is any political activities or any other … extremism, then we will take strong action," Musharraf declared.
He warned Muslim clerics to "spread the good points of Islam" or "there will be strong action against them."
The speech had been widely anticipated in hopes it would defuse mounting tension with India after the suicide bombing Oct. 1 at the parliament in Indian Kashmir. The tension escalated Dec. 13, when five armed gunmen stormed the complex. The five attackers and nine other people were killed.
India blamed Pakistan and two Kashmiri separatist groups - Jaish-e-Muhammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyaba - for the attack, and it dispatched troops to its border. Pakistan responded with its own buildup and warned that it would resist any Indian incursions. The standoff raised the prospect of an armed confrontation.
A spokesman for Lashkar-e-Tayyaba vowed to continue attacks against India despite the ban.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Pervez) Musharraf; Pakistani president

Load-Date: January 13, 2002


End of Document