Muslims speak out against terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 3, 2005 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 10A; Newspaper
Length: 401 words
Series: EDITORIALS
Body


Last week's religious declaration by a group of U.S. and Canadian Muslim leaders condemning terrorism sends an important message: Muslims cannot support or tolerate terrorism and be true to the teachings of Islam.
North America's leading Islamic scholars and jurists who interpret Islamic law condemned terrorism in language that was direct and unequivocal: "Targeting civilians' life and property through suicide bombings or any other method of attack is haram - or forbidden. And those who commit these barbaric acts are criminals, not "martyrs' . . . It is haram, forbidden, for a Muslim to cooperate with any individual or group that is involved in any act of terrorism or violence." The statement was endorsed by leaders of more than 120 U.S. Muslim groups.
At a time when the London bombings have the world on edge, Muslims have begun taking a clear stand against terror. And unlike the Islamic religious ruling, or fatwa, issued against terrorism by clerics in London, the North American group made no exception for suicide bombings against an occupying power.
This may be the tip of an encouraging trend: A recent poll by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press found significant drops in support for violence to defend Islam in Lebanon, Morocco, Jordan and other largely Muslim countries in recent years. And a Pew poll taken after the July 7 bombings in London found an 8 percent drop in the percentage of Americans who believed Islam is more likely than other religions to encourage violence, compared to two years ago.
Meanwhile, the Council on American-Islamic Relations is airing radio and TV ads distancing Islam from extremist violence, with moderate Muslims declaring they "will not allow our faith to be hijacked by criminals." Given the number of Muslim civilians killed by suicide bombers in places like Iraq, the efforts of groups such as CAIR to marginalize support for martyrdom is an important counterweight to Islamic extremism.
Some naysayers are noting that such fatwas are often limited in impact, and U.S. involvement in Iraq continues to incite deep hatred for America in many Muslim countries. But those who question whether American Muslims have sufficiently condemned terrorism should welcome last week's statement. Now comes the hard part - matching their words with actions to rid the mosques and communities of Islamic extremists who have hijacked their religion.

Load-Date: August 3, 2005


End of Document