MUSLIMS HERE DENOUNCE LINK TO TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 1, 1993, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 530 words
Byline: DENNIS B. RODDY, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Officials of the Islamic Center of Pittsburgh are denouncing two things -- terrorism and the automatic assumption that Muslims are prone to it.
''We did not equate Koresh with Christianity or Son of Sam with Judaism,'' said Abdul Mawjoud, president of the Islamic Center. The group acted in the wake of last week's arrests of several Muslims in New York and New Jersey in part of what the FBI said was a plot to blow up various targets in New York as well as assassinate U.N. Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and others.
Mawjoud and others at the center yesterday issued a statement condemning the use of terrorism as inconsistent with the teachings of Islam.
''Islam does not approve of this. It condemns it. The whole message of Islam is one of peace and it really condemns anything like this,'' Mawjoud said.
The group found support from a corner not usually viewed as a natural ally. An official with the Community Relations Committee of the United Jewish Federation expressed her total agreement with the Islamic Center's position.
''That would be a very similar position we would take,'' said Edie Naveh, who chairs the committee for the UJF's Pittsburgh branch. ''To condemn a whole people and a whole religion for the acts of a few people is anathema.''
Federal authorities said last week that a group of Muslim men who worship at the New Jersey mosque of a radical Arab cleric plotted to blow up the United Nations Building, the New York headquarters of the FBI, and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels.
What disturbed Muslim leaders in Pittsburgh, they said, was the media's focus on the fact that the suspects were Muslims.
''If something happens in Ireland, we don't say 'Christians are doing this or doing that,' '' Mawjoud complained. ''But if Muslims are involved, they say it is 'Islamic terrorism' or 'Islamic violence.' ''
Approximately 5,000 Muslims reside in and around Pittsburgh, according to the Islamic Center.
Since the Persian Gulf war of 1991, life has not always been easy for them, according to Kadir Gunduz, general body coordinator at the center.
''During the Gulf crisis, a couple of individuals made some calls. They were addressing us as people of Saddam Hussein,'' said Gunduz.
Gunduz said the center, early in the crisis that arose from Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, made clear its opposition to Saddam's regime.
The relations committee headed by Naveh and the Islamic Center have worked together in past months to drum up public and government support for the besieged Muslim population of Bosnia, where thousands have died in a widening civil war in the former Yugoslavia.
The cordial relations between the Islamic Center and one of the region's largest Jewish groups runs at variance with many popular perceptions and angers exacerbated by longstanding grievances between Israel and surrounding Arab and predominantly Muslim states.
But the horrific reports of shelling, rape and ''ethnic cleansing'' that targeted Muslims in Bosnia, Naveh said, evoked memories of past attacks on Jews that culminated in the systematic elimination of more than 6 million by Nazi Germany.
The images from Bosnia, Naveh said, ''hit the very core of who we are and our history.''

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document