MUSLIM SOLDIERS DECRY TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 30, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. c6
Length: 524 words
Byline: AP
Body


FORT LEWIS (AP) Ten years ago, there were no mosques on U.S. bases, no Muslim chaplains.
"I think things really started changing after the Gulf War," said Air Force Master Sgt. Tony Muhammad Langley after a Friday prayer service at the Fort Lewis Islamic Chapel Center, established in 1998. "A lot of soldiers who went there came back Muslim."
At least 4,000 Muslims serve in the armed forces, about 150 of them at Fort Lewis, McChord Air Force Base and Camp Murray.
James Yee, a West Point graduate and former Lutheran who serves as the Muslim chaplain at Fort Lewis, advised those at services Friday not to become angry about attacks on their faith.
"There is no question that anger is the root of much evil," he said.
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, military bases have launched Islamic sensitivity classes. Armed-forces newspapers have published articles explaining the tenets of Islam and urging tolerance.
Sgt. Steven Atlas said he's been asked: "How can you be one of them?"
"At first I got angry," said Atlas, who has been in the Army for 10 years. But in the end, "I passed it off to ignorance."
He finds no conflict between his faith and the nation's attempt to find out who was behind the attacks.
"I don't look at them as being Muslims. I look at them as terrorists," he said.
Spc. Amir Abdul-Haadee said he's received support at the post.
"They know the difference between Islam and terrorism," Abdul-Haadee said. "If I was called to go, I don't think it would be fighting against other Muslims. I think it would be fighting against terrorists."
Some say they have found support in the ranks from non-Muslims as well as other Muslims.
"I wish everybody could look at the Army and see how we treat each other," said Staff Sgt. Ousseynou Kamar after Friday's prayer service. "We're brothers."
Like other Muslim chaplains in the military, Yee has been assailed with questions about Islam.
"I've had people that have been very blunt in how they ask questions," said James Yee, a West Point graduate and Muslim chaplain at Fort Lewis. "People will ask, 'What does a Muslim believe?'"
Yee, who converted in 1991, says Islam is very straightforward: "That's probably the biggest misunderstanding, its simplicity. We believe in one God, we believe in the prophets and we respect life."
During and after the Gulf War, American personnel stationed in Saudi Arabia had access to an Islamic cultural center operated by the Saudi government.
"What it did was allow soldiers to come in and ask questions about it and to socialize with Saudi soldiers. So a lot of soldiers began to learn and read about Islam," said Yee, a lieutenant in a Patriot missile battery before he became a chaplain in 1999.
After the conflict, many U.S. soldiers "didn't have anything to do, so they learned about Islam," said Yee. "I've heard anywhere from 3,000 to 5,000 converted."
The Army ordained the military's first Muslim chaplain in 1993. There are now 15 scattered throughout the branches. Now the military provides chaplains for Muslim soldiers and provides field rations that meet Islamic dietary restrictions.
"They even have special programs to take soldiers to Mecca," Langley said.

Load-Date: October 1, 2001


End of Document