MUSLIM CLERIC INDICTED; SHEIK CALLED HEAD OF TERRORIST PLOTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 26, 1993, THURSDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 971 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


A radical Muslim cleric was charged Wednesday with commanding a "war of urban terrorism" that included the World Trade Center bombing and foiled plots to blow up New York landmarks and kill Egypt's president.  The federal grand jury indictment, which charges 15 men in all, marks the first time that prosecutors have tied together those conspiracies and other alleged terrorist acts, including the assassination in 1990 of militant Rabbi Meir Kahane, as part of a scheme to terrorize the United States.  It also is the first time that Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman has been charged in the Trade Center attack of Feb. 26 and the landmark-bombing plot. The sheik, in federal custody as he fights deportation to Egypt, has denounced and denied any involvement in those conspiracies, although followers of his have been charged in both cases.  Another of the 15 defendants is El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was acquitted on state murder charges in the killing of Kahane but is serving a seven to 15-year term in a New York state prison on a related weapons conviction.  This time, Nosair was indicted on federal racketeering charges in the fatal shooting of Kahane in a hotel in New York.  In addition to being charged in the overall terrorist conspiracy, Nosair, Abdel-Rahman and two others among the 15 are accused in the 20-count indictment of conspiring to murder Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.  Nosair is seen as a hero by young Muslim radicals. Many of those charged earlier in the Trade Center bombing and the plot to bomb New York landmarks are known to have supported him during his trial and visited him in prison.
The Trade Center bombing killed six people and injured 1,000. In June, authorities said they had broken up a plot to bomb the United Nations, a federal building that houses the FBI in Manhattan, the Lincoln and Holland tunnels and the George Washington Bridge linking New York City and New Jersey.  The indictment issued Wednesday speaks of an organization that from at least 1989 carried out acts of terrorism, including bombings and murders, against various governments and officials in the United States and abroad. The indictment gives few specifics.  The indictment was promised a month ago by prosecutors, who were transcribing hundreds of hours of tape recordings captured by a government informer who had become a confidant of Abdel-Rahman.  The indictment alleges that the suspects targeted government officials, law enforcement officials and judicial officers for kidnapping and assassination.  It says they also planned to obstruct justice by conspiring to kidnap and take hostages to attempt to gain release of imprisoned colleagues.  The suspects, the indictment says, "unlawfully, willfully and knowingly combined, conspired, confederated and agreed together and with each other to levy a war of urban terrorism against the United States." The indictment accuses Abdel-Rahman of leading the organization and says he was "consulted in pursuing and planning bombings, murders and other acts of terrorism." It says he also "provided instruction regarding whether particular acts of terrorism were permissible or forbidden, served as a mediator of disputes among members of the organization and undertook to protect the organization from infiltration by law-enforcement authorities." The indictment says that in late November or early December 1991, Abdel-Rahman asked an informer to murder Mubarak.  And in May 1992, the indictment alleges, Nosair asked an informer where to construct bombs, how to plan for Nosair's escape from Attica state prison, and how to target Jewish people for assassination, including a state assemblyman and the judge who had sentenced Nosair to prison.  Eleven of the 15 defendants already have been charged with plotting a summertime bombing rampage in New York City; all pleaded innocent. The first arrests took place in a raid on June 24, when authorities said they had caught five of the suspects mixing bomb ingredients.  None of the 15 had previously been charged with the Trade Center bombing.  Six others are charged in that attack; five of them are in custody, and their trial begins next month.  The four new defendants - who also were charged with plotting to assassinate Mubarak - are Abdel-Rahman; Nosair; Mohammed Abouhalima, the brother of a defendant in the Trade Center bombing; and Abdo Mohammed Haggag, who was charged last month with conspiring to kill Mubarak.  Many of the suspects charged previously are followers of Abdel-Rahman, 55, an Islamic fundamentalist and a vehement foe of Egypt's secular government who preached at mosques in Brooklyn, N.Y., and Jersey City, N.J.  The blind Egyptian cleric has been in federal custody in Otisville, N.Y., since July 2, after an immigration judge ordered him deported. He had been living in self-imposed exile in the United States since he was acquitted a decade ago in Egypt on charges that he sanctioned the assassination in 1981 of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat.  In addition to the U.S. deportation proceeding, which focuses on allegations that Abdel-Rahman lied to gain entry to the country, an Egyptian judge has issued an arrest warrant for the sheik on charges of participating in an anti-government riot in 1989.  Barbara Nelson, an attorney for Abdel-Rahman, said she was surprised by the new indictment.  "I don't think there's any basis to indict him," she said.  Ron Kuby, a lawyer in William Kunstler's office, said he was disappointed.  Kunstler's firm is handling the defense for two suspects in the alleged terror plot and represented Nosair at his trial,.  Kuby said: "This is the closest I've ever seen to using the criminal justice system to indict a religious group for religious teaching. That kind of action poses a much greater threat to democracy than the people who throw the bombs."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color Photo Headshot of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman - Federal indictment

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document