Muslim scholars in U.S. issue an edict against violence
 Philadelphia Inquirer
July 29, 2005 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A15
Length: 386 words
Byline: By Rachel Zoll; Associated Press
Body


After deadly bombings in Britain and other nations, American Muslim scholars issued an edict yesterday condemning religious extremism and calling suicide bombers and other extremists "criminals, not 'martyrs.' "
The 18-member Fiqh Council of North America said Muslims were barred from helping "any individual or group that is involved in any act of terrorism or violence. There is no justification in Islam for extremism or terrorism," the scholars wrote in the edict, called a fatwa. "Targeting civilians' life and property through suicide bombings or any other method of attack is haram- or forbidden."
Many Muslim leaders overseas have made similar statements in recent weeks, but some have left an opening for violence to be used in certain situations. One group of British Muslim leaders who denounced the July 7 attacks in London said suicide bombings could be justified against an occupying power - drawing criticism that it invited violence in Iraq, where civilians along with coalition troops have been killed.
The U.S. scholars said at a news conference in Washington that their prohibition applied to attacks on civilians everywhere. Their fatwastates that Muslims are obligated to help law-enforcement authorities "protect the lives of all civilians."
"Suicide bombing is forbidden in Islam," said Muzammil H. Siddiqi, head of the Fiqh Council. "This is not the solution; it is not the right way of doing things. Occupation is wrong, of course, but at the same time this is not the way."
Islam has no central authority, and the council serves an advisory role for American Muslims, who could number as high as six million.
While the Muslim world does not look to America as a center of Islamic thinking, U.S. Muslim leaders said they wanted to send a message about their faith.
Alan Wisdom, head of the Institute on Religion and Democracy, a conservative Christian group in Washington, praised the scholars for issuing the edict. He said he hoped Muslim leaders would follow up the statement with action, by helping combat "specific movements that employ terrorism as a basic tactic."
Rabbi David Saperstein, director of the Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism in Washington, was especially encouraged that the Fiqh Council said its edict applied in all countries. The term fiqh refers to Islamic legal issues.

Load-Date: July 29, 2005


End of Document