Muslim team names spur furor;
Some Calif. youth football teams were renamed
after criticism that their choices glorify terrorism.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 29, 2003 Monday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A04
Length: 615 words
Byline: Chelsea J. Carter ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: IRVINE, Calif.
Body


The idea was innocent enough: A group of young men organize a holiday football tournament and give their teams such innocuous names as "4th and Goal" and "1988'ers."
It was some of the other team names that raised eyebrows: "Intifada," "Soldiers of Allah," and "Mujahideen."
The furor that followed has forced some teams to change their names and a handful of players to quit. It also sparked a debate that threatens to overshadow the tournament, which was planned primarily for young Muslims and scheduled for Sunday.
"This was really just supposed to be about the youth playing football. Now it's become so political that a part of me thinks we shouldn't even play," said Tarek Shawky, 29, one of the tournament's organizers.
Those involved in the league said they never set out to upset or offend anyone. But critics say such names glorify terrorism.
Intifada, "uprising" in Arabic, is used by Palestinians for their revolts against Israeli occupation from 1987 to 1993 and over the last three years. Mujahideen, which means "holy warrior," is associated with several Islamic groups that are on the U.S. list of terrorist organizations.
"The issue is these are words that are linked to real terrorists, real threats, real murders today," said Rabbi Abraham Cooper, associate dean of the Los Angeles-based Simon Wiesenthal Center.
"There shouldn't be young Americans chanting the name Mujahideen as American soldiers in Afghanistan and Iraq are put in danger and attacked daily," Cooper said. "As for Intifada, it has been a disaster for the Palestinians and the nearly 1,000 Israeli children and parents murdered by suicide bombers."
Muslim leaders have asked the teams to reconsider the names.
"Sensitizing our youths is our role as adults," said Hussam Ayloush, the executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations in Southern California.
But he also said he believed the players were not being malicious when they decided the names.
"In this case, the choices were totally innocent and meant for a small intra-Muslim tournament whose members all knew what the terms stand for," Ayloush said. "Unfortunately, we are aware that a few of those terms are being tainted by the abominable actions of a few Muslims."
One member of the Intifada team said a few of his friends were forced to quit because their parents were worried for their safety.
"It's kind of annoying me how big it's gotten," said Mohamad, 16, whose family asked that his last name be withheld.
Mohamad, whose family is Palestinian, said little discussion went into selecting the team name.
Mohamad's mother, Nuha, said she wanted her son to play despite the controversy but said her sister was considering withdrawing her son from the tournament.
Sabih Khan, 18, the tournament's founder, has received hate e-mail. The team names also prompted a war of words in local newspapers and on talk radio.
"I don't understand it all. They are just words," Khan said, pointing to professional teams such as the Washington Redskins, a nickname deemed offensive by some American Indian groups.
But Khan said he also had asked the teams to change their names.
Although two teams - Soldiers of Allah and Mujahideen - agreed, Intifada has not. Shawky said the team was considering a name change before the tournament.
The league also posted an open letter on the Internet, apologizing "if anyone took offense to what was intended to simply be a positive outlet for Muslim youth."
The letter also defended the use of the name Intifada, citing the Palestinian movement.
Khan and others said they intended to continue with the tournament.
"Controversy comes and goes," he said. "Today it's about the tournament; tomorrow it will be something else."

Load-Date: August 19, 2005


End of Document