Muslim nations fail to define terrorism; Divided opinion: Ministers draft a declaration rejecting any link between terrorism and the Palestinian struggle
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 3, 2002 Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c6
Length: 592 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia
Body


Stumbling over the Palestinian conflict, Muslim nations on Tuesday were unable to agree on a definition of terrorism at a conference intended to dispel post-Sept. 11 perceptions that Islam is rooted in violence.
Instead, the foreign ministers and officials of the 57-member Organization of the Islamic Conference drafted a declaration that rejected any link between terrorism and the Palestinian struggle.
The draft declaration, received by delegates after two days of meetings that coincided with increasing bloodshed in the Middle East, was expected to be passed without change Wednesday. The document said a committee would be established to work for a U.N. conference to take up the issue.
"This is a wasted opportunity," said Ahmad Azam, head of the Malaysian Youth Islamic Movement, a non-governmental organization that observed the meeting. "The problem is too many countries have their own interests."
Opinion had been divided here over Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad's proposal that attacks on civilians - including those by Palestinian suicide bombers - be classified as terrorism.
Palestinian and other Middle East delegates rejected the proposal, saying the bombers were driven by frustration over what they called Israeli terrorism in the occupied territories, where tanks and troops have entered Palestinian towns and besieged leader Yasser Arafat.
Mahathir supports the Palestinians, but said attacks targeting civilians could not be justified "irrespective of the nobility of the struggle."
Shaher Bak, Jordan's minister of state for foreign affairs, said differing opinions made consensus impossible. Other delegates said there was not enough time.
"Mahathir and Jordan speak the same language; we have no problem with what he said," the Jordanian minister said. "But there is such a diverse opinion on the definition of terrorism. It is very difficult to come up with a single text that defines the thinking of 57 countries."
Mahathir and other officials said the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington - in which Islamic radical Osama bin Laden is the chief suspect - were a disaster for the world's estimated 1.2 billion Muslims, whose faith was now perceived to be rooted in terror.
The draft declaration rejected "any attempts to link terrorism to the struggle of the Palestinian people" to establish an independent state with east Jerusalem as its capital.
"We reject any attempt to associate Islamic states or Palestinian and Lebanese resistance with terrorism," the draft said.
The roots of terrorism, including "foreign occupation, injustice and exclusion" should be addressed, it said.
The nations pledged commitment to "the principles and true teachings of Islam, which abhor aggression, value peace, tolerance and respect, as well as prohibiting the killing of innocent people.
"We reject any attempt to link Islam and Muslims to terrorism, as terrorism has no association with any religion, civilization or nationality," the document said.
The declaration supported an unprecedented offer by Arab countries last week to establish normal relations with Israel in exchange for withdrawal from all lands occupied in the 1967 Mideast war.
Palestinian Foreign Minister Farouk Kaddoumi, speaking to reporters before leaving the conference early, compared Israel to Nazi Germany and urged the world to intervene.
"This is a holocaust of the Palestinians," Kaddoumi was quoted as saying by the Bernama news agency. "We have to be supported by the international community to stop the Nazi Israelis from killing the Palestinian people."

Load-Date: April 4, 2002


End of Document