Muslims condemn terrorism, urge halt to bigotry
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 21, 1995, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 508 words
Byline: Ann Rodgers-Melnick, Post-Gazette Staff Writer
Body


Muslims in the Pittsburgh region are offering prayers for victims of the Oklahoma City bombing -- while also praying not to become secondary victims of the terrorist attack.
Local and national Islamic groups condemned the bombing as an inexcusable sin, but also urged reporters not to fan fires of religious and ethnic bigotry.
''I personally don't believe that those who did this have any religion at all. I even question if they are human beings,'' said Abdul Mawjoud, director of the Pittsburgh Islamic Information Center.
''I am much concerned that this will bring hate crimes against Muslims. … Muslims, as law-abiding citizens in this country, know and believe and stand behind the statement made by President Clinton that this is an evil act and that these criminals have to be brought to justice.''
In Oklahoma City, Jebal Abdul Raheem Aziz, leader of the Islamic Community of Oklahoma, said: ''We know we've been labeled, and it won't go away until this is cleared up. We want the perpetrators to be caught and to be given the death penalty.''
Police in Oklahoma investigated death threats and threatening calls at two mosques in the wake of Wednesday's bombing.
But some politicians noted that Oklahoma City was the site of a 1992 Islamic conference featuring inflammatory rhetoric, and they cited parallels to the 1993 World Trade Center blast in New York City, in which the suspects had Middle Eastern backgrounds.
The Islamic Society of North America met in Tulsa last weekend. It was among at least a dozen Islamic groups that issued public statements about the bombing, all of them mixing denunciation of the crime with a plea for fairness.
Early yesterday, two Indiana University of Pennsylvania students told police that two strangers confronted them on the street with accusations of complicity in the bombing. One of the students, Mumtaz Mahmood, said one of the men shoved him.
No random acts of vengeance against Muslims have been reported in Pittsburgh.
''The Muslim community of Pittsburgh wishes to express its horror and shock at the cowardly terrorist attack on innocent people in Oklahoma City. A criminal act such as this cannot be legitimized by any cause,'' said a statement from the Islamic Center of Pittsburgh.
''We wish to express our condolences to the families of the victims and we pray for the speedy recovery of the injured. We also wish to express our concern about media stereotypes associated with this tragedy.''
Nine major national Islamic organizations signed a statement noting that crimes by Christians, Jews or Buddhists are not blamed on their religions.
''This is the accepted journalistic standard used when reporting on all types of crime. American Muslims ask that they receive the same consideration,'' it said.
Any Muslim who tried to justify this bombing would be twisting the faith beyond recognition, said Jeremiah McAuliffe, a spokesman for the Islamic Center of Pittsburgh. A convert to Islam from Catholicism, McAuliffe is a doctoral candidate at Duquesne University's Institute of Formative Spirituality.

Load-Date: April 23, 1995


End of Document