Muslims Across The UK Condemn Latest Terrorist Attack
The Salem State Log: Salem State College
June 5, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 1
Length: 398 words
Byline: Michael Luton
Body


Muslims in the U.K. condemned the last terrorist attacks carried, saying that those attackers who kill and terrorize have religion as a mask as they do not represent Islam and share twisted beliefs.
Terrorism has no religion
Imam Abdul Quddus Arif, of the local Ahmadiyya Muslim community, told HuffPost UK on Sunday, "Terrorism has no religion. Basically, not in my name, not in the name of Islam. I want to make that very clear."
There were eyewitnesses who claimed that they have seen the attackers of London Bridge shouting the name of Allah amid the attacks. ISIS has reportedly claimed responsibility for the attack, which comes after Manchester City suicidal attack of last months.
"Islam is not a religion as portrayed by these so-called Muslims. Islam is a religion that says if you kill an innocent soul it's akin to killing the whole of humanity, and if you save an innocent soul it's akin to saving the whole of humanity," he said, amid prayers for the victims and first responders. "A true Muslim, he only has two purposes. One is fulfilling the rights of God, and second is to fulfill the rights of his fellow beings."
Arif attempted to deliver a message that said that terrorism never represented Islam. Likewise, several Muslim organizations across the country denounce extremism and attempt to reform the misinterpreted image formed about Muslims and Islam.
In a statement, New Horizons in British Islam charity said, "It shouldn't even have to be said, but this is not Islam. Their warped view of the world doesn't belong here in our country. Frankly, it doesn't belong anywhere in the world. It should die with them."
MAOB
The Muslim Association of Britain also denounced that attacks and attempted to take a stand against it.
"As members of British Society, we must continue to condemn all acts of terror, and we must not allow these criminals to spread hatred and fear; and we must foil their attempts to divide us," they stated.
Harun Khan, Secretary General of the Muslim Council of Britain, said that all Muslim found the attacks revolting and labeled the attackers as cowards.
"Muslims everywhere are outraged and disgusted at these cowards who once again have destroyed the lives of our fellow Britons," he said. "That this should happen in this month of Ramadan, when many Muslims were praying and fasting only goes to show that these people respect neither life nor faith."

Load-Date: June 5, 2017


End of Document