Muslims must follow 5 pillars
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 22, 2008 Saturday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 3
Length: 458 words
Byline: shanethra stephenson Central Alternative High School
Body


Editor's note: Students at Central Alternative High School are conducting in-depth research on the impact and significance of global terrorism.
During the next several weeks, the Telegraph Herald will publish essays written by the students as part of their project, which will culminate in a public seminar on global terrorism this spring.
Islam: A Way of Life
When I first started this research on Islam, I didn't know what I was getting myself into. It was somewhat hard, but I learned a lot. We are writing research for a new book. This year the topic is global terrorism. I chose Islam because I was interested in knowing more about it.
There are two general meanings for Islam. Islam means the religious faith of Muslims, based on the words and religious system founded by the prophet Muhammed and taught by the Koran, the basic principle of which is absolute submission to a unique and personal god, Allah. It also means the whole body of Muslim believers, their civilization and the countries in which theirs is the dominant religion.
I learned that there are important teachings of Islam that every Muslim must follow. Here are the five pillars: 1. Believe that Allah is the only god and Mohammed is his messenger. 2. Pray five times a day, facing the holy city of Mecca, during the early morning, mid-morning, mid-day, evening and before bed. 3. Must give alms (portions of income) to help the poor. 4. At least once in their lifetime, Muslims should make a trip, called the hajj, to the holy city of Mecca. 5. During the month of Ramadan, Muslims have to refrain from eating, drinking or having sexual relations during the day. You'll have to read our book to learn more.
There also is believed to be a sixth pillar. The name of this pillar is "jihad," which has meant "striving," or "determined." Nowadays, most radical Muslims define this term to mean "holy war." There are three interpretations of jihad. The first interpretation means a personal struggle of knowing and doing what is right and avoiding doing wrong, or personal struggles against temptation. It's a private matter between Muslims who believe this definition and Allah.
The second interpretation means to sacrifice to defend the religion of Islam from the attacks of non-believers. It is not a physical struggle, but a mental or intellectual challenge. Muslims who believe this definition of jihad wear their traditional garments and observe all the teachings of Islam in public.
The third interpretation means willing to become a martyr and die for Islam. They use violence against non-
believers and "enemies" of Islam. Some radical Islamic leaders and scholars teach Muslims to believe that dying this way will bring great honor to families and friends and get them into heaven.

Load-Date: March 22, 2008


End of Document