Muslim laity must speak out against terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 8, 2002, Sunday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: VIEWPOINT;
Length: 794 words
Byline: By Betsy Hart Scripps Howard News Service
Body


As we get closer to the first anniversary of Sept. 11, I find myself thinking about . . . the Roman Catholic Church. As one Catholic parishioner recently told the New York Times in a story on how the Catholic laity has forcefully, openly, and actively responded to the priest sex abuse scandal, "We can't believe the depths of this disgusting evil that has snuck in from the inside."
I myself am Presbyterian, but I've been impressed that devoted Catholic laity have not been afraid to name those who committed these atrocious acts, demand they and those in the Catholic hierarchy who protected them be held accountable and punished, and to push for reform with the goal that this does not happen again. According to the Times account, the laity is by no means yet satisfied. So for starters, many are redirecting their donations to Catholic charities instead of the Catholic Church.
It seems it's the most religious and traditional members of the Catholic community who understand that while they are not responsible for the priest sexual abuse scandal, they are responsible for holding their church accountable for truly ending the scandal.
And so I think of this lay Catholic response when I hear from well-meaning Muslims who write to me in response to the question I've posed more than once in the last year, "where is the Muslim outrage since Sept. 11?" "What more can we do?" they typically ask me. "We have had open houses in our mosques, we have gone into local schools to explain our religion, we've participated in prayer services" and so on. But that says little except that Americans are by and large very tolerant.
Yes, some Muslim lay people and even leaders have condemned terrorism, including the terrorism of Sept. 11, yet so often in general terms and with a "but." "But" America has to understand what it's done to foment this hatred, "but" Muslims are being treated so unfairly in the wake of Sept. 11," etc.
Sure the comparison with the Catholic Church is imperfect. Many Muslims will undoubtedly bristle at it, for one thing arguing that there it was ordained priests, official representatives of the religion, preying on the youngsters. But then again, I doubt many such priests made the case that their Catholicism called them to commit these terrible acts, or had hundreds of millions of people cheering them on.
So yes, American Muslims of good will have a duty to call their religion to account too.
More than anything else, the Muslim laity should demand that Islamic religious leaders condemn by name those Muslims who commit suicide bombings anywhere in the world, reiterating that these killers do not go to heaven with their virgins but instead are punished in eternity. I have yet to hear a single Islamic cleric make such a statement, yet if they truly "condemn terrorism," doesn't it follow? And if hundreds of Muslim religious leaders were consistently making that argument, wouldn't that cause some would-be suicide bombers to think twice? Further, American Muslims should regularly denounce those who even implicitly support terrorism. That includes "respectable" Muslim governments like Saudi Arabia that pour millions of dollars into schools even here in the United States that preach hatred of America and the West and, though they deny it, pay families of Palestinian suicide bombers.
And American Muslims must speak out about international atrocities committed in the name of Islam. In Nigeria under Islamic law a young mother has been sentenced to being stoned to death for adultery. This is just one, of many such cases, which happened to gain notoriety. Western leaders are outraged but the Islamic world is largely silent, as is the American Muslim community.
American Muslim advocacy groups like the American Muslim Alliance, which on its Web site forcefully argues that "as a world leader the United States must do more to save lives and uphold international law," referring to Israel, says nothing about this lawlessness in Nigeria. The Council on American-Islamic Relations, which focuses extensively on "unfair" treatment of Muslims and Muslim nations at the hands of Americans, does not mention the savage treatment of this Muslim woman at the hands of her "brethren."
Certainly many Muslims of good will don't want to speak up out of fear, or cultural reticence. But just as it's those in the Catholic laity who've forcefully responded to the sex-abuse scandal who may save the American Catholic Church, if there is any hope of ending this scourge of extremist Muslim terrorism we desperately need to similarly hear from the American Muslim community. And long before the next anniversary of Sept. 11.
Betsy Hart, a frequent commentator on CNN and the Fox News Channel, can be reached by e-mail at: mailtohart@aol.com.  

Load-Date: September 8, 2002


End of Document