Muslim Group Drops Suit Against Yale U. Press and Others
The Chronicle of Higher Education
September 7, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 The Chronicle of Higher Education All Rights Reserved
Section: RESEARCH; Pg. 20; Vol. 54; No. 2
Length: 760 words
Byline: RICHARD BYRNE
Body


SLAPPED DOWN: In the climate of post-9/11 America, to be linked with the financing of terrorism is among the strongest charges that can be made against a group or individual.
Indeed, a Saudi banker named Khalid bin Mahfouz has been relentless in his pursuit of libel claims against presses that have published books linking businesses and charities with which he is associated to the financing of terrorism. His latest victory came in early August, when Cambridge University Press agreed to pulp all unsold copies of Alms for Jihad: Charity and Terrorism in the Islamic World, which the press published in 2006 (The Chronicle, August 10).
So it came as a surprise in mid-August when a nonprofit Muslim-American group and its chairwoman withdrew their libel suit against Yale University Press, the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, and Matthew Levitt, a senior fellow at the institute.
The suit, which was filed in California Superior Court in Los Angeles in April, said that charges in a book by Mr. Levitt defamed both the group -- KinderUSA, which works with children in Gaza, Lebanon, and other areas -- and Laila Al-Marayati, the group's chairwoman. The book is Hamas: Politics, Charity, and Terrorism in the Service of Jihad, which the Yale press published in 2006. Mr. Levitt's book "asserts that KinderUSA funds Hamas" and implies "that it is connected to the Al Qaeda funding network," according to the complaint.
In July 2006, KinderUSA notified the press and the institute of what it called "inaccuracies" in Hamas. The charity demanded a retraction and a halt in further distribution of the book. After the press refused, the charity filed the lawsuit, asking for $500,000 in compensatory damages and an unspecified amount in punitive damages.
The charity asserted in the complaint that the statements in Hamas "subject the organization to unfair scrutiny or suspicion, damage its ability to raise funds and to recruit and retain volunteers for its charitable mission, and cause irreparable harm to its reputation."
According to the Yale press and its lawyers, the lawsuit was withdrawn after an agreement between the parties. That agreement included no monetary settlement from the defendants, placed no restrictions on the book's distribution, and required no alterations to be made in the disputed passages in future editions of the book. The press followed the book's initial printing with a paperback version this year.
Todd E. Gallinger, a lawyer for KinderUSA, confirmed the agreement and withdrawal of the lawsuit. He told The Chronicle that "the KinderUSA board took a look at this and saw the resources that it would take to clear their name   and decided that it would be better to use those resources on their core mission of helping children in need."
***
A key element in the withdrawal of the lawsuit was a provision in California law enacted in 1992 and designed to prevent lawsuits filed with the purpose of chilling free speech.
Known as the "anti-Slapp" statute, ("Slapp" is short for "Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation"), the provision allows a judge to dismiss a lawsuit immediately if it involves free-speech issues and if the judge determines that it has little probability of success.
In response to the initial complaint by KinderUSA and Ms. Al-Marayati, lawyers for the defendants filed motions to strike the lawsuit based on the anti-Slapp provision.
Lawyers for the Yale press argued in a June memorandum filed in the case that the lawsuit was "the classic, meritless challenge to free expression that the anti-Slapp law is designed to protect against."
Dean Ringel, a lawyer at Cahill Gordon & Reindel who represented Yale University Press in the case, said the California law "does provide some extra procedural advantages to the defendant, including the potential for recovery of attorneys' fees." But, he added, he believed that "substantial grounds exist to dismiss this lawsuit in any jurisdiction."
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy hailed the withdrawal of the lawsuit as a vindication of its scholar. The institute's executive director, Robert Satloff, noted that "as a result of the dismissal, Dr. Levitt's scholarship stands as it should be -- on its own merit, unchanged by litigation or legal compromise. We were deeply concerned about the chilling effect lawsuits like this may have on other important scholars who are researching similar topics, and we hope that this result will help to create an environment more conducive to an open and honest discussion of such significant topics."

Load-Date: September 6, 2007


End of Document