Muslim-bashing display retracted, at least for now
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 31, 2005 Sunday


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: NEIGHBORHOOD TIMES; Pg. 5; Newspaper
Length: 512 words
Byline: ANNE LINDBERG
Dateline: PINELLAS PARK
Body


Ahmed Bedier went to photograph the anti-Muslim display that stood boldly last week in a front yard on 62nd Avenue N.
But when the Central Florida director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations realized the property owner was home, he made a bold move.
"I knocked on the door and had a conversation with him," Bedier said. "I asked him why he was doing it and why he had the display."
Mike Allen's display featured a toilet with a red-lettered sign that read, "Koran flushing. 1 p.m."
Allen said he explained that the tableau was his way of protesting what he saw as the failure of Muslim clerics to condemn terrorism and the actions that resulted in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Allen was a bit surprised by Bedier's response.
"He said, "I feel the same way about those terrorists you do,' " Allen said.
Bedier went out to his car and brought back his laptop computer. Then he showed Allen the press releases and articles that CAIR had issued to condemn terrorism and explain Islam to U.S. citizens. He also showed Allen a video of a public service announcement that CAIR recently released. The video, like the press releases, condemns terrorism.
"He was surprised to see those different things and that we're actually taking action," Bedier said.
Bedier also showed Allen pictures of his wife and child.
Then Bedier asked Allen to remove the display.
Allen said he agreed because Bedier had been "so nice."
"We took pictures of me removing the sign," Allen said. "I took it back over to the trash cans . . . and I put that sign in the trash can."
He also got rid of the toilet.
Allen said, "I told him I wished I had some bread in the house. We'd break bread."
Instead, the two ate grapes and cantaloupe.
Then Allen agreed to visit Bedier's mosque to break the fast of Ramadan in October.
For Bedier, the experience was hopeful and supported his belief that people are less likely to have anti-Muslim beliefs once they get to know members of the faith.
"I think more of us need to reach out and communicate with each other," Bedier said. "It was a good experience for me to see how different approaches could work."
Bedier said Allen seemed like a nice person who just might have had a "change of heart."
Maybe. Maybe not.
Allen explained to Neighborhood Times that he has a wait-and-see attitude. If he does not see CAIR's public service announcement or Muslim clerics speaking out, he will re-create the display.
As for Bedier, Allen said, "He was really the most charming person. But I realize that we've all been charmed before."
While Allen is monitoring Muslim reaction to terrorism, he has plans for a smaller toilet that he has. First, he'll flush pictures of people with whom he politically disagrees, such as U.S. Sen. Ted Kennedy, D-Mass., U.S. Rep. Barbara Pelosi, D-Calif., and U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill.
Then he may turn to Pinellas Park's code enforcement department. Allen has a continuing war with two of the code officers, Vinny Cassara and Vicky Watson, and their boss, Sgt. Tracey Schofield.
"I think I'm going to have a Schofield, Vinny and Vicky flush," Allen said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Ahmed Bedier (ran East, South, Beach, Seminole)

Load-Date: July 31, 2005


End of Document