MY OPINION;
Bombs: As we resist terrorism, politicians cower from lobbyism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 31, 1996, Wednesday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL OLYMPICS; Pg. 14A; Cynthia Tucker
Length: 563 words
Byline: Cynthia Tucker
Body


With a combination of courage and resolve, Americans are learning to live with terrorism and random lunacy on home turf. Like the Israelis and the British, the Indians and the French, Americans are getting used to the threat of attacks aimed at everybody and nobody in particular: children, business executives, government agents, homemakers. Even as the fear seeps under the skin, Americans go on.
On Tuesday morning, Centennial Olympic Park was officially reopened after a brief ceremony memorializing the victims of Saturday's vicious attack, which killed Alice Stubbs Hawthorne of Albany, led to the death by heart attack of Turkish TV cameraman Melih Uzunyol and injured more than 100 others. The memorial service was attended by tens of thousands of local residents and visitors who did not intend to allow a degenerate who plants explosives in a park to have the last word.
In their determination to stare down cowards with bombs, ordinary Americans show an integrity and a courage that many politicians are unable to muster. Congress passed a watered-down anti-terrorism bill last year that left out one of the most important terrorism-fighting measures: a provision to require colored plastic chips called "taggants" in all explosives that could be used to make bombs. Although that provision ran into opposition from both the explosives industry and the National Rifle Association, it was the NRA that scared its minions into toeing the line on taggants.
One of the ringleaders of the opposition to taggants was U.S. Rep. Bob Barr (R-Ga.), a man who displayed a capacity for reasoned judgment as a U.S. attorney that has been missing since he got to Congress. Barr has become a spokesman for hatemongering, right-wing causes ---including the anti-gay Defense of Marriage Act ---and a puppet of the NRA. He is a major proponent of overturning the ban on cop-killing assault-type weapons. And he led the fight in the U.S. House against mixing taggants into gunpowder.
Taggants are color-coded chips about the size of a grain of sand that leave a residue after an explosion. They allow investigators to trace not only the manufacturer of the explosive but also the distributor and, often, the purchaser. After a bomb blast that killed a Baltimore steelworker in 1979, the taggants in the residue led federal agents to a suspect, who was later convicted of the crime.
The NRA had no beef with using taggants in plastic explosives, the more exotic material often associated with terrorists of the foreign variety. But the gun lobby fiercely opposed putting taggants in gunpowder, sometimes used by home-grown anarchists who make crude bombs. Those home-grown lunatics, whether they run in packs or alone, whether they are political extremists or pathetic headline-seekers, are dangerous. There is no excuse for a failure to make it easier for law enforcement to track them down.
So, while citizens accept their duty to fight back against maniacs in the only way they know how ---by continuing to work and travel and mingle in public places ---they are sold out by their politicians, who do not want to give up the dollars dished out to their campaigns by NRA officials. The people deserve better than these politicians.
Congress has failed to make catching terrorists easier, says Cynthia Tucker, editor of the Constitution's editorial pages. Her column appears Wednesdays and Sundays.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document