MY TURN: SEEDS OF TERRORISM HAVE BEEN SOWN AND ARE BEING FERTILIZED
The Taos News (New Mexico)
August 14, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 The Taos News All Rights Reserved
Section: FAVOR Y CONTRA/OPINION; Pg. A-8
Length: 679 words
Byline: RICHY GREEN
Body


The July 10 column "What really do the terrorists want" is clearly a response to my first response letter posted in the July 3 issue. My response stated that a large amount of terrorism has been due to the United States' foreign policy and military action.
The writer sidesteps the issue with examples of negative aspects of Islam but fails to prove the actions of our administration are decreasing terrorism. The writer thinks if you believe our nation is responsible for causing Islamic terrorism, you are ignoring the history of militant Islam and being nice to terrorists will not change their behavior.
How does pointing out the effect of U.S. actions on terrorism either ignore the history of militant Islam or imply that we should be nice to the terrorists? My previous article did not "imply that if we change our attitude the Islamic terrorists will magically go away." Instead I stated that if we do not follow our own special interests groups that have dragged us to war, the Islamic terrorist will have less "... hate in his heart and a lust to kill us." Militant Islam may lead to terrorism but U.S. involvement has both strengthened militant Islam and increased terrorism.
Terrorism has increased in Iraq and worldwide since the start of the war. In the March 1, 2007 Mother Jones article titled "The Iraq Effect: War Has Increased Terrorism Sevenfold," the author states "Our study yields one resounding finding: The rate of fatal terrorist attacks around the world ... increased dramatically after the invasion of Iraq. Globally, there was a 607 percent rise in the average yearly incidence ... Contrary to Bush's assertion Jihadists have not let the Iraq war distract them from targeting allies. The rate of attacks on Western interests and citizens has risen by almost 25 percent..."
Contrary to the theme of the writer's article, the intentions of the Iraq war have nothing to do with stopping the institutionalization of Sharia Law. If that were the case we would be invading Darfur, Sudan and Somalia. Why did the U.S. invade Iraq or Afghanistan? The government in Iraq under Saddam Hussein was secular, and Afghanistan was invaded for harboring Osama Bin Laden.
The writer tries to explain the history of militant Islam with ambiguous terms like sharia, jihad, terrorist and biased reports from sources like Wikipedia in which any non-expert can publish. He continues to back up his argument using far-fetched scenarios of Muslims taking over the world and imposing Sharia law here in the U.S.
Our government has supported terrorists and groups like Osama Bin Laden and Taliban in the past. The U.S. administration is currently supporting a group called the Jondollah, whom are terrorists and enemies of America and who are also hostile to Iran. The U.S. also supports the tyrannical monarchy that follows Sharia Law, Saudi Arabia.
What do the terrorists want? Do they want to take over the world and impose a new world order based on Sharia Law and kill all the infidels? Osama Bin Laden said his reasons for attacking the U.S. were the U.S. support for Israel, the U.S. bases in the holy lands and the mistreatment of the Palestinians. He also March 1997 to CNN said, "We declared jihad against the U.S. government, because the U.S. government is unjust, criminal, and tyrannical. It has committed acts that are extremely unjust, hideous, and criminal, whether directly or through its support of the Israeli."
One can state all the evils of Islamic Sharia until one is blue in the face, but there are just as many if not more social ills in this society. That still won't change the fact that Western economies, neo-colonialism, foreign policy, clandestine military operations, and interventions have opened a Pandora's box in the Middle East. It is too late to undo the past actions. The seeds of terrorism have been sown and are being fertilized. The point is, are we going to make amends and reparations, or will we just follow the same path of empire that got us where we are today?
Richy Green lives on the West Mesa and is a student, artist, and gardener.

Graphic

 
See pdf's for caption, graphics and photographer info.

Load-Date: January 14, 2010


End of Document