N Y MINUTE
Daily News (New York)
March 6, 2007 Tuesday
CITY FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 10
Length: 361 words
Byline: BY JOHN MARZULLI AND MICHAEL SAUL
Body


L.I. sex-slavery convict
A SADISTIC Long Island pervert was convicted yesterday of S&M sex trafficking and torturing a woman who had once agreed to be his slave.
Glenn Marcus, 53, faces a possible sentence of 30 years to life in prison. He was acquitted of one count of disseminating obscene photos on his Web site, Slavespace.com.
The jury deliberated for seven days, poring over a mountain of evidence that included 4,000 images from the Web site depicting women being restrained, beaten, poked with needles and humiliated.
Marcus was allowed to remain free on $1 million bail and reside at his parents' home in Long Island.
John Marzulli.
Terror-insurance bill
MAYOR BLOOMBERG and Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) appealed to Congress yesterday to renew a law that provides insurance against terrorism, saying hundreds of billions of dollars in economic activity is at stake. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act requires insurers to provide coverage against terrorism but it caps their total liability, with the feds picking up the remainder. The law expires at the end of this year.
Michael Saul.
Mike pans gay ban
MAYOR BLOOMBERG criticized the organizers of New York's St. Patrick's Day Parade yesterday for banning gay groups from marching, one day after City Council Speaker Christine Quinn announced she will travel to Ireland to march as an openly gay woman in Dublin's March 17 parade.
Bloomberg said the law allows the parade's organizers to prohibit certain groups from marching, but he thinks the organizers are wrong for doing so.
Michael Saul.
Taco Bell suit crawls on
A BROOKLYN judge rejected a request yesterday from lawyers for Taco Bell to postpone a personal-injury trial because of the bad publicity surrounding a rat invasion in the chain's Greenwich Village restaurant.
Federal Judge Sandra Townes ordered lawyers to pick a jury yesterday, rejecting concerns by the embattled company that it can't get a fair trial even though it's a slip-and-fall negligence case.
Videos circulating on the Internet last month blew the lid off the rodent scandal at the Taco Bell on Sixth Ave. and W. Fourth St., showing numerous rats scampering around the restaurant.
John Marzulli

Load-Date: March 6, 2007


End of Document