N. Ireland Parties Reach Agreement To Halt Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
September 27, 1993, Monday


Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; INTERNATIONAL; Pg. 3
Length: 602 words
Byline: Alexander MacLeod, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: LONDON
Highlight: MORE SECRET DIPLOMACY
Body


SINN FEIN, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army
(IRA), has agreed on a formula with one of Northern Ireland's main
constitutional parties for putting an end to terrorism in the
war-torn province.
The plan marks the first time Sinn Fein and the Social
Democratic and Liberal Party (SDLP) have shared common ground on
how to achieve a peace accord in Northern Ireland.
Officials in London and Dublin called the move an important
breakthrough in attempts to halt the violence in Ulster. But the
development could create problems for British Prime Minister John
Major, whose narrow parliamentary majority could be threatened if
he backs the accord.
Sinn Fein and the mainly Roman Catholic SDLP have sent a
progress report on their peace talks to government authorities in
Dublin. British officials expect details this week.
The report, which is the outcome of six months of secret
negotiations between Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, and John
Hume, leader of the SDLP, has sparked anger among Northern
Ireland's Protestant politicians.
The Rev. Ian Paisley, leader of the Democratic Unionist Party
(DUP), said a pact among Sinn Fein, the IRA, and the SDLP
threatened to ''result in the destruction of Northern Ireland.'' He
promised to oppose such a development.
Mr. Hume, however, appealed to the Protestant side to show
patience and restraint. ''The peace process must involve all
parties and must be considered by both the British and Irish
governments.''
POLITICAL sources close to Hume say the peace formula involves
a cessation of terrorism by the IRA in return for a scaling down of
the number of British troops in Northern Ireland and a review of
cases of IRA prisoners held in British jails. The sources said
there were indications that Mr. Adams might be prepared to modify
his long-standing call for a united Ireland.
An SDLP source in Belfast, the Northern Ireland capital, said
that in his talks with Hume, Adams had acted with the full backing
of the entire republican movement, including the IRA.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, British secretary of state for Northern
Ireland, said that he would ''consider carefully'' any matters
Dublin wished to raise as a result of the talks. He emphasized that
the British government would not talk with the IRA until it had
publicly renounced terrorism.
The Sinn Fein-SDLP accord has emerged at a time of escalating
violence in Northern Ireland. Most of the attacks in recent weeks
have been launched by the Ulster Freedom Fighters and other
Protestant paramilitary organizations. British official sources say
supporters of the Unionist cause apparently got wind of the secret
talks soon after they began last April.
Reverend Paisley's DUP and the larger Ulster Unionist Party
(UUP), led by James Molyneaux, are likely to be embarrassed by the
agreement between Adams and Hume.
If Sinn Fein and the SDLP can lend credibility to their attempts
to persuade the IRA to abandon terrorism, Unionist politicians will
find themselves under pressure to restrain Protestant paramilitary
groups.
Mr. Major may find himself in an embarrassing position, too.
Last July he accepted the support of nine UUP Members of
Parliament in pushing the Maastricht Treaty through the House of
Commons. At that time, the prime minister insisted that he had made
no deals with Mr. Molyneaux. But with a narrow Commons majority,
and with some Conservative MPs hostile to his leadership, he may
have to continue to rely on UUP support.
If London looks favorably on what Adams and Hume have achieved,
Unionist MPs in the Commons may attempt to block progress on a
Northern Ireland peace deal by threatening to withhold support from
the Major government.

Load-Date: September 26, 1993


End of Document