N. IRELAND SENSES IMPENDING VIOLENCE;
TALKS CONTINUE, BUT PUBLIC EXPECTS MORE TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 21, 1998, Wednesday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A5
Length: 273 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND
Body


Politicians kept striving Tuesday for a settlement of Northern Ireland's future, despite a key negotiator's warning that the province was "moving closer and closer to all-out violence."
In Belfast's divided streets, Roman Catholics and Protestants alike took little heart from the continuing talks, instead bracing for more terrorism by the extremists.
Sam Magill, a Protestant delivering sacks of coal from a flatbed truck to Catholic homes in south-central Belfast, said, "People's emotions are running high. We all feel like potential targets."
A few hundred yards away, mourners gathered at the home of the latest Catholic victim, Larry Brennan, 52, who was shot point-blank late Monday while sitting behind the wheel of his idling cab.
Brennan's sister, Eilish O'Reilly, noted that his fiancee and best friends were Protestant. Police asked Belfast newspapers not to disclose the name of Brennan's fiancee or publish her picture after she received anonymous death threats Tuesday, and Brennan's Protestant colleagues at work would not be interviewed on the record.
No group claimed responsibility for killing Brennan. But police and politicians suspect members of the Ulster Defense Association, Northern Ireland's largest pro-British paramilitary group.
Gary McMichael, who represents the Ulster Defense Association in the Belfast talks, dismissed the speculation. But he admitted that he wasn't sure how much success he was having in his appeals to the group's members not to strike back over the murder earlier Monday of Jim Guiney, a family friend of McMichael's.
"We're moving closer and closer to all-out violence," McMichael said.     

Load-Date: January 21, 1998


End of Document