N. Korea may go back on terror list; U.S. mulls what to do in wake of Sony cyberattack
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 22, 2014 Monday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 6
Length: 474 words
Byline: JOSH LEDERMAN

The Associated Press
Dateline: HONOLULU  
Highlight: Obama says US reviewing whether to return North Korea to list of state sponsors of terrorism
Body


President Barack Obama says the United States is reviewing whether to put North Korea back on its list of state sponsors of terrorism as Washington decides how to respond to what he calls an act of cybervandalism, not one of war, against a movie company.
Sony Pictures Entertainment, which said it canceled the theatrical release of The Interview after distributors refused to show it, pledged to find a way to get the film out. How it's going to be distributed, I don't think anybody knows quite yet, a Sony lawyer said. The comedy involves a plot to assassinate North Korea's leader.
Obama is promising to respond proportionately to an attack that law enforcement blames on North Korea. We're not going to be intimidated by some cyberhackers, he said.
The president said the U.S. would examine the facts to determine whether North Korea should land back on the terrorism sponsors list.
We're going to review those through a process that's already in place, Obama told CNN's State of the Union in an interview broadcast Sunday. I'll wait to review what the findings are.
While raising the possibility of a terrorism designation, Obama also asserted, I don't think it was an act of war. I think it was an act of cybervandalism that was very costly, very expensive. We take it very seriously.
Obama's description drew immediate scorn from two Republicans who are longtime critics of his foreign policy.
It is a new form of warfare, and we have to counter with that form of warfare with a better form of warfare, said Arizona Sen. John McCain on CNN.
Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina called it an act of terrorism on CBS' Face the Nation and favored reimposing sanctions and adding North Korea to the terrorism list. The U.S. needs to make is so hard on the North Koreans that they don't want to do this in the future.
North Korea spent two decades on the list until the Bush administration removed it in 2008 during nuclear negotiations. Only Iran, Sudan, Syria and Cuba remain on the list, which triggers sanctions that limit U.S. aid, defense exports and certain financial transactions.
But adding North Korea back could be difficult. To meet the criteria, the State Department must determine that a country has repeatedly supported acts of international terrorism, a definition that traditionally has referred to violent, physical attacks rather than hacking.
North Korea threatened to strike back at the United States if Obama retaliated, the National Defense Commission said in a statement carried by the country's official Korean Central News Agency. The statement offered no details of a possible response.
The U.S. is asking China for help as it considers how to respond to the hack. A senior Obama administration official says the U.S. and China have shared information about the attack and that Washington has asked for Beijing's cooperation.

Load-Date: December 22, 2014


End of Document