N. Korea wants U.S. to drop tag; Kim: Terrorism list preventing tires
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
August 14, 2000, Monday


Copyright 2000 The Pantagraph
Section: News; Pg. A8
Length: 640 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


SEOUL, South Korea (AP) - The leader of long-reclusive North Korea said he would open ties with the United States right away if it removes his country from a list of terrorism-sponsoring nations, South Korea's state media reported Sunday.
"The U.S. is putting a cap of a terrorist nation on us," the Yonghap news agency quoted Kim Jong Il as saying. "As soon as they remove it, we would open ties with the U.S. - even tomorrow."
North Korea is one of seven countries branded by the U.S. State Department as a sponsor of terrorism. Under U.S. law, that bars all but humanitarian aid to the North's government and rules out bank loans from international financial organizations, which are heavily influenced by Washington.
The two nations recently held talks in Pyongyang, the North's capital, on possibly removing the communist country from the list. The U.S. State Department called the meeting productive but did not disclose details.
Pyongyang was put on the list because of its alleged involvement in the bombing of a South Korean airliner in the skies near Myanmar, also known as Burma, in 1987. All 115 people aboard the Korean Air plane died.
Kim's comments on ties with the United States came last week during a meeting with executives of 46 South Korean media organizations who visited the Stalinist North, Yonhap reported. Kim invited the executives after he met with South Korean President Kim Dae-jung in Pyongyang in June - the first-ever summit between leaders of the two Koreas.
The North's leader told the executives he wants to visit South Korea "at an appropriate time, but as soon as possible," Yonhap said. He had promised a visit during the summit.
Also Sunday, Yonhap quoted Kim as saying that North Korea will continue to develop what it calls scientific satellites for peaceful purposes. "The U.S. would not want to give us money, but they want to stop our research," Kim was quoted as saying.
North Korea shocked the region by firing a rocket over Japan and into the Pacific in 1998. It said it launched a satellite, but U.S. officials called it a test-firing of a long-range ballistic missile.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, who met with Kim Jong Il in July, told President Clinton at a summit of industrialized nations last month that North Korea was willing to abandon its missile program if other countries helped it launch space satellites. U.S. officials have expressed skepticism.
On a separate topic, Yonhap quoted Kim as saying the two Koreas will allow more reunions between families from each side in September and October. A first round of reunions between relatives who have not seen for a half-century begins Tuesday.
Thousands of South Koreans are believed to have gone to the North voluntarily or after being drafted into the North's army during the 1950-53 Korean War. An estimated 1.2 million North Koreans fled to South Korea before or during the war.
Since the war, the two Koreas have been separated by a highly militarized border. There is no mail, telephone or other direct means of communication between private citizens.
But in the first round of reunions Tuesday, South and North Korea agreed to exchange 100 people each. It was one of a wave of goodwill gestures set in motion by the summit between the neighbors, and a major step toward reconciliation for a peninsula divided into the communist North and the pro-Western South since 1945.
The first reunions will let the 100 people from each side visit Seoul and Pyongyang, respectively. But by next year, separated families from South Korea will be allowed to visit their hometowns in the North, Yonhap quoted Kim as saying.
"The overall relations between the North and the South have developed in favor of national reconciliation, unity and reunification," Kim Jong Il was quoted as saying in a report Sunday by the North's foreign news outlet, KCNA.

Load-Date: August 20, 2000


End of Document