N. KOREA ADVANCES NUKE PACT; DISABLING OF PLANTS TIED TO REMOVAL FROM U.S. TERROR LIST
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 4, 2007 Thursday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 876 words
Byline: HELENE COOPER, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


North Korea has agreed to disable all of its nuclear facilities by the end of the year, in a move that the Bush administration hailed as a diplomatic victory that could serve as a model for how to deal with Iran, which has defied U.S. efforts to rein in its nuclear ambitions.
The North Korea agreement, announced yesterday in Beijing, sets out the first specific timetable for Pyongyang to disclose all its nuclear programs and disable all facilities in return for 950,000 metric tons of fuel oil or its equivalent in economic aid.
The accord is the second stage of a six-nation pact reached in February that critics say rewards North Korea for its test of a nuclear device last October. The agreement has not yet resolved the contentious question of when North Korea will give up its nuclear weapons.
The agreement calls upon the United States to "begin the process of removing" Pyongyang from a U.S. terrorism list "in parallel" with North Korea's actions. Conservative critics said the United States should not take North Korea off the terrorism list until it gives up all its nuclear weapons, and argued that the pact was far too conciliatory toward a nuclear power with alleged ties to international terrorism.
But the Bush administration has been eager to show diplomatic progress, and President Bush suggested that the deal should serve as an example to Iran, which has refused to suspend its uranium enrichment program. During a town hall meeting yesterday in Lancaster, Pa., Mr. Bush told a questioner that he might hold direct talks with Iran if it first froze enrichment of uranium.
"If your question is, 'Will you ever sit down with them,' we've proven we would with North Korea, and the answer is, 'Yeah, just so long as we can achieve something, so long as we are able to get our objective,' " Mr. Bush said.
John R. Bolton, the administration's former United Nations ambassador, said the White House violated the original purpose of the diplomatic talks, by agreeing to negotiate side agreements with North Korea about taking Pyongyang off both the terrorism list and another list of "enemy" nations forbidden from trading with the United States. "If they come off either or both lists, without any final verification of their performance on the nuclear issue, I think the president will have embarrassed his administration in history," Mr. Bolton said.
Critics of the White House, including some Democrats, note that the February accord bears a strong resemblance to the 1994 agreement between North Korea and the Clinton administration, which Bush administration officials had denounced as a giveaway, and which collapsed in 2002.
Conservatives are also angry that the United States proceeded with the agreement despite a recent Israeli airstrike in Syria that Israeli officials have said was directed at nuclear material supplied by North Korea.
During meetings this past weekend, chief U.S. negotiator Christopher R. Hill told North Korea that among the disclosures it must make were details of whatever nuclear material it had been supplying to Syria, two senior Bush administration officials said. Both officials, who asked that their names not be used because they were not authorized to speak on the issue, said North Korean officials denied giving Syria any assistance. "We did not achieve clarity on this issue, but that does not mean we do not intend to keep trying," one of the officials said. "We aren't operating on faith."
On Monday, Syria's President Bashar Assad acknowledged for the first time that the Israeli incursion had been an attack, but said the target had been an empty warehouse. "They bombed a building, a construction; it's related to the military, but it's not used," Mr. Assad told the BBC.
Under the agreement reached in February, North Korea has shut down its Yongbyon nuclear plant, which, according to U.S. intelligence estimates, has produced enough plutonium for as many as a half-dozen bombs.
This week's agreement calls upon North Korea to disable Yongbyon by the end of the year. Administration officials said they hoped that, by disabling the facility, they would avoid a repeat of 2002, when North Korea shut down Yongbyon and then restarted the facility after talks broke down. "They were able to get the reactor up and running in two months," a State Department official said. "By focusing on disablement, the hope is that the next interim measure is to do things to it so it can't readily be turned back on."
Yesterday's agreement is part of a larger pact between North Korea, China, Russia, South Korea, Japan and the United States -- the so-called "six parties" that have been wrangling to denuclearize the Korean peninsula.
In Washington, Rep. Edward J. Markey, D-Mass., said North Korea should remain on the terrorism list. "In 2005, we wrote a law specifically aimed at closing the door on the possibility of civilian nuclear cooperation between the U.S. and North Korea," Mr. Markey said in a statement. "Given North Korea's dangerous record of developing nuclear weapons, exporting advanced missile technology, engaging in international criminal activity and engaging in international terrorism, that prohibition is just as necessary today as it was two years ago, when the president signed it into law."

Load-Date: October 4, 2007


End of Document