N.J. trooper of year stays on the go
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 28, 2010 Tuesday
JERSEY-C Edition


Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: SOUTH JERSEY; P-com News Local; Pg. B01
Length: 780 words
Byline: By Bobby Olivier

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


New Jersey State Police Detective Fred Fife travels year-round, all over the world, so it was no surprise that he was out of town when one of his bosses needed to talk to him early this month.
But Fife, who is assigned to the FBI's Philadelphia Joint Terrorism Task Force, wasn't on the trail of a suspect that day. He was on a more personal mission when he was told he would be receiving the 2010 New Jersey State Trooper of the Year Award.
"I found out when I was in Disney with my family. I got a call from a state police colonel saying that I would be receiving the award," the Gloucester County resident said. "It is a very exciting and humbling honor."
Fife will receive the award Sunday at the Tropicana Casino & Resort in Atlantic City for his work as a lead agent in the investigation of members of Hezbollah's U.S.-based terrorist cells over the last four years.
Following a probe of the group's links in Philadelphia and South Jersey, 26 alleged members and sympathizers were indicted in November on charges including providing material support to a terrorist group, acquiring missiles capable of destroying aircraft, and exporting machine guns.
Although excited to accept such a prestigious honor, the 37-year-old Fife was quick to credit his colleagues.
"Being selected as New Jersey state police trooper of the year is a humbling honor, to say the least, but it was predicated more on team sacrifice than individual achievement," he said.
Fife also made sure to recognize the Joint Terrorism Task Force's partnerships with the FBI, IRS, and U.S. State Department Bureau of Diplomatic Security in the case. 
Detective Sgt. First Class Dean D'Agostino, Fife's supervisor, wrote the report nominating him for the award. 
"I have been on [the force] for 23 years, and I am very confident in saying that [Fife] is the finest detective I've had. He has the leadership skills and investigative abilities and fortitude that are important to be successful," D'Agostino said. "He is a humble guy and likes to teach, constantly mentoring younger troopers in their investigations."
Besides being a source of advice in his field, Fife instructs formally as well. As an adjunct professor at the Camden campus of Rutgers University since 2007, he has taught a terrorism investigation class, covering radical Islam and investigative techniques.
Fife was detached for seven months in 2005 to be an instructor of criminal law and physical training at the New Jersey State Police Academy in Sea Girt. 
"I have always enjoyed teaching, and I am very fortunate in that I have been able to work in uniform, undercover, as a detective, and as an instructor," he said.
Fife joined the state police in 2000 before being hired by the FBI in 2002, working in Newark as a special agent for a year; he was rehired by the state police in 2003. 
Although he now lives in Gloucester County with his wife, daughter, and son, Fife grew up in Parkwood, in Northeast Philadelphia, where his parents still reside.
"Everyone in my neighborhood was a cop, fireman or union worker," he said.
Fife attended Archbishop Ryan High School, graduating in 1990 with honors, and was a two-sport athlete, playing defensive end in football and guard in basketball.
His true athletic passion of late, however, is watching his daughter play soccer and tennis. 
Fife graduated with honors from Pennsylvania State University in 1995 with a bachelor's degree in administration of justice and earned his master's in criminal justice from St. Joseph's University in 2005. He is working on his master's degree in government administration at the Fels Institute of Government at the University of Pennsylvania. 
Outside work, Fife is a devoted family man, although his job often has him on the road.
"What is lost in all of this is the unseen sacrifice that families make, and with Fred having a young boy and daughter, that is taxing for anyone, let alone the difficulties in the investigation," D'Agostino said. 
Fife's wife is "ecstatic" regarding his recognition. (He asked that her name not be used because of his profession.)
"He is so deserving of it," she said. "As much as he has been away, he makes up for it when he is home, and he is a phenomenal father. I am with the kids 24/7, and when he walks through the door, it's 'Daddy, Daddy, Daddy!' "
For Fife, his duty as a father does not end, no matter where he travels.
"He always calls whenever he has down time," his wife said. "Even if it is 3 a.m. where he is, he will make sure to call when it is 8 p.m. here so he can say good night. He's my best friend. He loves his family, and we are all proud of him." 
Contact staff writer Bobby Olivier at 856-779-3990 or olivier@phillynews.com. 

Graphic

 
Feed Loader

Load-Date: September 28, 2010


End of Document