N.J. LAW; State Terrorism Plan Is Nearing Completion
 The New York Times
July 28, 2002 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 14NJ; Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 501 words
Byline:  AP 
Dateline: TRENTON  
Body


The state is nearly finished drafting its emergency plans to deal with a terrorist strike, Attorney General David Samson says.
     A task force created weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York and on the Pentagon has completed its work and its report is being reviewed by the state's top security officials, Mr. Samson said last week. 
 The same State Police department that helps guide emergency services through weather disasters has been designated to coordinate the action.
"It's as good a response plan as exists in this nation," Mr. Samson said in a recent interview.
After taking office, Governor McGreevey signed an executive order demanding that New Jersey identify terrorism targets and look at ways to secure them.
Since then, the state has canvassed nearly every major business in New Jersey, inviting representatives to join committees and share plans.
The key is collaboration, Mr. Samson said. All levels of government must cooperate to share intelligence and resources, and the government must reach to businesses like power utilities, pharmaceutical companies, media organizations and telecommunications services.
"So many of the targets which terrorists will find attractive are civilian targets, not military targets," Mr. Samson said.
New Jersey also has hired several consultants, many with Defense Department experience, Mr. Samson said, to help the state learn more about defending against terrorism attacks involving radiation, biological or chemical weapons.
But detailed information about the overall security plan will not be made public, Mr. Samson said.
"There has to be, in order for this system to work well, some consideration given to the government to protect this information," he said.
Governor McGreevey recently signed an executive order that limits the release of public records, citing security concerns. The order has raised concerns about too many restrictions on access.
As attorney general, Mr. Samson is charged with reviewing complaints about the new public records law and deciding what should be released.
"We're going to deal with this with a scalpel, not a saber or a broad sword. We want to do this with the balance that's necessary to protect the public," he said. --------------------

Homeland Security Conference
ATLANTIC CITY (AP) -- The United States Army is planning a homeland security symposium to coincide with the one-year anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
The 2002 Homeland Security and National Defense Symposium, sponsored by the Fort Monmouth-based Army Communications Electronics Command, will highlight technological initiatives designed to support soldiers, combat terrorism and provide homeland defense.
About 1,500 military officials, civilian contractors and emergency management officials are expected to attend the event, which runs from Sept. 9 through Sept. 13 at the Atlantic City Convention Center.

The On Politics column does not appear today. It will resume next week.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 28, 2002


End of Document