N.J. will get none of safety grant;
$14.2 million for security against terrorism in the Phila. area will stay in Pa.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 2, 2003 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. A01
Length: 464 words
Byline: Jennifer Lin INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


Sorry, South Jersey, but when it comes to spending scarce federal dollars on homeland security, Gov. Rendell has decided that the buck stops at the Delaware River.
As part of a national drive to channel more homeland-security funds to major cities, the federal government awarded the Philadelphia area $14.2 million to shore up security at sensitive sites.
The federal funds were directed to Harrisburg, leaving it up to Rendell's office to decide where the money will be spent.
The answer: the city and the four neighboring counties in Pennsylvania.
As for the four counties of South Jersey that technically are part of the Philadelphia region, the money is not theirs for the asking.
David Sanko, director of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, said it is neither "unusual or extraordinary" for a governor to want to keep funding within state boundaries.
"At the end of the day, that money was allocated to Pennsylvania," Sanko said. "The Department of Homeland Security made the assignment to the city and state - not the city and two states."
In New Jersey, the decision came as no surprise.
"Rendell is taking care of his own people," said Donald Elmer, director of emergency management for Camden County. "He'd get a lot more flak if he did include us."
The $14.2 million grant for Philadelphia is not the only federal funding available for homeland-security improvements, but it is a much-needed infusion.
Sanko said the grant to the Philadelphia region would be spent on "hardening" security around critical infrastructure that faces the greatest threat for terrorism.
He said that would include historic sites, utilities, airports, transportation hubs, refineries, telecommunication facilities, and government operation centers.
Ironically, the decision to restrict the funds to Pennsylvania comes at a time when emergency directors on both sides of the Delaware are working more closely than ever to prepare for terrorist emergencies.
Since 9/11, emergency-management directors from the nine-county region - Philadelphia, Bucks, Chester, Delaware and Montgomery in Pennsylvania, and Burlington, Camden, Gloucester and Salem in New Jersey - have met on several occasions to work through "what-if" scenarios.
A major point of shared concern is the inability of first responders to communicate on the same radio wavelength. Philadelphia firefighters would not be able to talk by radio with counterparts in, say, Camden.
Thomas Butts, emergency-management director in Gloucester County, said there was greater recognition that if there was a terrorist attack, it would be everyone's responsibility. An incident in Center City, for instance, could send people fleeing across the Delaware River into South Jersey.
Contact staff writer Jennifer Lin at 215-854-5659 or jlin@phillynews.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Gov. Rendell decided against giving South Jersey a share.

Load-Date: August 15, 2005


End of Document