N.Y. BOMBING SUSPECTS GUILTY ON ALL COUNTS PROSECUTOR SAYS JURY HAS SENT A GLOBAL MESSAGE: AMERICA WILL NOT TOLERATE TERRORISM
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
March 5, 1994, Saturday


Copyright 1994 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Nation-World; Pg. A1
Length: 719 words
Byline: TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICES
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body

-- Just over a year after a 1,200-pound bomb ripped through the World Trade Center, bringing Middle East terrorism to U.S. soil, all four Muslim fundamentalists accused in the bombing were convicted Friday on every count.
"The verdict should send a clear and unmistakable message that we will not tolerate terrorism in this country," said U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White, whose office prosecuted the case.
Said President Clinton: "The signal should go out across the world that anyone who seeks to come into this country to practice terrorism will have the full weight of law enforcement brought against them."
The anonymous federal jury rendered its decision after six days of deliberations. The verdicts followed a grueling five-month trial in which prosecutors presented 207 witnesses and 1,000 exhibits that traced a complex plot to build the bomb and then hide it in the parking garage of the World Trade Center in the heart of Manhattan's financial district.
Six people were killed and more than 1,000 were wounded in the Feb. 26 blast, which blew a 5-story-deep crater beneath the Trade Center and shattered America's assumption that terrorism was a problem of distant lands.
The courtroom erupted in pandemonium after the verdict. Defendant Mohammad Salameh, 26, rose from his seat, pointed to the jurors across the courtroom and yelled "Injustice people!" He then shouted, "God is great! Victory to Islam!" before marshals pulled him to his chair.
Another defendant, Nidal Ayyad, 26, also began shouting at the jurors, as did his 23-year-old brother Yousef, who yelled from the back of the courtroom, "You are all liars! My brother is innocent!" The marshals dragged Yousef Ayyad out of the courtroom, and he later was charged with contempt of court.
The other two convicted defendants were Ahmad Ajaj, 28, and Mahmud Abouhalima, 34. The prosecution charged that all four participated in the conspiracy because of anti-American beliefs.
The courtroom outburst seemed to stun some of the jurors. They declined to participate in a proposed session with the media to discuss the verdict and were escorted from the building by marshals.
Minutes after news of the verdict reached the New York Police Department, an intricate security plan -- developed after the 1991 Crown Heights riots, and honed this week after the Brooklyn Bridge shooting -- was activated in New York City and in Washington, and spread within hours throughout the world.
State Department officials warned U.S. citizens worldwide about possible retaliatory attacks by Islamic extremists. In New York, Police Commissioner William Bratton dispatched scores of officers to Jewish schools and synagogues, and to predominantly Arab neighborhoods. The police wanted a strengthened presence in areas where there might be emotional responses to the verdict.
"Americans overseas, especially those living in or traveling through the Middle East, South Asia or North Africa, should be alert to continuing developments," said State Department spokeswoman Christine Shelly.
Streets around the U.S. District Courthouse in Manhattan were closed. Scores of uniformed and plainclothes officers, some with bomb-sniffing dogs, combed the area. Emergency units stood by, police said.
The police response plan was developed by Chief of Patrol Louis Anamone under orders from former Commissioner Raymond Kelly. The commissioner was responding to criticisms of police inaction that stemmed from three days of rioting in 1991 in the Crown Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn.
The increase in security Friday was only one notch above where it had been all week. The Police Department has been on alert ever since the jury began deliberating, and the security was heightened after Tuesday's shooting of four rabbinical students on the Brooklyn Bridge.
All of the trade center defendants are followers of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, a militant cleric and opponent of Egypt's current government who is imprisoned in Manhattan awaiting trial later this year in an alleged plot to bomb the United Nations and three other prominent New York City targets.
Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, a mysterious Iraqi who fled the New York area hours after the explosion, was indicted as a fugitive and is still at large. Investigators believe he is the ringleader of the plot and is the subject of an international hunt.

Graphic

 
Ajaj, Salameh, Abouhalima, Ayyad

Load-Date: April 14, 1995


End of Document