N.Y. AIRPORTS RAISE SECURITY AMID THREATS OF TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 14, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2C
Length: 305 words
Body


NEW YORK (AP) _ The highest security alert since the gulf war
was imposed at the area's three major airports Sunday amid reports of
a planned "suicide massacre."
The measures included closing at least one rooftop parking lot,
possible car searches and towing of vehicles left unattended outside
terminals at Kennedy International, LaGuardia and Newark airports,
officials said.
The actions were based on information from law enforcement
agencies, the Federal Aviation Administration said in a statement.
The agency wouldn't provide further details about the security
measures or any threats.
FBI spokesman Joe Valiquette also would not comment Sunday.
However, car and truck bombs, sometimes set off by suicidal
drivers, are a favored method of some Middle East terrorist groups
According to one published report, the FBI learned that Kennedy
Airport was a specific target of Islamic terrorists. The airport is
a main entry and departure point for thousands of visitors to the
United States.
Newsday, quoting officials speaking on condition of anonymity,
said the FBI had received detailed intelligence that two militant
groups - the Palestinian Hamas and the Iran-backed Hezbollah, or
Party of God - were planning a "suicide massacre" that could come
at any time.
On Wednesday, Transportation Secretary Federico Pena announced
new airport precautions nationwide to "deter possible criminal or
terrorist acts."
Pena also didn't give specifics, but factors that may have
played a role in the decision include the recent U.S. detention of
Mousa Abu Marzuk, alleged to be an Islamic terrorist leader, and the
New York trial of 11 people on charges of conspiring to plot
terrorist acts.
D. Joy Faber, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority of New York
and New Jersey, which operates the three airports, said there was no
telling how long the measures would remain in effect.

Load-Date: August 14, 1995


End of Document