NAACP calls for Biddeford rally;
 The group wants to counter an 'act of physical terrorism' against a black mayoral candidate.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 20, 1999, Saturday Correction Appended 
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE,
Length: 421 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: BIDDEFORD
Body


The president of the Maine NAACP is calling for a rally to protest the actions of two residents who dressed up in Ku Klux Klan-style outfits outside a black mayoral candidate's home late last month.
Moses Sebunya's call for a National Association for the Advancement of Colored People rally on Main Street in the next week stems from a decision by the Attorney General's Office that the protest broke no laws.
Sebunya and Rory Holland, who lost a bid for mayor this month, believe Robert Kalex and Denise Ever- est should have been charged with criminal threatening for parading outside Holland's house dressed in white sheets and hoods on Oct. 31. The Attorney General's Office ruled that their actions were protected free speech.
"This really tells us about the society that we live in, that racism is allowed by the government," Sebunya said. "The Constitution and laws may not have been broken, but this incident did violate a man's right to run for office safely."
Sebunya said the attorney general's decision not to prosecute shows the need for a counter-protest.
"We need to find other methods, because the Attorney General's Office is not going to help on this issue," he said. "They will tell you their hands are tied, which is the easy way out."
Downtown Coffeehouse owner Kalex and Everest said the white sheets and coned hoods were not intended to be racist. They said they were protesting Holland's decision to run for mayor and said he made race an issue in the election. They were simply "throwing it right back at him," Everest said.
But the protest conveyed a much more sinister and dangerous message given the Klan's violent history, Sebunya and Holland said. "This was physical terrorism," Sebunya said.
Kalex said he had been friendly with Holland until he decided to run for mayor. Kalex said he had been considering a run himself and felt Holland was thwarting him.
Everest said she had other problems with Holland and did not believe he should be mayor.
"The way to say that would have been to vote for someone else," Holland said Friday. "But what they did was say that I don't have the rights of citizenship to run for office unmolested . . . What that was saying was . . . if you run for office, you are going to die."
Kalex and Everest said they do not belong to the KKK and have rebuffed attempts by KKK members to contact them since the protest. They said they were sorry if anyone other than Holland was offended.
"My apologies couldn't be bigger than they are, but I am not sorry to Rory Holland," Kalex said.
Correction

Clarification -- A story and headline Saturday on Page 5B should have made it clear that the president of Maine's NAACP chapter, Moses Sebunya, and not the entire chapter has called for a rally in Biddeford to protest the actions of two residents who dressed in Ku Klux Klan-style outfits outside a black mayoral candidate's home. Victoria Mares Hershey, the group's vice president, said the NAACP has taken no official steps to organize a rally.
Correction-Date: November 23, 1999

Load-Date: November 24, 1999


End of Document