NADER CAUTIONS AGAINST TOO LITTLE DEBATE ON HOW TO RESPOND TO TERRORISM ;
 EX-CANDIDATE WILL SPEAK AT MCKENDREE COLLEGE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 24, 2001 Monday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. B3
Length: 271 words
Byline: Jo Mannies Post-Dispatch Political Correspondent
Body


Ralph Nader says he's concerned that all this "rallying around the president" is getting out of hand. As he sees it, there's too little discussion and debate about the particulars of President George W. Bush's anti-terrorism campaign.
"The reasons why governments make mistakes is often that they don't have enough input, enough challenges, enough reminders of history," Nader said in a telephone interview Friday. "The more input, the less likely the situation will be made worse."
Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, he asserted that the only complaints aired in Washington have been "a few squeals on civil liberties." Such reluctance to object reflects what happens in times of crisis, Nader added.
"The arena of permissible debate … tightens," he said.
Such observations fit in with Nader's continued promotion of the Green Party and other third parties since his failed bid for president last year as the Green Party nominee. If there were more political parties represented in Congress, he said, there would be more "diverse opinions about what should be done" to counter the terrorism threat.
Nader, who made his name as a consumer advocate, plans to offer his latest views on the third parties and other issues in a speech Wednesday night at McKendree College in Lebanon. He said he planned chiefly to talk about "third party politics and the environment."
Nader's appearance is part of McKendree's Distinguished Speakers Series. It begins at 7 p.m., is free and open to the public. A panel of four journalists from news outlets, including the Post-Dispatch, will question Nader. He also will take questions from the audience.

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS Reporter Jo Mannies: E-mail: jmannies@post-dispatch.com Phone: 314-340-8334  

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document