NAKASONE DEFENDS JAPAN'S RECORD ON TERROR
The New York Times
April 29, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 672 words
Byline: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TOKYO, April 28
Body


Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone today defended Japan's record in opposing terrorism and said his Government had taken a ''most appropriate approach'' against Libya by limiting business ties.
Mr. Nakasone, who will be the host at the gathering of major industrial democracies in Tokyo next week, said he would seek agreement on a declaration opposing terrorism. But in a luncheon interview with Tokyo-based foreign correspondents, he did not say how strong a statement he would accept, or whether he would go along with one that included a reference to Libya.
The Reagan Administration's determination to pursue a hard line on terrorism has troubled some Japanese officials, who worry that it may be too strong for them and may put them in an awkward situation as conference host.
On an important economic matter likely to be raised at the summit conference, the Prime Minister acknowledged that he faced strong resistance within his ruling Liberal Democratic Party to his call for Japan to restructure its economy by making it less export-oriented and more amenable to domestic spending and imports.
Earlier this month, both in Tokyo and in meetings with President Reagan in the United States, Mr. Nakasone issued what seemed to be a hard pledge that Japan would begin to undertake this fundamental economic overhaul, one that he described today as more difficult than climbing Mount Everest.
After encountering strong protests from his fellow conservative politicians, the Prime Minister shifted his tone, saying he had offered no promises. He also began putting new emphasis on the fact that a much-heralded report urging change was the work of a private advisory council and not a Government body.
Still, Mr. Nakasone has rejected suggestions that all this is a retreat, and today he repeated his contention that Japan must change its trading ways.
He sought to warn against hopes that change would come quickly. Moreover, his comments suggested that, because of domestic politics, he felt he had to talk of how Japan would enact reforms on its own and not to please the United States or other major trading partners.
''This is a declaration of my political determination, and not something that can be characterized as an international agreement,'' the Prime Minister said. ''That is because I have carefully watched the reaction of the Liberal Democratic Party.''
At the conference, Mr. Nakasone said, he will encourage new negotiations for international trade agreements. But while the focus of the Tokyo gathering is supposed to be on economics, political issues like American-Soviet relations and international terrorism will inevitably arise, he said.
Of the seven countries that will take part, Japan alone has said nothing of substance about whether it opposed or approved of the United States' air strikes against Libya two weeks ago.
But Mr. Nakasone, who was interviewed by reporters from the six visiting countries, insisted that Japan had nonetheless shown its displeasure with Libya. Even before the recent discotheque bombing in Berlin and the subsequent American air raids, the Government had instructed businesses ''not to take advantage of the retreat of American private industries from Libya,'' he said.
On the specific question of the American bombing of Libyan targets, the Prime Minister restated his position that Japan has ''listened'' to the American explanations but did ''not have on our own the evidence or details of the situation.'' ----Sabotage Hits Japan TOKYO, Tuesday, April 29 (Reuters) - A bomb blast badly wounded a man, and burned cables stopped high-speed trains for 90 minutes today, in suspected sabotage attempts by radicals who had vowed to wreck Emperor Hirohito's jubilee celebrations, the police said.
The bomb exploded in the public restrooms of a Tokyo park near the Defense Agency shortly after midnight, despite a major security drive for celebrations today marking Hirohito's 60-year reign.
An unidentified man, believed to be in his 20's, underwent surgery after being caught in the explosion.


End of Document