Name, rank and serial number
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 8, 2005 Friday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. C10
Length: 324 words
Body


WHEN MISSOURI LEGISLATORS play the terrorism card, Missourians need to be skeptical. A proposal working its way through the Legislature would require people to present a birth certificate to register to vote. In the name of fighting terrorism and combating illegal immigration, the bill would make it much harder for everyone -- married women in particular -- to register to vote.
Senate Bill 50, the brainchild of state Sen. Larry Gene Taylor, R-Carthage, would require people who register to vote to present their birth certificate, Social Security card or other proof of U.S. citizenship at the polls. This works a particular hardship on married women who would not only have to locate a notarized copy of their birth certificate, but also present a marriage license proving their name change is bona fide. Whether it would apply only to first-time registrants or every time a person moves across a county line is unclear.
Mr. Taylor says he's worried that the thousands of illegal immigrants in his neck of the woods will vote, although he acknowledges that there is no evidence they have already. As for deterring terrorism, Mr. Taylor notes that a truck driver must be a registered voter to haul flammable fuels, which could be used in an attack.
Missouri legislators have unfettered imagination when it comes to ginning up terrorist threats to justify their benighted bills. Another goofy bill, House Bill 666 would make it a crime to photograph farm animals in a pasture, for fear the photos could help terrorists poison the food chain.
The Constitution was 130 years old before women won the right to vote. In the ensuing years, most election reforms have made it easier for people to register and vote, not harder.
The Missouri Legislature would be making a mistake to start moving in the other direction by making Missouri among the first states in the nation to place such burdensome rules on John Q.-- and especially Mrs. John Q. -- Public.

Notes

 VOTING RIGHTS 

Load-Date: April 8, 2005


End of Document