NAME THE ENEMY; JIHADIS ARE DRIVEN BY A TWISTED VIEW OF ISLAM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
July 24, 2016 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. D-3
Length: 688 words
Byline: Jack Kelly
Body


Scores Die in Nice, France, as Truck Plows into Bastille Day Crowd," said the New York Times' online headline. "Tune in to MSNBC for continued live coverage of the deadly truck crash in Nice, France," the network tweeted after the story broke.
I hadn't been aware trucks drove themselves, or go rogue.
There was someone at the wheel - a "Tunisian born Frenchman" said the New York Daily News, a "Frenchman of Tunisian origin," said the Times. Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, 31, ate pork, smoked, drank alcohol, his relatives said. He couldn't have been a Muslim.
The 9/11 hijackers frequented strip clubs. Porn constitutes up to 80 percent of the material on laptops captured from ISIS, said Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, former head of the Defense Intelligence Agency. Maybe some pretty lousy Muslims think they can square things with Allah by killing a lot of infidels.
Bouhlel screamed "Allahu Akbar" as he murdered 84 people. He was one of its "soldiers," ISIS said. Three of his relatives are Islamic extremists who were imprisoned in Tunisia. His method of attack has long been advocated by jihadis.
"Killer's motives, worldview not clear," said the Associated Press.
Last month, three "Minnesota men" were convicted of providing material assistance to ISIS. An "Indiana teen" was arrested for trying to join ISIS. Three "migrant" boys were accused of sexually assaulting a 5-year-old girl in Twin Falls, Idaho. You'll never guess what they have in common.
Politically correct journalists strive to conceal the truth, not tell it.
The Nice massacre is "arguably the most lethal lone-wolf attack ever," said the McClatchy Newspapers.
Just before the attack, Bouhlel sent a text to someone he knew that said: "Bring more weapons." In the days before the attack, he sent $110,000 he couldn't have earned or saved himself to his family in Tunisia.
On Thursday, French authorities charged five people with assistingBouhlel in the attack, which appears to have been months in the planning. ButPC politicians claim terrorists are "lone wolves" even when there's evidence they had help because it gives them an excuse for failing to protect their citizens.
Terrorism is the "new normal," said French Prime Minister Manuel Valls and President Barack Obama. But terrorism in Europe and the U.S. didn't become the "new normal" until Mr. Obama assumed office.
There was no ISIS in 2008, Iraq was relatively peaceful, Libya wasn't a base from which Islamists infiltrated Europe, three-quarters of the Americans killed in Afghanistan were still alive.
There were 32,685 deaths from terrorism worldwide in 2014, an 80 percent increase from 2013, according to the Global Terrorism Index maintained by an Australian think tank. There were 61 percent more deaths from terror in 2013 than in 2012, 41 percent more in 2012 than in 2011.
Terror attacks and deaths worldwide declined 13 percent and 14 percent, respectively, last year, the State Department said. But they've increased exponentially in Europe and the Americas.
Multiculturalism, political correctness and mass migration are responsible for terror attacks in Europe, said Poland's interior minister, Mariusz Blaszczak. After each terrorist atrocity, the PC crowd lectures us on "Islamophobia," warns of a "backlash" against Muslims which rarely materializes.
The PC crowd "treat as enemies not those who seek to destroy them but those who dare to speak the truth about it," wrote Bruce Bawer in City Journal. "The free, civilized West has, for years now, been the target of a war of conquest . by adherents of a religion that preaches submission, intolerance and brutality, and our leaders and media . play a game whose fatuity, fecklessness, and pusillanimity have become increasingly clear."
"How many more savage attacks, how many more maddened massacres, before our leaders become willing to admit that Islamic fanaticism is waging a war to the death against our country and our civilization?" wrote Alexis Brezet, editor of Le Figaro, a French newspaper. "How many innocent victims [-] before our rulers finally decide to take the ruthless measures necessary that the barbarism of Allah's madmen demands?"

Notes

Jack Kelly is a columnist for the Post-Gazette (jkelly@post-gazette.com, 412-263-1476).

Load-Date: July 26, 2016


End of Document