Napolitano sails through Senate hearing
Arizona Capitol Times
January 15, 2009


Copyright 2009 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Length: 694 words
Byline: Phil Riske
Body


They didn't rough her up, and confirmation is set to go to the full Senate on Obama's inauguration day.
In a 2-hour, 20-minute hearing this morning before the Senate Homeland Security and Government Reform Committee, Gov. Janet Napolitano fielded questions from friendly senators, whose only real concern with her nomination, it appeared, was what they said was a lack of experience in matters of terrorism and counter-terrorism.
She had quick responses and appeared comfortable and confident. After listing her top priorities for a department she has consistently criticized for lack of action on the border - a "unified vision" for all 22 agencies under DHS, hiring "the best and brightest," and quickly completing the transition from Secretary Chertoff - Napolitano was asked for her priorities concerning terrorism.
Before answering, she told the committee she has experience in terrorism, having handled, as Arizona attorney general, part of the investigation of the Oklahoma federal building bombing, planning for which took place in Arizona.
Napolitano also testified she prosecuted a militia group that planned to blow up buildings in Phoenix. "Have I done that on a daily basis? Fortunately not," she said.
She said she will focus on terrorism in areas that have been overlooked, such as ground transportation and in the private sector regarding chemical and biological risks. "Let's go where the gaps are," she said.
Some challenges: Sen. Susan Collins brought up an Associated Press article about projects that have not been completed in Arizona's homeland security plan.
Napolitano said the article was partially inaccurate, eight of the plan's 10 projects have been completed, and were she to have served out her term as governor, all 10 would be completed.
Collins honed in on interoperability among agencies as a national problem, and Napolitano added no state has completed its communications systems to deal with attacks or major disasters.
Sen. George Voinovich cited the 9/11 report, which called for better oversight of DHS, and Sen. Daniel Akaka said the department  poses "the most serious management problem in the federal government. " The department under Chertoff has been plagued by poor morale and a large turnover in personnel.
Napolitano said the answer is creating "career paths" for employees and making them feel they are part of the overall effort for national security. "These are the kinds of things that provide good morale," she said.
Voinovich said that if Napolitano doesn't have to appear before Congress the more than 300 times the department has in the past four years, he will consider her a success. Sen. Jon Tester of Montana brought up northern border challenges, and Sen. Mary Landrieu of Louisiana discussed ongoing problems in the wake of Katrina.
Napolitano said she will visit both states to assess their situations. She the criticism of FEMA has been "strong and legitimate. " She said she will seek ways to better share information with state and local emergency-response officials.
She said she would focus on improving first responders' ability to communicate by bringing in people who are "technologically savvy" to ensure that the best, most up-to-date equipment is available.
In response to questions about Real ID, the governor noted Arizona is one of many states that rejected the identification program because it's a "huge financial burden" on states and there are privacy concerns with it.
She said she would meet with governors to get their recommendations for a national ID, and added the Bush administration did not collaborate enough with governors in the development of the mandated program.
 
Napolitano said she would immediately begin working with the Justice Department and U.S. district attorneys around the country to ensure sanctions for employers who hire undocumented workers. "You have to target appropriately," she said in response to a question from Sen. Claire McCaskill.
Four former Napolitano aides were at today's hearing: Noah Kroloff; Dennis Burke, Brian de Vallance, the governor's DC director; and Amy Shlossman. At the end of the hearing, a throng of reporters gathered in front of Napolitano.
 

Load-Date: January 16, 2009


End of Document