NARCO-TERRORISM MENACES WORLD
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 18, 2003 Sunday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. E-6
Length: 915 words
Byline: Joe Dombroski, Joe Dombroski, a Richmond-area enforcement supervisor for the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, is a 2003 Commentary Columnist.,
Body


Within the context of current world events, narco-terrorism has two definitions assigned by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration. The first is an international drug trafficker who uses terrorist tactics against the citizens of a country to further his political agenda and to protect his drug trade.  The second is an organized group that is complicit in the activities of drug trafficking in order to further, or to fund, premeditated, politically motivated violence against civilian targets with the intention of influencing a government or group of people.
Terrorist organizations use a number of sources to garner funds; however, drug trafficking is among the most profitable. According to U.S. government estimates, Americans spend approximately $64 billion per year on illegal drugs. In the broadest sense, some terrorist groups may be involved in all aspects of the drug trade, from cultivation, production, transportation, and wholesale distribution to money laundering.
Traffickers Pay 'Tax'
 These groups also may provide security for drug traffickers to transport their product through territory controlled by terrorist organizations or their supporters. In some cases, terrorist groups or their supporters may require a "tax" to be paid on illicit products, for passage through controlled territory.
Many insurgent and extremist groups are suspected of drug-trafficking involvement, such as al-Qaeda, Hezbollah, and the Islamic Resistance Movement (HAMAS), which operate in the area known as the "Fertile Crescent" of Pakistan, Iran, and Afghanistan. In South America the Sendero Luminoso, known as the "Shining Path," is based in Peru and operate as security forces for the cocaine trade in the region. In Colombia the Communist rebel group FARC provides security for the Colombia drug cartels. The Basque Fatherland and Liberty (ETA) in Spain is heavily involved in illegal drug trafficking throughout Europe. The level of involvement is often different, but the ultimate aim is acquiring large sums of untraceable cash to further their violent agendas.
When looking at the connection between drugs and violence, it is important to differentiate between drug-related violence and narco-terrorism. By definition, terrorism is premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against innocent civilian targets. With drug-related violence, we see financially motivated violence perpetrated against those who interfere with or cross the path of a drug-trafficking organization. While we see drug-related violence daily on the streets of our country, narco-terrorism is less visible, with the funding source often well-disguised.
Three Crucial Elements
 Law-enforcement officials see three elements crucial to attacking narco-terrorism: targeted enforcement efforts, intelligence gathering, and international cooperation. Many terrorist groups rarely act within the borders of one state, but tend to have a more global view in regard to their activities and fundraising. This means that combatting narco-terrorism requires a global network of law-enforcement and intelligence officials to tackle this issue wherever it appears. The key is cooperation at all levels. Cooperation will prevent atrocities perpetrated by terrorist organizations financed by drug money. International efforts to combat narco-terrorism are focusing on asset- seizure and control of all funding sources used by terrorist organizations.
In response to the incidents of September 11, 2001, the United States, along with the international community, expanded efforts to stop financing that supports terrorism. On September 28, 2001, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted an anti-terrorism resolution that called for the suppression of terrorist-group financing and improved international cooperation against terrorists. The Security Council noted the close connection between international terrorism and the trafficking of illegal drugs, with its related money-laundering and illicit arms-trafficking.
9/11's New Focus
 The events of 9/11 brought new focus to this old problem of narco-terrorism. These events have forever changed the world and demonstrate the vulnerability to acts of terrorism on even the most powerful nation. Through attempts to combat this threat, the link between drugs and terrorism came to the forefront. Whether it is a state aiding in the supply of heroin such as formerly Taliban-controlled Afghanistan, or a narco-terrorist organization such as the FARC protecting the cocaine trade in Colombia, the nexus between drugs and terrorism is evident and lethal.
Federal, state, and local law-enforcement agencies throughout the United States are aligning with our President and Congress to combat this imminent threat to international society. The War on Terror and the War on Drugs are linked. The War on Terror has brought about a rededication by law-enforcement personnel and ordinary people throughout the world to fight the War on Drugs. Thanks to television and magazine ads, people in Richmond and across the country understand that the profits from illegal drugs are just as deadly to society as the drugs themselves.
We must fight these wars to protect our children and future generations. Our grandparents were called to save the world from fascism and totalitarianism, and they met the challenge for us. We are now called to save the world from illegal drugs and the terrorism financed by their sale; as concerned adults and parents, we cannot fail.

Graphic

 
DRAWING

Load-Date: May 20, 2003


End of Document