NATION;
WORLD
 Philadelphia Daily News
JUNE 20, 2005 Monday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 35
Length: 454 words
Byline: From the Associated Press
Body


For FBI honchos, knowledge
of terrorism is not required
In sworn testimony that contrasts with their promises to the public, the FBI managers who crafted the post-Sept. 11 fight against terrorism say expertise about the Mideast or terrorism wasn't important in choosing the agents they promoted to top jobs.
And they still don't think such experience is necessary today even as terrorist acts occur across the globe.
"A bombing case is a bombing case," said Dale Watson, the FBI's terrorism chief in the two years after Sept. 11, 2001. "A crime scene in a bank robbery case is the same as a crime scene, you know, across the board."
Despite truce violations,
some optimism in Mideast
Palestinian militants ambushed Israeli soldiers doing construction work along the Gaza-Egypt border yesterday and killed one of them in the latest violation of a shaky 4-month cease-fire. One of the attackers was also killed, the army said.
Despite the violence, the two sides pushed forward with coordination of Israel's planned withdrawal from the Gaza Strip in mid-August. They were prodded by U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, who wrapped up a two-day visit to the region yesterday by saying she was reassured that Israel and the Palestinians are committed to a peaceful pullout.Rice's visit, ahead of an Israeli-Palestinian summit tomorrow, appeared to add momentum to cooperation on the Israeli withdrawal.
Air Canada cancels
32-plane Boeing order
Air Canada canceled an order for 32 widebody Boeing Co. jets after pilots rejected a contract deal that would have freed up funds for the new airplanes.
Pilots voted Saturday to reject terms that were tied to the aircraft order, which Air Canada announced April 25. The deal was worth about $6 billion at list prices, although airlines typically negotiate discounts, and was subject to employees accepting certain cost-cutting measures.
Montreal-based Air Canada emerged from bankruptcy protection last year.
Pair's remake of 'Jackass'
gets no stars from Pa. cops
A man and a teenager face charges for allegedly staging a fake kidnapping that recreated a scene from "Jackass: The Movie."
On Wednesday a store clerk called police and said that while a customer was paying for gasoline a teenager jumped out of the trunk with his hands bound and his eyes blindfolded, according to Dauphin County authorities.
The man caught the teen, threw him back into the trunk and drove off, police said.
But, when officers in Lykens, Pa., found the pair, they said they were re-enacting a prank from the 2002 gag and gross-out film, police said.
Daniel Reedinger, 31, was charged with creating a false alarm, corruption of minors and disorderly conduct. The 15-year-old will be handled by juvenile authorities. *

Load-Date: September 14, 2005


End of Document