Nation & World Digest: FBI investigating domestic terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 9, 2019 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2019 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 612 words
Byline:  Associated Press 
Body


FBI INVESTIGATING DOMESTIC TERRORISM
WASHINGTON - The FBI has more than 850 open investigations into domestic terrorism across the country, and the threat continues to grow, top counterterrorism officials said Wednesday.
FBI, Justice Department and Homeland Security officials gave testimony before a congressional committee on homegrown hate and violence. They cautioned lawmakers they could not prosecute a white supremacist simply for the ideology or an online manifesto - there must be intent to harm or harass.
"There's a lot of hate out there on the internet," said Mike McGarrity, the FBI's top counterterrorism official. "Violent extremists around the world have access to our local communities to target and recruit and spread their messages of hate on a global scale, as we saw in the recent attack in Christchurch, New Zealand," he said.
BOY, 9, CHARGED IN MOTHER'S DEATH
FAWN RIVER TOWNSHIP, Mich. - A 9-year-old boy has been charged with murder in the fatal shooting of his mother in their southern Michigan home, according to court documents.
The woman was found early Monday morning in Fawn River Township, about 160 miles west-southwest of Detroit, St. Joseph County Prosecutor John McDonough said.
The boy was undergoing a psychiatric evaluation at a state-run juvenile facility, said county Sheriff Bradley Balk. It isn't clear if he was charged as an adult or a juvenile. Authorities have not released the circumstances of the killing or details of why the child was charged.
BRIEFLY
MAGIC MUSHROOMS: Voters this week made Denver the first U.S. city to decriminalize psilocybin, the psychoactive ingredient in "magic mushrooms." Preliminary results Wednesday show that the citizen-led initiative narrowly passed Tuesday. Psilocybin was federally outlawed in the 1960s, when it was widely known as a recreational drug. Small studies in recent years found psilocybin had positive effects on anxiety and depression for cancer patients.
HUAWEI: The lawyer for Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou, who was arrested in Canada on a U.S. extradition warrant, said Wednesday he'll try to prevent the case from going ahead by arguing that comments by President Donald Trump suggest the case against her is politically motivated.
WAR REMAINS: In a new sign of troubled relations with North Korea, the Pentagon said Wednesday it suspended its efforts to arrange negotiations on recovering additional remains of U.S. service members killed in the North during the Korean War.
INJUNCTIONS: Vice President Mike Pence said Wednesday that the Trump administration intends to try to challenge the right of federal district courts to issue nationwide injunctions. Top administration officials have often complained about the proliferation of nationwide injunctions since Trump became president.
SCHOOL WALKOUT: Tens of thousands of teachers across Oregon walked off the job Wednesday to demand more money for schools, holding signs and wearing red shirts that have become synonymous with a nationwide movement pushing lawmakers to better fund education.
ROYALTY REVEALED: Tired but beaming, new parents Meghan and Prince Harry presented their 2-day-old son to the world as he slumbered Wednesday and also revealed his name: Archie. The royal couple said the full name of the child born seventh in line to the British throne is Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor.
TOBACCO SALES: Walmart will stop selling cigarettes and other tobacco products to shoppers younger than 21, making it the latest retailer to raise the minimum buying age. The world's largest retailer said Wednesday that it is also phasing out the sale of fruit- and dessert-flavored e-cigarettes at its 5,000 Walmart and Sam's Club stores.

Load-Date: July 11, 2019


End of Document