Nation & World Digest: 6 men indicted in alleged plot to kidnap Michigan governor
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 18, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 597 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


SIX MEN CHARGED IN ALLEGED PLOT
TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. - A federal grand jury has charged six men with conspiring to kidnap Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer in what investigators say was a plot by anti-government extremists who were angry over her coronavirus policies.
The indictment released Thursday by U.S. Attorney Andrew Birge levied the conspiracy charge against Adam Dean Fox, Barry Gordon Croft Jr., Ty Gerard Garbin, Kaleb James Franks, Daniel Joseph Harris and Brandon Michael-Ray Caserta. They are all from Michigan except for Croft, who lives in Delaware.
The charge carries a maximum penalty of life in prison, Birge said in a statement.
The six were arrested in early October following an FBI investigation into an alleged plot to kidnap the Democratic governor at her vacation home in northern Michigan.
OFFICIAL: ABDUCTED SCHOOLBOYS FREED
MAIDUGURI, Nigeria - More than 300 schoolboys abducted last week by armed men in northwest Nigeria have been released, the Katsina State governor said Thursday.
In an announcement on Nigerian state TV, NTA, Gov. Aminu Bello Masari said the 344 boarding school students were turned over to security officials and were being brought to the capital of Katsina, where they will get physical examinations before being reunited with their families.
Boko Haram claimed responsibility for last Friday's abduction of the students from the all-boys Government Science Secondary School in the Katsina State village of Kankara. The jihadist group carried out the attack because it believes Western education is un-Islamic, factional leader Abubakar Shekau said in a video this week. More than 800 students were in attendance at the time of the attack. Hundreds escaped, but it was believed that more than 330 were taken.
BRIEFLY
MACRON: French President Emmanuel Macron went ahead with a planned speech by videoconference Thursday, hours after testing positive for COVID-19 following a week in which he met with numerous European leaders.
GOOGLE LAWSUIT: Attorneys general of 35 states and the District of Columbia filed an antitrust lawsuit against Google on Thursday, alleging that the search giant has an illegal monopoly over the online search market that hurts consumers and advertisers. On Wednesday, 10 states filed a lawsuit against Google accusing it of "anticompetitive conduct."
BREXIT: While Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Union's executive commission, noted "substantial progress on many issues" on Brexit trade discussions Thursday, she voiced concerns about the discussions about fishing rights. Only two weeks remain before a potentially chaotic split.
DEATH ROW: Dustin John Higgs, a federal prisoner scheduled to be executed just days before President-elect Joe Biden takes office, has tested positive for coronavirus, his lawyer said Thursday. The revelation comes amid concern about an exploding number of coronavirus cases in the federal prison system and specifically at the complex in Terre Haute, Indiana, where federal executions are carried out.
SPACE PROGRAM: Following the successful return of moon rocks by its Chang'e 5 robotic probe, China is preparing for future missions that could set the stage for an eventual lunar base to host human explorers, a top space program official said Thursday.
TRAIN ATTACK: A French court on Thursday convicted an Islamic State operative over a train attack five years ago that was foiled with the dramatic intervention of three American passengers. The special terrorism court sentenced Morocco-born Ayoub El Khazzani to life in prison, with 22 years guaranteed behind bars.

Graphic

 
 PUTIN DENIES ROLE IN POISONING POLITICAL FOE - Russian President Vladimir Putin, shown via video call during a news conference in Moscow, on Thursday rejected allegations that the Kremlin was behind the poisoning of his top political foe, opposition leader Alexei Navalny, and accused U.S. intelligence agencies of fomenting the claims even as he held out hope for better ties with Washington. Putin also voiced hope that the administration of President-elect Joe Biden would move to extend the last remaining U.S.-Russian arms control pact that is set to expire in early February. The Russian leader countered accusations by saying that if the Kremlin wanted to poison Navalny, it would have succeeded. Photo by ALEXANDER ZEMLIANICHEKO, ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Load-Date: December 19, 2020


End of Document