NATION IN BRIEF;
Courthouse crash called terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 3, 1998, Monday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 04a
Length: 504 words
Series: Final
Body


A pickup truck crashed into the county courthouse in Lafayette, Ind., and burst into flames in what a county official today said was being investigated as a terrorist attack, badly damaging the ground floor. No one was injured, but 25 people who live nearby were evacuated late Sunday. Local authorities asked for help from the FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. ''They're treating this as a terrorist attack on the courthouse,'' Tippecanoe County Commissioner John Knochel said today. There was no driver at the scene and authorities went door to door today looking for information about how the vehicle got into the building. Sheriff Dave Murtaugh said the truck contained 55-gallon drums of what appeared to be gasoline and another, unknown substance. Albertson's to buy American Stores Supermarket giant Albertson's Inc. will buy American Stores Co. for $ 11.7 billion, creating what the companies say will be the nation's largest food and drug chain. The merger, announced today, will create a new company to be called Albertson's that will operate more than 2,470 stores with 218,000 employees in 37 states. It expects 1998 annual sales to top $ 36 billion. According to sales figures for 1997, Albertson's and American Stores were the third- and fourth-largest U.S. supermarket chains behind Kroger and Safeway. Consumer spending up; weak income gain Americans kept spending at a strong pace in June even though their incomes posted the smallest increase in 3 1/2 years.
The combination of weak income growth and strong spending pushed the personal savings rate down to an all-time low. The Commerce Department reported today that personal incomes rose by just 0.2 percent in June, just half of the 0.4 percent May gain. The big decline reflected in part a loss of $ 2 billion, at an annual rate, in wages because of the General Motors strike, which was not settled until last week. The 0.2 percent rise in incomes matched gains in April of 1997 and October 1996 and was the smallest since a 0.1 percent rise in November 1994. Consumer spending, which accounts for two-thirds of economic activity, rose at a strong 0.6 percent clip in June. Net income rises 27% for major U.S. firms Net income increased 27 percent for major American corporations in the second quarter, but the strong earnings of a cable television giant hid what was actually a slight decline for the rest, The Wall Street Journal reported today. With a large one-time gain by MediaOne Group removed, corporate net income actually fell 1.5 percent from the same quarter in 1997, the Journal reported, based on its monitoring of 677 publicly traded companies. Low commodity prices, tough global competition and waning overseas demand caused by the Asian financial crisis have hurt many companies. In the first quarter, U.S. corporations saw a 20 percent gain in net income, the Journal found. But almost all of that gain came from Ford Motor's sale of a financing unit. Without the Ford sale, the nationwide gain was just 2.5 percent.

Load-Date: August 4, 1998


End of Document