Nationalism fuels terror
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 5, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P2C
Length: 871 words
Byline: William Pfaff
Body


VLADIMIR PUTIN is in grave difficulty because he has refused to acknowledge the real nature of the challenge to his government in Chechnya. The terrible hostage-takings and bombings of recent days are the result of his unwillingness to recognize the implications of defying nationalism - not mere "terrorism" - in the Caucasus.
He is making the same willful mistake that George W. Bush and the U.S. government made after the attacks of 2001. Like Putin, they insisted they were merely dealing with terrorists or criminals.
They were actually dealing with terrorism and crime in the service of nationalism and puritan religion, which is entirely different. In the political circumstances of today, nationalism and radical religion have come to compete and overlap in Chechnya, as in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Nationalism has been a driving force in the Caucasus since the 18th century. The Chechens fought Czarist imperial expansion into the region starting in 1818, and after 1917, they fought the Bolsheviks. They rose again when the German offensive reached Chechnya in 1942, and in revenge Stalin deported many of the Chechens to Central Asia.
When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, the Chechens again demanded independence, and Boris Yeltsin sent troops against them. This is what Vladimir Putin inherited. He too was foolish enough to think that he could crush the Chechens.
He renewed the war against them to win votes. He won George W. Bush's favor in 2001: Were the Chechens not terrorists? Were they not America's enemies, too?
Now Chechen terrorism is undermining Putin. Like President Bush, he has promised to "win," but he is not winning.
In invading Iraq, the Bush administration made a gift of Iraqi nationalism to the Islamic fundamentalists. Without nationalism, the fundamentalist cause is weak. The aim of its jihad is re-creation of the fundamentalist intellectuals' idealized notion of Medieval Islamic society. Recovering a golden age is an idea that recurs in weak societies suffering the crises of development.
A segment of society, usually young, often Western-educated, at least in part, and often from relatively privileged circumstances, experiences a puritan reaction against the dominant materialism, moral disorder, licentiousness and abuse of power it sees in the West (and naturally, against the seduction of that West, as well).
This is a common phenomenon. The "Maoist" terrorists of western Europe in the 1970s and early 1980s included pastors' daughters and former seminarians motivated by moral outrage against capitalism.
The Italian commentator Sergio Romano has said that the personal evolution of Red Brigade militants was often from young Social Christian groups to the more radical young Communists, on to liberationist "groupuscules" in post-1968 universities "and finally the clandestine organizations." The aim, all the way, was to make society once again moral.
Young Muslims, mobilized to fight Russian aggression in Afghanistan, moved on to fight corruption and heresy elsewhere. The people, however, did not follow them. Just as in the case of Europe's "Maoists," the radicalized young had believed that ordinary people were ready for revolution, and were mistaken.
In Egypt and Algeria, the people didn't follow. In Bosnia, instead of fighting to impose Sharia and re-establish the universal caliphate, most Muslims fought to have back the liberal and secular values of prewar Sarajevo. They saw perfectly well that 14 centuries of history lay between them and the caliphate. In Afghanistan, when the United States attacked, people were glad to throw over the Taliban and be free of strict religious law.
When the people won't follow, the next step for the radical (in both Europe and the Islamic world) is terrorism - "terrible" acts meant to awaken Muslims to the truth, and to terrify enemies by invoking God's liberating wrath. That brings us to al-Qaida.
Fundamentalism and nationalism were parallel forces at work in the Caucasus and the Middle East well before the new fundamentalists came home from Afghanistan. Nationalism, with terrorism a part of it, drove the Zionists' war against the British and the Palestinians before Israel was created. Palestinian terrorism has been part of the war against Israel ever since.
Whatever Washington thought it was doing (and, at the time, there seems to have been little responsible thought about what it was doing), it made a basic error by declaring a "war on terror" after the 9/11 attacks and then attacking the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and invading Iraq.
It created the circumstances in which nationalism, and "terrorism," are now at war with the United States. The Iraq insurrection's essential motivation is nationalism. Thus, sooner or later, the United States will be forced out of Iraq.
Nationalism has been the most important force in modern history, resisting and outlasting all totalitarianisms. It easily merges with religious fundamentalism, which is another way to affirm identity. It makes use of terrorism because this is the weapon of the weak. But nationalism is what it is all about. After all, what has driven U.S. policy since 9/11, if not outraged nationalism?
Pfaff is a columnist for the International Herald Tribune.

Load-Date: September 6, 2004


End of Document