Nation & Digest: Pentagon raises nuke cost estimate
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 20, 2020 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 587 words
Byline:  Lee wire reports 
Body


PENTAGON RAISES NUKE COST ESTIMATE
WASHINGTON - The Pentagon has raised to $95.8 billion the estimated cost of fielding a new fleet of land-based nuclear missiles to replace the Minuteman 3 arsenal that has operated continuously for 50 years, officials said Monday.
The estimate is up about $10 billion from four years ago.
The weapons, known as intercontinental ballistic missiles, or ICBMs, are intended as part of a near-total replacement of the American nuclear force over the next few decades at a total cost of more than $1.2 trillion.
Some, including former Defense Secretary William J. Perry, argue that U.S. national security can be ensured without ICBMs, but the Pentagon says they are vital to deterring war. The Trump administration affirmed its commitment to fielding a new generation of ICBMs in a 2018 review of nuclear policy.
TRUMP: SUDAN OFF TERRORISM LIST
CAIRO - President Donald Trump on Monday said Sudan will be removed from the U.S. list of state sponsors of terrorism if it follows through on its pledge to pay $335 million to American terror victims and their families.
The decision would open the door for the African country to get international loans and aid needed to revive its battered economy and rescue the country's transition to democracy. The announcement comes as the Trump administration works to get other Arab countries to join the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain's recent recognition of Israel.
Removing Sudan from the state sponsors blacklist is a key incentive for the Sudanese government to normalize relations with Israel.
Sudan has agreed to pay compensation for victims of the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, attacks conducted by Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network while bin Laden was living in Sudan.
BRIEFLY
SYRIA: A senior White House official made a secret visit to Syria for high-level talks aimed at securing the release of two Americans who have been missing for years amid the country's long civil war, Trump administration officials said Monday.
PENNSYLVANIA: The Supreme Court will allow Pennsylvania to count ballots received up to three days after the election, rejecting a Republican plea. The justices divided 4-4 Monday, an outcome that upholds a state Supreme Court ruling that allowed officials to receive and count ballots until Nov. 6.
CEASE-FIRE: Reports of renewed shelling on Monday challenged the new cease-fire in the conflict over the separatist territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, where heavy fighting between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces has raged for over three weeks.
TROPICAL WEATHER: Tropical Storm Epsilon formed Monday in the central Atlantic, the latest in what has been a very active hurricane season. The storm was forecast to be at or near hurricane strength by Thursday, the U.S. National Hurricane Center said.
ALASKA: Residents sought higher ground along Alaska's southern coast after a reported 7.5 magnitude earthquake triggered a tsunami warning Monday. The warning was downgraded to an advisory just over two hours after the quake.
BELARUS: About 3,000 retirees rallied in the Belarusian capital of Minsk for a third straight Monday to demand the resignation of authoritarian President Alexander Lukashenko as mass protests of a disputed election continue to roil the country.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Stocks closed lower Monday on Wall Street as optimism fades that Washington will deliver more badly needed aid for the economy before the election next month. The benchmark S&P 500 index fell 1.6% after starting the day higher.

Graphic

 
 MORALES' PARTY VICTORIOUS IN BOLIVIA'S PRESIDENTIAL VOTE - Luis Arce, center, Bolivian presidential candidate for the Movement Towards Socialism Party, MAS, and running mate David Choquehuanca, second right, celebrate Monday during a press conference in La Paz, Bolivia. Evo Morales' party claimed victory Monday in a presidential election that appears to sharply shift Bolivia away from the conservative policies of the U.S.-backed interim government that took power after the leftist leader resigned and fled the country a year ago. The leading rival of Morales' handpicked successor, Luis Arce, conceded defeat on Monday, as did interim President Jeanine Áñez, a bitter foe of Morales. Photo by JUAN KARITA, ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Load-Date: October 20, 2020


End of Document