Nation & World Digest: Democrats pull surveillance bill
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 29, 2020 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A19
Length: 620 words
Byline:  Associated Press 
Body


DEMOCRATS PULL SURVEILLANCE BILL
WASHINGTON - Democrats on Thursday pulled legislation from the House floor to extend FBI surveillance authorities after President Donald Trump and Republicans turned against the measure and ensured its defeat.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said there instead would be a new round of negotiations with the Senate over the expired powers the FBI considers vital in fighting terrorism. The House later voted 284-122 to officially start those negotiations.
The provisions, which lapsed in March, allow the FBI to get a court order for business records in national security investigations and conduct surveillance on subjects without establishing they're acting on behalf of an international terrorism organization. They also make it easier for investigators to continue eavesdropping on a subject who switched cellphone providers to thwart detection.
A bill renewing those authorities passed the Senate with 80 votes this month, and it appeared on track for easy passage.
GRAHAM URGES OLDER JUDGES TO RETIRE
WASHINGTON - Lindsey Graham, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, is publicly urging federal judges in their mid-60s or older to step aside so President Donald Trump and Senate Republicans can fill the vacancies with conservative jurists.
Graham's comments, in an interview Thursday with conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt, come as Republicans fret they may lose the Senate majority in the November elections amid the economic shutdown resulting from the coronavirus and Trump's stumbles in addressing the crisis.
Democrats have increasing hopes of gaining the minimum three seats they'll need to capture a Senate majority, while Republicans who once banked on a robust economy and rising Trump approval ratings are showing signs of nervousness.
Graham's committee is set to vote next week on Judge Justin Walker, a 37-year-old protege of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell who has been nominated to the nation's second-most powerful court.
BRIEFLY
SMUGGLING: The family of a slain Libyan human trafficker attacked a group of migrants in a town that recently changed hands amid the fighting over the country's capital, killing 26 Bangladeshi and four African migrants, the Tripoli government said on Thursday. The slayings underscore the perils that migrants face in Libya, where violence and lawlessness have created a haven for smugglers.
AFGHANISTAN: A five-member Taliban team was in Kabul on Thursday to follow up on this week's prisoner release by the Afghan government that saw hundreds of insurgents freed.
PLANE CRASH: The cockpit voice recorder of the Pakistani airliner that crashed last week was found on Thursday, six days after the passenger plane went down in a crowded neighborhood near the airport in the city of Karachi, killing 97 people on board.
CHINESE STUDENTS: The Trump administration may expel thousands of Chinese graduate students enrolled at U.S. universities in the latest sign of tensions between Washington and Beijing that are raging over trade, the coronavirus pandemic, human rights and the status of Hong Kong.
IRAN: Iran's parliament elected a former mayor of Tehran tied to the Revolutionary Guard as its next speaker Thursday, solidifying hard-line control of the body as tensions between the U.S. and the Islamic Republic remain high over its collapsed nuclear deal.
RACIST EMAIL: An Oklahoma police officer will keep his job after being disciplined for responding to an email about department-issued coronavirus masks by sending racist images of people with white bags over their faces carrying torches, reminiscent of the Ku Klux Klan, officials said. The Norman police department didn't reveal the extent of Officer Jacob McDonough's discipline.

Load-Date: May 30, 2020


End of Document