NATION DIGEST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 16, 2013 Wednesday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A23
Length: 963 words
Byline:  Associated Press 
Body


Demolition is set for Sandy Hook school
When the old Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., is demolished, building materials will be pulverized on site and metal will be taken away and melted down in an effort to eliminate nearly every trace of the building where a gunman killed 26 people last December.
Contractors also will be required to sign confidentiality agreements and workers will guard the property's perimeter to prevent onlookers from taking photographs or videos.
The goal is to prevent exploitation of any remnants of the building, Newtown First Selectman E. Patricia Llodra said Tuesday.
"We want to be absolutely certain to do everything we can to protect the privacy of the families and the Sandy Hook community," she said. "We're going to every possible length to eliminate any possibility that any artifacts from the building would be taken from the campus and ... end up on eBay."
Demolition is set to begin next week and be finished before the Dec. 14 anniversary of the shootings. Town voters last month accepted a state grant of $49.3 million to raze the building and build a new school, which is expected to open by December 2016.
Ex-San Diego mayor pleads guilty to harassment charges • Former San Diego Mayor Bob Filner, driven from office by sexual harassment allegations, pleaded guilty on Tuesday to a felony and two misdemeanors for unwanted physical contact with three women at public events.
Filner entered the plea under an agreement that calls for three months of home confinement and three years of probation, the California attorney general's office said.
Filner, 71, was charged with felony false imprisonment and two counts of misdemeanor battery.
The felony involved a woman restrained against her will at a fundraiser. The misdemeanors involved a woman who was kissed without permission and a woman whose buttocks were grabbed.
The plea deal also requires mental health treatment.
The maximum possible sentence for the felony is three years in prison and one year for each misdemeanor. Sentencing was set for Dec. 9.
Serpent-like fish spotted off California coast • A marine science instructor snorkeling off the Southern California coast spotted something out of a fantasy novel: the silvery carcass of an 18-foot-long, serpent-like oarfish.
Jasmine Santana of the Catalina Island Marine Institute needed more than 15 helpers to drag the giant sea creature with eyes the size of half dollars to shore on Sunday.
Staffers at the institute are calling it the discovery of a lifetime. "We've never seen a fish this big," said Mark Waddington, senior captain of the Tole Mour, CIMI's sail training ship. "The last oarfish we saw was 3 feet long."
Because oarfish dive more than 3,000 feet deep, sightings of the creatures are rare and they are largely unstudied, according to CIMI. The obscure fish apparently died of natural causes. Tissue samples and video footage were sent to be studied by biologists at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
Uneven enforcement suspected at nuclear plants • A congressional study expected to be released this month shows that the number of safety violations at nuclear power plants across the U.S. varies dramatically from region to region.
The Government Accountability Office report obtained by The Associated Press suggests inconsistent enforcement of regulations could be responsible.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission figures cited by the GAO shows that while the West region has the fewest reactors, it had the most lower-level violations in the 13-year period from 2000 to 2012.
A spokesman for the industry group Nuclear Energy Institute declined to comment. The NRC's public affairs office had no comment, citing the government shutdown.
White supremacists arrested in Arizona • Two members of a notorious family that authorities say once tried to set up a whites-only nation in America were arrested this week in Arizona on federal firearms charges after a raid on a sprawling ranch netted dozens of weapons and thousands of rounds of ammunition.
Kirby Kehoe, 65, and his son, Cheyne, 37, had an initial court appearance Tuesday in Flagstaff. Cheyne Kehoe's attorney declined to discuss the case, while a lawyer for Kirby Kehoe did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
Authorities received a tip that Kirby Kehoe had weapons on his 40-acre property near Ash Fork, about 140 miles north of Phoenix, said Tom Mangan, a special agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
Agents who raided the property seized dozens of guns, including shotguns and semiautomatic rifles and pistols, according to the ATF. Kirby Kehoe was arrested on site, while federal authorities picked up Cheyne Kehoe in Prescott, where he had a scheduled court appearance in another case.
Blasts at LA airport not called terrorism • Police said Tuesday they don't believe two dry ice explosions this week in restricted areas at Los Angeles International Airport were an act of terrorism, and they're pursuing the theory that the blasts were the work of a disgruntled employee.
The bombs were made by putting dry ice in 20-ounce plastic bottles and could have caused serious injury to anyone in close proximity, though no one was hurt, said Los Angeles Police Department Deputy Chief Michael Downing. Police are treating them as seriously as if they were pipe bombs.
"Our intent is to find the person who did it, build a prosecutable case, and put them in jail," Downing said.
Investigators have not identified a suspect. They were interviewing employees Tuesday and requesting that anyone with information come forward.
Police believe the explosions were set off because of an internal labor dispute and not terrorism because of the locations of the devices and because people weren't targeted, Downing said.

Load-Date: October 17, 2013


End of Document