Nation Briefs: South Carolina teen pleads guilty in terrorism case
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 9, 2018 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 591 words
Byline:  From news sources 
Body


U.S. faces new tariffs by China
China will impose tariffs on an additional $16 billion worth of U.S. products, officials announced Wednesday, marking the latest parry in an escalating trade war between the two countries.
The 25 percent tariffs will go into effect Aug. 23, targeting cars, crude oil, natural gas and coal.
In a statement, the Chinese Commerce Ministry accused the United States of "once again put domestic law above international law by imposing ‘very unreasonable' new tariffs on Chinese goods."
China's announcement is a direct response to new duties on Chinese goods imported into the United States, announced Tuesday in Washington. Those new tariffs, totaling $16 billion, will be levied against 279 products, including motorcycles and railway cars.
Trump team responds to Mueller interview proposal - Attorneys for President Donald Trump said Wednesday that they had responded to the latest interview proposal from special counsel Robert Mueller, part of a monthslong negotiation process over whether and how investigators can question the president on possible obstruction of justice in the Russia investigation.
Though he has publicly railed against the Russia investigation, Trump has said he's willing to be questioned.
Trump's attorneys did not detail the terms of any counteroffer they may have made, and they also did not suggest that they were close to agreeing to an interview, suggesting the possibility of additional negotiations.
22 arrested in drug-smuggling operation - Nearly two dozen people were arrested Wednesday and charged by authorities in Los Angeles with using small aircraft to smuggle heroin, cocaine and methamphetamine over the U.S. border at the behest of one of Mexico's most notorious drug cartels.
The arrests of 22 suspects come on the heels of a nearly three-year investigation into three drug trafficking organizations that authorities say were working on behalf of the Sinaloa cartel. The groups, which received the drugs from the cartel in northern Mexico, would then stash them in soup cans, inside hidden compartments in cars and used small aircraft to transport the drugs over the border, officials said.
Authorities seized 850 pounds of methamphetamine, nearly a ton of cocaine, 93 pounds of heroin, almost 50 pounds of marijuana and $1.42 million.
Ivanka Trump visits Godfrey - Ivanka Trump, the daughter of President Donald Trump, toured the welding facility at Lewis and Clark Community College in Godfrey on Wednesday on a trip that was promoting the importance of continued worker training.
The school opened a $4.5 million training center in 2016 with 30 welding stations.
The Belleville News-Democrat reported that Trump said during a roundtable discussion that a new national council for U.S. workers was aiming to provide information to mid- and late-career workers about training for jobs of the future.
Teen pleads guilty in terrorism case - A teenager from South Carolina pleaded guilty Wednesday to allegations that he tried to fight for the Islamic State group.
Zakaryia Abdin, 19, pleaded guilty during a hearing in Charleston to a charge of attempting to provide material support to a terrorist organization, according to federal court documents. The charge carries a possible 20-year prison sentence.
Abdin was arrested at Charleston's airport in March 2017 as he tried to board a plane for Jordan. According to authorities, he told an FBI agent posing as an Islamic State recruiter that he wanted to torture an American and would attack a U.S. site if he couldn't get out of the country.

Load-Date: August 12, 2018


End of Document