Nation & World Digest: Court hears fight over Trump taxes
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 26, 2020 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2020 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 572 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


COURT HEARS FIGHT OVER TRUMP TAXES
NEW YORK - A federal appeals court tested the waters on a potential compromise, but didn't immediately rule Friday after arguments in President Donald Trump's long-running fight to prevent a top New York prosecutor from getting his tax returns - a battle that seems destined to return to the Supreme Court.
A Trump lawyer argued that a subpoena for the records is overly broad but balked when an appellate judge suggested the court might be able to alleviate that concern by limiting the scope of documents being sought.
If the three-judge panel refuses to put a hold on the enforcement of the subpoena, Trump's lawyers will be forced to ask the Supreme Court to prolong the legal fight.
EUROPE'S LEADERS PLEAD FOR UNITY
PARIS - Struggling to contain resurgent virus infections, European leaders decried a collective failure to vanquish the pandemic and told the U.N. General Assembly on Friday that the time has come for countries to reinvent international cooperation.
This year's unusual work-from-home General Assembly comes as COVID-19 cases escalate in many regions but especially in Europe, where some of the world's most advanced hospitals in some of the world's richest countries are again under strain.
"This emergency has, more than a thousand treaties or speeches, made us suddenly realize that we are part of one single world," said Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez.
The pandemic "has also revealed the fragility of countries that thought they were strong," EU Council President Charles Michel said.
And it has exposed weaknesses within the European Union, which like the U.N. was founded on the ashes of World War II to avert new conflict and encourage cooperation.
BRIEFLY
PRESCRIPTIONS: If you're on Medicare, don't run to the mailbox looking for a $200 prescription drug card courtesy of President Donald Trump. Government officials said Friday that key details of Trump's election-year giveaway still have to be fleshed out.
PUBLIC LANDS: A federal judge ruled Friday that President Donald Trump's leading steward of public lands, William Perry Pendley, has been serving unlawfully, blocking him from continuing in the position in the latest pushback against the administration's practice of filling key positions without U.S. Senate approval.
SHOOTING: The 17-year-old charged in the shooting deaths of two protesters in Wisconsin is fighting his extradition from Illinois, but his attorneys didn't outline their strategy during a brief hearing on Friday and legal experts say there isn't much the teen can do to stop it.
MARKETS: Stocks shook off another bout of volatile trading and finished solidly higher Friday, led by gains in technology and health care companies. Despite the rally, the S&P 500 still posted its fourth straight weekly loss, extending Wall Street's September swoon.
ASTRONAUT: NASA astronaut Kate Rubins told The Associated Press on Friday that she plans to cast her next vote from space – more than 200 miles above Earth. Rubins is just outside Moscow in Star City, Russia, preparing with two cosmonauts for a mid-October launch and a six-month stay at the International Space Station.
PROTESTS: Oregon Gov. Kate Brown said Friday she's sending state troopers and sheriffs deputies to Portland through the weekend to help police in the state's largest city monitor a weekend rally in the city by the right-wing group Proud Boys and counterprotests by liberal groups.

Graphic

 
 TERRORISM PROBE OPENED IN PARIS STABBING - A young man stabbed two people Friday outside the former Paris offices of satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo, where 12 people were killed in 2015, and a terrorism investigation has been opened into the new attack, authorities said. The suspected assailant had been arrested a month ago for carrying a screwdriver but was not on police radar for Islamic radicalization, France's interior minister said. He said the screwdriver was considered a weapon, but did not explain why. Two people were wounded with a bladed weapon in Friday's attack, although their injuries were not life-threatening. Two suspects were arrested. Above, France's Prime Minister Jean Castex, center, arrives at the scene. Photo by THIBAULT CAMUS, ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Load-Date: September 26, 2020


End of Document