Nation & World briefs
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 13, 2009 Friday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 9
Length: 554 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Federal deficit sets October record WASHINGTON - The federal deficit hit a record for October as the new budget year began where the old one ended: with the government awash in red ink. Economists worry that if such deficits continue it could push up interest rates, further dragging on the fragile economic recovery. The Treasury Department said Thursday that the deficit for October totaled $176.4 billion, even higher than the $150 billion imbalance that economists expected. 
The deficit for the 2009 budget year, which ended on Sept. 30, set an all-time record in dollar terms of $1.42 trillion. GOP health plan covers abortions WASHINGTON - The Republican National Committee's health insurance plan covers elective abortions for its employees, an option Republicans strongly oppose in health overhaul legislation that Democrats are trying to push through Congress. Republican Party Chairman Michael Steele learned of the policy's abortion coverage Thursday through a news report and immediately instructed staff to inform the insurance carrier that the RNC wanted to opt out of elective abortion coverage, RNC spokeswoman Gail Gitcho said. Gitcho said the policy has been in effect since 1991. Italy: 17 arrested in terrorism probe MILAN - Italy's top security official said Thursday that authorities have smashed an international terror cell with the arrest in Italy and elsewhere in Europe of 17 Algerians who were raising money to finance terrorism. Interior Minister Roberto Maroni, speaking to reporters in Rome, called the terror cell "significant." The arrests stemmed from an anti-terrorism investigation in Milan, and anti-terrorist units from Algeria, Austria, Britain, France, Spain and Switzerland cooperated in the probe, Milan police said. U.S. reports large mumps outbreak ATLANTA - U.S. health officials say the largest U.S. outbreak of mumps in three years is occurring in New York and New Jersey. About 180 cases were identified in those two states from the time an investigation began in August through the end of October. Another 15 cases tied to the same outbreak have been reported in Canada. Three people have been hospitalized but no deaths were reported. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the outbreak was first reported at a boys camp in Sullivan County, N.Y. It may have been triggered by an 11-year-old boy from the United Kingdom, where an ongoing mumps outbreak has sickened about 4,000. Spain tries 11 in alleged terror plot MADRID - Three men of Pakistani origin denied any wrongdoing Thursday as they went on trial over an alleged plot to stage suicide attacks in Barcelona on orders from the Pakistan Taliban. Police foiled the alleged plan with a series of raids in January 2008 in Spain's second-largest city, after a member of the cell designated to blow himself up got cold feet and alerted authorities, a Spanish prosecutor said. The 11 men on trial include nine men of Pakistani nationality or origin and two from India. They have all pleaded innocent. Russia might reduce its 11 time zones MOSCOW - Russia has 11 time zones across its vast territory - and its leaders believe that's just too many hours in the day. President Dmitry Medvedev suggested Thursday that Russia reduce the number of time zones in the name of economic efficiency. The Associated Press

Load-Date: November 13, 2009


End of Document