NATIONS ENDORSE 25 MEASURES TO FIGHT TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 31, 1996, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 303 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


In a meeting Tuesday, the United States, its six principal industrialized allies and Russia formally adopted 25 measures designed to combat terrorism.
The meeting was the third international conclave on terrorism in four months.
It was held amid intensive investigations into Saturday's bomb blast at Olympic Centennial Park in Atlanta, which led to two deaths, and into the July 17 explosion aboard TWA Flight 800, which killed all 230 persons aboard.
Like its predecessors, the five-hour conference ended in a show of unity against terrorists and the states that support them.
The closing of ranks Tuesday followed a U.S. decision not to press President Bill Clinton's demands for "strong sanctions" against governments accused of sponsoring terrorism. With France and Germany in the forefront, the principal allies of the United States have openly opposed U.S. efforts to enforce new economic and other sanctions against Iran, Iraq, Libya and the Sudan.
Regardless, Peter Tarnoff, undersecretary of state for political affairs, said the measures would "send a very strong message, not only to terrorists around the world but to states around the world that support and harbor terrorists."
The measures adopted Tuesday included:
Tightening controls on firearms and explosives.
Preventing terrorist use of the Internet.
Improving bomb detection methods for airplanes.
Thwarting terrorist financing.
The participants also called for developing extradition treaties and faster international exchanges on terrorists, including terrorist use of chemical, biological and nuclear materials.
The measures closely resembled those circulated in an informal working paper in Lyon, France, last month at the annual meeting of the Group of Seven major industrialized countries.
Key details agreed to Tuesday were left for experts to work out.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document