Nations hope to refocus attention on trade;
Delegates are convening in Brazil to talk about tariffs, but U.S. is occupied by war, terrorism.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 13, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. E12
Length: 599 words
Byline: Alan Clendenning ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SAO PAULO, Brazil
Body


Seeking to shift the international agenda from terrorism to poverty, delegations from 120 nations are converging on Brazil for talks aimed at giving developing countries a stronger role in the global economy.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which promotes trade to help poor countries, opens its 11th forum in its 40-year history today amid a clamor from developing countries for trade liberalization to relieve Third World misery.
Although negotiations to spur free trade between developed countries and their poverty-stricken counterparts have advanced in recent years, critics say concrete movement has been blocked by the focus of the United States and its allies on crushing terrorism and on fighting the war in Iraq.
"It isn't that terrorism isn't a serious problem, it is," said UNCTAD Secretary-General Rubens Ricupero. "But we shouldn't forget about themes like development, hunger and AIDS."
The weeklong meeting in Sao Paulo will bring together leaders of Latin American countries, plus trade ministers and development officials from other countries.
UNCTAD, which holds the event every four years, last gathered in Bangkok in 2000 just months after the World Trade Organization tried to launch a new round of trade negotiations in Seattle collapsed amid violent anti-globalization protests.
Although UNCTAD does not have the power of the WTO to negotiate and enforce treaties, the two groups cover many of the same issues. Participants hope the meeting will generate ideas for reviving world trade talks.
That in turn could actually benefit the fight against terrorism, supporters say.
"Unfair trade rules keep millions of people in poverty, and we know that poverty and inequality exacerbate global insecurity and terrorism," said Katia Maia of the relief agency Oxfam International.
Still, it is unclear what can be achieved while the Bush administration's focus is on terrorism, said Gary Hufbauer, a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics in Washington.
"The combination of the war on terrorism and the Iraq war has sucked the oxygen away from virtually all other issues on the agenda," he said.
A senior State Department official said President Bush's fight against terrorism is aimed at bringing peace to the world and promoting economic advances for developing countries.
Trade negotiators will also hold meetings on the sidelines of the forum.
Negotiators from the European Union and four South American nations - Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay - are expected to advance their talks on creating a free trade zone by October.
And U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick is expected to meet with Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Amorim after Brazil hosts a meeting of the so-called G20 group of developing nations. They are pushing to reach a deal by July to relaunch the stalled Doha round of WTO trade talks aimed at slashing subsidies, tariffs and other barriers.
Global trade relations were chilled by the collapse in September of the 147-member organization's last formal ministerial meeting in Cancun, Mexico.
But they began to thaw last month after the European Union agreed in principle to scrap export subsidies on farm produce - blamed for hurting producers in poor countries - and dropped demands for new global rules on investment, competition and government procurement.
The United States has already signaled readiness to scrap its own much smaller export subsidies and trade-distorting export credits. But Washington and Brussels have stressed that the concessions depend on poorer countries agreeing to open their markets.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
ALEXANDRE MENEGHINI, Associated Press
A Brazilian army soldier surveys the area around the Sao Paulo convention center where the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is meeting this week. Brazil has deployed 2,000 troops to patrol the area during the meeting.
Rubens Ricupero (left), the Secretary-General of UNCTAD, chats with Celso Amorim, Brazil's foreign minister, before the event.

Load-Date: August 26, 2005


End of Document