Nation must do what's necessary to defend against terrorism
USA TODAY
September 13, 2012 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 501 words
Body


Perhaps commentary writer Jonathan Turley fails to appreciate the fact that it is the terror networks, not counterterror operatives, that are to blame for the interrogation deaths detailed in his  piece "Outrage at U.S. torture dwindles" (The Forum, Tuesday).
Terror networks, such as al-Qaeda, are only an idea away from killing as many innocent people as they can. These groups blow up buses, shops, schools, cafes, places of worship or any other target of their choosing. Their tactic is murder.
These groups wear no uniforms,  have no borders,  do not adhere to international law, treaty or convention, and they target civilians. Our only defense against them  is to somehow know of their next attack before it happens.  How do we do that? Should we read them their rights?
Ron Peavey
Buford,Ga.
No excuse for torture
In his excellent column on the abominable torture policies of the Bush and Obama administrations,  Jonathan Turley writes: "The image of a man beaten, stripped and frozen to death in a CIA prison is not nearly as unnerving as a nation that stood by and did nothing about it."
That is dead-on accurate. I will not give my vote to candidates who will torture or excuse torture. I am voting for Libertarian Party candidate Gary Johnson,  who has been outspoken in his opposition to this nightmare. Every vote he gets is a vote against torture as acceptable U.S. policy. Perhaps if enough of us do this, the message will be heard. At least the blood will not be on our hands.
James W. Harris
Rydal, Ga.
11 years later, all is not well
An item in your Electionline column Tuesday, on the anniversary of the 9/11 tragedy, included  some statistics that should serve to give Americans pause as we remember and  try to evaluate our America 11 years later. All is still not well ("Ignore latest polls, Romney camp says," News).
It  quoted a pollster saying that for 43 straight months, unemployment has been 8% or higher; 23 million Americans are struggling to find work; and, to me most shocking, 47 million Americans are on food stamps. That 70 million combined number represents approximately 23% of the  300 million population  of  our country. I can only wonder what the 70 million represents of the available to workforce. Eleven years after the worst day in our American history, it is painfully obvious we still need to choose the right man to "fix it up" and get us all back on track.
Dave Mayne
Hilliard, Ohio
A day of remembrance
We Americans forget traumatic events too easily, or at least we often try to. But we must realize that it is therapeutic to allow ourselves to experience sorrow and curiosity concerning such tragedies as the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
I hope that no one ever forgets the 9/11 tragedies. At the same time,  how we remember is  important.  I think Sept. 11  each year should be a day of remembrance: to remember  to visit the  lonely,  smile at those who are sad,  comfort those with fear,  feed the hungry  and  house the homeless.  But don't ever forget.
Will Lance
Atlanta 

Load-Date: September 13, 2012


End of Document