Nation / world digest
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 4, 2009 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 666 words
Byline: From news services
Dateline: 0 
Body


Eighth suspect named in N.C. terrorism case
A 20-year-old U.S. citizen who traveled to Pakistan in 2008 "to engage in violent jihad" has been named as the eighth suspect in a North Carolina terrorism case, according to court documents released Monday.
Jude Kenan Mohammad is charged with conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists and conspiracy to murder, kidnap, maim and injure persons in a foreign country, according to a newly unsealed indictment. Authorities have said Mohammad is not in custody and is believed to be in Pakistan.
Seven other men were arrested last week and are scheduled to appear today in federal court for a detention hearing. The indictment alleges that Daniel Boyd, 39, bought guns and led the group of men - all but one of them U.S. citizens - who were planning to kidnap, kill and maim people in other countries.
Family wants baby that was cut from womb - The uncle, aunt and estranged boyfriend of a slain woman whose baby was cut from her womb announced their intentions Monday to seek custody of the infant girl.
The baby's mother, Darlene Haynes, 23, was eight months pregnant when she was found slain in her Worcester, Mass., apartment last week. The baby was found two days later at a New Hampshire homeless shelter with Haynes' former neighbor, Julie Corey. Corey has been charged with kidnapping and is being held in lieu of $2 million bail. The infant is now in state custody.
Simpson wants out of prison while awaiting appeal - Three Nevada Supreme Court justices are trying to decide whether ex-football star O.J. Simpson and a former golfing buddy should be freed from prison while their appeals are considered.
Simpson is serving nine to 33 years for kidnapping and assault with a deadly weapon in the September 2007 confrontation with two sports memorabilia dealers in a Las Vegas hotel room. Clarence "C.J." Stewart, 55, is serving 7 ½ to 27 years. Neither was in the courtroom in Las Vegas on Monday while their attorneys argued neither had received a fair trial.
Michael Jackson's mother wins custody of kids - The wishes Michael Jackson expressed in his will began to come into reality Monday during a lengthy court hearing, with his mother placed firmly in charge of rearing his children and the two men he designated still at the reins of his financial empire. As a media frenzy buzzed outside, a surprise motion from Jackson's longtime dermatologist injected some drama inside the courtroom: An attorney for the doctor, Arnold Klein, tried to enter objections to the parenting of Jackson's children.
Bill Clinton heads to N. Korea to try to free U.S. journalists - Former U.S. President Bill Clinton is heading to North Korea for negotiations to secure the freedom of two detained American journalists, a news report said Tuesday, nearly five months after they were seized on the Chinese border.
Clinton is on his way to Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, where he will try to win the release of Laura Ling and Euna Lee, South Korea's Yonhap news agency reported, citing an unidentified high-level source. It was not immediately clear when Clinton was expected to arrive.
Iraqi Shiite group vows to put down arms - Asaib Ahl al-Haq, or League of the Righteous, an extremist Shiite group believed responsible for the killing of five American soldiers in a bold raid south of Baghdad and the kidnapping of five British men has agreed to renounce violence, a government adviser said Monday.
The group promised to lay down its weapons and join the political process, according to government aide Sami al-Askari, who was at the meeting. In return, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki promised to seek the release of the detainees in U.S. custody, al-Askari said.
Australia foils alleged terrorist plot; 4 suspects are arrested - Police foiled a terrorism plot in Australia on Tuesday, arresting four men suspected of links to a Somali Islamic extremist group who were allegedly planning commando-style attacks on at least one army base, senior officers said.

Graphic

 
 Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - A U.S. Army soldier inspects the site of a bomb attack Monday on American soldiers in southern Afghanistan. Thousands of U.S. troops are deploying in the region in an effort to prevent the Taliban from disrupting the Aug. 20 presidential election. Early today, five rockets hit Kabul. One child was reported injured. 

Load-Date: August 11, 2009


End of Document