Nations offer plan to fight terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 31, 1996, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 772 words
Byline: WILBUR G. LANDREY
Dateline: PARIS
Body


If anything underlines how hard it is to fight terrorism, it is international  conferences such as the one by the foreign and security ministers of eight  leading world powers here Tuesday.
The ministers' list of 25 "concrete steps" and promises to do better  could hardly be called just a whimper. Many of the steps were repeats or  recommendations for tougher measures and closer cooperation yet to come in  tighter controls, exchanges of information, and new ways to prevent terrorist  acts and track down perpetrators.
But the conference won't have the impact that its French sponsors and  American promoters may have hoped for in this third conference dealing with  terrorism in the past four months.
LANDREY
After being warned by the Europeans, Attorney General Janet Reno and  Undersecretary of State Peter Tarnoff did not put forward President Clinton's  call for sanctions against terrorist suspect countries he named as Iran, Iraq,  Libya and Sudan, omitting, it was quickly noted, Syria.
In interviews before the ministers of the United States, France, Britain,  Germany, Canada, Italy, Japan and Russia met, French ministers went out of  their way to say bluntly that parallel American attempts to restrict trade had  nothing to do with terrorism.
"We did not talk about individual countries," said Tarnoff when asked.  "What we sensed here today was a very fierce, united determination to work  together so to reduce the likelihood of terrorism, to make sure that states  that harbor terrorists were put on alert, and I have no doubt that if the path  leads in any direction the countries represented here today will follow that  path with determination and cooperation."
In short, appearances were preserved, differences papered over for the time  being.  Along a table at a press conference, various ministers highlighted various  proposals.
French Foreign Minister Herve de Charette mentioned tighter observance of  so-called charitable organizations and tighter controls to prevent terrorists  from communicating and using the Internet.
Canadian Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy told the others during the meeting  how his 11-year-old son had shown him how to find such things as instructions  on how to make bombs on the Internet.
Speaking to American correspondents afterward, Reno listed a number of  steps the United States proposed - "and the other seven nations agreed  with." Among them:
+ Proposals to protect mass transportation. The International Civil  Aviation Organization has been asked to be tougher, and experts of the eight  nations will meet in Washington to develop standards for more complete and  accurate passenger and cargo manifests.
+ A call for a new international convention on terrorist bombing. Another  meeting of the eight will take place in Washington in the fall to begin  drafting a new treaty.
+ Cooperation to provide better access and decoding of terrorist  communications.
+ A call for a biological weapons convention to make it a crime for  individuals to possess such weapons.
+ Agreement to speed up and share research and development for detecting  explosives and controlling their manufacture and sale.
Still other agreements at the conference covered preventing terrorist  fund-raising, controlling borders, extraditing fugitives, making sentences  more severe and preventing the abuse of political asylum.
President Clinton called the first of these anti-terrorist conferences at  the end of March to make a big splash after the bomb attacks in Jerusalem and  Tel Aviv. It shed more heat than light.
In June, after the first anti-American bombing in Saudi Arabia, Clinton  pushed for a strong statement from the G-7 meeting of the major industrialized  nations in Lyon, presided over by French President Jacques Chirac. That  produced more lists of what to do than action.
Tuesday's meeting was the French-sponsored follow-up, which went into more  detail and is intended to begin bringing about the action.
What everybody recognized is that there are no miracle solutions. The  Atlanta bombing reminded them that terrorism is not only international but  home-grown and has to be tackled there. And while differences with U.S. allies  were being papered over in Paris, Clinton was busy working out others with  Congress.
On Tuesday, Canada's Axworthy cut through all the high-sounding  declarations best when he evoked the poison gas attack on commuters in the  Tokyo subway and uttered a chilling warning.
"Terrorists are now getting access to weapons of mass destruction,  chemical weapons, biological weapons, even nuclear weapons," he said.
"It really has a doomsday quality unless we act now."

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Associated Press; U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno and French Interior Minister Jean Louis Debre.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document