NATIONAL NEWS: Feds: Patriot Act a 'breakthrough'
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 22, 2003 Wednesday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Metro News;
Length: 603 words
Byline: EUNICE MOSCOSO
Body


Washington --- The Justice Department's push to defend the Patriot Act was in full swing Tuesday as senior officials told the Senate Judiciary Committee that the law has been vital to preventing terrorism.
"The act was nothing short of a breakthrough," said Assistant Attorney General Christopher Wray, referring to the anti-terrorism law passed in response to the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
The Patriot Act has improved information sharing among agencies, allowed law enforcement to adapt to terrorist groups' use of technology and provided tools to identify, pursue, disrupt, prosecute and punish terrorists, he said.
Cox Washington Bureau
Wray, who heads the Department of Justice Criminal Division, also echoed a theme of the administration, that the Patriot Act has been unfairly maligned. GOP lawmakers did the same.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican who chairs the committee, said that critics from "extremist groups" have engaged in "intellectual babbling" and false statements about the law.
Groups as diverse as the American Civil Liberties Union and the American Conservative Union have denounced the Patriot Act as an affront to civil rights and to the constitutional protection against unlawful searches.
Charlie Mitchell, an ACLU legislative counsel, said that momentum against the act is growing.
"Voices of skepticism are being heard from communities across America and in the halls of Congress," he said, in a written statement. "We now know that civil liberties were exchanged for many powers that were unnecessary and, in many cases, are being used for purposes that have little or nothing to do with terrorism."
Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-Vt.) said that 190 communities in 34 states have passed resolutions against the Patriot Act. "The administration shouldn't dismiss them," he said.
A bipartisan group of senators introduced legislation this month that would gut major provisions of the Patriot Act, including one that allows federal investigators to delay notifying terrorism suspects about search warrants.
The House effectively voted to do the same thing to the "sneak-and-peek" provision in July.
The Department of Justice has launched a counteroffensive, including a campaign-style tour by Attorney General John Ashcroft to generate support for the act.
At the hearing, Wray said that the Justice Department has charged 284 defendants in terrorism investigations and that 152 of those have been convicted or pleaded guilty.
But Leahy, the committee's ranking Democrat, questioned the significance of the numbers, saying that the median sentence in terrorism cases is two months. That could mean that routine cases such as immigration violations are being reclassified as terrorism cases, he said.
Patrick Fitzgerald, U.S. attorney for the Northern District of Illinois, denied the allegation, saying he was never directed to "pump the numbers."
Democrats also questioned Justice officials about the investigation into allegations that one or more senior administration officials leaked the identity of undercover CIA agent Valerie Plame to reporters after her husband, former diplomat Joseph Wilson, publicly criticized the president.
Sen. Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.) aggressively questioned Wray about the investigation and how much Ashcroft is involved.
Wray said that John Dion, a 30-year career prosecutor, is the chief investigator in the case and that it would be conducted fairly, professionally and impartially. "It has been made perfectly clear that no punches will be pulled," he said.
But Schumer said that Ashcroft should remove himself from the investigation because of his close ties to the White House.

Graphic

 
Photo: Assistant Attorney General Christopher Wray appears before Senate committee.

Load-Date: October 22, 2003


End of Document