NATIONS VOW TO IMPROVE THEIR SECURITY: AT PARIS SUMMIT, TERRORISM CALLED AN 'INTERNATIONAL VIRUS'
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 30, 1996, Tuesday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 457 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


PARIS - With the bomb attack on the Olympic Games and the possible
sabotage of TWA Flight 800 fresh in their minds, Western ministers
today called for stronger international cooperation to fight
terrorism.
Foreign and security ministers from the Group of Seven industrialized
nations plus Russia intend to improve joint anti-terrorism efforts
during a summit here today. The United States is represented by
Attorney General Janet Reno and Peter Tarnoff, the undersecretary of
state for political affairs.
"We have to coordinate our efforts," British Foreign Affairs Minister
Malcolm Rifkind said as he entered the meeting.
"Terrorism is an international virus," he said. "It no longer happens
in individual countries. It is now necessary to toughen up the codes
so that terrorists have no place of refuge."
Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini last week said he was certain
the European Union and the United States agree there must be strong
solutions to the fight against terrorism.
"Terrorism cannot be resolved by one country, there need to be global
solutions," Dini said.
The ministers will consider anti-terrorism legislation that each
country could enact, as well as steps to strengthen international
accords against terrorism, French Foreign Ministry spokesman Jacques
Rummelhardt said. One goal of the summit will be to facilitate
extradition of suspected terrorists.
The ministers also will consider efforts to clamp down on charities
that serve as terrorist fronts, control over information such as the
spread of bomb-making instructions over the Internet, and means to
pressure nations believed to support terrorists.
However, U.S. legislation to tighten economic embargoes against Iran
and Libya, which Washington blames for supporting terrorists, has not
won favor with French Foreign Minister Herve de Charette.
"American laws have no rapport with the fight against terrorism. They
are bad laws," he said.
Interior Minister Jean-Louis Debre, who is co-chairing the conference
with de Charette, said the American approach "is not exactly ours."
Along with the U.S. representatives, ministers from Britain, Canada,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Russia are attending the meetings.
On Monday, Arab ministers opened a three-day anti-terrorism conference
in Cairo. Egypt's interior minister called on his counterparts to
fight harder against the Islamic militancy that is behind much of the
terror in the Arab world.
The Arab ministers are discussing how to improve cooperation between
police forces and exchange information, and unified rules on
extradition.
The Paris anti-terrorism conference was announced at last month's G-7
summit in Lyon, France, and proposed by President Clinton in the wake
of a truck bomb that killed 19 U.S. servicemen in Saudi Arabia on June
25.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document