NATIONAL GUARD MAY GET DOMESTIC DUTIES;
COHEN FORESEES REDUCTION IN NUMBERS BUT A LARGER ROLE IN CRISES, TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 17, 1997, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 765 words
Byline: PAT GRIFFITH, POST-GAZETTE WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Defense Secretary William Cohen said yesterday that the National Guard may be given a new mission to deal with domestic terrorism threats from chemical and biological weapons as part of a still-trimmer U.S. military force going into the next century.
''I believe this is going to be a very serious threat to the security of our country in the future, and we're not adequately prepared for it today,'' Cohen said at a breakfast meeting with reporters at which he discussed the Pentagon's quadrennial report to Congress, which will be made public Monday.
The report recommends a new round of military base closings and a cut of about 61,000 troops from the 1.4 million active-duty force while providing money to modernize arms and maintain the Pentagon's ability to wage two regional wars at once.
Among many controversial aspects of the report that have come to light since Cohen briefed congressional defense committee members Thursday are proposals to reduce the National Guard and Reserves by 54,000 - with perhaps 38,000 coming from the Army National Guard alone. That would be a 10 percent reduction in Army National Guard troops, compared with a proposed cut of 15,000 or 3 percent, from active Army forces.
Many governors have already advised the White House that the cutback could hurt their ability to respond to emergencies such as floods, earthquakes, civil disturbances or plane crashes.
In Pennsylvania, Gov. Ridge was waiting to see details before launching a campaign on behalf of the state's 17,000-plus Army National Guard troops, spokesman Tim Reeves said. One of the few states with a full Guard division, the 28th Infantry Division-Mechanized, Pennsylvania has the second-largest number of Guard troops in the nation, with an overall total of 22,500 in the Army and Air Force guards.
Its troops have seen duty throughout the state in combating floods, helping with rescue operations and working to shore up eroded river and stream banks over the past two years. ''We intend to advocate vigorously for Pennsylvania's interest,'' Reeves said.
In terms of dealing with domestic terrorism, Cohen said the Defense Department is already working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Environmental Protection Agency and local officials in cities around the country to develop plans for responding to emergencies similar to the subway gas attack in Tokyo.
While the United States should be ''very hesitant'' to use the military for non-military purposes around the world, Cohen said, he expects a greater use of troops to combat drugs and terrorism within the country.
In a letter sent May 5 to the White House, the National Guard Association president said he just attended an Adjutants General Association conference at which top Army officials said Cohen's office was mandating a 10 percent cutback.
Maj. Gen. Richard C. Alexander, adjutant general for Ohio, wrote President Clinton that the association doubted that the Army would get the savings it was hoping for from such ''draconian reductions'' because it costs just $ 17,000 a year to keep a Guardsman combat-ready, compared with $ 80,000 for an active-duty soldier.
Rep. John Murtha of Johnstown, ranking Democrat on the House appropriations subcommittee for national security, supported that view yesterday. Murtha said in a statement that it has become more cost-effective in recent years to rely on the Guard and Reserve for support functions than to use full-time active-duty troops.
The Guard and Reserve have become an ''absolutely essential component of our military strength,'' he said, and they were a key factor in the Persian Gulf war.
Col. Lawrence T. Luba, the Washington-based commander of the 28th Infantry's 2nd Brigade, which covers Western Pennsylvania, said yesterday that his 3,500 soldiers have maintained a high level of training that makes them ''by far the best in the division.'' He said units under his command have gone to Bosnia and Germany, and some have been tapped for combat training roles as ''opposition forces,'' going up against enhanced brigades.
If the division were ordered to make a 10 percent cut, he said, ''we'd have to eliminate units, and when you do that, you're going to impact the community in terms of rapid response. There's also a financial impact since the Guard probably supplements a lot of incomes.''
 
He said the Guard is ''certainly capable'' of a new role combating domestic terrorism. ''It would take some additional training, but look at how rapidly we respond now to state emergencies, where in a matter of hours we can have hundreds of troops on the street.''

Load-Date: May 20, 1997


End of Document