Nation Briefs for 10/24/2014
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 23, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 505 words
Byline: Staff Writer
Body


Hatchet-wielding man killed by NYC officers
NEW YORK — New York City police shot and killed a hatchet-wielding man on Thursday after he attacked a group of patrol officers without warning in broad daylight on a busy commercial district in Queens.
 Police Commissioner William Bratton said investigators were still trying to confirm the identity of the assailant and determine a motive. One officer was being treated for a serious head wound.
 Security video and witness accounts appeared to leave no doubt that the man purposely targeted four rookie NYPD officers. Asked if the attack could be related to terrorism, Bratton did not rule it out.
 White House suspect ‘mentally disturbed’
 WASHINGTON — The latest person to climb over the White House fence had the paranoid belief he was being watched by cameras, his father said.
 Dominic Adesanya, 23, of Bel Air, Md., was ordered held without bail in an appearance Thursday before a federal magistrate judge. He has been charged with two federal offenses: unlawfully entering the restricted grounds of the White House and harming two law enforcement dogs that were released to take him down.
 “He’s not violent. He’s not a criminal. He’s not a murderer. He’s just someone that’s just mentally disturbed,” said his father, Victor Adesanya.
 The Secret Service on Wednesday swiftly apprehended Dominic Adesanya, who also had been arrested at the presidential residence in July.
 Border deaths drop
 to lowest in 15 years
 TUCSON, Ariz. — The number of people who died trying to cross the U.S.-Mexico border has fallen to the lowest level in 15 years as more immigrants turned themselves in to authorities in Texas and fewer took their chances with the trek across the Arizona desert.
 The U.S. government recorded 307 deaths in the 2014 fiscal year that ended in September — the lowest number since 1999.
 Illegal Pete’s chain urged to change name
 FORT COLLINS, Colo. — Some people are urging the Colorado burrito chain Illegal Pete’s to change its name because of the way the word “illegal” has been used to describe immigrants.
 About 30 people gathered in Fort Collins on Wednesday to ask owner Pete Turner to change the name of the chain, which is about to open an outlet there. It’s part of a bigger campaign nationally against what critics refer to as the “I-word.”
 Turner said the name is a reference to a novel he read in college and the “Pete” part refers to his name and his father’s.
 Guantanamo prisoners protest female guards
 MIAMI — Some prisoners in the highest-security unit of the Guantanamo Bay detention center have launched a protest against what they consider the religiously offensive use of female guards to move them around the U.S. base in Cuba, lawyers for the men say.
 Prisoners designated as “high-value detainees” because of their allegedly significant involvement in terrorism recently began refusing to meet with defense lawyers appointed by the Pentagon to defend them against war crimes charges unless the military agrees to use only men to escort them to meetings.

Load-Date: December 18, 2014


End of Document