Nations vow to combat terrorism, foster trade
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 18, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 697 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


MADRID, Spain -- Nearly 50 European and Latin American leaders agreed Friday to boost their cooperation fighting terrorism and drug trafficking, while saying a European Union-Chile free-trade deal could be an example for the whole region.
In a 33-point statement issued on the first day of a two-day summit, 50 leaders from the EU, Latin America and the Caribbean pledged "to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations."
The declaration touched on subjects ranging from the fight against poverty to human rights, education and environment. The attending nations also called for a boosting of historic ties.
The declaration also augured for free trade agreements with Central America and the Andean group of nations in the future.
"We are talking here about the opening up of trade; this process must continue," said Mexican President Vicente Fox, whose country will host the next EU-Latin American summit in three years.
Worried by growing instability in Latin America, EU leaders also urged their counterparts from the region to stick with democratic and economic reforms.
"There must be no return to the outdated recipes of the past," Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar said.
Aznar highlighted the economic, social and political crises facing several Latin American nations and stressed that "democracy and freedom are assets . . . to be preserved above all else."
Latin American leaders asked Europe to offer practical help and not dictate solutions.
"We are not here to be lectured at. We will only accept advice," said Argentine Foreign Minister Carlos Ruckhauf.
At the request of Colombian President Andres Pastrana, EU leaders agreed to consider adding the leftist guerrilla group the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, to the EU terrorist list.
"We all feel that the FARC is a terrorist organization," Spanish Foreign Minister Josep Pique said, adding that a decision would be made soon.
Latin America has been shaken in recent months by the collapse of the Argentine economy, political chaos in Venezuela and resurgent violence in Colombia. The summit marked the first trip abroad for Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez since a failed coup against him in April.
The EU is eager to show Latin American leaders that despite past ambivalence, it wants this meeting to mark a new start.
"What is at stake is the fundamental credibility of this whole process," said EU External Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten. "The only way in which we can tackle the problems is through … cooperation."
The EU initialed a new "association agreement" with Chile, which will free up $7.7 billion worth of trade. The deal, which will signed formally in a few months, comes two years after a similar accord with Mexico.
Peruvian President Alejandro Toledo said the summit should mark the start of more trade negotiations, but EU officials said further economic and democratic reforms were necessary before talks could begin.
Aznar said the EU is committed to opening trade with Latin America.
"We are working to reach partnership agreements with all the countries in the region, including those of Central America and the Andes," he said. "We are well aware of the difficulties, not just in terms of the economic content but also in respect of the political repercussions."
Negotiations with Mercosur -- a trade group that comprises Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay -- began three years ago. However, progress has been slow due to disagreements over import restrictions on agricultural goods.
Despite concerns about economic progress, EU-Latin American trade has doubled over the last decade, making the region the EU's second largest trading partner. EU exports totaled $51 billion while its imports from Latin America amounted to $45.6 billion.
The first EU-Latin American summit, held in 1999, ended with leaders promising a "strategic partnership" focusing on boosting human rights and stability, as well as promoting regional free trade pacts and cultural ties.
But pledges were soon put to the side as the EU turned its attention to eastern Europe and the Balkans, while South America committed to talks with the United States to set up a free trade zone covering the Americas.

Load-Date: May 18, 2002


End of Document