NATO to deal with terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 6, 2001 Thursday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a10
Length: 645 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body


U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell and his NATO allies will make a tough new statement on international terrorism at their winter meeting Thursday and offer greater cooperation to Russia, NATO officials and diplomats said.
Though it has no direct role in the conflict in Afghanistan, NATO invoked Article 5 of its founding treaty declaring that an attack on one member is an attack on all. As an alliance, NATO is providing such support as blanket overflight clearances, access to ports and airfields, and increased intelligence sharing for the U.S.-led coalition forces.
On Friday, the allies will hold talks with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov on bringing Moscow at least part of the way into the NATO fold.
The United States says it appreciates Russia's cooperation in the war in Afghanistan and has taken President Vladimir Putin's overtures for closer relations at face value. The allies believe they must seize this opportunity to take a new direction in Europe, making Russia a full partner in forging European security, alliance officials and diplomats said.
Nearly all member nations are providing additional military help on a bilateral basis, and countries such as Britain, France, Germany, Spain, Italy and the Netherlands have offered troops, ships and aircraft.
The Americans obtained strong backing for tougher civilian police and financial controls from foreign ministers of the 55-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe at their meeting Tuesday in Romania. Washington believes another declaration from NATO will be useful.
The United States is not seeking anything new from the alliance beyond a renewed common commitment and a declaration that the fight against terrorism is now clearly one of NATO's priorities, according to the alliance officials and diplomats, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
As a 19-nation collective defense organization, NATO is ill-prepared for the anti-terrorism struggle sparked by the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States. Even though terrorism and the development of weapons of mass destruction are among what NATO identified as the threats of the future in its latest strategic concept, top military officials acknowledge they have no real strategy for defending against it.
What the allies hope to do during two days of talks in Brussels is to identify the capabilities the alliance has for fighting terrorism and begin the long process of adjusting to changing times and new threats.
Alliance officials say individual nations or civilian organizations like the European Union often are better armed for the fight against terrorism through civilian police and financial institutions. But there clearly are areas in which NATO needs to do more thinking, such as civil protection and combatting chemical, biological and nuclear weapons of mass destruction, the officials say.
The NATO-Russia Permanent Joint Council was created in 1997 in the wake of the alliance's enlargement plans as a forum for consultation with Moscow. But all agree that format has not been satisfactory and had a tendency to pit the 19 allies against Russia.
The foreign ministers are expected to instruct the permanent North Atlantic Council, NATO's ruling body, to begin working out a new forum where the Russians will be brought in at the beginning of discussions on specific issues. This will allow them to participate fully in planning and decision-making.
Because the alliance works on a consensus basis, some fear this will give Russia an effective veto. But officials insist the council will continue to function as it always has, and say that if agreement cannot be reached with the Russians, NATO will meet on its own and reach a decision.
The allies also will discuss the situation in the Balkans, where NATO is leading three military operations - in Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia- and relations with the European Union.

Load-Date: December 6, 2001


End of Document