NATO sees stronger ties to Russia key to anti-terrorism; Transformation: Alliance is also working to close military capabilities gap
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 2, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c7
Length: 777 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: BRUSSELS, Belgium
Body


With global terrorism replacing the Soviet Union as a major threat, NATO is considering changes that could produce the biggest transformation of the alliance since its creation 53 years ago.
In advance of a November summit in Prague, alliance members are working on three fronts to:
* Deal with terrorist threats and close the gap between capabilities of the U.S. and European militaries;
* Expand NATO membership to include new democracies of eastern and central Europe;
* Improve cooperation with the old enemy, Russia.
The goal is to make the NATO alliance relevant to the modern era now that the Cold War is over and global terrorism has become a significant security threat.
"The new security threats are not abstract any longer," NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson said recently. "They are here. They are real. And they are lethal. We must take action. We simply have no choice."
Those threats now include militant nationalism, weapons of mass destruction, the proliferation of ballistic missile technology and terrorism.
NATO planners believe the key to a comprehensive anti-terrorism strategy is to forge stronger ties with Moscow, including an institutionalized relationship which some describe as a form of "associate NATO membership" for Russia.
NATO officials hope to wrap up an agreement by May 14 when NATO foreign ministers meet in Reykjavik, Iceland. President Vladimir Putin is to join NATO leaders in Rome two weeks later to seal the deal.
The advantages of Russian cooperation became clear after Sept. 11, when the Russians shared intelligence on international threat groups and smoothed the way for U.S. troops to move into former Soviet republics of Central Asia to support the war in Afghanistan.
NATO planners foresee some sort of arrangement in which the Russians would join alliance members as an equal partner to devise a common strategy for fighting terrorism and combatting the spread of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
That could in turn lead to joint programs in such areas as peacekeeping, arms control, civil emergency planning, disaster relief and even joint missile defense.
A new relationship with NATO also would soothe Moscow's unease over alliance plans to offer membership to former pro-Soviet states of eastern Europe, particularly Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. All three used to be part of the Soviet Union.
During the Nov. 21-22 summit in Prague, NATO is expected to send membership invitations to selected eastern European countries. In addition to the three Baltic countries, NATO officials are considering offering membership to Slovenia, Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria in an expansion that will take the alliance's frontiers to within a few hundred miles of Moscow and St. Petersburg.
"We must take on new members, securing freedom from the Baltic to the Black Sea," President Bush said at a recent White House meeting with Robertson.
Increasingly, NATO officials feel problems of corruption, military backwardness or political instability in some of the candidates are outweighed by the advantages of bringing them into the fold.
Romania and Bulgaria, for example, could offer the alliance a bulwark in the volatile Balkans.
"The creation of a joint defense area is of crucial importance for the promotion of security in Europe's southeastern flank," Greek Defense Minister Yannos Papantoniou said. "We face common threats."
At the same time, alliance officials say NATO must address the imbalance in military power between the United States and its NATO partners.
"Many militaries in Europe remain organized, trained and equipped just as they were in the latter half of the previous century," Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, wrote in the April edition of Britain's Royal United Services Institute Journal.
"In terms of providing a real improvement in fighting capabilities for European members … not much as been accomplished."
NATO wants European leaders in Prague to agree to improve their capabilities against threats from nuclear, chemical or biological weapons; enhance their precision guided munitions; build up their fleets of transport planes to move troops quickly; and improve communications, surveillance and intelligence.
That could be difficult for European governments, which have been reluctant to divert resources from social welfare systems to their militaries.
Lord Robertson has warned, however, that failure to do so could have severe political repercussions.
"If we do not develop our capabilities … how will we explain to our publics if the next major terrorist attack uses microscopic germs instead of massive jetliners and we are unable to respond?" Robertson said.

Load-Date: May 2, 2002


End of Document