NATO EVENT BRINGS UPRECEDENTED D.C. SECURITY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 20, 1999, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 415 words
Byline: DAVID BRISCOE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Bomb squads, SWAT teams and other federal and local police will blanket America's capital this weekend to protect the leaders of about 40 countries meeting for NATO's 50th birthday commemoration.
The unprecedented cloak of protection, intensified because of the NATO bombing campaign over Kosovo, will include the first-ever closing of several Smithsonian museums for security reasons.
Police are virtually shutting down more than two dozen busy blocks in the city's center.
Strategy sessions and security drills began six months ago to pre pare for anything from a drive-by shooting or truck bombing to nuclear or biological terrorism.
"We are the No. 1 target in the world," said Jim Rice, FBI special agent for terrorism.
"But we have home-field advantage. We know the streets. We know the skyline. If something is out of place, we know it."
Altogether, 17 agencies are involved, including riot police and hazardous chemical units, plus security details for each world leader.
"All are prepared to respond to an emergency," said Secret Service Special Agent Jim Mackin.
"Our goal in planning was to prevent them from having to do that."
The war in Kosovo and the ongoing U.S. and British skirmishes with Iraq add to security concerns. But neither action has so far brought a specific threat - at least not one made public.
"I don't want to jinx anything, but the threats we have today are the same ones we had yesterday and the day before," Rice said. "We are prepared."
For three days beginning Friday, traffic will be banned from several blocks surrounding the sprawling new Ronald Reagan Building downtown, where the leaders will meet. Closer in, even pedestrians will be restricted.
A major subway stop next to the NATO meeting site also will be closed for three days.
Commuters will be rerouted around barricades and motorcades.
Most Washingtonians, of course, are used to having their day disrupted by everything from presidential motorcades to global gatherings. But nobody remembers anything quite this full of risk for a city that has never suffered a major terrorist attack.
The principal terrorist threat today is from truck bombs, which is what much of the physical security around Washington is designed to stop, notes Brian Michael Jenkins, a California-based terrorism analyst.
But, he said, "Can those measures prevent some individual or ad hoc conspiracy or terrorist group on behalf of a multitude of causes from setting a bomb somewhere in the city? Absolutely not."
CONFLICT IN KOSOVO

Load-Date: April 20, 1999


End of Document