NATO agrees with U.S. terrorism view
University Wire
November 18, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Brown Daily Herald via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 688 words
Byline: By Grant Welker, Brown Daily Herald; SOURCE: Brown U.
Dateline: PROVIDENCE, R.I. 
Body


Maybe the American viewpoint in the world isn't so wrong after all. On Nov. 10, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, the secretary general of NATO, declared in an interview that there is a "perception gap" between the American and European views on global terror and that "Europeans must move closer to the American view of the seriousness of the threat."
During an assembly last week with President Bush, de Hoop Scheffer said that Europe should focus on the war on terror as much as the United States does and that the difference in perceptions on the issue is likely contributing to occasionally bumpy trans-Atlantic relationships.
The words from the NATO chief might come as a surprise to some, since it is typically believed that the United States lives and thinks separately from the rest of the world. Maybe Americans do think differently than other nations on international issues, but in this most important case, Americans may be right. Perhaps anti-American sentiment in parts of Europe and the Middle East are not as warranted as those against the war in Iraq would believe.
"If the gap is to be bridged," de Hoop Scheffer said, "it has to be done from the European side and not from the United States."
He also said that despite competing views, all parties must agree there is an obligation to repair Iraq in the right ways.
The former Dutch foreign minister feels that the meeting with President Bush in Washington should be taken as an indication that frictions between Europe and America on perceptions of terrorism have abated.
It was de Hoop Scheffer that backed the pre-emptive war in Iraq from the Bush administration, without animosity from his European contemporaries. Now he is pressing for unity, especially among the European alliance members.
"If Europe sees its integration process as one directed against the United States, it will not work because the result will be a split in Europe, and integration is an ambition that the EU should have."
So does this mean that it is the Europeans that need to get things straight when it comes to terrorism? Maybe the Bush administration -- forget the false evidence -- was right in going into Iraq to remove Saddam Hussein from power. Maybe it is still too early to come to a conclusion on that, but this appears to be a significant step in repairing an international division over the issue of Iraq and terrorism.
Jaap de Hoop Scheffer is also the first foreign visitor that Bush has seen since the election, which could certainly be a sign that both sides of the Atlantic are committed to a closer relationship through NATO. It isn't likely that France or Germany, which argued the war made the world less safe, will do an instant roundabout, but Bush had another meeting with a European leader five days later.
After meeting with de Hoop Scheffer, Bush convened with Britain's Tony Blair on Nov. 15, and the two allies discussed similar world issues.
"Europe and America should be working together," Blair said in a Reuters report, "to bring the democratic, human and political right we take for granted to [Iraqis]."
Blair said in the meeting that both the U.S. and Europe need to do more than use conventional military force to achieve security against terrorists and must have a commitment to democracy, freedom and justice.
Aside from the NATO Secretary General's stance on terror, the meeting with Bush has another positive result -- reinforcing the importance of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which at times has been criticized as being ineffective.
The 26 democracies that form the organization have no other forum or association as effective in which to discuss, debate or collaborate on international issues like global terror, war and security. Certainly it is better to have a working alliance for humanitarian efforts than for one or a small number of nations to undertake the initiative alone.
Perhaps equally important is that if the Dutch diplomat is willing to speak out, saying that it is Europe that needs to think more like America, than the meeting could change the tide of anti-American sentiment, or at least in Europe.
(C) 2003 Brown Daily Herald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 18, 2004


End of Document