Naval Academy professor talks terrorism, China in latest book
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
September 21, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: ARUNDEL; Pg. B1
Length: 695 words
Byline: ANDREW CHILDERS

Staff Writer
Body


Any journalist intent on describing the lives of soldiers, sailors and airmen in the field needs to jettison notions of first-class travel.
"The C-2, a miniature version of the C-130, was the most uncomfortable plane I ever flew on," Robert D. Kaplan wrote in "Hog Pilots, Blue Water Grunts," his follow up to 2006's "Imperial Grunts."
"I faced backward in a windowless fuselage, wearing a tight helmet with ear pads, strangled inside a four-way harness and a life vest. For two and a quarter hours we vibrated violently in the disorienting blackness before beginning a steep descent. Landing on a carrier facing backward with no visual warning was like being in a car crash. All of a sudden I was smashed against the seat as though against a cement wall."
And that was Mr. Kaplan's introduction to the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln. The renowned foreign correspondent spent the better part of the past three years embedded with Air Force and Navy units, researching his latest book about the war on terrorism.
The accommodations for his book-signing last night at the Borders in Westfield Annapolis weren't quite as Spartan as the bowels of a submarine, or as exposed as Marine tents in western Africa.
Unlike "Imperial Grunts," which primarily focused on ground forces, "Hog Pilots" finds Mr. Kaplan traipsing around the globe with Navy and Air Force units. The latest volume recounts Mr. Kaplan's experiences embedded with units across Africa and the Pacific against the backdrop of China's increasing military clout.
"We've seen them as a remarkably dynamic economic power," he said. "Now they're a remarkably dynamic military power."
The prolific author has been a correspondent for Atlantic Monthly for 25 years, and he also writes for the editorial pages of The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post.
Mr. Kaplan, who has commanded the attention of presidents and made a career covering the far corners of the globe - the past four years in Afghanistan and Iraq - is serving as the first Class of 1960 Distinguished Visiting Professor in National Security at the Naval Academy.
Mr. Kaplan, who will hold the chair for two years, has lectured at the military war colleges, the FBI and the CIA, as well as at a number of universities. He also has been a consultant to the Army's Special Forces and to the Air Force and Marine Corps.
And he's also talked foreign policy with Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush.
Fan Richard Jackson, a New Zealander who graduated from the Naval Academy in 1973, was in town for a class reunion when he got a chance to spend a few minutes hashing over world affairs with the author.
"It's at a time that's very much of interest," Mr. Jackson said, picking up a copy of "Hog Pilots." "After the Cold War we went through 10 years of aimlessness."
Seeing an advertisement for the book-signing, Susan Jackson, also an admirer of Mr. Kaplan's work, said her "besotted" husband just had to meet the author.
But she also praised Mr. Kaplan's ability to boil geopolitical forces down to real-life experiences.
"Too many people are academic," she said.
With "Hog Pilots," Mr. Kaplan said his intention was to funnel evolving national security challenges through the eyes of the noncommissioned officers charged with implementing military policy rather than the generals. He spent the better part of the past three years hobnobbing with Marines, sailors and airmen as they did their jobs.
"This book is very lower command-centric," he said. "This is very much a book at the tactical level."
China's global military reach will present a new set of challenges for the Navy in particular, Mr. Kaplan predicted. Spared large-scale sea battles since World War II, sailors will need to relearn how to engage a formidable power on the waves.
"The Navy has not really had a competitor since World War II with the exception of special units," he said. "The Navy hasn't been in a battle since Korea."
Those are the lessons Mr. Kaplan hopes to relay to midshipmen during his tenure as a visiting professor.
"I know where they're going because I've been where they're going," he said. "I know the duties of a junior officer on a submarine."

Load-Date: September 25, 2007


End of Document