NBC FILM ON TERROR WINS PRIZE
The New York Times
July 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Weekend Desk
Length: 414 words
Byline: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: HOLLYWOOD, July 7
Body


''Special Bulletin,'' a controversial madefor-television film about nuclear terrorism that implicitly criticizes the way television handles news, was awarded the $25,000 Humanitas Prize today.
The award goes to the writers of prime-time television programs that have ''a humanizing influence'' on television. NBC's ''Special Bulletin,'' which was written by Marshall Herskovitz with original story credited to Mr. Herskovitz and Edward Zwick, was cited ''for its courage to raise moral questions about the use of media in our media-culture'' and ''for its mold-breaking dramatization of the central moral issue of our time -the use of nuclear weapons - and of the evil absurdity of continuing the arms race.''
HOLLYWOOD, July 7 - ''Special Bulletin,'' a controversial madefor-television film about nuclear terrorism that implicitly criticizes the way television handles news, was awarded the $25,000 Humanitas Prize today.
In ''Special Bulletin,'' a terrorist succeeds in detonating a nuclear weapon partly through the refusal of a television anchor to stop reassuring the public and to take a stand.
Winner of the $15,000 prize in the hourlong category was David Milch for an episode of NBC's ''Hill Street Blues'' in which the rape and murder of a nun put due process and real justice at odds.
 
Fourth Award for ''M*A*S*H''
In the half-hour category, David Pollock and Elias Davis were awarded $10,000 for an episode of CBS's ''M*A*S*H'' in which the death of a shy nurse forces the other characters to recognize the fragility of life and shallowness of relationships. In the nine years of the Humanitas awards, ''M*A*S*H'' has won four prizes and been a finalist eight times.
Two of today's winners and five of the nine finalists were NBC programs, a fact that the Rev. Ellwood Kieser, a Jesuit priest who is president of the Humanitas Board, said reflected the influence of NBC's president, Grant Tinker. Mr. Tinker's former production company, M.T.M., often was responsible for many of the finalists in the shorter categories.
Among today's finalists was the episode of ''Different Strokes'' on sexual abuse of children in which Gary Coleman and a friend fall prey to a male pedophile.
The Humanitas Awards are given by the Human Family Institute and endowed by 22 broadcasting groups, including Cox Communications, Group W, Gannett and Metromedia. This year the goal of a $1 million endowment was reached, and the board is planning to expand its prizes to include children's programming.


End of Document