Necessary blows in the war against terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 21, 1998, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 436 words
Body


The bombings of American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania earlier this month  were acts of war, even if they were carried out by terrorists unaffiliated  with any recognized government. If U.S. officials had compelling evidence that  facilities in Afghanistan and Sudan were involved in those and other attacks,  they had a right - indeed a duty - to retaliate against them with the force  necessary to put them out of commission.
Following the deadly attacks in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, U.S.  intelligence quickly focused suspicion on groups bankrolled by Saudi  millionaire Osama bin Laden. In fact, bin Laden's followers hardly have been  shy in claiming responsibility for past acts of terrorism, and administration  officials say they have evidence that the group was preparing to attack other  American targets. Defense Secretary William Cohen and Gen. Henry Shelton,  chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also referred to chilling evidence that  bin Laden's group has been working to develop chemical weapons capable of  causing massive casualties.
WAGDOG
Even if the U.S. military reprisals were as successful as intended,  Americans should take no false security. In the short run, our military  response is likely to provoke more terrorist activity aimed at American  targets, not less. The war against terrorism cannot be won with sporadic  paroxysms of military retaliation. Instead, it requires a sustained commitment  of intelligence, security, diplomacy and political will to protect our  interests at home and abroad.
Cynics immediately questioned whether this military action was some Wag the  Dog ploy designed to divert attention from President Clinton's ethical  troubles. For now, the president and his national security team deserve the  benefit of the doubt against such charges. Planning for a mission of this  complexity had to be under way well before the president went on television  Monday night, and the critical business of national security cannot be placed  on hiatus until this scandal passes.
However, the retaliation in Afghanistan and Sudan is a powerful reminder of  the risks of a paralyzed government. Enemies of the United States have not  been resting while Washington has been obsessed with Monica Lewinsky. If  anything, Thursday's events served to illustrate just how damaged the  president's credibility has become. Cohen and Shelton were reassuring  presences as they addressed the nation; the president, unfortunately, was a  distracting one. Until the White House re-establishes credibility at home and  abroad, our national security will remain dangerously compromised. 

Load-Date: August 21, 1998


End of Document