Need for TRIA likely to extend beyond '05 expiration; IUMI Conference 2003
Business Insurance
September 29, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 17
Length: 367 words
Byline: NEIL HODGE
Body


SEVILLE, Spain-The U.S. government should extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act beyond its 2005 expiration because of reinsurers' reluctance to cover primary terrorism policies, an attorney says.
Speaking at the International Union of Marine Insurers conference in Seville, Spain, last week, Joseph Grasso, a partner at New York-based law firm Thacher Proffitt & Wood L.L.P., said that he thinks that the U.S. government won't extend TRIA because it believes that ''terrorism coverage is now generally available.''
But he added that TRIA should be extended because the low level of interest in buying terrorism coverage has slowed the development of products in the commercial market. This, he said, stems in part from ''reinsurers being unwilling to cover terrorism risk,'' which curbs insurers' ability to offer affordable primary coverage.
''Clearly, a factor is whether coverage is generally available on the commercial market and, if it is, it will end the Act. Terrorism coverage is generally available now, but how comprehensive it is could be subject to debate,'' he said.
TRIA, which was passed in November 2002, created a backstop that ensures that the government will share in future terrorism losses. The program includes a deductible that increases each year until the law expires, and the coverage provided by the government is capped at $100 billion.
The law requires insurers to offer terrorism coverage, but reinsurers are not subject to its provisions.
''TRIA was always intended as a short-term measure to provide insurance companies with sufficient time to come up with suitable commercial solutions. Technically, that is happening, but there is no provision within the act to compel reinsurers to take on the risk, whereas direct insurers have to provide terrorism cover,'' said Mr. Grasso.
Richard Decker, senior vp-ocean marine at ACE USA in New York, agreed that some progress had been made in the commercial market, but he said that the law likely would need to be extended.
''TRIA is very narrow, and you still need specific coverage to replace that. There is still one-and-a-half years to go, but if sufficient alternatives do not emerge, it will have to be extended,'' Mr. Decker said.

Load-Date: October 1, 2003


End of Document