NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK CLOSE; Addendum to the Syllabus: Terrorism in America 101
 The New York Times
October 7, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 14; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 555 words
Byline:  By SETH KUGEL
Body


Brigitte Nacos, an adjunct professor of political science at Columbia University, had been slated to teach Political Science W3922, Section 3: "Political Violence and Terror in the American Context" long before Sept. 11.
     "I really had planned to talk more about domestic groups," Professor Nacos said the other day. "Of course, I'm going to switch it back to focus on international terrorists." 
 In the days after the attack on the World Trade Center, the city's colleges and universities hastily scheduled teach-ins, brown-bag lunches and lectures on related topics. But when it came to actual course offerings, especially in fields like political science, religion and Middle Eastern studies, few academics are finding that decisions can be made so easily.
A handful of professors have shifted into overdrive as they plan new courses. Most are considering how to adjust current offerings. Some are sticking with the status quo.
Hamid Dabashi, a sociologist who heads Columbia's department of Middle Eastern and Asian languages and culture, is drafting a proposal for an interdisciplinary course tentatively called "Destruction of the World Trade Center: Critical Reflections." The course, which would be offered in the spring if it passes through a lengthy approval process, would emphasize themes like Islam, globalism, terrorism and the end of the nation-state.
"I think it will attract about a million students," Mr. Dabashi said.
Some professors at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, whose program emphasizes security and law enforcement, felt an immediate need to adjust their courses. On Sept. 10, a committee of law enforcement officials and others met to consider a panel on the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. Three members of the committee died the next day.
The school has already added one course for next semester, on the psychology of terrorism. Dr. Robert Lichtman, a forensic psychologist, said he was designing the course as he lay in bed at night.
Perhaps no courses at John Jay will change as much as those in the master's program in protection management, which trains security professionals.
"We had been talking about car bombs, shootings, letter bombs," said Charles Jennings, the program's director. "I don't want to say it's something we never considered, but certainly it was just stunning."
Some schools and departments are not planning radical changes. Over the last six years, New York University has rebuilt its interdisciplinary department of Near East languages and literature, adding 12 specialists. Professors say they are already covering much that is relevant to the current situation. 
"I'm sure there is some adjustment of syllabi to devote more time to Afghanistan and Central Asia," said Timothy Mitchell, director of N.Y.U.'s Hagop Kevorkian Center, which studies the modern Middle East. "But much of the larger background that students want, we're already covering." 
Some professors are reviving old courses that had not been scheduled for next semester. Ervand Abrahamian, the Baruch College historian whose area of specialty is the Middle East, will bring back his course "Islam in the Contemporary World" ahead of schedule. At least one work has already been added to the reading list for his fall course on the modern Middle East: President Bush's recent address to Congress.
   SETH KUGEL

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart lists several different books on the topic of terrorism in the Middle East. 


End of Document