NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: MIDTOWN;
Terrorism, Parking and Angry Merchants
The New York Times
August 13, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: The City Weekly Desk  
Section: Section 13;  ; Section 13;   Page 7;   Column 1;   The City Weekly Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 463 words
Byline: By BRUCE LAMBERT  

By BRUCE LAMBERT  
Body


This time the Empire struck first.
The Empire State Building's managers recently sought stricter parking rules, voicing concerns about the risk of a terrorist truck bombing that were prompted by the attack on the Federal Building in Oklahoma City. This month -- to the surprise and chagrin of neighboring merchants -- the city responded by lining 33d Street between Broadway and Fifth Avenue with the requested "No Standing" signs.
Delivery vans were immediately hit with $55 fines. Shop owners complained they had no legal way to get supplies. John Xidias, manager of the Skyscraper restaurant said when he begged one driver to deliver, "he said only if you pay the tickets." Also affected were residents of the McAlpin House and major stores on 34th Street with delivery entrances on 33d, like the Gap and Sam Goody. Especially hard hit was the U2 restaurant at 28 West 33d, whose dinner trade depended on parking that had been legal at night. "Now people drive up, see the sign and just take off," said David Kim, the owner.
The local City Councilman, Thomas Duane, said his office has been deluged with complaints. "The administration imposed a decision without conferring with the impacted parties," said his aide, Chris, Quinn. "It's a big mess."
Community Board 5 "probably could have suggested something that would have worked," said Joe Clift, a co-chairman of its transportation panel. But, contrary to procedure, the board was not notified.
Some merchants complained that the 34th Street Business Improvement District, which represents them, did not consult before lobbying for the parking ban. They suggested that the district ignored their interests while promoting those of its chairman, Peter Malkin, an owner of the Empire State Building. But Daniel Pisark, the district's retail director, denied any favoritism. "The point was to protect this landmark building," he said, "as well as its neighbors, the people who work there and more than 2 million visitors a year."
A spokeswoman for Empire State Partners, which owns the 102-story tower, said: "The Empire State Building never planned on anybody's business being harmed. They just wanted to prevent a possible catastrophe." The spokeswoman, Jeanne Gargano, said the company now wants delivery privileges restored. The Empire State Building's deliveries are through a drive-in entrance.
Merchants dispute the need for no-standing rules on 33d Street's south side and along the block's western half. They said it is far enough from the Empire State Building to be an unlikely target.
A city transportation department spokesman, Oscar Serra, held out some hope for relief. "We are looking at alternatives which are amicable and business-friendly," he said. "We hope to resolve the complaints very shortly."   BRUCE LAMBERT

Load-Date: August 14, 1995


End of Document