Neil Smelser speaks on terrorism at Illinois State U.
University Wire
April 5, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 The Daily Vidette via U-Wire
Length: 513 words
Byline: By Guadalupe Rosales, The Daily Vidette; SOURCE: Illinois State U.
Dateline: NORMAL, Ill. 
Body


The Old Main Room in the Bone Student Center quickly filled Monday night as many students, faculty and community members awaited the arrival of Neil Smelser.
"Neil Smelser is one of the most important and influential sociologists of the past half century. His scholarship has had a significant and defining impact on many areas of our discipline, more recently, the study of terrorism," Nick Maroules, chair of the Department of Sociology & Anthropology, said.
The College of Arts and Sciences along with the Department of Sociology and Anthropology hosted a lecture concerning terrorism by Smelser. The lecture was titled "Why Are Terrorists Beliefs So Powerful?"
Smelser has been a visiting professor of sociology at Illinois State University this semester.
He is currently teaching a graduate seminar and an upper division undergraduate course.
"He has recently published two books on the subject, and I asked him if he would be willing to give a public lecture on the topic, and he agreed," Maroules said.
"Terrorism is a universal ideology," Smelser said.
According to Smelser there are several ideologies that influence a terrorist's thinking. These ideologies included cultural mysticism, diagnosis, assignment of agency, vision and strain and consistency.
"[These ideologies] suggest and demonstrate belief systems. They constitute such powerful ingredients which derive influence," Smelser said.
Smelser explained how each ideology contributed to some common beliefs of terrorists.
"Ideology of diagnosis identifies what is wrong with the world," he said.
He used as an example the Ku Klux Klan and Nazis and added that groups similar to these will not accept any other explanation of what is wrong with the world except other people not like themselves.
"Ideology of assignment of agency has the tendency to target one set of people who have a long history of antagonist belief systems," Smelser said.
Also, according to Smelser, with the assignment of agency there are three tendencies. These tendencies include converting the negative stereotype of a group into the absolute enemy and assimilating that most nearby people are the enemies.
He said these tendencies are used as justification to unjust treatment toward a group.
"If the group is seen as a less than human agent, then this will justify inhumane treatment," Smelser said.
As the lecture came to an end, he addressed the ideology of strain and consistency.
"The ideology of strain and consistency vows that things fit together," Smelser said.
After he was done with his presentation a short question and answer session continued.
Smelser has served as a member of the Committee on Science and Technology to Counter Terrorism for the National Research Council, and he has chaired the panel on Understanding Terrorists to Deter Terrorism for the NRC.
"We are incredibly fortunate to have someone of his stature with us for a semester," Maroules said.
Gary Olsen, dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, said he was pleased with the turnout.
"I am thrilled to see such a large turnout," he said.
(C) 2006 The Daily Vidette via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 5, 2006


End of Document