NESCAC News
The Spectator: Hamilton College
November 14, 2014 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 573 words
Body


Connecticut College senior wins $11,000 scholarship
Maureen Smolskis '15, an international relations major, won an $11,000 Women in Defense HORIZONS scholarship. Smolskis is one of only four women nationally to receive 2014-15 HORIZONS Scholarships from WID, a nonprofit networking and development organization for defense industry professionals, according to an article on the Connecticut College website. Awards are based on academic achievement, participation in defense and national security activities, work experience and financial need. Smolskis, who plans to use the money to finish her studies at Conn and graduate in December, wants to pursue a defense career because of the effect terrorism had on the United States during her childhood. She hopes to enroll in the U.S. Coast Guard's Officer Candidate School next year.
"I have learned how to think in a variety of ways and to work with diverse groups of people. This not only made me a good candidate for the HORIZONS scholarship, but will help me in my future career," she said. "My experiences at Conn and through the programs here have prepared me for the Coast Guard or for whatever my future career will be."
Terrorism lecture sparks protest at Bowdoin
A small group of Bowdoin students protested in response to a lecture on the War on Terror by retired U.S. army colonel David Hunt. According to The Bowdoin Orient, the students chanted, "Bowdoin students are not used to hearing racist rhetoric like this man has just presented. Our problem is not terrorism from Islamic extremists but racism and fear-mongering dividing our country."
"It's interesting that Bowdoin gave him a platform to speak like this," said Christopher Wedeman '15, a founding member of Bowdoin's chapter of Students for Justice in Palestine. "In a speech about the War on Terror, not a single word was spoken about the biggest state sponsor of terror in the Middle East. Which would maybe be a tie between Israel and the United States."
Vice President for Communications and Public Affairs Scott Hood said that the College welcomed Hunt as a speaker because his viewpoint is not often heard at Bowdoin, and because of the importance of foreign policy in the Middle East.
"Terrorism is clearly an important topic, and Colonel Hunt offers a perspective based on a long and distinguished career in the military," he said. "His point of view is one that we don't often hear firsthand at Bowdoin."
Wesleyan launches new programs to boost diversity
Faculty at Wesleyan College gathered on Nov. 6 to discuss programs devoted to increasing the diversity of the campus, specifically the Veterans Posse Program and the Wesleyan Math and Science Scholars Program.
According to The Wesleyan Argus, Associate Professor of Chemistry T. David Westmoreland discussed a course which aims to provide support and motivation for underrepresented groups in the fields of physical science and mathematics. These groups include first-generation college students, ethnic and racial minorities, low-income students and women. The class, a weekly colloquium, introduces students to a different math or science professor each Friday, who in turn teach from a broad range of topics, from preparing for midterm exams to learning about mindfulness.
"The group of students has formed a tight cohort, but it is too soon to judge the overall success," Westmoreland said. "We will be surveying them relentlessly over the next year and a half."

Load-Date: November 14, 2014


End of Document