NETANYAHU TIES PEACE TO WAR ON TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 10, 1996, Wednesday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 698 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Taking an unyielding stance, Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu told President Clinton on Tuesday he will give no
ground in Middle East peacemaking unless terrorism is halted and
Israel's security is bolstered.
"Those who are on the side of peace must show complete dedication to
the fight against terrorism," Netanyahu said after 2 1/2 hours of
talks with Clinton. "Anything less will simply not do. Israel is eager
to make peace but we cannot do so alone."
Netanyahu made clear he is not ready to meet with Palestinian leader
Yasser Arafat. He showed no interest in pursuing the "land for peace"
maxim that has guided Middle East peacemaking. And he would not commit
to withdrawing Israeli troops from Hebron, where 450 Israelis live
among 94,000 Arabs. "I'm looking into the problem," he said.
On another sensitive point, Netanyahu refused to lift restrictions
that have prevented thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip from working in Israel. "As soon as I deem the security
conditions will allow it, I will ease the closure," Netanyahu said at
a joint news conference with Clinton.
On Syria, Netanyahu said he would reopen negotiations only if Damascus
stopped supporting terrorists. "I think that it's peculiar to have
peace talks that are progressing while you have a terror campaign
parallel to it."
For his part, Clinton declared there is no alternative to the peace
process, saying, "We need to keep the tide of history going."
Yet, recognizing the sea change in the Middle East after Netanyahu's
May 29 election, Clinton said, "I think we're going to have,
necessarily, a period of adjustment, and those of us who care about it
need to try to minimize the negative and maximize the positive and get
through it as well as possible."
The trip to Washington was Netanyahu's first visit abroad as prime
minister and was viewed as crucial in setting the tone for relations
between Clinton and the new prime minister. Despite Netanyahu's
generally tough words in pubic, he privately assured Clinton he wants
to move ahead in negotiations with Palestinians and find a formula
soon for a Hebron solution, said a senior U.S. official who insisted
on anonymity.
Peacemaking in the Middle East and in other global hot spots has been
a cornerstone of Clinton's foreign policy and a central theme in his
re-election campaign. Clinton - as well as Arab leaders - worry that
Netanyahu's hard-line views put a cloud over peacemaking efforts.
Netanyahu's tough stance was the chief reason Clinton had supported
his rival, then Prime Minister Shimon Peres. The president glossed
over that fact at the news conference, saying, "I don't think it
needed that much explaining." Netanyahu interrupted to come to
Clinton's rescue, saying they didn't discuss the election results.
The two leaders began their talks in the Oval Office and then
adjourned to the residence for what Netanyahu said was a quick but
good lunch. The Israeli leader promised his relationship with Clinton
would be based on "chemistry, not combustion - good chemistry."
There was a clear disagreement on the issue of the land-for-peace
principle.
Netanyahu stressed that Israel should make territorial concessions
only for secure borders. But White House spokesman Mike McCurry said,
"Our views on land-for-peace remain unchanged, and the president
conveyed that to the prime minister today."
Netanyahu said Israel "has made substantial concessions on all
fronts" and Arab neighbors have not reciprocated by guaranteeing
secure and recognized boundaries. "Does fairness require that Israel
yield 100 percent and the Arab sides yield zero percent?" he asked.
"Well, obviously, we think differently."
News reports from Israel had suggested Netanyahu would tell Clinton he
planned to meet with Arafat. However, the prime minister said merely
he wouldn't rule out the possibility of a one-on-one session "if I
deem it necessary for peace or for the interest of Israel."
He said Arafat's Palestinian Authority has not fulfilled its
agreements with Israel to close its offices in Jerusalem or to crack
down harder on terrorists. "The battle against terrorism cannot be
episodic. It cannot be a product of whim or tactics or strategy," the
prime minister said.

Load-Date: July 10, 1996


End of Document