Netanyahu, Clinton discuss stalled talks
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 8, 1997, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 397 words
Body


SUMMARY: The president's meeting with the Israeli head of state fails to produce a solution to an impasse with Palestinians over West Bank issues.
WASHINGTON - With Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at his side, President Clinton agreed Monday that Israel should never "have to bargain to be free of terrorism." But their White House meeting failed to produce an immediate formula to resume stalled Mideast peace talks.
An Associated Press report
Clinton said he would explore "any reasonable opportunity" to end the impasse. A Palestinian delegation will come to Washington later in the week to broaden the discussions.
"We keep our commitments; they violate theirs," Netanyahu said at the end of the day, signaling that divisions remain.
However, he affirmed homes for Palestinians should be built in Jerusalem, a gesture designed to offset the harsh criticism surrounding Israel's project for 6,500 new Jewish housing units.
The Israeli leader also pledged to carry out commitments for a three-stage pullback on the West Bank whether or not the Palestinians accept his proposal to move quickly into negotiations over Jerusalem, refugees and other tough issues.
Still, Hasan Abdel-Rahman, the chief Palestine Liberation Organization representative in Washington, reiterated the Palestinian position that the talks would not be resumed until Israel stopped construction of the Har Homa project.
"Mr. Netanyahu knows very well that we oppose terrorism because we feel that terrorism is against our national interests for Palestinians," he said. "Mr. Netanyahu bringing up the issue of terrorism is an attempt, in our view, to cover up for his own policies that are very disruptive to the peace process."
Violence continued Monday in the West Bank, when a Jewish settler in Kharbata opened fire with an M-16 on Palestinian stone-throwers, wounding two. Islamic militants responded, warning Israeli settlers "will not be safe from our human bombs."
Clinton described his two-hour meeting with Netanyahu as "very thorough," but gave few details.
And Netanyahu gave this spare summary at a news conference: "We discussed a number of ideas to move the peace process back on track, assuming that the battle for terrorism is engaged effectively."
At the outset of their meeting, the president renewed his call for a statement from Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat of "zero tolerance" for terrorism.

Graphic

 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu appears after talks with President Clinton.  AP photo

Load-Date: April 9, 1997


End of Document