Netanyahu: Palestinians not serious on terrorism
USA TODAY
April 6, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 344 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Body


Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu charged Sunday that
an explosion March 29 that killed a senior Islamic militant in
the West Bank was new proof that Palestinian police were not fighting
terrorism seriously. Netanyahu told his Cabinet that the blast
took place at an explosives factory that operated with impunity
in the Palestinian-run city of Ramallah. Netanyahu also reaffirmed
his government's denial of any role in the death of Mohiyedine
Sharif, the top Hamas bomb-maker. Israel says Sharif was killed
when a bomb he was building blew up prematurely. A Palestinian
autopsy, however, said Sharif was shot and his body dumped in
a booby-trapped car.
AMERICANS WARNED: Egypt demanded the immediate retraction
of a warning Washington issued last week urging Americans in the
Egyptian capital to be cautious because of possible terrorist
attacks. Muslim militant groups have targeted foreign tourists
in their battle with the government to set up a purist state.
IRANIAN POWER STRUGGLE: As a young revolutionary fighting
the shah of Iran, Gholam Hossein Karbaschi spent 17 months in
solitary confinement in Tehran's Evin prison. Sunday he was there
again, this time the object of a power struggle between Iran's
new president, Mohammad Khatami, and its judiciary. Karbaschi,
mayor of Tehran since 1989, was arrested Saturday on charges of
embezzlement. Iran analysts say he has been targeted because his
support for Khatami helped defeat the establishment candidate
in elections last year. -- Barbara Slavin
PALM SUNDAY: Opening Holy Week services, Pope John Paul
II blessed palms and olive branches and dedicated his thoughts
to youths preparing for a huge rally in Rome in 2000. John Paul
led a nearly three-hour-long Palm Sunday Mass and ceremony in
St. Peter's Square.
JAPAN BRIDGE: Built to withstand an 8.5-magnitude earthquake,
the world's longest suspension bridge opened in Japan Sunday,
and 5,350 cars crossed in the first hour. The 12,831-foot Akashi
Kaikyo Bridge links Shikoku, the smallest of Japan's four main
islands, with the biggest main island, Honshu, via Awaji Island.

Load-Date: April 6, 1998


End of Document