NETANYAHU AIDE STILL SEES HOPE FOR PEACE IN MIDEAST
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 23, 1998, Monday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 307 words
Byline: KRISTEN OSTENDORF, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


David Bar-Illan jokes that although he gave his last piano concert years ago, his fans have been ''increasing at an alarming rate'' since he became the spokesman for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
With bumps in the road on the way to peace in Israel, it's a tough sell for Bar-Illan, former pianist and journalist and now the director of policy planning and communications for the Israeli government. But he found a receptive audience last night at the Zionist Organization of America's 53rd annual American Zionist Fund Banquet at The Westin William Penn, Downtown.
Bar-Illan said after his speech that attempts at negotiation had ''not brought the peace that was supposed to be brought.'' But he still pleads the case for the peace process by saying that while Israelis need to fight terrorism, the Palestinian authority must also do its part to end violence in Israel.
Last night, Bar-Illan walked his audience through events leading up to the agreement signed last month at the Wye Plantation in Maryland, which sets up a timetable for Israeli withdrawal from parts of the West Bank. In exchange, the Palestinians have agreed to fight terrorism and to abolish the charter calling for the destruction of Israel.
The Palestinians have not done this after years of negotiations, Bar-Illan said.
''We are still demanding precisely those two things,'' he said.
Bar-Illan made the distinction between what he saw as giving land back to the Palestinians and giving up land that is Israel's through historical and legal precedent.
''There is one thing clear: We are not going to get peace if in an exchange for territory we get terrorism,'' he said.
It is the responsibility of organizations such as the ZOA to take Israel's cause to the United States.
''The state of Israel is vulnerable, and it can only be invulnerable if you stay the course.''

Load-Date: November 25, 1998


End of Document