NEW YORK LAW GROUP OPPOSES F.B.I. CHARTER AS 'SERIOUSLY DEFICIENT'
The New York Times
June 8, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 567 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 7
Body


A New York City lawyers' group contends that the statutory charter proposed for the Federal Bureau of Investigation ''contains serious deficiencies and should not be enacted in its present form'' because it does not adequately protect civil rights and civil liberties.
In a report issued last week, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York, a voluntary group of nearly 13,000 lawyers, said that it might endorse amended legislation if it provided more safeguards for civil rights, including more controls on certain investigative techniques.
Noting the bureau's increasing use of undercover operations, the report said that the charter should prevent Federal agents from entrapping people by implanting the idea of a crime in those who might not otherwise commit one. It also said that the charter should contain stronger civil and criminal penalties.
AN-A
The lawyers' group has issued influential reports on proposed constitutional amendments and all sorts of Federal legislation. The study is being printed and will be available without charge from the association at 42 West 44th Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
 
Independent Commentary
The report is one of the most exhaustive commentaries on the charter by an independent group not directly involved in negotiations on the charter's content. Officials of the bureau, as well as its critics outside the Government, have endorsed the idea of a charter as the first comprehensive statement of the bureau's powers and duties.
John B. Hotis, a lawyer with the Federal Bureau of Investigation who is the principal draftsman of the charter, said that he had not had an opportunity to discuss the report with the lawyer's group.
The group's committee on Federal legislation, which prepared the report, said that the charter should expand the requirements for judicial warrants to ''the most intrusive investigative techniques,'' such as the use of informers to infiltrate private organizations and the use of mail covers, which record certain information found on the outside of sealed envelopes.
 
Definition of Investigative Means
The association recommended that the charter define all the investigative techniques available to the bureau, listing the circumstances in which they may be used and restrictions in various situations.
The draft charter offered by the Administration would establish separate standards to guide the bureau in opening investigations of general crimes, terrorism and racketeering. The lawyer group's report said that there should be one grant of investigative power and that separate standards for rackteering and terrorism ''can only imply special powers and latitude for the F.B.I., rather than (as we think necessary) special restraints.''
Although the charter sets forth the standards for initiating criminal investigations, the report said, it does not set the standards for beginning preliminary inquiries or list the techniques that may be used. The purpose of preliminary inquiries is to determine whether there is a basis for a full-fledged investigation.
The report said that one serious defect in the charter was that it did not specifically prohibit preventive, disruptive actions such those as the bureau carried out in the 1960's in the counterintelligence program known as Cointelpro. The lawyers said that people subjected to Government acts that violated the charter should be able to recover damages and legal costs.


End of Document