New strategy necessary to stop terrorism
University Wire
October 31, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Battalion via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 756 words
Byline: By Mariano Castillo, The Battalion
Dateline: College Station, Texas
Body


The Russian operation to free 750 hostages from a Moscow theater taken by Chechen separatists was an order that should never have been given. Not only was it premature, but the logic which traditionally justifies leaders to take such high-risk operations is not effective with suicide-bent terrorists.
With the number of groups that are increasingly resorting to suicide missions, it is time to rethink how terrorism is fought. The Washington Post editorial board summed it up well: "The Moscow theater siege ended much the way the Chechen terrorists seemed to hope it would -- with the deaths of scores of innocent civilians, along with their own."
Texas A&M U.
Waging a successful war on terrorism is not pretty. It usually involves military operations of dubious legality that are designed to scare the daylights out of potential terrorist recruits. Up to now, when faced with a siege, the only method to successfully defeat terrorists has been to engage in risky, often bloody, raids. However, with the increasing numbers of terrorists who are willing -- and expecting -- to die, leaders must realize that risky intervention may succeed in lowering the number of civilian casualties, but fail in its ultimate goal to deter terrorists from striking again.
Terrorists are following the example of the Palestinian H-Bomb - the Human Bomb - and governments must act immediately to develop new tactics to deter terrorism. Terrorists who signed up to give their lives can't be intimidated.
The siege of the Moscow theater is reminiscent of the 500 hostages taken in the 1996 siege of the Japanese Embassy in Peru by Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) terrorists. Both were no-win situations, except for one marked difference. The Chechen terrorists were prepared to die.
During the Peruvian siege, for instance, its government, like the Russians, refused to be blackmailed by the terrorists. After drawn-out negotiations that lasted four months, the MRTA released all but 72 hostages from the embassy. In April, without warning, a Peruvian elite military unit blew a hole underneath the embassy and stormed the residence, saving all but one hostage. The operation was hailed as a success worldwide, but this success came at a high cost to human rights. In the weeks following the operation, the Peruvian media began reporting human rights horror stories. The terrorist leader's body was riddled with 150 bullets; his second in command received six shots point blank; and the terrorists who surrendered and deposed their weapons were shot several times anyway.
Now, Peruvians are rightly critical of these monstrous human rights abuses, but no one was complaining then. Everyone was too busy celebrating because the operation marked a decisive and long-term victory over the terrorists. The people most likely to be recruited by the MRTA would not join for fear of meeting fates similar to those of the hostage-takers. It was through similar military operations that Peru defeated the Shining Path.
The same effects on terrorism cannot be said for the Russian affair. Besides the fact that the operation gassed 150 people to death and put another 600 in the hospital, Putin's solution did nothing to deter future terrorist attacks, or to intimidate people from joining the terrorists. On the contrary, the outcome of the siege was more or less what the terrorists had in mind. Military force by itself does not defeat the new threat of suicide terrorists. It has not been effective in the Middle East conflict, and was not successful in the Russian conflict. Just three days following the operation, Chechnyan terrorists shot down a Russian helicopter.
Rethinking how to respond to terrorists is not an easy challenge. In addition to military responses, more emphasis on cutting the money flow would be a start. The United States is setting a good precedent through its thorough targeting of al-Qaida funders.
Also, more use must be made of the ultimate weapon against this type of terrorism: education. Resources would be wisely allocated to teaching would-be terrorists that any doctrine that asks them to give their lives in the name of anything is a perversion and distortion. Those people who feel oppressed must learn that terrorism will only result in a more dire situation for them. The Washington Post put it in good perspective, "Terrorism discredits and destroys even legitimate political movements, corrupts civilian leaders and denies justice to people suffering oppression."
(C) 2002 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 31, 2002


End of Document