New York needs to know
Daily News (New York)
May 12, 2012 Saturday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 20
Length: 302 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


Five days after reports that the CIA had disrupted a new underwear bomb plot against a U.S.-bound airliner, Police Commissioner Ray Kelly says the feds are still keeping the NYPD in the dark on the details.
Two words: outrageous and dangerous.
Bits and pieces of the complicated story - involving a double agent who may or may not have been working for the Saudis, who may or may not have had a British passport - have made their way into media reports.
There was one wave of leaks, then another. British and U.S. intelligence are said to be rattled by the disclosures.
At this point, the public doesn't need to know key facts. You know who does need to get the straight dope? The police department that protects the nation's largest city, which also happens to have America's most proactive and sophisticated local terrorism-fighting operation.
There's a thing called the Joint Terrorism Task Force. It was created to facilitate precisely this type of information sharing.
And right now, it's sharing bupkus. Here's what Kelly said:
"There's a little bit of confusion. Different stories are coming out. But we're still trying to get some specificity as to precisely what happened."
Does the police bomb squad have information about how the underwear bomb was built?
"Not as yet. . . . We'd like to know the specifics of the device. We'd like to know the materials used, where those materials may be obtained, the shape and size of the device."
Were New York City targets contemplated?
Were there key sources or contacts who might further important leads - or signal to the NYPD that other trails of evidence aren't worth pursuing?
Instead of leaking like sieves to the reported horror of intelligence professionals, the feds should have made briefing the NYPD a priority. That they have not smacks of turf warfare at its worst.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: May 12, 2012


End of Document