New U. Oklahoma play explores atrocities of terrorism
University Wire
February 17, 2000


Copyright 2000 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Length: 381 words
Byline: By George Zabolski, Oklahoma Daily
Dateline: Norman, Okla.
Body


With the battle against terrorism constantly in the headlines, a new play opening at the University of Oklahoma tells the story of one woman's fight against terrorism and her surprising adversary -- the United States government.
Lee Blessing's Two Rooms opens Friday at 8 p.m. in the Lab Theatre at Old Science Hall.
The play follows an American couple, Michael and Lainie Wells, who teach at an American university in Beirut. Rachelle Reside, drama senior, plays Lainie and Chad Lawrence, drama sophomore, plays Michael.
U. Oklahoma
When Michael is taken hostage by Lebanese terrorists, Lainie struggles to find support for the release of just one man.
"The play analyzes hostage situations in Beirut," said Jenni Page, drama senior and assistant stage manager for Two Rooms. "A group of twenty people gets released in eight days. This man is there for three years."
The cast is rounded out by Brian Thompson, drama freshman, as Walker Harris, a reporter covering Michael's kidnapping, and Lauren Ford as Ellen Van Oss, an advisor from the State Department.
"Walker and (Ellen) represent the two ends of the spectrum that Lainie and Michael have to deal with," said Ford, drama sophomore. "Ellen represents her head and Walker represents her heart, and we vie for her attention."
The set for the play is two rooms very far apart from each other. One is in Beirut and the other is in America. Drama senior Lindsey Scott designed the set and her task was to capture the theme of the play physically on the stage.
"It's the exploration of a relationship that's put on hold," Scott said. "It touches a very basic human thing about love in people."
The two rooms of the play are the room in which Michael is held hostage and his study at home, which Lainie has cleared out but uses to wait for Michael's return.
Two Rooms is directed by Stephen Simpson, directing graduate student, who is also in charge of costume design. This is his first production as director at OU. Clare Adams, lighting design graduate student, is in charge of sound. Lighting design is by Teri Cobourn, drama sophomore.
The show runs from Feb. 18 to Feb. 20 and again from Feb. 24 to Feb. 27. All shows are at 8 p.m., except for the Feb. 27 show, which will be at 2 p.m.
(C) 2000 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 17, 2000


End of Document