New Poll Finds Mixed Support For Wiretaps - Correction Appended
The New York Times
January 27, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1734 words
Byline: By ADAM NAGOURNEY and JANET ELDER; Marjorie Connelly, Marina Stefan and Megan Thee contributed reporting for this article.
Body


Americans are willing to tolerate eavesdropping without warrants to fight terrorism, but are concerned that the aggressive antiterrorism programs championed by the Bush administration are encroaching on civil liberties, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.
  In a sign that public opinion about the trade-offs between national security and individual rights is nuanced and remains highly unresolved, responses to questions about the administration's eavesdropping program varied significantly depending on how the questions were worded, underlining the importance of the effort by the White House this week to define the issue on its terms.
The poll, conducted as President Bush defended his surveillance program in the face of criticism from Democrats and some Republicans that it is illegal, found that Americans were willing to give the administration some latitude for its surveillance program if they believed it was intended to protect them. Fifty-three percent of the respondents said they supported eavesdropping without warrants ''in order to reduce the threat of terrorism.'' 
  The results suggest that Americans' view of the program depends in large part on whether they perceive it as a bulwark in the fight against terrorism, as Mr. Bush has sought to cast it, or as an unnecessary and unwarranted infringement on civil liberties, as critics have said. 
  In one striking finding, respondents overwhelmingly supported e-mail and telephone monitoring directed at ''Americans that the government is suspicious of;'' they overwhelmingly opposed the same kind of surveillance if it was aimed at ''ordinary Americans.''
  Mr. Bush, at a White House press conference yesterday, twice used the phrase ''terrorist surveillance program'' to describe an operation in which the administration has eavesdropped on telephone calls and other communications like e-mail that it says could involve operatives of Al Qaeda overseas talking to Americans. Critics say the administration could conduct such surveillance while still getting prior court approval, as spelled out in a 1978 law intended to guard against governmental abuses.
  The findings came in a poll conducted as Mr. Bush prepares to deliver his fifth State of the Union address on Tuesday. It found that Mr. Bush will face a nation that has grown sour on Washington and skeptical that he will be able to achieve significant progress in health care, the economy, the Iraq war and the cost of prescription drugs for older patients before he leaves office in three years.
  The poll also signaled concern for Republicans as they prepare to defend their control of the House and the Senate in midterm elections this November. Investigations into Congressional corruption are taking a toll as the elections approach: 61 percent of Americans now hold an unfavorable view of Congress, the highest in 10 years. 
  This finding holds particular peril for Republicans as the party that has been in charge. More than half of the respondents said they believed that most members of Congress would exchange votes for money or favors.
  Republicans were seen as more likely to be unduly influenced by lobbyists. And the Republican Party is now viewed unfavorably by 51 percent of the nation, its worst rating since Mr. Bush took office. By contrast, 53 percent said they held a favorable view of Democrats.
  The telephone poll was conducted with 1,229 adults, starting Friday and ending Wednesday. Its margin of sampling error was plus or minus three percentage points.
  The poll found that Americans were to a large extent perplexed as they weighed conflicting forces: the need presented by Mr. Bush to take extraordinary action to fight terrorism, and a historical aversion to an overly intrusive government.
  The poll found that 53 percent of Americans approved of Mr. Bush's authorizing eavesdropping without prior court approval ''in order to reduce the threat of terrorism''; 46 percent disapproved. When the question was asked stripped of any mention of terrorism, 46 percent of those respondents approved, and 50 percent said they disapproved.
  At the same time, 64 percent said they were very or somewhat concerned about losing civil liberties as a result of antiterrorism measures put in place by Mr. Bush since the attacks of Sept. 11. And respondents were more likely to be concerned that the government would enact strong antiterrorism laws that excessively restrict civil liberties than they were that the government would fail to enact antiterrorism laws.
  The poll was conducted just as the White House commenced an elaborate campaign to defend the surveillance program, and thus may have been too early to offer a full measure of that campaign's effectiveness. There were no measurable changes in the poll findings from one day to the next. 
  The findings, and follow-up interviews with some participants, clearly suggest that Mr. Bush has an opportunity to make the dispute over the program play to his political advantage. He has been pointing to the threat of another terrorist attack to justify the eavesdropping program and is trying, for the third election in a row, to suggest that he and his party are more aggressive about protecting the nation than are Democrats. 
  ''Say they're targeting someone in Al Qaeda outside the country, and that person then calls someone in the United States about a plot or something really bad: I don't have a problem with that phone being monitored,'' Debbie Viebranz, 51, a Republican from Ohio, said in a follow-up interview. ''But I don't think they should do it for no reason.''
  Donnis Wells, 69, a Republican from Florence, Miss., said: ''I don't think civil liberties are the more important thing we need to handle right now. I think we need to protect our people.''
  Still, interviews reflected clear apprehension about the program. ''If there is a warrant and done by the courts, I would agree,'' said Robert Ray, 54, an independent from Kentucky. ''But they're trying to do it without using the courts. I just don't trust them.''
  In the poll, 70 percent of respondents said they would not be willing to support governmental monitoring of the communications of ''ordinary Americans''; 68 percent said they would be willing to support such monitoring of ''Americans the government is suspicious of.''
  Beyond surveillance, the poll found that Americans hold unfavorable views of the president and the Republican-controlled Congress as Mr. Bush prepares to give his State of the Union speech. Americans, while declaring themselves generally optimistic about the next three years under Mr. Bush, do not expect him to accomplish very much in that time.
  When Mr. Bush leaves office, respondents said, the deficit will be larger than it is today, the elderly will be being paying more for prescription drugs, and the economy and the health care system will be the same as today, or worse.
  Mr. Bush is viewed favorably by 42 percent of the respondents, statistically the same as in the last Times/CBS News poll, in early December, a lackluster rating that could hamper his ability to rally public opinion behind his agenda and push legislation through a divided Congress. Beyond that, nearly two-thirds of the country thinks the nation is on the wrong track, a level that has historically proved to be a matter of concern for a party in power.
  A majority said they were dissatisfied with the way Mr. Bush was managing the economy and the war in Iraq. Public approval for his handling of the campaign against terrorism, once one of his greatest political strengths, has rebounded somewhat from last fall, but remains well belowwhere it was for the first two years after the Sept. 11 attacks.
  Most strikingly, the poll found abundant evidence of public unhappiness with Congress. While it is risky to draw conclusions about Congressional elections from national measurements of discontent -- for example, more than half of all Americans said they were satisfied with the job their member of Congress was doing -- the findings underscored the tough electoral environment that has led some analysts to predict significant Republican losses this fall.
  The corruption investigations appear to account for a lot of the dissatisfaction. Nearly 80 percent of respondents said that the kind of influence-peddling revelations that have emerged in the investigation of the lobbyist Jack Abramoff reflected the ''way things work in Congress'' and were not isolated incidents. More than 50 percent said most members of Congress ''accept bribes or gifts that affect their votes.''
  ''It seems like the integrity of Congress members in the last few years has just gone to pot,'' said Donald Pertuis, 54, an independent voter from Hot Springs, Ark. Mr. Pertuis added: ''In the last 20 years, greed has accelerated. People expect more, I suppose, and want to work less.''

How the Poll Was Conducted
  The latest New York Times/CBS News poll is based on telephone interviews conducted Jan. 20 through Jan. 25 with 1,229 adults throughout the United States. 
  The sample of telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges across the country. Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete telephone number, thus permitting access to listed and unlisted numbers alike.
  Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey. 
  The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variation in the sample relating to geographic region, sex, race, marital status, age and education. 
  In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, overall results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults. For smaller subgroups, the margin of sampling error is larger. 
  In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll. Variation in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results. 
  Dr. Michael R. Kagay of Princeton, N. J., assisted The Times in its polling analysis. 
  Complete questions and results are available at nytimes.com/polls.


http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


A front-page article yesterday describing the results of the most recent New York Times/CBS News poll referred imprecisely to Americans' favorable opinions of President Bush. The 42 percent of respondents who said they viewed him favorably were referring specifically to how he handles his job. On another question -- about how he is liked over all -- the result was 37 percent favorable.
A front-page article yesterday describing the results of the most recent New York Times/CBS News poll referred imprecisely to Americans' favorable opinions of President Bush. The 42 percent of respondents who said they viewed him favorably were referring specifically to how he handles his job. On another question -- about how he is liked over all -- the result was 37 percent favorable.
Correction-Date: January 28, 2006

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush at his news conference yesterday. The latest poll shows that public opinion on Mr. Bush's surveillance program is still unresolved. (Photo by David Scull for The New York Times)(pg. A21)ChartIn order to reduce the threat of terrorism, would you be willing to allow government agencies to monitor the telephone calls and e-mail of . . .. . . ordinary Americans on a regular basis?: WILLING 28%. . . Americans that the government is suspicious of?: WILLING 68%The complete polling sample was split
 each half was asked one question.(Source by The New York Times/CBS News Poll)(pg. A1)ChartPublic Sentiment on EavesdroppingHow concerned are you about losing some of your civil liberties as a result of the measures enacted by the Bush Administration to fight terrorism?Very: 34%Not very: 17Not at all: 18No opinion: 1Which concerns you more -- that the government will fail to enact strong anti-terrorism laws or that the government will enact new anti-terrorism laws which will excessively restrict the average person's civil liberties?Fail to enact: 40%Enact laws that restrict civil liberties: 48Neither: 2No opinion: 8Both: 2After 9/11, President Bush authorized government wiretaps on some phone calls in the U.S. without getting court warrants, saying this was necessary to reduce the threat of terrorism. Do you approve or disapprove of this?Approve: 53Disapprove: 46No opinion: 1After 9/11, George W. Bush authorized government wiretaps on some phone calls in the U.S. without getting court warrants. Do you approve or disapprove of this?Approve: 46Disapprove: 50No opinion: 3Public Expectations of the Second TermBy the end of George W. Bush's second term in office . . .the economy will be better: 22Worse: 28About the same: 49No opinion: 1the health care system in this country will be better: 9Worse: 40About the same: 50No opinion: 1seniors will pay more for their prescription drugs than they do today: 51Less: 11Same: 35No opinion: 4the federal budget deficit will be bigger than it is now: 70Smaller: 6Same: 22No opinion: 3the office of the presidency will be more powerful: 21Less powerful: 22About the same: 55No opinion: 3most abortions will be legal: 47Against the law: 41No opinion: 12Public Perceptions of CongressDo you approve or disapprove of the way Congress is handling its job?Approve: 29Disapprove: 61No opinion: 11Do you think that recent reports that lobbyists may have bribed members of Congress are isolated incidents or is this the way things work in Congress?Isolated incidents: 16Way things work: 77No opinion: 7Who is more likely to accept bribes or gifts that affect their votes -- Republicans or Democrats in Congress?Republicans: 28Democrats: 13Both equal: 36Neither: 3No opinion: 20Totals may not add to 100 because of rounding.Based on nationwide telephone interviews conducted by The New York Times and CBS News January 20-25 with 1,229 adults.(pg. A21)

Load-Date: January 26, 2006


End of Document