New Minneapolis FBI boss out to fight fraud
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 18, 2011 Wednesday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2011 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 486 words
Byline: JAMES WALSH; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Donald Oswald was an Air Force sergeant and a local cop before a chance meeting brought him to the FBI.
Body


A former staff sergeant in the U.S. Air Force who spent time working as a cop, a lawyer and a night court judge has taken the reins at the local FBI office.
Donald E. Oswald is the new special agent in charge of the Minneapolis Division, supervising FBI operations in Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota.
He steps into a division that has been at the center of an international counterterrorism investigation involving young men returning to their homeland of Somalia to fight in a civil war there -- as well as one of the national hotbeds of health care and mortgage fraud.
On Tuesday, Oswald reiterated that combating terrorism remains the FBI's highest priority -- in Minneapolis and elsewhere. But he also confirmed that the local office is forming a task force with local law enforcement to take on health care fraud. More of the division's white-collar-crime investigators will be dedicated to such crimes, he said.
"We have been underspending resources in this area," he said.
Oswald, 52, takes over a position last held by Ralph Boelter, who now coordinates FBI counterterrorism efforts in Washington, D.C. Boelter gained renown here for his efforts to improve FBI outreach and connect with the Somali community. Oswald said he is just as committed to those efforts and is hitting the ground running, with June meetings planned with Somali leaders and Somali youth.
Oswald calls his FBI career something of a "fluke."
A New Jersey native, he joined the Air Force out of high school, serving more than six years on active duty and with the Air National Guard.
He was a police officer and detective in Brick Township, N.J., and a deputy sheriff and detective in Broward County, Fla. After graduating from law school, he practiced law and was appointed a traffic magistrate for Broward County, where he presided in traffic court.
"Just like 'Night Court,'" he said of the 1980s television show.
The idea of an FBI career came after Oswald sat next to a special agent on an airplane flight. They talked and "he planted the seed that never went away," Oswald said.
Oswald became a special agent in 1992, investigating bank robberies and gang crimes in Los Angeles, then public corruption in New York. In 2000, he was promoted to the Office of the General Counsel at FBI headquarters, where he provided advice on proposed undercover operations.
In July 2003, Oswald worked as a field supervisor for the South Florida Joint Terrorism Task Force squad in Miami. His most recent assignment was chief inspector in the FBI's Inspection Division.
Oswald said his first order of business is to observe how his new division operates and then, perhaps, "tweak" some things. Included in that observation will be visits to all 14 of the Minneapolis office's resident agencies over the next couple of months.
"My supervisors and I are hitting the road," he said. "I told them to pick a week and pack their bags."
James Walsh - 612-673-7428

Load-Date: May 19, 2011


End of Document