New thriller novel is set in Avalon Bay; Novel confronts the issue of terrorists in our backyards
The Catalina Islander (Avalon, California)
November 22, 2013


Copyright 2013 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2013 The Catalina Islander


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 290 words
Byline: The Catalina Islander staff
Body


Are homegrown Islamic terrorists in the United States a myth, or something people need to be aware of?
Ronald von Freyman's new thriller, Avalon Bay, A Jewelry Thriller makes the case that this notion is not a myth, but real.
Avalon Bay is a thriller that exposes the threat of homegrown terrorism. The novel's setting is a small town and its residents, who never would suspect terrorist activities in their backyard.
As the main characters uncover terrorist activities and pursue the members of the terrorist cell in this suspenseful, fast-paced novel, the author shares information about the threats of terrorism in the United States and the truth about Islam's use of terrorist activities.
Von Freymann is a graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point and the United States Army Ranger School and served as administrator of the U.S. Army Behavioral Sciences Research Laboratory.
He also has an understanding of the effort that goes into finding and neutralizing terrorist cells. Von Freymann is a self-made scholar of Islam and the Qur'an's influence on terrorist activities.
"I've researched the facts," he says, "not [what] you hear from [people] who bang on Islam, and who haven't done their homework, yet make wild inflammatory statements with little or no basis, twist information or make it up."
Because of his background and research, von Freymann is able to go into the minds of terrorists to help people better understand the motivation behind terrorist acts.
He endeavors to show people how the Qur'an dictates the actions of Islamic terrorists and encourages the public to take this threat seriously Avalon Bay, A Jewelry Hunter Thriller. By Ronald von Freymann Available at www.amazon.com and            www.barnesandnoble.com.

Load-Date: September 20, 2015


End of Document