New York State Court of Appeals Case Summaries: December 26, 2012
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
December 26, 2012 Wednesday


Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 360 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff
Body


Private Right of Action
Class Benefited by Legislation Stray from the Heart Inc v. Dept. of Health and Mental Hygiene, et al. No. 158 Memorandum
Background: The petitioner was an animal rescue organization which brought an action for damages for the work it performed. The petitioner alleged that the Animal Shelters and Sterilization Act provided for such a remedy. Ruling: The Court of Appeals affirmed the Appellate Division. The court held that when a statute or local law does not expressly authorize a private right of action, the inquiry becomes whether the plaintiff is one of the class for whose particular benefit the law was enacted, whether recognition of a private right of action would promote the legislative purpose, and whether creation of such a right would be consistent with the legislative scheme. The court found that, under the legislative history of the act, the plaintiff was not a member of the class for whose specific benefit the law was enacted. Catherine St. John for the appellant; Avshalom Yotam for the respondents Terrorism
Intent to Intimidate Civilian Population People v. Morales No. 186 Judge Graffeo
Background: The defendant was a member of a street gang. The defendant and members of his gang fatally shot a 10-year-old girl and paralyzed a rival gang member after a party they all had attended. The defendant was charged with committing the crime of terrorism. On appeal, the defendant argued that his involvement in the shooting did not evince an “intent to intimidate or coerce a civilian population” as required by the Penal Law. The Appellate Division held that there was insufficient evidence to prove such intent. Ruling: The Court of Appeals affirmed. The court found that the legislature did not intend to elevate gang-on-gang violence to the status of terrorism. The court also held that to broadly construe the disputed phrase would open the door for the government to invoke the “specter of terrorism” every time organized crime orchestrates a murder of a rival. Peter D. Coddington for the appellant-respondent; Catherine M. Amirfar for the respondent-appellant
© 2013 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: January 2, 2013


End of Document