New anti-terrorism law might not be a cure-all;
Players like those in a USF case still could slip through the cracks.
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 20, 1996, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: FLORIDA/METRO,
Length: 703 words
Byline: PHIL WILLON; Tribune Staff Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The anti-terrorism bill rushed through Congress this week will allow federal authorities to crack down hard on foreign-born terrorists in the United States - if they can figure out who they are.
And that's a big if.
It's unclear whether the new measures would have snagged what federal agents call a terrorist network that operated out of an Islamic think tank associated with the University of South Florida.
In that case, the FBI and the Immigration and Naturalization Service believe two Palestinian terrorist leaders managed to slip into the United States undetected under the guise they were visiting professors at the Tampa institute.
The new law would would make it easier for federal authorities to prohibit aliens with links to terrorist groups from entering the country, deport those already hereand stop foreign terrorist groups from raising money in the United States.
"It's pretty good in terms of providing the law to support the actions that we need to take. But enforcement is another matter," said U.S. Rep. Porter Goss, R-Sanibel, a member of the House Select Committee on Intelligence.
The most difficult task will be determining which groups are considered terrorist organizations. For instance, is the Irish Republican Army a terrorist group? What about its political wing in Northern Ireland, Sinn Fein?
Intelligence efforts then must do a better job identifying the individuals affiliated with those groups, Goss said.
Goss is confident it can be done in a just manner but said additional legislation might be required to allow closer cooperation between U.S. foreign intelligence operations and domestic investigations.
"There has to be some "offense' outside our borders," said Goss, a former clandestine agent for the Central Intelligence Agency.
One of the most controversial provisions in the anti-terrorism law would allow the government to deport foreign terrorists without disclosing classified evidence against them. While the process includes avenues for appeal, the hearings may be conducted in secret.
"It's not going to be the normal, dragged-out appeals process with thousands of people with placards outside," Goss said. "It's going to be, "You're on the next plane out, baby.' "
Washington-based journalist Steven Emerson, producer of a recent PBS documentary detailing the migration of foreign terrorist groups to the United States, agreed with Goss that the bill would give "more legal hooks for authorities investigating some of the groups."
But Emerson said the new measures don't appear to be retroactive, so their value for federal authorities investigating the think tank affiliated with USF is unclear.
In that case, federal agents believe USF Professor Sami Al-Arian, head of the World and Islam Studies Enterprise, arranged visas for two terrorist leaders of the Islamic Jihad, one of the Palestinian terrorist groups sponsoring bomb attacks in Israel, according to federal court records.
One of those professors, Ramadan Abdullah Shallah, has surfaced in Syria as the new leader of the Islamic Jihad.
"Our main purpose is to identify people who are involved with foreign terrorist organizations," said U.S. Rep. Charles Canady, R-Lakeland, a member of the House Judiciary Committee. "That's not always possible. … There are people out there who pose a threat who we'll find, and there are some we might not find."
Several Muslim, Arab and Irish groups opposed the bill, concerned the government might trample on the rights of immigrants accused of belonging to terrorist groups.
"We have the right to freedom of association. You can't indict people because of their associations," said Anisa Abd El Fattah of the Council on American-Islamic Relations in Washington.
She fears the federal government will abuse these new powers by deporting Muslims and others just because they are rumored to be connected to overseas terrorists groups.
On Friday, her organization released a study showing that reports of discrimination and violence attacks against Muslims have increased since last year's bombing in Oklahoma City. Initial reports were that Middle Eastern terrorists were responsible for the attack, but those proved to be false.  Staff writer Michael Fechter contributed to this report.

Load-Date: April 22, 1996


End of Document