New Privacy Stress Stirs Debate
The American Banker
February 8, 1980, Friday


Copyright 1980 American Banker, Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 640 words
Byline: By GEOFF BROUILLETTE
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO
Body


Speakers at a Bank Administration Institute Conference on Security presentation here this week were at sharp odds over whether increased emphasis on individual rights of privacy was a constitutional mandate that would ultimate benefit banks, a trend of overzealousness that would hamstring law enforcement and endanger bank security, or merely one aspect of a larger trend in which banks fail to recognize or react to attacks upon them by their adversaries, including terrorists.
The opposing viewpoints were voiced at a closing session by a staff counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union, the director of Americans for Effective Law Enforcement, and the head of Research West, Inc., a research and reporting firm.
The ACLU speaker, Amitai Schwartz, contended in his presentation that the drafter of the Constitution wrote the Bill of Rights not to make law enforcement easier but more difficult, and that courts have been concerned with not giving police excessive power.
He emphasized, however, that the right of individual privacy was not an absolute one, and that it is outweighted by some public needs.  However, he declared, there must be a compelling reason for privacy to be invaded.
Mr. Schwartz further asserted that the banking industry itself should have an interest in preserving their customers' right of privacy since depositors put a degree of trust in their banks.  They lose that trust, he said, if banks distribute information about customers without a compelling reason.
He predicted increased demand for privacy protection from the public and more pressure on lawmakers to provvide it.
However, Wayne Schmidt of Americans for Effective Law Enforcement contended that "a person or firm that voluntarily places in the stream of commerce certain records or checks, which will be seen by perhaps dozens of employees of numerous banks, cannot retain a reasonable expectations of privacy."
He attacked as perhaps "the most pernicious corollary of third-party sanctity" a Federal requirement that a bank customer be notified that his records have been obtained or are being sought by law enforcement investigators.
"This is like telling the fox he will be followed to the hen house," he declared.
He pointed out that a proviso in the Financial Privacy Act of 1978 permits a court to delay notice requirements if an investigation will be compromised, or for other statutory reasons.
"However, some banks and other firms in custody of third-party records believe that they may have a higher moral or quasilegal obligation to promptly notify their customers, even if a law enforcement agency is excused from doing so," he said.
Mr. Schmidt also criticized banks for donating, without proper investigation, to "movement" and counterculture groups who, he said, have established their own widespread and "highly sophisticated" intelligence operations.
The third speaker, Patrica Athowe, of Research West, Emeryville, Calif., criticized his discussion of the counterculture groups and terrorism as being too mild, and reponded to Mr. Schwartz's earlier remarks that terrorism had died down lately in this country by declaring that the terrorists were simply reorganizing and would reassert themselves after the next election.
She also argued, in reference to Mr. Schwartz's remarks, that it is not just depositors who have trust in banks, but shareholders and employees as well.
Banks, Ms. Athowe said, should look at the question of security not only in relation to specific practices and measures, but also as part of a broader picture which includes terrorism and government actions which hinder effective law enforcement and intelligence gathering.
She was also critical of banks for not actively opposing the National Consumer Cooperative Bank, the formation of which she described as the start of "nationalization of the banking industry."


End of Document