NEW TERRORISM THEORY - DON'T CLAIM RESPONSIBILITY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 11, 1996, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 925 words
Byline: RICK HAMPSON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


At the beginning of the century, Russian revolutionaries used to say terror was to be done, not talked about.
At the end of the century, terrorists seem to be taking their advice.
Many explosions are followed by a long, terrible silence, unbroken by any credible claim of responsibility. Yet many Americans wonder how anyone could blow a jumbo jet out of the sky, killing hundreds of perfect strangers, and not feel compelled to say why?
More than three weeks after TWA Flight 800 exploded over the Atlantic, investigators have received scores of messages claiming responsibility. The FBI won't say if any is valid; the crash hasn't even been declared a crime.
Some interpret that silence to mean the July 17 crash was an accident. But many terrorist attacks - as many as half, by some estimates - are not accompanied by a legitimate ''confessor claim.''
These include the bombing of Pan Am 103 over Scotland in 1988, of an Air-India jetliner over the Atlantic in 1985 and of the federal building in Oklahoma City last year.
''It doesn't matter whether anyone claimed credit or not,'' James Kallstrom, the FBI agent in charge of the TWA investigation, argued last week. ''The event in itself is a public statement . . . that there is tremendous animosity and hatred in the world.''
It does matter, according to Charles Bahn, a forensic psychologist who has advised federal agencies on terrorism: ''If you can label a problem, a solution seems more likely. It not, it's more terrifying.''
If the fall of Flight 800 was the worst terrorist attack in U.S. history, people want to know. If even the Son of Sam and Zodiac killers sent messages, however garbled, why not someone with a cause to push?
Rona Fields, an Alexandria, Va., psychologist, voices the common puzzlement: ''If you don't say anything, you're defeating one of your purposes.''
The world is so filled with exploding bombs and explosive politics that no conclusion can easily be drawn when a car bomb plows into a post office. Absent a message, how do we know if it is the work of militant Muslims who feel U.S. policy is too pro-Israel or Jewish militants who feel it is too pro-Arab? Or simply a domestic militia upset about taxes?
The Irish Republican Army practices a more easily understood form of terrorism. It always takes responsibility for its bombings, and each repeats a demand hundreds of years old: England Out of Ireland. The IRA's grim dance with British authorities is so set that it uses a secret code to inform police if a bomb was the IRA's.
But there is another approach: anonymous, seemingly pointless, terror.
With the end of the Cold War, none of the United States' enemies has weapons for a toe-to-toe slugout. So they resort to war by other means, like the bomb in the baby carriage.
If such a conflict's means are limited, its ends are not. To some, such as more militant Islamic fundamentalists, Western civilization is the fundamental evil in the world. The goal, however unlikely, is not negotiation, but destruction.
To claim responsibility is also to increase the risk of capture, and few terrorists are so radical as to court that fate.
The men who bombed the World Trade Center in 1993 mailed a ringing statement of principle to newspapers - and each news organization passed it on to grateful detectives. At trial, an expert testified that DNA found in dried saliva on an envelope flap matched one defendant's DNA. And the voice on a tape-recorded message claiming responsibility matched, too.
Vincent Cannistraro, a former CIA counterintelligence officer, says state sponsored terrorism favors anonymity because a nation - a small one - is more vulnerable to sanctions and other reprisals.
In other cases, terrorists bypass the public and take their message directly to those in power. For state sponsors, terrorism can be a subtle, unspoken bargaining chit, said Bahn, the forensic psychologist.
A leader like Syrian President Hafez Assad, Bahn speculated, ''might tell (U.S. Secretary of State) Warren Christopher, 'Get Israel to give us some land up north, and we'll restrain terrorism.' ''
''What else gives a guy like Assad power against the U.S.?'' asks Mike Ackerman, a former CIA counterintelligence agent.
In spy circles, authorship of some terrorist acts has become the subject of hot academic debate.
Take the bombing of Pan Am 103. The United States has indicted two Libyans in absentia, but the PLO has blamed Iran. Gerry Bremer, a Bush administration counterterrorism official, has blamed Libya, Syria and Iran. Several analysts and journalists have blamed the Syria-based terrorist group of Ahmed Jibril, the PFLP-General Command. And a Palestinian follower of terrorist mastermind Abu Nidal has told a Beirut court that he did it.
Even if there is a claim, it isn't always immediately apparent. In 1993, it took almost a month for officials to confirm and announce that the Trade Center bombers had issued a statement.
It's usually not easy to identify a legitimate message.
''When a bomb goes off, everyone takes credit,'' says Robert Louden, a former New York City police bomb squad member. ''You have to eliminate the hoaxers.''
For all the mystery of silent terrorism, you can sense something in the dark, quiet hours after such a bombing: a vast distance between terrorist and target.
''It's pointless to us because we're pragmatic; we think an act has to have a purpose,'' says Cannistraro, the former CIA man.
''Other people don't look at it that way. The balance sheet they keep to redress grievances is more archaic - an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.''

Load-Date: August 16, 1996


End of Document