New TV ads link SUVs to support of terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 11, 2003 Saturday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Business;
Length: 479 words
Byline: LEON STAFFORD
Body


Driving an SUV is like putting money in the bank for terrorists.
That's the shock-value assertion Americans for Fuel Efficient Cars makes in commercials that begin airing Sunday in New York, Washington, Los Angeles, Chicago and San Francisco. Don't look for them in Atlanta; the group had only enough money for a few markets.
AJC
The commercials parody the Bush administration's ads linking illegal drug use to terrorism. The group's campaign, dubbed the Detroit Project, makes the same claims --- substituting SUVs for drugs.
But Atlanta advertising executives doubt the ads will succeed in persuading motorists to give up their SUVs in favor of hybrid vehicles. The commercials, they say, come off as insincere, fail to clearly link terrorism and ownership of an SUV, and miss their target by being a parody of the drug ads.
In essence, they'll only anger SUV owners.
"I love the goal of the Detroit Project," said Bart Cleveland, creative director for Sawyer Riley Compton advertising. "Unfortunately, I don't think they did the right thing to achieve their goal. By doing a parody of the drug spots, they made a joke of their own cause."
The ads are the latest salvo in a growing campaign against the increasing popularity of sport-utility vehicles.
Some religious leaders late last year asked "What Would Jesus Drive" in ads intended to persuade Americans to cut short their love affair with the big road machines. And New York Times reporter Keith Bradsher raised the ire of the SUV community in September when his book, "High and Mighty: SUV's --- The World's Most Dangerous Vehicles and How They Got That Way," hit store shelves.
Arianna Huffington, a syndicated national columnist and one of the leaders of Americans for Fuel Efficient Cars, said the group wants Americans to recognize "the effect-energy wastefulness is having not just on the environment but on our foreign policy.
The group's thinking goes like this: When a SUV owner fills his tank, he is linked to the oil companies that purchased the oil and refined the gasoline, which are linked to the Middle Eastern government that provided the oil, which is linked to the terrorists who are being funded by that government to carry out a war with America.
Jamie Turner, chief marketing officer at One Source advertising, said Americans for Fuel Efficient Cars has the right cause but the wrong execution. The group should outline the benefits of hybrid vehicles, which members support, instead of questioning the patriotism of SUV owners.
"One of the hardest things to do is to get people to change their behaviors," he said. "It's much easier to sell a product."
But Patrick Scullin, a partner in Ames Scullin O'Haire advertising, said the campaign works because it will make people think.
"When I see a Hummer in a commercial riding around in the desert, I always think it's in search of its own oil supply," he said.

Graphic

 
Photo: Arianna Huffington unveils two TV ads linking gas-guzzling vehicles to terrorist funding. / JEAN-MARC BOUJU / Associated Press

Load-Date: January 11, 2003


End of Document