New York State Court of Appeals Case Summaries: December 4, 2012
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
December 4, 2012 Tuesday


Copyright 2012 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 293 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff Report
Body


Long-arm Jurisdiction
Foreign Banks — Transacting Business Licci, et al. v. Lebanese Canadian Bank, SAL and American Express Bank Ltd. No. 183 Judge Read
Background: The plaintiffs were U.S., Canadian and Israeli citizens who were residing in Israel when they were injured by rocket attacks launched by Hezbollah during the Second Lebanon War in 2006. The plaintiffs brought suit against the defendants alleging they assisted Hezbollah in committing the attacks by facilitating international monetary transactions. After numerous motions and appeals, the Second Circuit of the U.S. certified two questions to the Court of Appeals. The first, was whether a foreign bank’s maintenance and use of a correspondent bank account at a financial institution in New York to effect wire transfers on behalf of a foreign client constitute a “transaction” within the meaning of CPLR section 302 (a) (1)? The second was whether the plaintiff’s claims under the Anti-Terrorism Act, Alien Tort Statute, or negligence or breach of statutory duty arose from the transaction of business within New York?
 Ruling: The Court of Appeals found that in the banking context, the inquiry is a fact-intensive inquiry. However, a complaint that alleges a foreign bank’s repeated use of a correspondent account in New York on behalf of a client show purposeful availment of New York’s banking system. With respect to the second question, the court found that the repeated use of the account showed not only transaction of business, but an articulable nexus or substantial relationship between the transaction and the alleged breach of duty. Robert J. Tolchin for the appellants; Jonathan D. Siegfried for the respondent Lebanese Canadian Bank
© 2012 Dolan Media Newswires. All Rights Reserved.

Load-Date: December 11, 2012


End of Document