New on the shelf: Terrorism
USA TODAY
March 27, 2008 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. 6D
Length: 310 words
Byline: Carol Memmott
Body


Terrorism, both international and domestic, remains a hot topic for thriller writers. USA TODAY's Carol Memmott looks at five new pulse-pounding thrillers.
The Ghost War
By Alex Berenson Putnam, 383 pp. $24.95
The  plot
CIA agent John Wells must figure out which superpower is funding a surge in Taliban activity and why China is supporting Iran's nuclear weapons program.
The  locales
Afghanistan; China; Washington, D.C.
Why  it's  hot
Heart-pumping adventure, including a firefight in the mountains of Afghanistan and a sea chase off the coast of North Korea.
The Prince  of Bagram Prison
By Alex Carr Random House, 289 pp., $14, paperback original
Army Intelligence reservist Kat Caldwell searches for a teenage Moroccan boy who claims to have seen a fugitive terrorist.
Afghanistan, Morocco, Spain
The John le Carre quality of Carr's characters and the realistic portrait of what it's like to be a prisoner interrogator.
The Amateur Spy
By Dan Fesperman Knopf, 367 pp. $24.95
Freeman Lockhart, a retired relief worker, is forced into spying on an old Palestinian friend who may be involved in terrorism.
The Aegean island of Karos; Jordan; Jerusalem; Washington, D.C.
It takes an unflinching look at the festering atmosphere inside a Palestinian refugee camp in Jordan.
Prepared for Rage
By Dana Stabenow St. Martin's Minotaur, 292 pp., $24.95
Coast Guard Capt. Cal Schuyler and astronaut Kenai Munro unravel a plot to destroy a space shuttle.
Pakistan, Iraq, and Florida waters near the Kennedy Space Center
It offers an in-depth profile of a terror cell and a battle to the death aboard a Coast Guard cutter.
Judas Horse
By April Smith Knopf, 318 pp. $23.95
FBI Special Agent Ana Grey infiltrates a group of environmental terrorists to solve the murder of another undercover agent.
Rural Oregon
Its authentically rendered portrait of the psychological ordeal of working undercover. 

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, B/W (5)
PHOTO, B/W, Sigrid Estrada
PHOTO, B/W, Andre Studio, Lexington, Va.
PHOTO, B/W, Amy Deputy
PHOTO, B/W, Chris Arend Photography
PHOTO, B/W, Elena Seibert

Load-Date: March 27, 2008


End of Document