New surveillance powers for FBI?
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 25, 1995, Tuesday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE OKLAHOMA CITY BOMBING; Pg. 4A
Length: 604 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senate leaders have made proposed anti-terrorist laws a priority and vowed to  give law enforcement broader powers to head off attacks like the Oklahoma City  bombing.
"Partisanship . . . stops at evil's edge," Senate Majority Leader Bob  Dole, R-Kan., declared as he promised swift action on a bipartisan package of  anti-terrorism measures requested by the Clinton administration.
Senate leaders returned Monday from their two-week Easter recess.
Compiled from Times WiresSECURITY
The House returns from its Easter recess next week. It is expected to hold  hearings and pass similar legislation by mid-May.
Under a proposal being considered, the FBI would be able to compile  information on potentially menacing organizations like right-wing paramilitary  groups even when there is no evidence they are involved in criminal activity.
Under current guidelines, the FBI is forbidden from investigating such  groups unless there is a "reasonable indication" that they are trying to  achieve their goals through violence and explicit violations of the criminal  laws. Since the Oklahoma City bombing, law-enforcement officials have  complained privately that those guidelines hamper them from gathering the kind  of information needed to prevent such tragedies.
The proposals would make it easier for immigration authorities to expel  illegal immigrants with suspected terrorist ties; make planning a terrorist  act a federal crime; tighten laws against raising money in the United States  for terrorism abroad; create an interagency Domestic Counterterrorism Center  led by the FBI and a special FBI counterterrorist and counterintelligence  fund; and make it easier for the FBI to trace telephone calls and get  information from credit agencies, hotels, motels, airlines and other  transportation carriers.
Civil libertarians have expressed concern that calls for expanded police  powers to avert future terrorism could turn the clock back to the 1960s.
Between 1968 and 1971, the FBI's Counterintelligence Programs, known as  Cointelpro, collected thousands of files on black radical groups as well as  people involved in opposition to the Vietnam War.
The FBI not only infiltrated the groups on which they kept extensive  records but also planted false information to discredit their leaders.
Those tactics were halted in 1971.
Law-enforcement officials and the White House are now looking at ways to  modify guidelines - last revised in 1983 - that specify when the FBI may  compile information on groups that could be involved in terrorism.
Oliver B. Revell, a retired former senior FBI official, said that the  current guidelines did not fit the modern world, in which explosives and even  nuclear weapons may become available to terrorists. He said the guidelines had  been a constant frustration to FBI officials.
"The problem is that these rules require we have a criminal predicate  before we investigate," he said. "That means you have to wait until you have  blood on the street before the bureau can act. You can't prevent what you  don't know about and you can't know about a group if you can't investigate  until after they have committed an act of terrorism."
Harold Ickes, the deputy chief of staff at the White House, said Clinton  would be sensitive to any constitutional issues raised by giving the FBI more  investigative authority.
"This president is well familiar with the Constitution," Ickes said. "He  has taught constitutional law and he is very concerned that whatever is  submitted conform to the Constitution." 
 
- Information from the New York Times, Washington Post and Los Angeles Times  was used in this report.

Load-Date: April 26, 1995


End of Document