New Terrorism Case Confirms That Denmark Is a Target
The New York Times
September 17, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 1511 words
Byline: By NICHOLAS KULISH; Nicholas Kulish and Souad Mekhennet reported from Copenhagen, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
Dateline: COPENHAGEN, Sept. 16 
Body


This article was reported by Nicholas Kulish, Souad Mekhennet and Eric Schmitt, and written by Mr. Kulish.
  After three terrorism cases in less than two years, including an alleged bombing plot broken up this month, intelligence officials say tiny Denmark is on the front line in the battle against Islamic terrorism in Europe.
  ''Even though we've prevented one terrorist attack, we know that there are still people in Denmark and abroad that have the capacity, the will and the ability to carry out terrorist attacks in Denmark,'' Jakob Scharf, the head of Danish intelligence, said in an interview in his office here. 
  He was referring to predawn raids on Sept. 4 that resulted in the arrests of eight suspects, two of whom are still in custody on terrorism charges and are accused of planning a bombing attack. 
  American authorities helped Danish security officials locate the suspects through electronic intercepts from Pakistan, just as they did in arrests the same day in a bombing plot in southern Germany, intelligence officials in Washington said. They said one of the men in the Danish case received instruction within the past 12 months in explosives, surveillance and other techniques at a terrorist training camp in Pakistan near the border with Afghanistan.  
  With Europe again focused on the threat posed by terrorist plots, Denmark illustrates the powerful interplay between foreign agitation and domestic discontent. The country became a target of foreign Islamist terrorist groups two years ago after a conservative newspaper here published controversial cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad, drawing worldwide attention. At home, the children of Muslim immigrants complain of job discrimination and integration problems, feeding the disenchantment of the small but growing Muslim population. 
  ''In the schools, Danish teachers are always talking about democracy and human rights, but now they see what Denmark is doing in Afghanistan and what they did here with the cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad,'' said Imran Shah, 31, who leads a youth group at a local mosque. ''They ask themselves, is this a democracy or are they talking about double standards?'' 
  While much of the world's attention was focused on the arrests that took place that same day in Germany, but were announced one day later, intelligence officials here and in Washington said at least one suspect in the Danish group had direct ties to leading figures in Al Qaeda, which has regrouped in northwestern Pakistan. 
  ''What's coming from this is that they are now able to give military and terrorist training and able to plan and steer specific operations in Europe,'' Mr. Scharf, the Danish intelligence chief, said. ''Al Qaeda is back.''
  Mr. Scharf drew a clear distinction between independent or loosely affiliated groups drawing inspiration from Al Qaeda's ideology and specific control of plans for attack, saying the Danish bomb plot was clearly the latter. ''I'm not indicating a direct phone line to Osama bin Laden,'' he said, but leading members are able to ''direct operations outside of Afghanistan and Pakistan.'' 
  This case was the first time officials here have linked an operation in Denmark to the group that masterminded the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
  While Mr. Scharf underscored the threat posed by Islamic terrorism, he also differentiated between the religion of Islam and those who commit violence in its name, an important distinction in a country where debates over the role of Islam in a traditionally Christian society have often been contentious and the lines sometimes blurred.
  The case in Denmark also highlights the uneasy coexistence of intelligence and prosecution. Danish authorities gave no indication of the quantity of explosive material found in Copenhagen this month, but they said  suspects had begun mixing precursor chemicals for bombs. Of the eight men arrested, the authorities quickly released six of them, fueling skepticism about the strength of the case and the government's ability to turn arrests into convictions.
  In the first of the recent terrorism cases, stemming from arrests in October 2005, three of the four defendants found guilty by jurors had their verdicts overruled by a three-judge review panel. The fourth was convicted and sentenced to seven years in prison on terrorism charges, and prosecutors say they will retry another. In the second case, nine suspects were initially arrested, of whom four are on trial. The court proceedings are under way in Copenhagen.
  ''They are manipulating the press and the public by giving the impression that they have a very serious case,'' said Bjoern Elmquist, a lawyer for defendants in two of the cases, including this one. ''They are scaring people.''
  With a population of 5.5 million, Denmark is smaller than New York City by several million people, but it is a disproportionately large target on jihadist Web sites. Not only did Denmark achieve infamy across the Muslim world for the publication of the Muhammad cartoons, which incited violent and even deadly protests in other countries, it also has troops both in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
  There are no official statistics, but researchers estimate that there are roughly 210,000 Muslims in Denmark. It is not a homogeneous group but is split among Turks, Iraqis, Bosnians and others. That jihadist Web sites have been translated into Danish for such a small and disparate group demonstrates the interest and effort they are putting into the country.
  Mr. Scharf said  the profile of Muslim men pulled into extremism was young, ''normally in the age from 16 to 25.'' The young men are courted by mentors whose job is to identify those predisposed to a jihadi mind-set, radicalize them and put them in touch with others who could help them plan violent acts.
  ''This is not taking place when the imam is preaching in the mosque,'' Mr. Scharf said. ''I think that these imams play a very important role in preventing the radicalization'' of young Muslims.
  Mohammed el-Banna, an imam from the famous family of the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood, Hassan al-Banna, said,  ''They like heroes, and heroes, from their point of view, are not those who talk but those who fight.''  He preaches at a mosque in Heimdalsgade that Politiken, a leading newspaper here, reported had been attended by suspects in all three of the alleged plots. ''We cannot check the ID cards of people who attend the prayers,'' he said.
  Mr. Banna, 49,  moved to Denmark from Egypt in 1985. He is a Danish citizen and has four children, the eldest of whom is studying computer science at a university in Denmark. Saying he was speaking for himself and not the mosque, Mr. Banna said that before the cartoon controversy, Denmark enjoyed a very good reputation in the Muslim world, as a nation that did business in the Middle East rather than fighting or keeping colonies there.
  For second-generation Muslims coming of age after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and the American-led invasion of Iraq, it is a different story. Mr. Banna said  young men had come to him looking for religious justification to go and fight in Iraq. ''When I told them that there is no justification, they would look for someone else to get the justification,'' he said.
  The generational gap is a concern not only for security officials, but for Muslim parents  grappling with the anger of their children. 
  ''Young people have a problem of identity,'' said Bilal Assaad the spokesman for the Community of Islam Mosque in Copenhagen, which led the protests here against the Muhammad cartoons. ''They were born in Denmark but they don't feel Danish. They don't have good possibilities to get jobs because their name is Muhammad. My son tells me, 'Yes I can see that I'm Muslim, but I can't see that I'm Danish.' ''
  Mr. Shah, the youth group leader, said, ''When I'm going on a train with my backpack, people start to look at me in a different way.'' He said that he appreciated the irony of the fact that, while under suspicion on his commute, he was  on the way to his job as a security guard at the airport.
  Of the 11 locations searched by Danish authorities in the recent raids, it was an apartment on Glasvej Street in a mixed neighborhood of Muslim immigrants and ethnic Danes where investigators say the bomb-making materials were found. The front door is cracked where it was broken open by a police battering ram.
  The apartment was occupied by two brothers of Pakistani descent. Both were arrested in the raids. The older of the two, who is 24, was released after less than a day. ''They came at 2 o'clock,'' he said. ''They broke open the door. They broke everything. They came as animals.''  
  He  added that he had not seen his brother since going to sleep the night before their arrest. Under Danish law, the authorities do not release the names of suspects, and he asked not to have his name used. The authorities say he remains under investigation.
  ''I work all day,'' he said in a soft voice. ''I don't know what my brother and his friends do.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A mosque in Copenhagen. Young Muslims, coming of age with the war in Iraq, have more anger than their parents, an imam says.
Muslims see hypocrisy in Denmark's talk of human rights and its actions in places like Afghanistan, said Imran Shah, 31.
 The Heimdalsgade mosque which, according to a Danish newspaper, was attended by suspects in all three of the alleged plots.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN MCCONNICO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                      

Load-Date: September 17, 2007


End of Document