New York Today: Terrorism Crisis Mode for a Principal. Again.; New York Today
The New York Times 
November 2, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 1075 words
Byline: JONATHAN WOLFE
Highlight: Thursday: A principal who faced two terrorist attacks, the return of “hotumn”, and the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree is chosen.
Body


Good morning on this warming Thursday.
As the principal of P.S. 89 in Lower Manhattan, Veronica Najjar has guided her school through two terrorist attacks.
On Sept. 11, 2001, she was standing in the schoolyard, when she said she saw the first plane slam into the North Tower of the World Trade Center.
“I snapped into crisis mode,” said Ms. Najjar, 60, on Wednesday, thinking back to the day. She gathered students and teachers and led them a mile away to P.S. 3 in the West Village. “It was terrifying, but I was really calm.”
Sixteen years later, another deadly terrorist attack in Manhattan. On Tuesday afternoon, a man driving a truck killed 8 people and injured 12 others, before            crashing into a school bus in front of the elementary school. The attack happened right after school let out, with some of the school’s 433 children outside in the schoolyard.
Ms. Najjar said she heard screaming from her second-floor office. By the time she arrived downstairs, teachers had pulled the students, and some adults, into the building. Ms. Najjar quickly placed the school on lockdown.
But Ms. Najjar didn’t stop moving. She alternated between calming frantic parents gathered outside of the school and complimenting the children hunkered down in the cafeteria on their listening skills. She thanked them for their patience.
“With kids, they can feel more of the panic when their adult is also panicked,” she said. “I also had to let the parents know that it was their job to stay calm so that their kids would stay calm. Because with kids, it’s often the aftermath that has ripple effects.”
None of the children at P.S. 89 were injured in the attack.
Now the hard work begins, she said. Again.
In the coming days, teachers will be dispelling rumors and keeping an eye out for unusual behavior – atypical silence, ceaselessly talking about the attack, sleep problems, exaggerated clinginess. The school has brought in extra counselors to help.
But there’s one word you won’t hear her staff mention: “Terrorism.” The students are too young, Ms. Najjar said.
“We just make sure that we’re giving kids the facts that are not overly explicit or overly graphic,” she said. “When you stick to the facts with kids, without giving them any embellishment or emotion with it, they are usually very satisfied. They just want to know that you’re being truthful with them.”
Read more Times coverage of the attack, including articles on theinvestigation,            victims,            alleged attacker,            president’s response, and            officer who ended the rampage           .
Here’s what else is happening:
Weather
And just like, that our “hotumn” is back.
Temperatures could jump to 70 today and the sun will put in lots of face time.
Still, throw on a jacket this morning — it should hover around 60 for the a.m. commute.
In the News
 Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno of New Jersey has struggled to move out of the shadow of her boss, Gov. Chris Christie, as she campaigns to succeed him. [New York Times]
  The final mayoral debate had a solemn start, but quickly descended into cross-talk and pointed attacks. [New York Times]
 Last year, tens of thousands of city schoolchildren did not get special education services that they were supposed to receive, the Department of Education said. [New York Times]
 The Carroll Gardens brownstone had long been an eyesore. With Paul Manafort’s indictment, it’s now become evidence. [New York Times]
 How the weeds sprouting in New York tell stories about the city’s history. [New York Times]
 The seller was looking for $1 billion. None of the bids came close. [New York Times]
 How the senior White House adviser Jared Kushner is tied to the fate of a Gowanus parking lot. [WNYC]
 Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “Traveling the World at J.F.K.”
 For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing.
Coming Up Today
 Learn about pet first-aid, health and fitness at One Health Day at the Animal Medical Center in Midtown East. 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. [Free]
 Check out the colors of the season on a fall foliage tour at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Staten Island. 1 p.m. [Free]
 A discussion by a former C.I.A. counterterrorism officer and whistle-blower, John Kiriakou, “Saying No to Torture: My Secret Life Inside the CIA’s War on Terror and the Price of Whistleblowing,” at the New School in Greenwich Village. 6 p.m. [Free]
 The author of “Death: A Graveside Companion” discussed death rituals, beliefs, and traditions from across the globe at the Brooklyn Historical Society in Brooklyn Heights. 6:30 p.m. [$5]
 Islanders at Capitals, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers at Lightning, 7:30 p.m. (MSG).
 Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Nov. 7.
 For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.
And Finally...
We have a winner.
Rockefeller Center selected the tree that will adorn its plaza this year. The 80-year-old, 75-foot-tall Norway spruce, from State College, Pa., is 50 feet wide and weighs between 12 and 13 tons.
It still has its roots in the ground, for the moment. It won’t arrive to the city until Nov. 11.
Since 2010, the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree has been selected by one man: Erik Pauze, Rockefeller Center’s head gardener.
He spends months scouring back roads along the East Coast, he said, until he finds one worthy of the honor. But he’s had his eye on this year’s special spruce for a while.
Mr. Pauze found it on the side of the road on his way to watch his son play football in Sept. 2010, but it needed time to mature, he said. When he revisited the tree this year it was looking lush and green.
“It has a nice perfect shape, it looks great from all the angles when you walk around it, and it was really full,” he told us. “I thought, ‘This is the year to take it.’”
So he will, on Nov. 9. That’s when the tree, which was donated by Jason Perrin, will be cut it down. When it arrives in the big city, its fragrant needles will be decorated with 50,000 lights, topped with a Swarovski star, and then lit up on Nov. 29.
New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.
For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.
What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using            #NYToday. 
Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and            Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.
You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.
Alexandra S. Levine contributed reporting.

Load-Date: November 4, 2017


End of Document