New Mexico State U. class uses game to study terrorism
University Wire
November 25, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 The Round Up via U-Wire
Length: 419 words
Byline: By Cassie Nicklen, The Round Up
Dateline: Las Cruces, N.M.
Body


Although terrorism is not usually referred to as a game, New Mexico State University Criminal Justice 432, titled "terrorism" did just that to address terrorism through a game based on real world situations Wednesday night.
Students played the terrorism game, which was based loosely on issues the U.S. intelligence has faced in the past with terrorism. The scenario involved international terrorist groups which were plotting to kill the U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom.
New Mexico State U.
Kate Dowe-McManus, a senior majoring in physics and geology and the teacher's assistant for the class, said the students were given a packet of information, which contained bits and pieces of information about a terrorist act.
McManus said students then broke into groups and had two hours to pinpoint the most important facts with the information provided to them. At the end of the two hours, the students had five minutes to explain a possible outcome.
"It's like saying the general only has five minutes," McManus said, referring to the presentation part of the game.
J.F. Holden-Rhodes, professor of the course, said the intention of the class was to teach critical thinking through cause and effect situations.
"The gaming exercise is just one part of the entire class where the students develop and practice these skills," Rhodes said.
"The game helps because what seems to be important may not be, causing students to debate and analyze the material given."
Rhodes also had the students answer a "so what" question during their presentations, designed to help students ask themselves whether their questions are pertinent to the situation.
"This helps the students to get to the point faster," Rhodes said.
Dusty Tucker, a senior majoring in criminal justice, said the class increases critical thinking skills.
"Since there is the potential for a possible minor in intelligence at NMSU in near future, this class and others will help students be a step ahead in the game when joining the work force if they go into that field," Tucker said.
"Since Sept. 11, terrorism has become common place, so it is important students learn about it," Tucker added.
Steven Milan, a senior majoring in criminal justice, said the class helps students learn to read and write faster through current world issues.
"I think it is a good thing that the game and the class is based on real world issues like terrorism because students learn about the world around them," Milan said.
(C) 2002 The Round Up via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 25, 2002


End of Document