NEW INFO FROM RICE NOT COMFORTING
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 9, 2004 Friday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10; EDITORIAL
Length: 545 words
Body


CONDOLEEZZA RICE'S TESTIMONY BEFORE THE national 9/11 commission didn't devolve into a spitting match between her and Richard Clarke. This is good. It might have, if she had decided to take him on, point-by-point.
She was, after all, as national security adviser, the boss of the former anti-terrorism official before he quit and went off to write a book critical of the Bush administration on terrorism issues.
Instead, Ms. Rice offered a matter-of-fact account of what the Bush White House did and didn't do (and know) about terrorism before 9/11. She says it did a lot, focused a lot, but didn't see 9/11 coming. She said it was, in that regard, like previous administrations that didn't see Pearl Harbor coming or the pre-World War I sinking of the Lusitania.
She also noted that the CIA and FBI were hopelessly uncoordinated. She attributed this largely to legal constraints on them working together. But she acknowledged that the agencies still have problems of coordination, even after the post-9/11 Patriot Act allowed for more sharing of information.
She said a lot that she was expected to say about the Bush administration. What she said about the Clinton administration was less predictable. She pretty much acknowledged that, while she and other Bush people knew about al-Qaida before the 2000 elections, briefings by the outgoing Clinton administration heightened their consciousness of the terrorism threat.
And she said, "The decision that we made was to, first of all, have no drop-off in what the Clinton administration was doing, because clearly they had done a lot of work to deal with this very important priority. And so we kept the counterterrorism team on board."
That ought to dispose of the most partisan conservative caricatures of the Clinton record on terrorism. (It won't, but it ought to).
Another particularly intriguing passage of Ms. Rice's testimony: In discussing pre-9/11 intelligence, she said, "Let me read you some of the actual chatter that was picked up in that spring and summer: 'Unbelievable news coming in weeks,' said one. 'Big event. There will be a very, very, very, very big uproar. There will be attacks in the near future."
She continued, "Troubling, yes. But they don't tell us when; they don't tell us where; they don't tell us who; and they don't tell us how."
The quotes from the "chatter" are newly declassified. Ms. Rice mentioned them to make her point that the warnings were vague. (She says that everybody thought the big event would be abroad.) But what's most striking about the quotes is their intensity.
Also new is the information that President George W. Bush got a memo on Aug. 6, 2001, in response to questions he had asked, titled "Bin Laden Determined to Attack Inside the United States."
Ms. Rice insisted that the memo didn't warn of impending attacks, but only laid out the long-term desire of Osama bin Laden. Still, in retrospect, the combination of that memo and the intelligence chatter seem to suggest the possibility of a domestic attack soon.
The commission's hearing are giving the American people some remarkable insights into what the government did and not know. The new information would not have been available without the hearings, at least not this soon. It doesn't offer much that's comforting.

Load-Date: April 10, 2004


End of Document