New minor in Security and Intelligence Studies now offered at King College
Clinch Valley Times (St. Paul, Virginia)
April 12, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 Clinch Valley Times


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 958 words
Byline: Clinch Valley Times staff
Body


The past decade has brought forth remarkable changes to Americans' understanding of national and global security. Many employers look for college graduates who can demonstrate an appreciation of contemporary issues including security threats and challenges. In an effort to both broaden students' knowledge and awareness, and provide them with skills that will increase their marketability to potential employers, King College is now offering a new minor program in Security and Intelligence Studies (SIS).
"We were looking at ways in which to modernize and accentuate traditional majors in the job market," said Dr. Joseph Fitsan-akis, instructor and coordinator for the Security and Intelligence Studies program at King College. "This minor complements so many different majors so well. In preparing students, we often ask 'what sets you apart'."
Since the attacks on the United States on September 11th, Americans have come to the realization that terrorism is no longer something that happens in other parts of the world. The volatility and unpredictable nature of terrorism breached the shores of the U.S. in 2001, and continues to impact us still today.
As a result, the U.S. securities sector has significantly increased and degree programs in security and intelligence studies have been developed. There are approximately only 25-schools in the nation offering this type of program.
"The securities sector of the U.S. economy is vast," said Fit-sanakis. "Within the U.S. government, there are 18 different agencies that comprise the securities sector. They are all hiring frequently in areas that include everything from nurses to educators, operatives, ad-minnistrator and scientists. You also have the private sector that regularly works in partnership with the government. What we are talking about is a constant connection between all of those disciplines and the job market. The SIS minor will provide a bridge for students seeking to set themselves apart."
When it comes to intelligence studies, it is essential to understand both the cultures and belief systems of adversary organizations or groups. "You'd be surprised how many Americans, although we have been in a war that's been going on for a decade, do not know the basics about that very war," said Fitsanakis. "The issue is that we must understand history as well as belief systems which are very different than those traditionally held by Americans. You cannot attempt to fix a problem without understanding it."
Students who take the SIS minor would have the opportunity to leam about espionage and intelligence, international terrorism, history and politics of the Cold War, covert action, and advanced topics in geopolitics. Career paths where a minor in Security and Intelligence Studies is beneficial include careers in government, military, diplomacy, or intelligence. Areas of study in which a SIS minor is complementary are political science, history and business particularly accounting, finance, economics, management, and administration. Other majors enhanced by the SIS minor are neuroscience, forensic science, physics, mathematics, psychology and foreign language.
"There are three degrees most wanted by the FBI currently - computer science, accounting, and politics & history," said Fitsanakis. "The reason why accounting is important in fighting terrorism is to trace the money flow. If the person studying for an accounting degree adds the SIS minor, they will also know a lot of things about how terrorists groups operate and how they are organized. They will learn about international terrorism, how these groups are becoming increasingly sophisticated, trarts-national/cross-border drug cartels, money laundering, history of the cold war, and how money and competition for energy resources basically shaped the world in which we live today.
Service, in areas of government, is a great goal and a great aspiration," said Fitsanakis. "Students have options to work towards service in the diplomatic corps and represent their country abroad. They can combine a degree in foreign language with an SIS minor and they are well on their way. For math majors, the biggest employer of mathematicians in the world is the National Security Agency (NSA).
The NSA works to encrypt government communications so that agents from other countries cannot read them. Whether it is communication between the
President of the United States and the Vice President, or with military and soldiers in the field, the NSA has mathematicians working to encrypt communications. Employers like the NSA not only want mathematicians to understand numbers but also show an awareness of world events."
A specialist in intelligence, terrorism, and cyber-warfare, Dr. Joseph Fitsanakis received his Bachelor of Arts from the University of Birmingham in England, and his Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. He is a member of the Counterintelligence Operations Group, the Association of Former Intelligence Professionals, and the International Association for Intelligence Education, among other organizations.
Dr. Fitsanakis has authored several books and articles and is a frequent contributor to the news media. His work has been referenced in Studies in Intelligence (the journal of the CIA); the Washington Post; Boston Herald; RT Television (Russia); Le Monde Diplomatique (France); Agencia EFE (Spain); The Guardian (UK); Inter Press Service (Italy); and the Australian National Radio among other outlets.
For additional information on the Security and Intelligence Studies program, visit http://artsandsciences.king.edu/maiors-minors-folder/security-intelligence-studies/or contact Dr. Joseph Fitsanakis at 423.652.6014 or jfitsanakis@king.edu

Load-Date: June 14, 2013


End of Document