New N.Y. state anti-terrorism laws make bomb threats a felony
University Wire
September 20, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Orange via U-Wire
Length: 493 words
Byline: By Justin Young, Daily Orange
Dateline: Syracuse, N.Y.
Body


Those living at the Lawrinson Residence Hall at Syracuse University should expect some changes in security measures.
In response to the two bomb threats the residents experienced during the past week, new precautions have been implemented. These include allowing only Lawrinson residents access to the building without being signed in and having a Department of Public Safety officer on duty during the daytime hours. There will also be a Resident Security Aid checking identification 24 hours a day. Previously, they were only on duty from 8 p.m. until 6 a.m.
Syracuse U.
The implementation of these new rules began at 11 a.m. Wednesday and will continue indefinitely, said Assistant Director of Public Safety Wes Bird. There are currently no plans to expand the increased security measures to any of the other residence halls.
"We haven't had bomb threats in other buildings," Bird said, "nor do we hope to."
Although there are still no suspects in last week's threats, if someone is caught and convicted they could be in for an increased penalty under the state's new anti-terrorism laws. The measures were fast tracked through the New York State Legislature via a special session called Sunday by Gov. George E. Pataki. Under one of the new laws, anyone who phones in a false bomb threat to any public building will be treated as a violent felon and could face up to seven years in state prison.
Before the changes, such an action was considered a Class A misdemeanor; now it is a Class D felony.
The package, which includes the death penalty for crimes of terrorism, passed overwhelmingly despite some staunch opponents of capital punishment voting otherwise. A similar package of laws, however, was shot down in June by the Democrat-controlled legislature. They then argued that laws against terrorism should be left to the federal government.
Joan Deppa, an associate professor at the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, has specialized in the area of terrorism since writing a book with three other Newhouse professors about the media coverage of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103. The new laws, she said, should serve as a sufficient deterrent for those at SU who would be "terrorists" themselves, granted on a smaller scale.
"Some students on campus seem to do a lot of things as a joke or a dare," Deppa said. "But seven years and a felony conviction is no joke."
Although Brandi Shaddick, an undecided freshman resident of the 11th floor of Lawrinson, was sickened by the timing and insensitivity of the threats to her residence hall, she was unsure if the new punishment fit the crime.
"Seven years … wow," Shaddick said. "Maybe that is a little excessive."
Despite the hassles of adjusting to the new security measures, Shaddick is positive about why they were implemented.
"They don't bother me one bit," Shaddick said. "It bothers me that people are making bomb threats from our lobby."
(C) 2001 Daily Orange via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 20, 2001


End of Document