New Mexico weapons labs turn focus to terrorism
Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
March 10, 2002, Sunday


Copyright 2002 New Mexican, Inc.
Section: Local; Pg. B-5
Length: 1009 words
Byline: SUE MAJOR HOLMES The Associated Press
Body


LOS ALAMOS -- Sandia National Laboratory's Joan Woodard asks scientists to think about what keeps them up at night. Then she challenges them to figure out how to fight that nightmare.
Los Alamos National Laboratory's John Browne wants the federal labs to ask "what if." He says America must invest brainpower not just in fighting terrorism it faces today, but also what might appear tomorrow.
The two New Mexico labs, whose main job is nuclear weapons, were called in on the nation's sudden war on terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York and Washington. The technology they have been able to offer began with work spun off years before and projects begun after the 1996 Oklahoma City bombing.
Scientists who design bombs must figure out how to protect those weapons; use supercomputers to test them; detect nuclear or other hazardous materials; and miniaturize all that technology to make it useful.
Such work in New Mexico led to:
A device that dismantled an airplane passenger's shoe bomb by disrupting its internal workings. The Percussion-Actuated Nonelectric, or PAN, Disrupter was used on the bomb that authorities say was worn by Richard Reid, who was tackled by flight attendants and passengers as he allegedly tried to set it off on a trans-Atlantic flight. "PAN ripped the shoe apart enough so investigators could see inside it," said Chris Cherry, one of the Sandia team who developed it in the early 1990s.
Los Alamos' detective work to trace the source of anthrax-through-mail attacks on congressional offices and news-media outlets last fall. The lab's DNA studies can pinpoint genetic strains and their geographic origin.
An anthrax-killing foam used to decontaminate congressional office buildings and ABC's facilities in New York after they were exposed to the deadly toxin. The foam, developed by Sandia in the 1990s, is a mixture of common household chemicals found in toothpaste and hair conditioner.
Tiny cameras on collars for rescue dogs. Sandia began evaluating a system of wireless cameras and hand-held receivers after the 1999 attack on Columbine High School in Colorado. Project leader Richard Sparks spent 22 days at the World Trade Center helping rescuers outfit search dogs with prototype collars.
The Bush administration's push in counterterrorism is already showing up in lab budgets. This year, Los Alamos has about $ 100 million for research and development into such technology; Browne expects that to increase to $ 116 million in fiscal year 2003.
"So this is a significant recognition by the government of the capabilities that exist here," he says.
A "substantial fraction" of Sandia's work now relates to anti-terrorism, said Sandia's Dave Nokes, whose principal assignment is overseeing the lab's efforts to combat terror. Sandia, however, could not break out specific projects for an overall budget figure.
Interest in fighting terrorism will translate into 50 to 100 full-time equivalent jobs for Sandia in such areas as sensors, computer simulation and clean-up programs like the anti-anthrax foam, says Woodard, executive vice president of the Albuquerque-based lab.
She says a key factor in the choice of Sandia's foam over others was that Sandia's was already in production. The lab licensed the technology to suppliers a year ago, and those suppliers could produce the thousands of gallons needed.
"That transfer of technology is essential," she says.
Los Alamos has worked on counter-terrorism for three decades. However, Browne says its ability to contribute today depends on being able to move quickly from an idea to a demonstration model to "something that gets into the hands of the people who need the capability."
Los Alamos began in 1943 as a top-secret project to develop the world's first atomic bomb. Sandia, its design and engineering stepchild, traces its beginnings to a bunch of engineers in prefab buildings surrounded by junked World War II planes in the Albuquerque desert. It became a separate lab in 1949.
The main mission of both labs is the security and reliability of the nation's nuclear arsenal -- but even that is affected by the realities of today's world.
The mutual-assured-destruction strategy the United States used in the Cold War standoff with the former Soviet Union won't work against "people who feel they have nothing to lose," says Sandia President C. Paul Robinson.
Browne says the nation's nuclear stockpile is the stockpile of the Cold War. Policymakers need to decide "what are these nuclear weapons there to deter? No one has said what new challenges we have to meet."
"We must have flexible research and development to be able to respond to whatever challenge … to our national security," he says.
Sandia is looking ahead to "where might this new world disorder take us in terms of national-security needs and drive us in terms of technical needs," Woodard says.
"We need careful thinking about where to make those investments as a country."
Los Alamos expects to hire 1,000 new people this year -- 600 new hires; 400 to replace retirees and others who have left the lab, Browne says. About 300 of the 1,000 already have been hired.
He's aiming for a more diverse workforce and a younger one. Los Alamos' average worker is 47, and Browne wants to recruit more entry-level people who have earned advanced degrees within the past five years.
"We want to create the workforce of the future. … We're looking for people with flexible skills that can be brought to bear in fields we know will be important in the coming 20 years," he says.
In the past year, Sandia has hired more than 400 people in technical fields.
Woodard sees the problem of attracting new thinking not so much as an issue of age as one of knowledge. Many of today's students are nontraditional students switching careers, she notes.
"We're just trying to get the knowledge," she says.
The labs say recruiting is easier today than even a few months ago due to a combination of the labs' own active hiring efforts, the slower economy and a feeling by many in the wake of Sept. 11 that they'd like to contribute.

Load-Date: March 10, 2002


End of Document