New Colorado anti-terrorism bill could infringe on student privacy
University Wire
April 4, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Campus Press via U-Wire
Length: 574 words
Byline: By Elisabeth Nardi, Campus Press
Dateline: Boulder, Colo.
Body


A new bill passed by the Colorado Senate and House of Representatives will force University of Colorado and other state college officials to give federal authorities all "lawful information" about students.
The bill is currently in the Senate for a final vote because of amendments added by the House.
Bill 113 was created after Sept. 11 to keep closer tabs on the actions of students and particularly the status of foreign student visas.
U. Colorado
First introduced in February, the bill states that school officials must turn over any information federal agencies ask for on any student "in connection with anti-terrorism investigation." These federal agencies include the Federal Bureau of Investigations, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the Office of Homeland Security, "or any other federal agency in connection with anti-terrorism."
It is the wording of the bill that Taylor Pendergrass, president of the CU school of law ACLU chapter, said worries him. He said if the bill passes, federal agencies would have too much power.
"Nowhere does the bill define the scope or definition of an 'anti-terrorism investigation,' which is worrisome because it leaves federal agencies a great deal of latitude," Pendergrass said.
Robert Nero, assistant vice president of institutional relations at CU, said this bill is nothing different than the school's current policy, but he said it is a way for the government to verify student visas.
"I think this bill is slightly redundant because we are already required to verify international students," Nero said. "I think the state just wants to make a strong statement."
Pendergrass said the bill does not just limit international students and student visas. He said it will allow federal agencies to have information that is currently protected by the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act. FERPA states disclosure of student information is not allowed without consent from the student.
Pendergrass said he is also worried about bill 3108, which is currently going through re-writing and amending in the U.S. Congress. He said if the bill is passed it would set the standard for "lawful reach" as stated in both bills.
"If the bill in Congress is any indication of how far the reach will extend, then agencies could gain access to student e-mail, library-use records and medical records," Pendergrass said.
However, the Colorado bill's wording does not say federal agencies can have access to e-mail, library records and medical records. It says that administrators will be required to turn over information, comply with federal agencies and the registrar must verify immigration status on students.
Nero said there were 12 countries, including Iran and Iraq, which would require school administrators to check and verify if student's visas were current.
"They are really only asking us to screen student visas, and, as I understand it, this is a visa-check bill," Nero said.
Pendergrass said he understands the need for investigation after Sept. 11, but he questions the effectiveness of a bill such as this. He also said he wonders if it is worth the possible ramifications.
"We must determine that first the bill would improve security, and second, we must decide that the loss of civil liberties is worth it," Pendergrass said. "Only if the answers are yes, then S.B. 113 is justifiable."
(C) 2002 Campus Press via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 4, 2002


End of Document