New York Delegation Unanimous on Counter-Terrorism Bill
New York Sun (Archive)
July 25, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2
Length: 337 words
Byline: Staff Reporter of the Sun
Body


NEW YORK AID Following on the heels of the House, the Senate yesterday gave final approval to an emergency supplemental spending bill that provides $5.5 billion for New York City rebuilding.
Senator Clinton and Senator Schumer joined the majority in a 92-7 vote in favor of the $28.9 billion bill that also pays for a variety of anti-terrorism efforts, such as the fight in Afghanistan and homeland security.
The money for New York includes $2.66 billion for Federal Emergency Management Agency emergency response and debris removal; $1.8 billion for a transit facility to connect PATH trains subway lines running through Lower Manhattan; and $750 million for utility reconstruction.
Mrs. Clinton's $90 million for health care screenings of emergency and recovery workers remains in the bill, despite the objections of the Bush administration.
The Bush administration called the original $31 billion Senate legislation too costly - it had singled out the $90 million health care screening, among other expenditures - and threatened a veto, but the bill is close to the price range limits the Office of Management and Budget had set.
Every member of New York City's House delegation voted in favor of the bill Monday.
" P ARTIAL BIRTH " ABORTION SPLIT
The House yesterday passed a bill to ban "partial birth" abortions, with all but two lawmakers in the New York City delegation voting against the legislation.
Rep. Vito Fossella, a Republican, and Rep. Joseph Crowley, a Democrat, voted with the 272-member majority that approved the bill.
Under the legislation, a doctor could only perform the procedure if a mother's life is threatened.
The measure has passed both the House and Senate in recent sessions, but there are few indications the Senate will take up the legislation before the end of the year.
Voting against the ban, all Democrats: Reps. Gary Ackerman; Eliot Engel; Nita Lowey; Carolyn Maloney; Gregory Meeks; Jerrold Nadler; Major Owens; Charles Rangel; Jose Serrano; Edolphus Towns; Nydia Velazquez; and Anthony Weiner.

Load-Date: December 3, 2003


End of Document