New legislation decisions create polarized opinions
University Wire
October 10, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 The Daily Vidette via U-Wire
Length: 525 words
Byline: By Eric Heisig, The Daily Vidette; SOURCE: Illinois State U.
Dateline: NORMAL, Ill. 
Body


The Senate and the House of Representatives have passed new legislation in the pursuit to crack down on terrorism.
On Thursday, Sept. 28, the Senate endorsed the bill President Bush presented outlining his plans and methods to prosecute and interrogate terrorism suspects being detained.
A federal appeals court judge also ruled last week that wiretapping without a warrant could continue while the administration appeals a decision that the program is unconstitutional. The House of Representatives approved the warrantless wiretapping last month.
Both decisions have been met with mixed reactions.
"I think the thing that concerns us more than anything is what the House of Representatives seem to be focused on doing is capitulating to the Bush administration's previous violations of the law in giving them a 'get out of jail free card,'" Ed Yohnka, the director of communications of the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois, said.
Yohnka also discussed the matter of the detainees in Guantanamo Bay.
"The detainee bill would create an immunity for the policy makers who have let abuse happen over the past five years and simply forgiven as though it didn't occur," Yohnka said.
Yohnka also said people who break the law are punished for their actions.
However, these new laws are more or less exempting them from anything they did wrong by making them legal.
There has also been concern that these laws are being created due to the upcoming election period.
"To do all of this in four of five days before an election period has the look of it being partisan politics than really constitutional principles," Yohnka said.
He also added that there has been a frightful trend since 9-11.
"It is not a fact of finding the right solution to combat terrorism, but it is the president's way or no way. If a person does not agree with a method that the White House is using, then they are considered un-American and pro-terrorist," he said.
On the other hand, the government could be using these new laws to flex their muscles.
"I would suggest that they're planning on using these bills to show their strength on the terrorism issues," Neill Arendt, a senior information systems major and vice president of the College Republicans, said.
Arendt added that the terrorists' objective is to kill people, and if action is not taken, they are going to hurt innocent people. If the U.S. does not do anything, it is a big risk that does not need to be taken.
Arendt also discussed some of the powers the President takes.
"I think that in a time of war the President had the power to create the wiretapping initiative and he went ahead with it," Arendt said.
Still there is concern that what the government is doing with the detained terrorists is constitutional.
"The right to habeas corpus is granted in the United States constitution. I am very concerned about any erosion of the right to habeas corpus," Arnold Wolfe, an associate professor in the School of Communication, said.
"[Which is] the right of the accused to see all of the evidence that the government has accumulated and is prepared to present in court against the accused."
(C) 2006 The Daily Vidette via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 10, 2006


End of Document