New terrorism fight casts shadow over 9/11 ceremonies
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 12, 2014 Friday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 743 words
Byline:  By RACHELLE BLIDNERand JONATHAN LEMIRE Associated Press   
Body


NEW YORK • The nation's gathering war against a new upsurge in Islamic terrorism hung heavy over the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks Thursday, stirring both anxiety and determination among those who came to ground zero to remember their loved ones.
The familiar silence to mark the attacks and the solemn roll call of the nearly 3,000 dead came just hours after President Barack Obama told the country he is authorizing stepped-up airstrikes in Iraq and Syria against Islamic State extremists.
"It's an ongoing war against terrorists. Old ones die out and new ones pop up," Vasile Poptean said as he left the ceremony, where he had gone to remember his brother, Joshua Poptean. "If we don't engage them now, there's a possibility there will be another 9/11 down the road."
Victims' relatives and dignitaries gathered in the plaza where the twin towers once stood, an area of shimmering new skyscrapers, including the soon-to-open 1,776-foot One World Trade Center.
The attacks were also commemorated in Shanksville, Pa., where former House Speaker Dennis Hastert gave the flag that flew atop the U.S. Capitol on 9/11 to the Flight 93 National Memorial.
At the Pentagon, where Obama spoke at a wreath-laying ceremony, he didn't mention the rise of Islamic State extremists specifically but noted: "We cannot erase every trace of evil from the world.
"That was the case before 9/11," the president said, "and that remains true today."
A look at events marking the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks:
NEW YORK CITY
In New York, the annual commemoration has changed little over the years. But so much around it has. The museum now sits open at the site of the tragedy. The fences have come down around the memorial plaza. A new mayor is in office, Bill de Blasio, one less linked to the attacks and their aftermath than his predecessors. And One World Trade Center is nearly complete and set to open this year.
WASHINGTON
A few minutes before 9 a.m., Obama emerged from the White House with his wife, Michelle, and Vice President Joe Biden to observe a moment of silence marking the anniversary. He offered reasons for optimism in brief remarks at the Pentagon's 9/11 memorial. "Thirteen years after small and hateful minds conspired to break us, America stands tall and America stands proud," he said. He did not mention the administration's new plan, announced hours earlier, to step up military and diplomatic action against a new upsurge in Islamic terrorism.
SHANKSVILLE, PA.
Hastert gave the flag that flew atop the U.S. Capitol on 9/11 to the Flight 93 National Memorial in Shanksville, saying the building might not still be standing if the passengers and crew of Flight 93 had not rebelled against four hijackers. Hastert spoke at a ceremony in the field where the United Airlines plane crashed and 40 were killed.
BOSTON
A commemoration was held at the Statehouse, during which participants read the names of more than 200 attack victims with ties to Massachusetts. During the ceremony, a civilian bravery award named after 9/11 flight attendant Madeline Amy Sweeney was given to Michael DeSousa, who left his car and rushed into a burning building to alert residents to a fire.
MORRISON, COLO.
Hundreds of firefighters and others paid tribute to the first responders killed in the attacks by climbing the stairs at Red Rocks outdoor amphitheater. Participants, some wearing their fire gear, walked up and down the steps and around the Denver-area venue nine times. Organizers say the elevation gain is the equivalent of climbing 110 stories - the height of the twin towers.
WESTVILLE, IND.
A large marble sculpture commemorating the Sept. 11 attacks was dedicated at Purdue University North Central in Westville. Campus Chancellor James Dworkin called the sculpture a moving reminder of an event that must never be forgotten. The sculpture will remain on permanent outdoor display on the campus, about 25 miles east of Gary.
CLEVELAND
Former President George W. Bush said he had a "moment of clarity" while listening to a young girl read in a Florida classroom as his chief of staff whispered to him that the second tower of the World Trade Center had been struck by an airliner on Sept. 11, 2001. Bush says he knew that from then on, it would be his job to protect the girl, her family and their community. The former president spoke Thursday at a college scholarship luncheon in Cleveland, an event that coincided with the 13th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks.

Graphic

 
 Firefighter Tim Millian, rear, rings the bell in honor of the fallen, as Police Officer Evan Rosenberg salutes during the town's annual 9/11 Memorial Ceremony, Wednesday, Sept. 11, 2014, in Wellesley, Mass. The two planes, hijacked by terrorists that crashed into New York's World Trade Center towers 13 years ago, departed from Logan International Airport in nearby Boston. (AP Photo/MetroWest Daily News, Kate Flock)  Roses and flags left by loved ones are placed on the names inscribed at the North Pool during memorial observances on the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. Family and friends of those who died read the names of the nearly 3,000 people killed in New York, at the Pentagon and near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. (AP Photo/The Daily News, Robert Sabo, Pool)  A woman pauses at the edge of the North Pool during memorial observances on the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. In New York, family members of those killed at the World Trade Center will read the names of the victims at a ceremony at ground zero. (AP Photo/Justin Lane, Pool)  A wilting rose is left in remembrance of those lost before the memorial observances held at the site of the World Trade Center in New York, Sept. 11, 2014. This year marks the 13th anniversary of the September 11th terrorist attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people at the World Trade Center, Pentagon and on Flight 93. (AP Photo/POOL, Andrew Burton)  From left, former New York Governor George Pataki, former New York Mayor Rudy Guiliani, former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Mary Pat Christie and her husband New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo and his partner Sandra Lee stand in silence while bells were being sounded signifying the planes that crashed into the twin towers during memorial observances on the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. (AP Photo/The Record of Bergen County, Chris Pedota, Pool)  Brian Sommer, left, and Lito Deleon hold photos of their friend Wayne Russo, who died in the Sept 11, 2001 attacks, during memorial observances held at the site of the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. The three played together in the punk rock band "Stetz" in Union , N.J. in the 1980's. Family and friends of those who died read the names of the nearly 3,000 people killed in New York, at the Pentagon and near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan, Pool)  Students at Choctawhatchee High School pause before school starts during a Sept. 11 remembrance service Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014, in front of the school in Fort Walton Beach, Fla. (AP Photo/Northwest Florida Daily News, Nick Tomecek)  Eileen Esquilin hugs her husband, Joe Irizarry, while mourning the loss of her brother, Ruben Esquilin Jr, during memorial observances on the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. Family and friends of those who died read the names of the nearly 3,000 people killed in New York, at the Pentagon and near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. (AP Photo/Andrew Burton, Pool)  Sarah Bello wipes away tears during a service at the Fire Museum of Memphis to honor those who died in the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, on Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014, the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks. More than 100 first responders filled the museum for the ceremony which also included the unveiling of a new memorial installed at the museum that was originally displayed in New York City's Central Park and contains portraits of the first responders who died when the World Trade Center towers collapsed. (AP Photo/The Commercial Appeal, Mike Brown)  Firefighter Tom Engel with Ladder 133 plays Taps at the end of memorial observances on the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terror attacks on the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. Family and friends of those who died read the names of the nearly 3,000 people killed in New York, at the Pentagon and near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. (AP Photo/The Daily News, Robert Sabo, Pool)  Lito Deleon holds a photo of friend Wayne Russo, who died in the Sept 11, 2001 attacks, during memorial observances held at the site of the World Trade Center in New York, Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. The two played together in the punk rock band "Stetz" in Union, N.J. in the 1980's. Family and friends of those who died read the names of the nearly 3,000 people killed in New York, at the Pentagon and near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan, Pool) 

Load-Date: September 13, 2014


End of Document