NEW REPORT SHOWS TERROR ATTACKS HIGHER
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 23, 2004 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 598 words
Byline: ANN MCFEATTERS, POST-GAZETTE NATIONAL BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


An admittedly embarrassed State Department yesterday re-released its latest report on global terrorism, and Secretary of State Colin Powell vowed that its figures this time are accurate -- showing that the administration's war on terrorism hasn't been quite the success as was first announced in April.
 But the data still do not include insurgent and suicide attacks against the U.S. military in Iraq, on grounds that those acts don't constitute terror attacks in the traditional sense because combatants are involved.  Terrorist incidents against Iraqi civilians are included.
At a news conference called to eat a little crow, Powell insisted that the mistake that wrongly showed terrorism incidents declining in 2003 stemmed from erroneous calculations by the new Terrorism Threat Information Center, or TTIC, a multi-agency task force formed after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that reports to the CIA. "These were honest mistakes, and certainly not deliberate deceptions, as some have speculated," Powell said.
 The report's initial version, published April 29, said that last year there were 190 international terrorism acts that killed 307 people. The corrected figures indicate 208 acts of terrorism, up from 198 in 2002, and that they killed 625 people and wounded 3,646. That compares with 2002 figures showing 198 terror acts that killed even more than last year -- 725 -- and wounded 2,013.
 When the report, "Patterns of Global Terrorism," was published in April, Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage said it showed that terror attacks declined last year to their lowest level in 34 years and had dropped 45 percent since 2001. He called it "clear evidence that we are prevailing in the fight" against terrorism. J. Cofer Black, coordinator of the State Department's counterterrorism office, described the April report as "good news."
 Powell yesterday said errors were first pointed out by Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., and that the State Department, after crunching the numbers again, realized that he was correct. Actually, the department in May was deluged with complaints -- many from the public --that the figures didn't add up, a spokesman said. Finally, the Congressional Research Service urged a review of the report's "structure and content."
 Yesterday, Black said: "The 2003 'Patterns of Global Terrorism' was marred by significant errors. … From the reexamination, we have concluded that there were obvious problems with some of the numbers themselves. Events were left out; some were mislabeled and counted in the wrong categories; some events were counted twice; and some portions of the year were omitted entirely.
 "I hope it goes without saying that we've already begun the process of improving the way we arrive at these numbers for future reports."
 Black said 50 percent of the casualties have taken place in 11 incidents in seven countries, "and they've all been the result of Islamic extremist terrorists."
 TTIC Director John Brennan said he was assuming personal responsibility for the error, which, he said, was a result of a "longstanding interagency review process and database."
 Democrats immediately pounced on the errors, with the campaign of Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry, President Bush's presumptive presidential rival, charging that they betrayed evidence that the administration was trying to distort its data to show that Bush's war against terrorism was having a positive result.
 Analysts said that, in one of the more egregious errors, the report did not include 13 terror attacks last year in Russia alleged to have been committed by Chechens.

Load-Date: June 23, 2004


End of Document