NEW ROME GOVERNMENT ECLIPSED BY SCALOPPINE, ETC.
The New York Times
October 26, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 1183 words
Byline: By HENRY TANNER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, Oct. 25
Body


The new four-party coalition Government of Prime Minister Arnaldo Forlani won the approval of the Chamber of Deputies today and is certain to be fully installed next week after a vote of confidence in the Senate.
With a larger parliamentary majority than virtually all the 39 previous governments that have tried to govern Italy since the end of World War II, the new one may achieve a respectable lifespan.
A nice first storm blew up between Mr. Forlani's Christian Democrats and the Socialists, his main partners in the Cabinet, when Bettino Craxi, the Socialist leader, accused Pope John Paul II and Italian church leaders of ''intolerence'' and ''interference'' in Italian affairs for having made public appeals in favor of a referendum for repealing the abortion law passed two years ago. The Christian Democrats were stunned. They have always been close to the church.
AN-A
Italians for the most part seemed indifferent to the maneuvering that went into the making of the Government. They had other things on their minds - veal scaloppine, for instance.
 
Terrible Weeks Without Veal
For a few terrible weeks this mainstay of Italian cuisine had vanished from the butcher shops and market stalls. A judge near Rome had banned the sale of all veal after his court had found that cancer-inducing synthetic estrogens were being used to fatten the calves.
A million or so tons of veal were confiscated in Rome. But the outcry throughout Italy was such that the authorities relented long before a relevant sample of the confiscated meat had been analyzed.  Now the beloved scaloppine cuts are back in all their customary incarnations -breaded or with lemon, marsala or white-wine sauce - presumed estrogen and all, and of course at a higher price than ever.
Then there was the case of the vanishing telephone token. This too was the magistrates' fault. They ruled that the national telephone company had acted illegally when it doubled the price of a token to 100 lire, or about 12 cents, nearly a year ago. Down went the price to 50 lire, touching off hoarding by Italians who knew that the low price would not last.
Pay telephones all over Italy fell silent. Token dispensers at railroad stations and other public places were emptied, and cafe owners professed to be out of tokens. Then the caretaker Government of Prime Minister Francesco Cossiga stepped in and restored the 100-lire token in one of its last actions. The wires are humming again.
 
Gasoline Prices Drop
It's been a great time for motorists too. Although Italy had been depending on Iran and Iraq for more than 20 percent of its oil, gasoline prices dropped soon after those two countries started blowing up each other's pipelines and refineries. The reason, this time, was political.
The Cossiga Government had increased the oil price by decree. But decrees must be ratified by Parliament within 60 days. With no government and no sessions of Parliament, the decree expired, and down went the price from 750 to 700 lire a liter, about $3 a gallon.  But the joy will not last. The new Government said the price will go to 800 lire a liter.
Meanwhile, political terrorism no longer has a stranglehold on Italy. Three years of patient police work by the Carabinieri against the Red Brigades, Front Line and other leftist terrorist organizations have begun to pay off. There have been scores of arrests, and more and more of those arrested are identifying their accomplices and describing the structure of their organizations.
In the last 10 days more than 50 left-wing terrorist suspects were arrested, 29 in Milan alone. All these arrests involve leftist terrorism. The police have been less successful in finding the rightwing terrorists who blew up the Bologna railroad station in August and killed 84 people. Some 35 neo-Fascists are being held in connection with this and other terrorist acts, and almost 100 are being sought by the police.
 
Labor Trouble Sharpening
Fear of unemployment has replaced the fear of terrorism for many Italians. Labor disputes have sharpened as major Italian industries, caught in a sharp recession, have reduced their work force or threatened to do so.
This was the reason why the country's three leading news magazines - L'Espresso, Panorama and Il Mondo - gave their covers this week not to the new Prime Minister and his Cabinet but to the political aftermath of a confrontation between Fiat, Italy's largest private enterprise, and the unions.
The consensus is that the dispute was a political milestone and that the unions and the Communist Party suffered a bruising defeat.  The Fiat dispute was unprecedented in several ways. It was touched off by the company, which announced it would dismiss 14,000 workers.  Italian industries are not usually that bold. But Fiat, whose auto section has been in the red, wanted a showdown so it could improve labor productivity and cut production.
 
An Unusually Long Strike
The normally cautious unions reacted by calling an indefinite strike, something Italian unions almost never do. Strikes here usually last a few hours, with no real money loss for the workers.  This strike lasted 35 days, the longest in a major industry since the war. Critics say the unions overestimated their strength.
The Communist Party also overcommitted itself when Enrico Berlinguer, the party secretary, told workers at the gates of the main Fiat plant that if they occupied the factories, as they had threatened to do, his party would support them ''morally and materially.'' After years of moderate talk from the Communists, his declaration shocked the country.
For the first time in a major labor dispute since the war, moreover, a back-to-work movement developed among the workers. Some 30,000 workers marched through the streets of Turin in defiance of the union leaders.
 
State Will Pay Workers
Two days later the strike was settled on terms generally favorable to Fiat. There will be no outright dismissals, but 23,000 workers will be suspended for at least 15 months and the state will pay them 93 percent of their salaries.
When the leaders of the three national labor unions appeared at the factory gate, they were booed by hard-line strikers, and one of them escaped injury only by being hustled off in a car that was pelted with stones.
For the Communists the setback in Turin spoiled what would otherwise have been a major triumph - the fall of the Cossiga Government, against which they had campaigned relentlessly.
The real target of the Communist campaign was Mr. Craxi, the Socialist leader, who had brought his party into the Government.  Since Mr. Craxi has been moving to the right and since the governing Christian Democrats have been dominated lately by their conservative, anti-Communist wing, the Communists regarded the Government alliance as directed against them.
To the disappointment of the Communists, Mr. Craxi survived the new Cabinet crisis with his power intact. He consolidated his position in his party against left-leaning rivals. He entered into an alliance with the Social Democrats, with whom he had been feuding. Now both these parties are in the new Government.


End of Document