NEW MURDERS, POLITICAL BOMBS MARK PROBES OF 'BLACK' TERROR
The New York Times
September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4; Week in Review Desk
Length: 1027 words
Byline: By HENRY TANNER
Dateline: ROME
Body


In the seven weeks since a terrorist bomb blew up the Bologna railway station and killed 84 people, Italian police have arrested more than 30 members of extreme right-wing groups on charges of having a part in planning or executing the attack. The man who placed the bomb may be among those arrested but he has not been named.
The investigation, which has turned the attention of press and the public to ''black'' (or right-wing) terrorism after years of preoccupation with ''red'' terrorists - Red Brigades and Front Line - has been punctuated by new murders and partisan polemics. Last week, two more prominent neo-Fascists, Romano Coltelacci, a former Rome city councillor, and Adriano Tilgher, an ex-convict, were officially warned that they may be charged with subversion.
AN-A
The most damaging development has been the discovery that the Bologna massacre was almost certainly perpetrated by the same people as the murder on June 23 of Mario Amato, a Rome magistrate who had been conducting a single-handed investigation into black terrorism and whose warnings were ignored. Mr. Amato was alone when he was gunned down at a bus stop on his way to work in the Nomentana quarter of Rome. He had no police escort and though he had told his superiors that he had been receiving death threats, his request for a bulletproof car had been denied.
In his report to Giovanni De Matteo, then the chief prosecutor of Rome, Mr. Amato warned two months before his death of an impending resurgence of black terrorism. He named two prominent Fascists, Aldo Semarari and Paolo Signorelli, as ideological fathers of a revived right-wing terrorist underground. Mr. Amato's report was ignored by Mr. De Matteo. Some magistrates charge that it was deliberately sidetracked. Messrs. Semerari and Signorelli were arrested in connection with the Bologna bombing and there are frequent insinuations in the press that the massacre would not have taken place if Mr. Amato had been heeded.
Messrs. Signorelli, Semerari and a third arrested man, Claudio Mutti, have long been regarded as the leading intellectuals of the ''revolutionary'' right. Mr. Signorelli, a professor of history and philosophy in Rome, was arrested last year for alleged membership in the Armed Revolutionary Nuclei, the leading rightist terrorist group. Not incidentally, his arrest warrant bore the signature of Mr. Amato. Mr. Mutti, a former professor of literature at the University of Parma, helped found New Order, a now-banned neo-Fascist organization. Mr. Semerari, a criminologist and professor of psychiatry, was called frequently to testify in Rome courts. A declared Fascist, he entertained politicians and magistrates at his villa in Rieti, east of Rome, and showed off his collection of Hitler portraits, swastikas, flags and other Nazi memorabilia, according to Italian newspapers. The press has described him as a friend of Mr. De Matteo.
 
Yes, We Did It, No, We Didn't
Mr. De Matteo's handling of the prosecutor's office was investigated early this summer by the Supreme Council of the Magistrature after complaints by his subordinates. He was removed and promoted to the post of president of the Court of Cassation. His place as chief prosecutor went to Achille Gallucci, the man in charge of the investigation of the kidnap-murder of former Prime Minister Aldo Moro which, after two and a half years, remains unsolved. Mr.  Gallucci also is said to be a friend of Mr. Semerari.
The changeover from Mr. De Matteo to Mr. Gallucci took place last week. The Bologna magistrate in charge of the investigation had accused ''a criminal in Rome'' of leaking to the public official information that hampered the inquiry. It was the discovery last week of the body of Michele Mangiameli, a young Sicilian Fascist, that convinced the Bologna magistrates that the bombing in the railroad station and the murder of Mr. Amato were the work of the same group.  Mr. Mangiameli was found with three bullets in his head in an irrigation pond just outside Rome. A witness identified the corpse as Mr. Amato's killer.
Identikit likenesses based on other testimony showed a strong resemblance between the killer and the dead man. Mr Mangiameli had been interrogated after the Bologna explosion because he was known to be in touch with other suspects. The Armed Revolutionary Nuclei had claimed responsibility for killing Mr. Amato and, at first, also for the Bologna bombing. But when the dimensions of the massacre became known, anonymous callers speaking for the group denied its involvement. Police believe that Mr. Mangiameli was killed by his own companions to keep the connection between the Amato murder and Bologna from coming to light.
The case includes what Italian newspapers like to call a ''super witness'' in the person of Giorgio Farina, a young disc jockey who is said to have accused two neo-Fascists, Dario Pedretti and Sergio Calore, of organizing part of the bombing operation from a prison cell he shared with them. Mr. Farina also implicated a nightclub bouncer and fellow disk jockey, Francesco Furlotti, who is suspected of having been in charge of the explosives before they were placed in the station. Mr Furlotti has an alibi for his actions on the day of the bombing. There had been reports, apparently false, that Mr.  Farina had given the explosives to Mr. Furlotti when he was allowed to leave the prison for a day. Other reports make him out to be a police spy who had been planted in the cell to report on the other inmates. In a letter sent from prison to Paese Sera, the Communist Rome daily, Mr. Farina wrote last week that he was physically well and in good spirits and that if he should die in his cell it would be murder and not suicide.
Mr. Farina in his letter denied most of what has been written about him: He has not been accused of any part in the bombing but is being interrogated as a witness only; he is serving time for a kidnapping, not for rape, and he is no longer a Fascist, having left the movement eight years ago. And he chose Paese Sera to publish his letter because it was the only paper that had nice things to say about his appearances on television before his arrest.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo


End of Document