New laws fight international students more than terrorism
University Wire
September 20, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 The Daily Iowan via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 427 words
Byline: Editorial Staff, The Daily Iowan
Dateline: Iowa City, Iowa
Body


Before Sept. 11, 2001, international students were treated the same as every other student on this campus. Their backgrounds may have been different, and they may have spoken a different language, but they attended the University of Iowa for the same reasons that American students do -- to receive an education. However, after the attacks, these students began to be looked at in a different light.
U. Iowa
Laws have been passed that infringe on the civil liberties of international students across the United States and in Iowa. In April, a state law was passed that required international students' licenses to be branded with a red notation at the top. It will state, "Nonrenewable -- Documentation Required." However, international students already know that documentation is required to renew their licenses. Why, then, would the state require this mark?
The Department of Transportation says the reason for this mark is to "limit identity theft, license fraud, and prevent terrorism." Are we not all frightened that our identity could be stolen and that license fraud may occur, and do we not all want to prevent terrorism? This mark is only a way to separate those who are legal residents from those who are foreign. This mark is in no way going to stop identity theft, fraud, or terrorism. Not only are the reasons outlined by the DOT inexcusable, but they discriminate. Terrorism remains a threat, but this does nothing to solve the problem.
This new mark is not the only way that students at the UI are being separated. As a part of the Patriot Act, a database, to be put into effect on Jan. 30, 2003, will be set up to monitor foreign students attending college in America. It will consist of information on students' visas, addresses, majors, course loads, and the status of each student at each particular university. The UI will be required to link up with the national data bank and hire someone to keep the database up-to-date.
This means that the university will spend $ 33,000 year, plus an initial fee of $ 50,000 for the new system; the UI doesn't have money like this to spare. If the federal government wants to keep a closer eye on students, it should fund the project instead of forcing already financially troubled universities to do so.
In the end, all of these new laws and tools for the so-called prevention of terrorism violate foreign students' rights. These are students just like everyone else -- but these new laws separate them by, in effect, stamping "Foreign" on their licenses.
(C) 2002 The Daily Iowan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 20, 2002


End of Document