New law may help in terrorism fight
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 26, 1997, Tuesday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6A
Length: 348 words
Body


WHEELING - A federal law used for the first time against a firefighter
who gave photographs of FBI center blueprints to a militia leader is a
new tool to stop terrorism, a prosecutor says.
Former Fire Lt. James "Rich" Rogers was convicted by a U.S. District
Court jury Monday under an antiterrorism statute that makes it a crime
to provide material resources for preparation for a terrorist attack.
The law, part of President Clinton's 1994 crime bill, was designed to
eliminate loopholes and help prevent acts of terrorism, said U.S.
Attorney William Wilmoth.
"I hope that we don't have many chances to use it," Wilmoth said
Monday.
Rogers was convicted by jurors after 17 hours of deliberations over
three days.
He faces up to 10 years in prison under the statute when he is
sentenced by U.S. District Judge Frederick Stamp.
Rogers was acquitted of a conspiracy count that would have increased
the penalty by up to five years.
Defense lawyer Gary Zimmerman said he would likely appeal the guilty
verdict but that the decision would not be made until after
sentencing. Rogers is free on bond.
The verdict was a double blow for Rogers, whose firefighting career in
Clarksburg ended Monday after nearly 20 years.
"From the city's perspective, these are extraordinary circumstances
that we hope will now be completely behind us," said City Manager
Percy Ashcraft.
Rogers, 41, of Jane Lew, Lewis County, was advised by his lawyer not
to comment. He left the courtroom with his wife and his parents.
He was accused of providing photographs that Mountaineer Militia
leader Floyd "Ray" Looker sold for $ 50,000 to a person he believed
was the middleman for Middle East terrorists.
When assembled like a jigsaw puzzle, the photos provided an overview
of the FBI center plans, showing underground utilities, a computer
center, building structures and other details.
Prosecutors say Rogers made 34 photographs of the blueprints.
Zimmerman said his client was drawn into criminal activity by Looker
and Looker's intelligence chief, Okey Marshall Richards Jr., who
turned out to be an FBI informant who made hundreds of tape
recordings.

Load-Date: August 28, 1997


End of Document