NEW FBI TERRORISM WARNING Fears of mail bombs sent from Germany
Daily News (New York)
December 24, 1999, Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 442 words
Byline: By RICHARD SISK DAILY NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU
Body

WASHINGTON - Postal inspectors and airlines stepped up security yesterday after the FBI warned that mail bombs from Frankfurt may be included in the flood of holiday packages.
Federal officials also reported yesterday that a Canadian woman caught bringing an Algerian national across the Vermont border this week has links to an Islamic terrorist organization.
In an unusual and cryptic statement put out at 2 a.m., the FBI said it received "unsubstantiated information that individuals may be planning to send bombs in small parcels" from Frankfurt, Europe's biggest air hub.
"The public should be cautious with parcels originating from or bearing Frankfurt postal markings or stamps" and should call local police about "questionable packages," the FBI said.
Mail handlers immediately began using X-ray machines to screen incoming parcels and first-class mail from Frankfurt, said Postal Inspection Service spokesman Dan Mihalko. Frankfurt airport increased security, and the Federal Aviation Administration sent an advisory yesterday to U.S. airlines, officials said.
In addition, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson yesterday said, "We are taking extra security precautions at energy installations."
The precautions were the latest in a series of escalating steps taken by U.S. law enforcement and the military to protect Americans against attack following a series of bomb scares.
Federal authorities have beefed up security at airports and border crossings since the capture last week of Algerian national Ahmed Ressam, 32, in Washington State and the arrest of a second Algerian, identified as Boubide Chamchi.
Chamchi was stopped in Vermont crossing from Canada with a Canadian woman, Lucia Garofalo.
In court documents released yesterday, federal prosecutors in Vermont said they had linked Garofalo's cell phone and the car she was driving to a member of the Algerian Islamic League, Brahim Mahdi, which the documents said were connected to "organizations sponsoring a number of terrorist acts in Europe and Algeria."
But in an interview with The Associated Press at his Montreal apartment, Mahdi said he has no connection to terrorism and has never heard of the Algerian Islamic League.
"I don't know anything," Mahdi said. "I don't know why they would accuse me of that."
Canadian and U.S. authorities also are investigating whether Ressam, who has been indicted on explosives smuggling charges, had ties to the organization, which allegedly ran a theft ring in Montreal to funnel money into anti-U.S. activities.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police yesterday raided a Montreal apartment where Ressam was believed to have once lived, but no explosives were found.

Load-Date: December 24, 1999


End of Document