New York Officials Urge Renewal Of Federal Terrorism Insurance
The New York Times
March 6, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 451 words
Byline: By DIANE CARDWELL
Body


New York officials urged Congress yesterday to renew a terrorism insurance program set to expire at the end of this year that they said allowed the city's economy to recover and grow in the years after the Sept. 11 terror attack.
  The program, created by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act in 2002 and extended in 2005, was devised when insurers began excluding terrorism from their property policies after Sept. 11, 2001. Under its terms, the federal government would pay most of the cost of losses from a foreign terror attack, up to a total of $100 billion a year. In seeking its renewal, the officials told the House Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises at a hearing in Manhattan that without it, the city's robust development engine could sputter to a halt.
Senator Charles E. Schumer told the panel gathered at City Hall that the cycle of pending expiration and renewal had created a damaging ''fear pattern'' among insurers, and he argued that the program should be made permanent or at least cover the next 15 years. 
  ''The closer we get to the expiration, the fewer projects are planned,'' said Mr. Schumer, Democrat of New York. 
  Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg also spoke in support of continuing the program, saying it was crucial to the city's overall economic health. 
  ''Without a doubt, the federal government's terrorism insurance program has been a critical part of New York City's revival and is giving businesses the confidence to move forward with exciting new projects,'' he said. ''But without terrorism risk insurance, none of them would ever get off the ground.''
  The officials also urged lawmakers to extend the program to cover domestic terrorism and to take into account the possibility of nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological attacks.
  Critics have argued that the act was an unneeded gift to the insurance industry and has weakened the marketplace by encouraging insurers to depend on it.
  But Eric R. Dinallo, acting superintendent of the State Insurance Department, said that the program helped correct a market dynamic in which insurers would avoid offering coverage, or offer it only at astronomical prices to cover all possible outcomes of unpredictable acts.
  Referring to the federal program, Mr. Dinallo said it ''doesn't replace the private sector'' but ''makes private-sector involvement possible.''
  United States Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a Democrat who represents parts of Manhattan and Queens and who had requested the hearing in New York, echoed that sentiment. She called the act ''an essential tool for providing economic security following a terrorist attack, not a bailout of the insurance industry.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 6, 2007


End of Document