NEW SWAT FORCE SUITS UP TO BATTLE TOXIC TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
August 25, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  40
Length: 653 words
Byline: By DAVID L. LEWIS
Body


CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C.  The future of the nation's war against terrorism is taking shape here in a squat, red-brick building surrounded by a parking lot.
It's a high-tech place where terms such as "blister gas" and "hot zone" apply to the streets of New York as well as the sands of Iraq.
The brainchild of the country's top military and scientific minds, it is headquarters for a new hand-picked SWAT team to combat chemical or biological attacks at home or overseas.
"This is something I saw in 'Star Wars,' and all of a sudden the technology is here and you can use it," said Navy Lt. Mike Picio, 31. "It's a little surreal."
A medical doctor, Picio wears a gas mask mounted with a fiber-optic camera. His charcoal-lined protective suit, equipped with an internal transmitter, can beam live pictures of germ warfare to military and research laboratories around the country.
Picio and the team 350 Marines and sailors use two six-wheel-drive, pressure-sealed amphibious reconnaissance vehicles with external vacuum probes attached to computers that break down air into its atomic elements in 10 seconds.
The unit hit the road for the first time for the Atlanta Olympics, bunking in a winery warehouse for three weeks, and went on alert when the pipe bomb went off in Centennial Olympic Park on July 27.
"We did not have to respond to the scene," said Lt. Col. Arthur Corbett, the unit's commanding officer. "And if it never happens, no one will be happier. But we are clearly planning that if it does happen, we will have a robust capability to deal with these terrorist attacks."
Corbett's team, meanwhile, is standing by and prepared to deploy at the Democratic convention in Chicago, if necessary.
City Health Commissioner Margaret Hamburg is one of eight experts who will play a crucial operational role in the new bio-chemical warfare.
In her apartment on the upper West Side of Manhattan, she keeps a military-issue laptop computer loaded with Defense Department software. She can log onto the Internet for a multi-media conference call with troops fighting biologically engineered threats such as typhoid, Sarin or anthrax.
"It essentially puts these experts in the chem-bio field in the foxhole with me," said Navy Cmdr. Laurie Balagurchik, the unit's top medical officer and a 1971 graduate of Curtis High School on Staten Island.
"It is quite a different kind of a first response than if you have a sewer main that breaks, or a hurricane or an earthquake or even traditional terrorism activity," said Hamburg. "It's going to take real medical detective work."
The team ran its first on-line exercise during the Olympics, led by Dr. Joshua Lederberg of Rockefeller University, a Nobel laureate and the model for the bio-sleuth in the 1969 novel "The Andromeda Strain."
But the threat is not the stuff of fiction. When Ohio police arrested white supremacist Larry Harris last summer, he was carrying three samples of bubonic plague obtained by mail from a lab in Rockville, Md.
"He drove around with it in his pickup truck, in the glove compartment, for a couple of weeks," said Dr. Gail Cassell, a microbiologist at the University of Alabama who serves on the advisory team.
"The threat is real," said Cassell.
It would take four or five hours for the unit to reach New York City in the event of an attack here. Once on the ground, it would be under the command of local authorities such as the police, fire or health commissioner.
Maj. Michael Malone, the unit's chief operations officer, said the Atlanta experience opened officials' eyes to the wealth of resources and the lack of training in the nation's urban centers.
"Your Fire Department up in New York city has capabilities that no one has really realized," Malone added.
"If something does happen, how we react to it as a country mitigates the effects of the terrorism. If we're effective at mitigating that, it no longer has the same threat or usefulness it originally had."

Graphic

 
JOHN ROCA DAILY NEWS UNIT'S top medical officer, Laurie Balagurchik.

Load-Date: August 26, 1996


End of Document