New security department is overkill
Anchorage Daily News (Alaska)
April 29, 2003 Tuesday, FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Anchorage Daily News
Section: ALASKA; Pg. B4; Commentary
Length: 733 words
Byline: by John Havelock
Body


To create the Department of Homeland Security, large and small units of government were taken from their historic niches in the federal structure and laid out as a foundation to the new department. Old lines of command and communications were severed. A massive new management structure was required to join and supervise this base and to add new functions. Hundreds, possibly thousands, of new jobs, many offering supergrade pay, have been created. The department requires a secretary and 18 deputy assistants and undersecretaries. Each of those has a staff and presides over its own directors, deputy directors, counsels, inspectors and advisory councils.
Liaison officers are required with the departments from which each unit was taken to assure that the prior functions, including food inspection, epidemiology and emergency rescue, are not entirely ignored. Liaison offices are required. The new department's priority is finding ways to spend money on terrorism prevention or deterrence. Whether there is terrorism to be deterred will not interfere with that emphasis.
Resources now used to fight crime may be recommitted to fighting phantom terrorism. The No. 2 man in the FBI was recently quoted as "amazed and astounded" by the reluctance of the FBI's 56 field offices to switch resources from bank robbery, kidnapping and major drug deals to terrorism. He shouldn't have been. Not withstanding color-coded messages calling for high levels of alertness to suspicious activity among all Americans, international terrorism, post-Sept. 11, 2001, is a less likely threat to the average citizen than lightning. Infrastructure threats are also limited. In either case, risk varies enormously by location.
FBI Director Robert Mueller wants Washington, not local offices, to set priorities. Fighting terrorism is tops. How about Alaska? Too many other places are more accessible and offer more dramatic possibilities. How do local Homeland Security or FBI offices respond to the demanded priority? Will an office come under suspicion for not aggressively pursuing Patriot Act wiretaps? If you can't find a terrorist, maybe ferreting out the names of people who complain about the government is the next best thing. Watch the little old ladies on their way to the Alaska Native Medical Center in Anchorage being searched for weapons at Kotzebue airport by the new Homeland Security agents and wonder: Is the FBI going to reflect this official paranoia?
The fiscal demands of new internal security apparatus will dry up resources, a consequence that weighed heavily on Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in turning him against the Vietnam War. As I heard a Pentagon official put it off the record last fall, "If fighting terrorism is the country's priority, then that's what we do." All government departments make the same claim, no matter that they are as ill-suited to fighting domestic terrorism as the Defense Department. Like the rest of us, bureaucrats follow the money.
The Homeland Security Act will also expedite the growth of the private internal security industry generated by the act. Billions will be spent on procurement and experiment with hardware and systems for surveillance, barriers, identifications, controls, perhaps color-coded warning systems, as far as the imagination can reach, each to enhance the security of something. Texas AandM is a particular beneficiary of expanded research.
Smelling billions in new expenditures, the Democrats make political capital out of the administration's supposed weakness on domestic anti-terrorism spending, by which they mean money passing through to (often Democratic) cities for local police, fire services and pork. Your town can have an anti-terrorism squad too.
There are things to be done. Improved communications among intelligence agencies, lack of which may have contributed to the 2001 attacks, is being addressed.
Terrorism is a very old method of radical action. A dozen countries, including our close allies Britain and Israel, and our former close allies, Germany and France, have contemporary experience in dealing with terrorism. We should use it instead of building from imagination. The FBI at home and the CIA and other intelligence agencies abroad have a rich experience and competence with terrorism in sharp contrast to this new department we never needed.
 John Havelock is a former attorney general of Alaska. He lives in Anchorage.

Load-Date: April 29, 2003


End of Document