New York on 'Heightened State of Alert' After Boston Bombings
New York Observer
April 15, 2013 Monday


Copyright 2013 The New York Observer, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Length: 383 words
Byline: Colin Campbell and Anna Silman
Body


(Photo: Anna Silman)
Earlier today, multiple bombs went off at the finish line of the Boston Marathon, killing at least two and injuring dozens more.
New York City has already stepped up its own security efforts in case there is a plot to attack additional cities, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced.
"[T]he NYPD has stepped up security at strategic locations and critical infrastructure, including our subways," the mayor said in a statement.
"Some of the security steps we are taking may be noticeable, including deployment of Critical Response Vehicles and additional police personnel, and others will not be. We have 1,000 members of the NYPD assigned to counter-terrorism duties, and they - along with the entire NYPD and the investments we have made in counter-terrorism infrastructure - are being fully mobilized to protect our city."
Governor Andrew Cuomo issued his own statement announcing that all state agencies are on "a heightened state of alert as we learn more about this incident," the facts of which are still emerging.
"I have directed state agencies, including the Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Services, State Police, the MTA and the Port Authority, to be on a heightened state of alert as we learn more about this incident," Mr. Cuomo said.
(Photo: Anna Silman)
"New York National Guard on Sunday sent three vehicles and 6 soldiers to support the Marathon, and they are on hand to assist with emergency response and work together with local authorities following this incident."
Several other cities, including Washington D.C., have begun taking similar steps to secure landmarks and high-trafficked areas.
In Times Square, bystanders were frightened by the news and the heightened police presence.
Kirsten Andrews and Lauren Adamo, visitors from Maine, had been following the news for the past hour in their hotel room and came out to observe the scene in the square.
"I wanted to come down and talk to a cop and see if they have a plan in motion if anything happened right now, because it would be chaotic," said Ms. Andrews. "I'm wondering why subways and buses are still running."
Ms. Adamo was concerned about the possibility of more explosions. "My stepdad's in the military and he says all big cities are under threat right now," said Ms. Adamo. "It's a little unsettling."

Load-Date: April 15, 2013


End of Document