New Views on Terrorism Insurance Don't Look So Nice for Taxpayers
The American Banker
December 7, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 American Banker, Inc.
Section: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 12
Length: 853 words
Byline: BY JOHN SAMPLES, TOM MILLER, and PETER VANDOREN
Body


Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, investors' attitudes toward risk have changed. So, too, have political inhibitions about shifting costs to taxpayers. "Everyone," including Bert Ely in his article in the Nov. 30 American Banker ("Why Congress Should Foot the Bill for Future Major Terrorist Attacks," page 7), agrees that taxpayers should be forced to bear the risk of damages to commercial structures caused by terrorists. But have any taxpayers been consulted?
Since Sept. 11, bankers who make loans for new construction and owners of commercial buildings have been worrying that their money has been further jeopardized. Lenders have always required companies to take out insurance against terrorism and other risks as a condition for getting financing. Now more than ever, they will want builders and borrowers to have that insurance.
Unfortunately, the insurance industry says it plans to stop offering insurance against terrorism at any price. Sept. 11 changed their view of risk and, hence, of the profitability of insurance and reinsurance that includes terrorism risks. The Bush administration and Mr. Ely claim that if terrorism insurance does not exist, no buildings will be built, and the economy will tank.
That's hardly likely. A more plausible scenario would be that bankers, their construction customers, insurance companies, and the owners of commercial office space would adjust. There is evidence that insurers will not universally drop out of the picture. The Nov. 15 Wall Street Journal reported that Marsh and McLennan, the world's largest insurance broker, had started a subsidiary days after Sept. 11 to "sell insurance to corporate customers at sharply higher rates."
If insurers limit their liability through contractual provisions or drop out of the picture, the remaining parties, and perhaps new ones, will share the risk. We might, for example, see catastrophe bonds and insurance derivatives, which would offer high returns to institutional investors willing to take a chance that terrorism will not happen.
Markets will also adapt by reducing the risk. Buildings will become shorter and less symbolic. Fewer of them may be located in Manhattan and Washington. Mr. Ely cites Warren Buffet's claim that terrorism risk for landmark buildings in New York is 10 times that of buildings in less-populated areas. Both argue that cities are "essential" to our society. Apparently they are not so essential that Mr. Buffet wants to lose his own money insuring them.
Free markets work best if they include all costs and benefits to market participants. No one likes the added costs and anxieties created by the Sept. 11 catastrophe, but we can't pretend they don't exist or that the government can magically make them disappear. Our markets for risk are not failing, they are simply telling us news we don't like hearing.
Commercial real estate interests, insurers, and most politicians have a different idea. They want the federal government (that is, those risk-taking conscripts known as taxpayers) to bear the risk of insuring commercial property. The proposals vary, but all of them have the taxpayer providing the cash to pay off future claims caused by terrorism and putting Washington in the middle of the insurance business. If Congress comes up with such guarantees, the insurers say they grudgingly will offer insurance against terrorism.
In other words, the insurance industry wants taxpayers to assume a risk they themselves are unwilling to assume. Yet if experts at risk assessment (that is to say, insurers) are unwilling to spend their own money offering policies, why should the public? If members of Congress decide to assume risks that no private insurer, with presumably better risk-assessment skills and its own money at stake, will undertake, are they really serving the best interests of their constituents?
Mr. Ely and other supporters claim that the government involvement in the insurance business is temporary. But proposed legislation first preempts the market for insurable risk by providing taxpayer subsidies at very low thresholds. It then fails to eliminate tax penalties imposed on insurers who accumulate sufficient reserves against large future losses. A jurisdictional turf fight killed off an initiative to eliminate this tax penalty, one of the few good ideas in a previous version of the House legislation.
Mr. Ely correctly argues that government failed to protect us from attack, but he then insists that the proper remedy is "government should pay." But when the "government" goes shopping for funds, it stops first at "TaxpayersRUS."
Government does have a positive role to play in this, but it does not involve greater entanglement in insurance markets. By improving national security, government can reduce the risk of terrorism and its costs. Success on that front would go a long way toward easing the uncertainty we see now in insurance markets. Better security, not more subsidies, is the best response to the events of Sept. 11. Change the risk. Don't hide its cost.
 
Copyright c 2001 Thomson Financial. All Rights Reserved. http://www.americanbanker.com 

Load-Date: December 7, 2001


End of Document