New terrorism warning issued;
 Americans at hotels and tourist sites in Jordan may have been targeted, arrests reveal.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
December 22, 1999, Wednesday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT,
Length: 822 words
Byline: BARRY SCHWEID The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The State Department issued a new worldwide warning Tuesday night that Americans may be the target of terrorist attacks over New Year's.
Large groups of people, assembled for religious festivals or New Year's celebrations, may be especially at risk, the department said.
Arrests in Jordan last week have produced information that hotels, tour buses and tourist sites in the Arab kingdom may have been targeted, the statement said.
However, even after the arrests of 13 suspects, "we cannot rule out the possibility that attacks still may be planned for this and other parts of the world," the department said.
Amid heightened concerns about the possibility of a holiday terrorist attack at home as well as abroad, security was ordered tightened Tuesday at American airports, and the Pentagon said it was taking "appropriate action" to protect U.S. forces overseas.
White House spokesman Joe Lockhart reiterated a State Department warning that there was "credible information" about potential terrorist threats abroad, and that Americans should stay in touch with U.S. embassies or consulates.
An earlier worldwide caution was issued Dec. 11. At the time, a senior U.S. official said, the U.S. government knew a plot had been uncovered in Jordan.
"The announcement was designed to keep Americans abreast of the counter-terrorism operation," said the official, who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity.
The official also said authorities were looking for a 31-year-old U.S. citizen from California with ties to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile the Clinton administration considers the mastermind of a worldwide terrorist operation.
Anxiety has increased since last week's arrest of an Algerian man who crossed into Washington state from Canada in a car carrying bomb-making materials.
The Federal Aviation Administration said travelers should expect tightened security precautions at airports, including stricter enforcement of parking rules.
The agency said it would make more use of devices to check airline passengers for small traces of explosives and additional bomb-sniffing dogs and uniformed police would patrol airports as the new year approaches.
In another development, law-enforcement officials said they were searching for as many as three people they believe may have been accomplices to the Algerian arrested last week.
The new warning to Americans was stated clearly: "The U.S. government believes that terrorists may be planning to conduct attacks, including against official and non-official Americans, in and around the New Year period, from now through mid-January 2000."
At the Pentagon, spokesman Kenneth Bacon said the Defense Department last week sent to U.S. military commanders worldwide two advisories highlighting State Department cautions about terrorist threats against Americans abroad.
The messages also provided "other information" relevant to the security of U.S. forces. Bacon would not be more specific, although he said no commanders abroad had requested additional equipment or other assets to increase security on their bases.
Asked specifically if the Pentagon had taken any new precautions or put any additional military assets on standby, Bacon said only, "We're taking appropriate action."
Also Tuesday, Federal Election Commission employees in Washington were told to evacuate their building shortly after 5 p.m. because of a threat directed against the FBI building across the street, FEC spokeswoman Sharon Snyder said. The FBI denied there was a problem.
The U.S. Embassy in Quito, Ecuador, was closed Friday over concern it might be targeted by terrorists, the State Department's deputy spokesman, James B. Foley, said Tuesday.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, CIA Director George Tenet, Gen. Henry H. Shelton, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, and several other senior U.S. officials met for two hours Monday at the White House to consider issuing new public warnings about the potential for year-end terrorist attacks here and abroad.
Various statements were drafted for their review, but none was approved, a senior government official told the AP.
The primary causes of concern are the travel of some suspected terrorists from one country to another, and reports that a terrorist group linked to bin Laden may be planning attacks, said another official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Last week, Jordanian authorities announced the arrest of 13 members of the terrorist group linked to bin Laden and said they were planning attacks against Americans, Israelis and other targets.
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, long accused by the United States of supporting terrorism, said Tuesday he had no knowledge of imminent danger to Americans, but added, "The U.S. government is hated. All the people in the world are against it, therefore there is a threat."
In a CBS interview from Tripoli, Gadhafi said, "I hope it will not happen in this new year. I have no knowledge about this."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: color;
The Associated Press;
 Motorists line up to enter Detroit from Windsor, Ontario, going through U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Services and U.S. Customs on the Detroit side of the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel on Tuesday. Kevin Weeks, Michigan's U.S. Customs management director, said the agency added staff at the Ambassador Bridge in Detroit and the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel to prevent tie-ups.

Load-Date: December 23, 1999


End of Document