New in terrorism fight: X-ray gun
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 12, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: Front, Pg. a 1
Length: 474 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: SANTA MONICA, Calif.
Body


The latest weapon against terrorism can see right through you.
The Passive Millimeter Wave Imager can X-ray through clothing to "see" a concealed weapon, plastic explosives or drugs. A police officer can aim it into a crowd from as far away as 90 feet.
The new X-ray gun is becoming a symbol for an unlikely alliance of civil libertarians and gun owners who fear the fight against crime and terrorism might be waged at the expense of personal freedoms.
"I'm incredibly concerned," said John Henry Hingson, a past president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, meeting here this past week. "The entire nation could become a victim of illegal searches and seizures and the law is powerless to protect them from these police abuses."
But in these nervous times following the crash of TWA Fight 800 and bombings at the Olympics, Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center, many Americans are willing to trade some privacy and liberties for greater security.
A poll last week by the Los Angeles Times found that a majority of people - 58 percent - said it would curtail some civil liberties if it would help thwart terrorism. Thirteen percent said it would depend on what rights were at stake. The poll didn't ask people to single out any rights.
Last year, the National Institute of Justice awarded $2.1 million to three companies to develop weapon detectors for airports, stores and public buildings.
Two models are being developed of the Passive Millimeter Wave Imager, a creation of Massachusetts-based Millimetrix Corp.
The larger one, about the size of a shoebox, is mounted on a patrol car and pointed at the unsuspecting person. The gadget doesn't send out X-rays; instead, it picks up electromagnetic waves emitted by human flesh.
Anything that stands in the way of those waves - like a gun - or anything that emits weaker waves - like a bag of cocaine or a plastic explosive - will show up on a small screen in the patrol car.
Clothes emit no waves. Neither do walls, allowing the device to even be used from outside a room.
A second model is a smaller, battery-operated version that an officer can operate by hand, like a radar gun.
Millimetrix hopes to field test the larger model soon.
Hingson argues the device runs roughshod over bans against illegal searches and seizures.
Millimetrix points out that while the imager can see through clothing, it still leaves people some privacy. The device's display screen, the company says, "does not reveal intimate anatomical details of the person."
Chip Walker, spokesman for the National Rifle Association, noted that devices like the imager threaten the legal rights of people in 31 states who are allowed to carry concealed weapons with proper licenses.
"We certainly support efforts to disarm criminals, but we need to be careful that we're not painting with too broad a brush here," he said.

Graphic

 
A model is shown in normal dress (left) and as he is screened by Millimetrix Corp's Passive Millimeter Wave Imager (right). The screening detects two concealed pistols. (AP photo)

Load-Date: December 9, 1996


End of Document