New top leader in Jordan urged to attack terrorism; King Abdullah named a prime minister hours after a resignation. He also called for a new law.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
November 25, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A16
Length: 428 words
Byline: Jamal Halaby, Associated Press
Body


Jordan's King Abdullah II appointed a new prime minister yesterday and urged him to launch an all-out war against Islamic militancy in the wake of the deadly triple hotel bombings earlier this month.
Abdullah also called for a new anti-terrorism law to replace the current, general one that does not specify punishment for different terrorist acts and their perpetrators.
In a designation letter to Prime Minister Marouf al-Bakhit - who was named hours after his predecessor resigned - Abdullah said the Nov. 9 attacks "increase our determination to stick to our reform and democratization process, which is irreversible."
"At the same time, it reaffirms our need to adopt a comprehensive strategy to confront the Takfiri culture," Abdullah said, referring to the ideology adopted by al-Qaeda and other Islamic militants who condone the killing of those they consider infidels.
The king called for a "relentless war on all the Takfiri schools, which embrace extremism, backwardness, isolation and darkness and are fed on the ignorance and naivete of simple people."
He said fatwas, or religious edicts, issued by such groups constitute a "threat on the society and its interests."
The appointment of a new premier came after Prime Minister Adnan Badran, 69, resigned earlier yesterday.
The change of government is part of a general shake-up after the suicide bombings of three Amman hotels, which killed 63 people, including the bombers, and wounded hundreds. The blasts harmed Jordan's reputation as one of the most stable countries in the Middle East.
In his letter, Abdullah also instructed al-Bakhit to press ahead with democratic reforms initiated under his late father, King Hussein.
Abdullah - who has allowed a relatively more liberal media to emerge and advocated wider freedoms for women - said such reforms were "not only a matter of choice, but a necessity for the new Jordan we aspire for."
Al-Bakhit, 58, was Jordan's ambassador to Israel until six days after the bombings, when he was appointed to head the national security council.
Government officials said the king may have chosen al-Bakhit because of his reputation as a tough former general. He also taught political science in a southern Jordanian university that trains army and police recruits.
He is known to be a moderate politician, who is expected to embrace Abdullah's policies of upholding the kingdom's longtime alliance with the United States, strategic ties with Israel under a peace treaty signed in 1994, and close relations with other Arab countries, particularly one-time business associate Iraq.

Load-Date: November 25, 2005


End of Document