NEW YORK AIRPORTS ARE SUBTLY GIRDING TO FIGHT TERRORISM
The New York Times
May 2, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 2034 words
Byline: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL
Body


Leaning against the Citibank counter in the International Arrivals Building of Kennedy International Airport and wearing a dark three-piece suit and raincoat, he easily passed for a businessman waiting for a visitor.
Nearby, a confederate wearing a sweater vest and swinging an umbrella threaded his way through the crowd. Neither man was what he seemed.  Each carried a concealed pistol and a detective's badge.
In contrast to many European airports, where police troops with submachine guns and sentry dogs serve as highly visible deterrents to terrorist attacks, the three airports of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey rely on an often invisible security shield, one of a host of generally unobtrusive measures that officials call more suited to conditions in the United States.
''Tactically, I don't know if it's a good idea to show the terrorists exactly where the 'enemy' is,'' said Henry I. DeGeneste, the authority's police superintendent who carries most of the responsibility for protecting the nearly 80 million air travelers who fly into and out of New York each year.
But one police union leader criticized a lack of preparedness and called for more and better-trained officers.
Beyond increased plainclothes police surveillance, recent measures include stepped-up police weaponry - kept, for the most part, discreetly out of sight -tamper-resistant employee identification cards, daily intelligence briefings and an alertness campaign backed by an employee-incentive reward program.
In addition, Kennedy Airport last fall put into service a new mobile X-ray van that can be dispatched quickly to the runway or other sites to examine suspicious packages. La Guardia Airport is completing a new V.I.P. lounge in the police building where travelers requiring special protection can be guarded and escorted directly to their planes.
And Newark International Airport -which for the first time in recent history handled more passengers than Kennedy in a 12-month period - has begun using the nation's first computerized ''watch list,'' storing the names of 40,000 people ''of interest'' to the Immigration and Naturalization Service and law-enforcement agencies.
Elsewhere in the region, smaller commuter and general-aviation airports are also reassessing security, although passenger screening remains minimal. Westchester County Airport near White Plains, for example, has increased staff training for baggage inspection. And Teterboro Airport in Bergen County, N.J., which serves only private planes and therefore conducts no passenger checks, is nevertheless hiring a consultant to survey the airport perimeter to improve security there. Absolute Security Considered Impossible Port Authority officials acknowledge that although American airports so far have been largely spared terrorist attacks, there is no absolute way of securing them - or any other potential terrorist target, for that matter.
''Kennedy Airport is a city; can you protect Manhattan?'' Mr. DeGeneste said.
A terrorist determined to die is virtually impossible to stop, whether at an airport or a military base, Mr. DeGeneste said. Also, he and airline officials said, there is a limit to the stringency of security measures that can be practically applied to a busy airport.
Moreover, Mr. DeGeneste said: ''People are focusing on the airports, but look at department stores. Look at museums and hotels. That's what worries me.''
An opposing view on the adequacy of airport security was offered by Sgt. Gennaro Aprile, president of the Port Authority Police Sergeants Benevolent Association. He said the authority was relying too heavily on overtime rather than hiring nearly 800 more officers to bring the total police force up to 2,000.
He also said that the authority had failed to maintain up-to-date airport maps and terminal floor plans for use in thwarting hijackings or other attacks, and that it lacked a ready mobile communications trailer for emergency operations.
Mr. DeGeneste acknowledged that the maps were not complete, although he said they were being updated. He said that an operations trailer, while in disrepair, was usable and that the authority was expanding the police force to 1,500 by next year, a level he said studies found sufficient. Some Schemes Have Been Foiled In 1975, La Guardia Airport became the first American airport hit by a major terrorist attack when a bomb, which a Croatian separatist group later said it had planted, exploded in a locker, killing 11 people and injuring 75.
In 1981, a bomb explosion in a men's room at the Pan American World Airways terminal at Kennedy killed a worker, minutes after a telephoned warning by a man who said he represented a Puerto Rican independence group.
Since then, there have been many scares and some thwarted schemes, including an effort to place an incendiary device aboard an Air Haiti jet at Kennedy last fall, but no successful attacks.
Several weeks ago, a telephone caller threatened to destroy Vice President Bush's plane at La Guardia. The threat unsettled security officials because, according to Capt. Stephen Brown of the Port Authority police at La Guardia, the arrival of the plane was not general knowledge at the time. For security reasons, Presidential and Vice-Presidential arrivals are shuffled among the three airports.
Like other airport managements and the Federal Aviation Administration, the Port Authority went through a major security reappraisal after the hijacking of a Trans World Airlines flight out of Athens last June and a subsequent rash of terrorist attacks, including massacres of travelers in the Rome and Vienna airports in December. Many tightened measures were mandated by the F.A.A. Information Called The Best Protection Every morning in Mr. DeGeneste's office, a detective sergeant who has national security clearance dials a special telephone number in Washington, recites a code word and receives the Government's latest terrorist intelligence update.
The officer also telephones the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Joint Terrorist Task Force of the F.B.I. and the New York City police and Interpol, the international police intelligence agency. He also calls his counterparts at airports in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Atlanta, Washington and Boston to exchange the latest reports on airport terrorism and crime.
According to Mr. DeGeneste and other officials, such intelligence, provided by informants and surveillance, remains the best protection against surprise attacks. A terrorist bomb maker might give himself away, for example, by approaching certain suppliers who might be monitored or infiltrated by the F.B.I.
From such intelligence data, a daily report is written for Mr. DeGeneste, who uses it to deploy about 600 Port Authority airport police officers. This force is matched by an almost equal number of Federal law-enforcement agents. Other Port Authority and airline employees at Kennedy alone total nearly 40,000. ''That comes to about 80,000 eyes,'' said Allan H. Haack, Kennedy's assistant general manager. ''They're the best protection we could have.'' More Firepower And Technology More tangible measures have also been adopted at all three airports.
Officers in radio-equipped cars have received armored vests and shotguns, which are carried in special, locked front-seat gunracks. Some officers now also carry automatic rifles. And 240 police officers this month will begin taking two-day antiterrorism training seminars conducted by the F.B.I.
Access to the departure areas has been restricted to ticketed passengers. At the screening points, where all passengers must pass through metal detectors and submit bags for X-raying, silent alarm buttons can quickly summon guards - within 45 seconds in most cases.
Employee identification cards granting access to sensitive areas carry three-dimensional holographic images considered virtually impossible to counterfeit. Some cards may eventually carry the bearer's thumbprint as well. Vehicles with access to restricted ramp areas must be specially registered.
In addition, special measures have been adopted at each of the three airports.
 
Kennedy Airport
As the region's major international gateway, with nearly 30 million passengers a year, five-square-mile Kennedy International Airport has long been considered the most likely terrorist target. Since last year, baggage is no longer accepted for check-in at curbside but must be checked in at terminal counters, where it can be matched to traveling passengers.
Kennedy also has the only mobile X-ray van that provides an instant paper image of the contents. The device is used routinely to double-check cargo or baggage before loading.
Recently, for example, a cargo pilot had what Mr. DeGeneste described as a ''bad feeling'' about boxes that were about to be loaded on his plane. On the basis on his hunch, the entire cargo was X-rayed in a hangar.
The van operator, John Ramirez, a Port Authority police officer, watched as box after box of video components, computer chips, barbecue utensils and party masks was revealed on his screen. In particular, he said, he was looking for telltale wires or blasting caps marking the ''firing train'' of any bomb. He found none, and the cargo was loaded without incident.
Crews of El Al Israel Airlines continue to be escorted between Kennedy and their hotels by New York City police teams. El Al and Air-India, moreover, each limit access to their terminals to ticketed passengers.
Also, a Port Authority armor-plated police van is often parked near the terminal shared by El Al and Air-India. The authority is also considering obtaining a light tank from West Germany.
El Al, furthermore, has its own steel chamber where baggage can be tested under low pressure to detonate any bomb designed to explode in flight under such conditions.
 
Newark Airport
For the 12 months that ended in January, Newark International Airport for the first time in decades handled more passengers than Kennedy - 28.8 million for Newark, compared with 28.7 million for Kennedy, according to Port Authority figures. The striking, but long predicted, shift in traffic -largely a function of the mounting domestic traffic of Newark-headquartered People Express Airlines - has imposed new security concerns on the 2,000-acre airport.
Terminal C, used for international arrivals, in March became the first in the nation to put the computerized immigration watch list into regular service. The list, the National Automated Immigration Lookout System, or NAILS, had until then been tested only in Baltimore. It replaces the cumbersome volumes of names that immigration agents elsewhere still leaf through to check each arriving passenger.
Also at the international terminal, travelers and visitors alike enter through a metal detector and must submit their bags for X-ray inspection.
''Who'd pick on People Express?'' said Brussels-bound Stan Bracey of Charlotte, N.C., as he hoisted his 10-week-old daughter, Mary Clare, through the metal detector the other day.
 
La Guardia Airport
Security here is helped by the airport's compactness - its 600 acres could be tucked easily into the central terminal areas of either Kennedy or Newark. Still, concerns abound.
At the police building near the Butler Marine Terminal for general aviation, a new V.I.P. lounge is being completed that will allow closer guarding of visiting leaders and other celebrities. From there, they can be driven directly to their planes without going through terminal areas, according to Captain Brown.
Security for the traditionally casual Eastern Airlines shuttles to Washington and Boston has also been tightened, according to Jerry Crosley, an Eastern spokesman. Although the hourly service has long featured easy access without tickets, procedures have been ''modified'' - in ways that Mr. Crosley declined to specify - to conform to new security requirements, including the matching of luggage and passengers.
New York Air, which offers competing hourly service to Washington and Boston out of La Guardia, has also stepped up its vigilance, according to a spokesman, Bruce Hicks. The fact that many Government officials fly such flights, he acknowledged, ''makes us more conscious of security.''

Graphic

 
photo of security measures being taken at local airports to combat terrorism (NYT/Jack Manning) (page B4)


End of Document