NEW GENERATION LEADS ISRAEL'S LIKUD;
NETANYAHU, 43, SUCCEEDS SHAMIR IN SPEARHEADING HARDLINE OPPOSITION
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 26, 1993, Friday,
ONE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 661 words
Byline: CLYDE HABERMAN, NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE
Body


Israel's main political opposition changed generations yesterday, from the founders of the Jewish state to their heirs, when Benjamin Netanyahu resoundingly won a nationwide primary to become the Likud Party leader.
Netanyahu, born in 1949, a year after Israel came into being, succeeds former Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, 77, who headed the party for the past decade.
As the winner yesterday, Netanyahu automatically will become the Likud candidate for prime minister in the next national election, which is not scheduled until 1996 but could come sooner should the current Labor-led government fall.
In that election, the Israeli prime minister will be chosen for the first time by direct popular vote, with personalities and images likely to count at least as much as party policies.
A final tally of the 145,000 votes cast Wednesday but only counted yesterday showed Netanyahu with 52.1 percent, far more than the 40 percent he needed to avoid a runoff.
Former Foreign Minister David Levy was second with 26.3 percent, followed by Benjamin Begin, a member of Parliament and son of the late Prime Minister Menachem Begin, with 15.1 percent, and former Transportation Minister Moshe Katsav with 6.5 percent.
It is clear that as the political culture changes, a majority of Likud members consider Netanyahu -- well-spoken, attractive and savvy in television techniques -- to be their best hope to recover the power they lost nine months ago.
Netanyahu, a member of Parliament and former deputy foreign minister, pledged last night that the right-wing opposition would unseat Labor and its leader, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, 71.
And he left no doubt that he will make the most of a recent surge of anti- Israeli violence to accuse the Rabin government of being weak-kneed against Arab terrorism and of endangering Israeli security by offering territorial concessions in the Middle East peace talks.
''This government says that it is impossible to fight the knifings, that it is impossible to fight terrorism,'' he told an auditorium filled with supporters rhythmically chanting his nickname, Bibi. ''How do they put it? 'Terrorism has only one solution: a political solution.' In other words, there is no solution to terrorism except retreat.''
In the peace negotiations, the government only offers concessions, he said, and the consequences for Israel will be ''to bring the Syrian army on the Golan Heights closer to us, to shrink and reduce the size of this country, to bring the border to the outskirts of Petah Tikvah,'' a town just outside Tel Aviv.
Probably no Israeli politician of his generation is better-known in the United States, where Netanyahu lived as a teen-ager. He graduated from MIT in Cambridge, Mass., and later served as Israel's delegate to the United Nations and as No. 2 at its Washington embassy.
No modern politician in Israel has logged more time on U.S. television than Netanyahu, explaining Israel's positions in idiomatic English on international terrorism and the Persian Gulf war.
And no Israeli politician has adopted a more U.S. campaign style, from crafted sound bites to cross-country bus barnstorming.
So successful is he at reducing his pragmatically hawkish opinions to manageable TV proportions that some in Likud -- allies as well as foes -- worry that he is prey to accusations that he is not a deep thinker. One task before him now, these Israelis say, is to prove that he is more than glib.
A former army commando, he also gained reflected glory from his older brother, Jonathan, who led and died in the 1976 raid at Entebbe, Uganda, in which Israeli commandos rescued the hostage passengers of a hijacked airliner.
The Likud primary was a bruising four-man race, complicated and given spice by a sex scandal that had swirled around the thrice-married Netanyahu but inflicted no lasting damage. His wife, Sara, stood by him during the campaign, and she was at his side yesterday -- getting a kiss from him -- during a victory rally.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document