News Anchor - Oct. 13th
The Current: Nova Southeastern University
October 13, 2020 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 442 words
Byline: Rick Esner
Body


Nearly 50,000 voters received incorrect ballots in Ohio
According to the Associated Press, elected officials announced that almost 50,000 voters received incorrect absentee ballots last Friday in Franklin County, Columbus, OH. Officials quickly noticed the mistake and announced that correct ballots would be mailed out to citizens within 72 hours. Some of the incorrect ballots had an incorrect congressional race for nominees and others contained correct information, but were sent to voters in a different precinct. Shortly after the mistake was announced, President Trump cited the incident in a tweet claiming "A Rigged Election." However, no such evidence of the claim exists. 
Michigan anti-government group plotted to kidnap Governor
Last Thursday, the F.B.I, along with Michigan state officials, announced charges for terrorism, conspiracy and weapons against six men who are a part of an anti-government terrorist group who planned to kidnap Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. According to The New York Times, Whitmer, a Democrat, was targeted by six members of the group due to anger over COVID-19 control measures. The group not only spied on Whitmer's vacation home throughout August and Sept. but also met numerous times for firearm training, combat drills and practicing building explosives. The six men were charged with conspiracy to commit kidnapping, which can carry a life sentence. 
Hurricane Delta hits Lousianna 
According to the Associated Press, Hurricane Delta, a Category 2 storm, hit south Louisiana last Friday. Delta hit a top wind speed of 100 mph before growing weaker and downgrading to a Category 1 storm with 85 mph winds. The hurricane still inflicted damage to the town of Creole and other southern Louisiana areas due to the area still recovering from Hurricane Laura only six weeks prior.  Delta's damage went as far west as Galveston, TX, 100 miles from where the storm hit land in Louisiana. Wind speed in Texas hit a high of 90 mph. Over 330,000 homes and businesses lost power shortly after Delta came ashore.
Tiger King star charged with wildlife trafficking
Last Friday, Bhagavan Antle, known as Doc on the Netflix documentary "Tiger King: Murder, Mayhem and Madness" and current owner of Mrytle Beach Safari in South Carolina, was charged with wildlife trafficking, according to The New York Times. The office of the attorney general of Virginia charged Antle with two felony counts related to wildlife trafficking and 13 additional misdemeanors in connection with lion cubs that were moved between Virginia and South Carolina. Antle denies any conduct of animal cruelty. Netflix declined to comment on Antle's charges. 
Related

Load-Date: October 14, 2020


End of Document