NEWS BRIEFS briefs briefs
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
September 06, 1998, Sunday sunday sunday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P13A P13A P13A
Length: 1075 words
Body


Bin Laden targeted
by U.S. since spring
WASHINGTON - U.S. intelligence officials drew up secret plans last
spring for a covert raid to capture Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan,
according to senior U.S. government officials.
The officials said the planning began after U.S. military,
intelligence and law-enforcement officials concluded they had ample
evidence linking bin Laden to anti-American terrorist attacks in
recent years.
The plan, developed by the CIA and U.S. special forces months before
the August bombings of two U.S. embassies, called for U.S. forces to
extricate the Saudi millionaire from his hideout in Afghanistan and
bring him to justice in the United States.
The White House was aware of the mission, which was ultimately shelved
by the director of Central Intelligence, George Tenet, and other
senior officials because of the risks involved. Those included the the the
potential for many casualties among Americans and innocent Afghans.
But Clinton administration officials said they were still working to
develop other options aimed at bin Laden or to dismantle his terrorist
network when bombs exploded Aug. 7 at two East African embassies.
The administration has presented the missile attack on sites in
Afghanistan and Sudan linked to bin Laden as an instance of Clinton's
decisiveness in the face of terrorism.
U.S. may lack solid plan
to deal with terrorism
At a time of growing fear of terrorism within the United States'
borders, senior state and local officials say the federal government
still has no coherent system for deterring or responding to it.
More than 200 officials from across the country who met in Washington
late last month to discuss emergency preparedness urged the Clinton
administration to put a single government agency in charge of
developing a new national plan within six months.
The current system of federal programs to counter attacks on American
soil, especially those involving chemical or biological weapons and
other arms of mass destruction, is not only often duplicative but
also, the officials said, frequently chaotic, confusing and overly
bureaucratic.
An eight-page summary of the group's assessment was given to Attorney
General Janet Reno by the Justice Department's Office for State and
Local Preparedness Support, which was created in May to help cities
and states better prepare for terrorism and deal with its consequences
should deterrence fail. A copy of the report was obtained by The New
York Times.
The urgent appeal for a restructuring of the nation's anti-terrorism
efforts, and the deep frustration expressed at the two-day closed
meeting last month, took even some longtime federal officials by
surprise. Both followed ambitious anti-terrorism efforts by the
administration and the spending of hundreds of millions of dollars in
recent years on training, infrastructure protection, new equipment,
and intelligence gathering and sharing.
For all of that, said Bernard Hicks, Atlanta's domestic preparedness
coordinator, whose city had experience with terrorism in the bombing
at the Olympics two years ago, "even we often don't know who to talk
to at the federal level."
Bob Canfield, an official with the Los Angeles emergency preparedness
division, agreed. "The federal government thinks it's focused," he
said, "but we see the effort as fragmented."
Hutu rebels raid prison,
free about 3,000 inmates
KIGALI, Rwanda - Hutu rebels stormed a prison in western Rwanda and
freed about 3,000 inmates suspected of involvement in the 1994
genocide, authorities said Saturday. Fearing army reprisals, most of
the inmates later returned to the prison.
Details were sketchy, but authorities in Kibuye, about 60 miles west
of capital Kigali, said a group of 2,000 rebels on Friday overpowered
guards at Kivumu prison and set the inmates free.
Most of the prisoners returned voluntarily to the jail because they
were afraid of army retaliation for any alleged association with the
rebels, Rwandan officials said on condition of anonymity.
State-run Radio Rwanda reported the insurgents, attacking from the
nearby Mukura forest, had also attacked the Nyange secondary school,
killing three teachers.
"Security forces intervened and inflicted a heavy defeat on the
infiltrators. Five guns were seized and many infiltrators killed,"
the radio said.
Unconfirmed reports put to 20 the number of those killed.
The rebels are former Hutu soldiers and militiamen responsible for the
1994 Hutu government-organized slaughter of more than 500,000 minority
Tutsis and politically moderate Hutus.
Tutsi-led forces overthrew the Hutu government in July 1994, and ended
the killing. Hutu rebels have since launched attacks from bases in
neighboring Congo.
Rwandan prisons are crowded with about 130,000 people awaiting
genocide trials. The rebels often target prisons, hoping to mobilize
the inmates into their ranks.
North Korea designates
Kim as its 'Great Leader'
TOKYO - North Korea became the first Communist country to transfer
government power within a family dynasty on Saturday, as it anointed
Marshal Kim Jong Il as its "Great Leader" and head of an expanded
National Defense Commission.
In effect, Kim, the eldest son of former "Great Leader" Kim Il Sung,
who died four years ago, will govern in much the style of an ancient
Korean king, ruling absolutely and inheriting legitimacy not from
institutions but from the bloodline of the previous ruler.
Saturday's announcement did not specify what would happen to the
presidency, but there have been reports that it will be abolished and
the position held forever by Kim's late father. While many countries
have had presidents for life, North Korea apparently would become the
first nation to extend the concept.
If North Korea is one of the most perplexing of nations, Kim Jong Il
is among the most mysterious of leaders. Intelligence experts believe
that he may have several nuclear weapons, making him the least
understood of any leader with a finger on a nuclear trigger.
Some analysts see him as a maniac, noting that he has been accused of
kidnapping a South Korean actor-and-actress couple whose work he
admired, of planning the bombing of the South Korean Cabinet in 1983,
and of plotting the bombing of a civilian South Korean airliner in
1987.
Others say that he lacks his father's charisma but appears to be
intelligent and relatively open-minded.
Most analysts expect few immediate changes, but some say that the
coronation of a new king permits the country to experiment carefully
with new policies.
Compiled from wire reports reports reports

Load-Date: September 7, 1998


End of Document