News Summary;
SATURDAY, APRIL, 25, 1981
The New York Times
April 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 907 words
Body


International
President Reagan lifted the ban on United States grain exports to the Soviet Union that had been in effect for 15 months, while maintaining that his decision did not undercut his determination to halt Soviet acts of aggression ''wherever they take place.'' The President's decision, which was announced to the Cabinet in a closed session, also had the effect of lifting President Carter's ban on shipments of phosphate fertilizers to the Soviet Union. (Page 1, Column 6.)
The Soviet Union was accused of being ''the greatest source of international insecurity'' by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. in his first public speech since taking office. In outlining the philosophy behind the Reagan Administration's ''new direction'' in foreign policy, Mr. Haig said, ''Let us be plain about it: Soviet promotion of violence as the instrument of change constitutes the greatest danger to the world.'' (1:2.)
Summary of international, national and metropolitan news for April 25National
The Ku Klux Klan's role in a fight between American shrimp fishermen and Vietnamese refugees who have flocked to the Gulf Coast to make their living as shrimpers has resulted in a Federal court case in which the white fishermen have been accused of conspiring with the Klan to intimidate the Vietnamese into leaving. A hearing is expected as early as next week. (1:5-6.)
Measles may be eliminated in the United States by the end of 1982, except for imported cases, according to the Federal Centers for Disease Control. The prediction was based on a dramatic decline in the number of cases reported in the first 14 weeks of this year as against the comparable period in 1980. (1:1.)
Spiro T. Agnew admitted to his lawyer in 1973 that he had accepted kickbacks from Maryland contractors, the lawyer has testified. The lawyer, George W. White Jr., testifying in a civil damage suit to recover for the state $298,110, said that the former Vice President said that he had taken the kickbacks because such bribery had been ''going on for 1,000 years.'' (7:1-2.)
Bowing to criticism that his hearings on an anti-abortion bill were ''stacked'' in favor of the legislation, Senator John P. East of North Carolina, a Senate subcommittee chairman who strongly opposes abortion, promised to extend the hearings to hear ''all points of view.'' (7:1-6.)
The Soviet Union is responsible for most international terrorism, and if the United States ignores the threat of terrorism, ''the sand in which we bury our heads will eventually bury our nation,'' said Senator Jeremiah A. Denton, endorsing a view held by several witnesses appearing before a Senate subcommittee on security and terrorism in the opening day of its hearing. (10:1-2.)
Metropolitan
New York City's largest pension system, which assumes that women live three years longer than men, illegally discriminates against women employees by requiring them to pay higher contributions and paying them lower monthly benefits upon retirement, Judge Mary Johnson Lowe of Federal District Court in Manhattan has ruled. (1:3-4.)
A freeze has badly damaged the apple crop in New York State, the second largest producer in the nation. Growing areas have reported substantial injury to crops because of three days of freezing temperatures. The eventual result is expected to be higher prices for consumers. Some experts, while acknowledging that there had been heavy damage to the blossom buds on trees, said they could not accurately estimate the extent of the damage until the apples began to grow in June. (1:2-4.)
Senator Harrison A. Williams Jr. maintained under hostile questioning at his Abscam bribery trial that he had neither said nor implied to undercover agents that he would get Government contracts for a titanium mine in which he had accepted stock. (1:1.)
Cases of child labor as well as violations of minimum-wage and overtime laws were found in a monthlong inquiry by Federal investigators in New York's garment industry, primarily in Chinatown, Labor Secretary Raymond Donovan has announced. Critics, noting that the Labor Department plans to reduce the number of employees in the New York regional office of the wage-and-hour division, challenged the effectiveness of such investigations in preventing such exploitation. (25:6.)
A plan to establish the first statewide teacher licensing tests by Sept. 2, 1984 was approved by the New York State Board of Regents by an 8 to 3 vote. However, the plan is contingent on approval by the State Legislature, which is not certain. New York City and Buffalo already have such tests for their school systems and they will not be affected by the plan. (26:6.)
A gunman threatened a candidate for Governor of New Jersey during a campaign stop at a hospital in East Orange, N.J., but was chased away by a security guard and escaped without firing any shots. The candidate, State Senator James H. Wallwork, Republican of Short Hills, was not hurt by the gunman, who was disguised in doctor's surgical garb and mask. (26:1-2.)
Manhattan office workers buy drugs -mostly marijuana at a dollar a cigarette - every workday from dealers who have learned to serve what police consider to be a growing market. The sellers favor officetower plazas, doorways and vacant lots as they wait for their regular customers and for first-time clients. ''Customers range from mail-messenger types to three-piece junior executives,'' a detective said. (25:1-2.)
Business Digest, Page 29


End of Document