News Anchor for April 21, 2015
The Current: Nova Southeastern University
April 21, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 504 words
Body


Aaron Hernandez found guiltyFormer New England Patriot Aaron Hernandez was found guilty of first degree murder and unlawful possession of a firearm on April 15. He was sentenced to life in prison without parole for the June 2013 death of Odin Lloyd, who was last seen with Hernandez and Hernandez's associates.
Colombian rebels break truceOn April 15, ten Colombian soldiers were killed and 17 more injured by left-wing FARC rebels.  The rebels used explosives and firearms to attack the soldiers, while representatives from both sides were having peace talks in Cuba. A ceasefire was declared in December 2014. FARC is the largest rebel group in Colombia, and, since 1964, its aim is to bring about a Marxist regime.
Cuba removed from terrorism listOn April 14, President Barack Obama stated that Cuba will be removed from the list of state sponsors of terrorism. The decision was made following a State Department review of the situation and their conclusion that Cuba has refrained from supporting international terrorism over the last six months. Cuba was originally added to the list in 1982 when the White House determined that they were "promoting armed revolution by organizations that use terrorism."
The last wild northern white rhinosThe world's last known male northern white rhino, known by the name Sudan, is under protection in Ol Pejeta Conservancy, Kenya. Sudan, along with two female northern white rhinos, is under 24-hour protection by armed guards. Experts are attempting to mate Sudan with the females so the species can continue. Because of the rhinos' ages, they may not be able to mate naturally, so experts are looking at other methods of conception, such as in vitro fertilization.
U.S. runs out of investor visasThe U.S. government announced on April 15 that the Chinese will no longer be able to take part in the EB-5 immigrant investor program for the rest of the fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30. EB-5 provides green cards to foreigners who invest at least $500,000 and create at least 10 jobs in the U.S. Because of the influx of Chinese investors, the government has run out of visas under this program. The program maxes at 10,000 visas, and that quota was reached early on in the fiscal year. As of April 15, there are 13,000 pending applications for the program and approval time is expected to take two to three years.
Xenophobia spreads across South AfricaSouth Africa, which is home to an estimated 5 million immigrants from Somalia, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe and Malawi, has fallen victim to anti-immigrant violence as a result of xenophobia, or extreme dislike toward people from other countries. The violence originally started in Durban, but has spread to the city of Johannesburg. South African citizens participate in the attacks because of the rising rate of unemployment, which is currently 25 percent, and they believe it is because of the influx of immigrants. Zulu king Goodwill Zwelithini instigated the latest wave of violence after stating that immigrants should "pack their bags and go."

Load-Date: April 21, 2015


End of Document