NEWS SUMMARY
The New York Times
March 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Column 5;; Summary
Length: 928 words
Body


International     A3-15
 
CAMBODIAN PACT UNRAVELS
With elections just two months away, the United Nations effort to bring peace to ravaged Cambodia is falling far short of its goals, United Nations officials, Cambodians and foreign diplomats say.  A3
 
INDIA JITTERY OVER TERRORISM
After a wave of bombings in Bombay and an explosion in what appears to be an underworld bomb factory in Calcutta, India is jittery over possible new acts of terrorism, particularly in New Delhi.  A6
 
U.S. AIRS KOREA CONCERNS
American diplomats met with North Korean officials in Beijing to express their displeasure with North Korea's intention to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a State Department official said.  A6
 
SOMALI TALKS SUSPENDED
Somali reconciliation talks that began in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, this week were temporarily suspended after one warlord refused to participate to protest renewed fighting in Kismayu, the port city.  A7
 
IRAN NAMED AS TERRORIST THREAT
Iranian-backed militant groups have expanded their bases of support well beyond the Middle East and represent the greatest threat in a likely increase of terrorism around the world, senior U.S. officials say.  A8
 
GERMAN RACISM SAID TO DECLINE
Officials who deal with the problems of foreigners in Germany said at a conference in Weimar that racist sentiment had sharply declined in recent months.  A13
 
NATO PLANS FOR BOSNIA TROOPS
As the warring sides in Bosnia prepared for a new round of peace talks, NATO has stepped up its planning to send at least 50,000 peacekeeping troops when a settlement is reached, Western officials said.  A14
 
GEORGIAN APPEALS FOR ARMS
The Georgian leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, appealed for citizens to donate guns to fight separatists in Abkhazia, and said his country was in a virtual state of war with Russia over the region.  A14
 
Head of American University named to run U.S.I.S.  A12
Clinton delays taking an active role in Ulster.  A15
South African warns U.S. on playing favorites in his country.  A9
Kisangani Journal: Traffic halts on a river highway in Zaire.  A4
 
National     A16-20, D22
 
VOTER BILL CLEARS SENATE
After two weeks of partisan sniping, the Senate passed the "motor voter" bill. But provisions that would have permitted voter registration at welfare and unemployment offices were removed under Republican pressure.  A1
 
CLINTON TO BACK OREGON PLAN
The Clinton Administration is expected to approve Oregon's novel proposal to ration health care for poor people in the state, Federal officials said. The proposal would expand eligibility for Medicaid there while eliminating coverage of some treatments.  A1
 
THE QUALITY OF HEALTH CARE
As Americans consider a more frugal medical future, possibly dominated by competing "managed care" plans that limit consumer choice, urgent questions are rising about the quality of care and how to protect it.  A1
 
F.B.I. CHIEF IN PERIL
Administration officials say the F.B.I. Director has lost support at the White House, the Justice Department, his own agency and Congress and stands little chance of keeping his job.  A1
 
SUIT IN CULT SHOOTOUT
A Federal agent injured in the shootout with the Branch Davidians filed a civil lawsuit against a local newspaper, claiming that it had alerted members of the group to the impending raid.  A16
 
DEATH IN MISSISSIPPI JAILS
Civil rights groups and black officials started an unusual hearing into a series of deaths in Mississippi prisons. Some contended that the deaths, officially classified as suicides, were jail lynchings.  A16
 
RUNNER'S SAD STORY
Friends of a high-school track star in Philadelphia who was shot to death say they were not surprised to learn who was the main suspect in the case: her mother.  A16
 
TOO MUCH MONEY
Donald Trump and the New York financier Henry Kravis were among 10 donors who have agreed to pay penalities because they violated the $25,000 annual limit on total Federal campaign contributions.  A17
 
WAY CLEARED FOR INCINERATOR
In a setback for Al Gore, the Clinton Administration said it would not oppose the opening of a hazardous waste incinerator in Ohio.  A20
 
IT'S HUGE, FOR A BACTERIUM
Flouting the scientific wisdom that all bacteria are microscopic, researchers have discovered a strain so large that it can be seen with the naked eye.  D22
 
Studying how women are treated for heart disease.  A18
 
Metro Digest   B1
SOGGY SALUTE TO ST. PATRICK
Declaring that political correctness is not worth "one comma in the Apostles' Creed," John Cardinal O'Connor triumphantly reviewed a St. Patrick's Day Parade kept tightly secure from homosexual intruders on a raucous, rain-drenched day in which more than 200 gay and lesbian protesters were arrested in sit-ins on Fifth Avenue.  A1
 
Obituaries   B9-10
HELEN HAYES DEAD AT 92
The actress whose portrayals of Queen Victoria and other regal women helped make her one of the best-loved stars of the American stage died in Nyack, N.Y.  A1
 
Business Digest   D1
 
Home Section   C1-14
People who live a glass house (and like it).  C1
In the classroom with Mary McDonnell.  C1
Woman ponder the Rodham question.  C1
 
Arts/Entertainment  C17-24
 
Sports   B11-17
Basketball: Two key questions for St. John's in N.C.A.A. tournament.  B11
Seton Hall must be reckoned with in Southeast Regional.  B11
Football: Jets obtain Esiason from Bengals.  B11
 
Editorials/Op-Ed  A22-23
Editorials
Spooked over intelligence cuts.
Cruelty and justice in Glen Ridge.
Gideon's promise, still unkept.
Letters
William Safire: Islam under siege.
Leslie H. Gelb: Asian arms races.
Christopher Layne: Pox Americana, not Pax Americana.
Jack Bass: Impeached, then elected.

Load-Date: March 18, 1993


End of Document