News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 8, 1980
The New York Times
October 8, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 878 words
Body


Persian Gulf Conflict
Washington offered defense equipment to nonbelligerents in the Persian Gulf fighting. One week after it sent radar surveillance planes to Saudi Arabia, the United States announced that it was willing to provide similar military aid to other countries in the region as long as they stayed out of the Iranian-Iraqi conflict.  (Page A1, Column 6.)
Iraqi forces pounded Abadan, the Iranian oil refining center, with heavy artillery and air strikes as convoys of Iraqi armor reportedly crossed a frontier waterway to reinforce troops in the port of Khurramshahr. Iranian jets bombed two major Iraqi oil installations and Teheran Radio reported that Iranian gunners had shot down two Iraqi planes over Abadan. (A1:4-5.)
AN-AMost Iranians back their leaders with apparent dedication in the war effort, donating blood and cash and volunteering for military service. The residents of Teheran appear unflappable in the face of worsening shortages of food and other necessities and the increasing raids by Iraqi bombers. (A1:5-6.)
International
Greater Soviet influence in the Mideast is imminent, according to Arab diplomats, who disclosed that the Soviet Union and Syria were expected to sign a friendship treaty in Moscow today. A leading Syrian official was said to have described the accord as nearly an alliance. A moderate Arab diplomat warned that such an accord ''could legitimize Soviet intervention in a Middle East war.'' (A15:1.)
Steps to deter terrorism in Turkey were pressed by the ruling military junta, which approved execution sentences for four terrorists, two of them leftists and two rightists. No executions have been carried out in Turkey for eight years. (A7:1-3.)
Paris deplored anti-Semitic terrorism in a four-hour march by a throng of perhaps 100,000 or more. The participants expressed a repudiation of the bombing last Friday at a Jewish temple that took the lives of four people and seriously injured 10. (A1:2-4.)
National
A second Congressman was convicted of criminal charges arising from the Abscam investigation. Representative John W. Jenrette Jr., Democrat of South Carolina, was found guilty on all three counts of bribery and conspiracy by a Federal Court jury that had deliberated four and a half hours after a five-week trial. (A1:1-2.)
Ronald Reagan accused the President of reaching ''a point of hysteria'' in charging Monday that the Republican's election as President would dangerously divide the country. Mr. Carter had said that a Reagan victory might separate ''blacks from whites, Jews from Christians, North from South, rural from urban.'' (B6:1-2.)
The ''low level'' of the campaign being waged by President Carter and Ronald Reagan was deplored by John B. Anderson. The Representative said that it would attract voters to his independent candidacy for President. (B6:5-6.)
Edward Kennedy joined the President as Mr. Carter signed into law a major reorganization of Federal aid programs for mental health services. Meanwhile, the chief of the Carter campaign acknowledged that the President was trailing Ronald Reagan in the opinion polls.  (B6:2-6.)
Racial violence among Boston students snarled classes at South Boston High School, a center of trouble over court-ordered busing in the city. A brawl last Thursday between black and white pupils injured 14 young people, and most whites have refused to return to classes until metal detectors are installed in the building. (A20:1.)
Concern over depletion of ozone in the atmosphere has prompted the Environmental Protection Agency to propose a limit on the production of chlorofluorocarbons. Some scientists believe that these substances threaten to exhaust the ozone layer. Two years ago, this view led the Goverment to ban the use of aerosol products that used the flurocarbons as a propellant. (A18:1-3.)
Metropolitan
A city pension fund investment plan was disclosed by Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin. He proposed that the funds buy up to $250 million a year in federally guaranteed mortgages to help stimulate the housing market in New York City's five boroughs. If approved by the pension fund trustees, who usually follow Mr. Goldin's recommendations, the municipal unions would become in effect the mortgage holder on thousands of private houses. (A1:3.)
A study of the criminal justice system in New York City was set by Mayor Koch. Writing that the main complaint of New Yorkers is crime and the way it is policed, prosecuted, judged and punished, he has asked more than 100 top law-enforcement and judicial officials for confidential memorandums naming the people and the agencies they believe may be responsible for the failure of the system. (A1:1.)
Legislators' ownership of casino stocks was disclosed in financial statements required for New Jersey's senators and assemblymen.  Several of them own stock in gambling hotels and development companies that hope to build casinos in Atlantic City. (B3:5-6.)
New charges in the Senate race in New York were made in broadcasts.  Alphonse M. D'Amato blamed Representative Elizabeth Holtzman for ''the terror of crime'' in her Brooklyn district while the Liberal Party, which is backing Senator Jacob K. Javits, accused Mr. D'Amato of involvement in kickbacks and petty corruption. (B2:5-6.)
Business Digest, Page D1


End of Document