NEXT TASK FOR HOSTAGES: READJUSTING TO FREEDOM
The New York Times
January 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 1967 words
Byline: By DAVA SOBEL
Body


Released at last, after 14 1/2 months in captivity, the Americans who were taken hostage in Teheran are not quite home free. They face a difficult readjustment to freedom, judging by the experiences of other hostages and prisoners of war.
Speculation on the psychological aftermath for the hostages has been widespread over the last year. But psychiatrists and psychologists who have studied the reactions of hostages in other situations say it is difficult to anticipate how these hostages will react to their ordeal because so little is known about the conditions they have endured during their captivity. Moreover, the reactions that can be anticipated will be further complicated by differences in each hostage's personality and individual abilities to cope with the ordeal.
The scant available studies on past hostages' experiences suggest that the 52 coming out of Iran could experience humiliation, embarrassment, self-deprecation, nightmares, guilt, fear, family problems and physical and nervous disorders, as well as anger.
Fifty-two American hostages freed from Iran now must face difficult period of readjustment following 14 month ordeal of imprisonment
And their anger might be intensified, the experts say, by resentment of America's commitment to the late Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi and by the fact that they were ill-prepared for the possibility of capture.
 
Psychological Aid to Families
The several hundred members of the hostages' families, who have suffered from stress as they grappled with anger, anxiety, guilt and fantasies of reunion, have been advised on how to cope by mental health professionals, including some on a special State Department team.
The return of their loved ones is another stress for the families, albeit a happy one, the doctors say. The Government hopes to bring all the hostages and their families together at intervals over the coming months and years so that they will be together in positive circumstances to counter the stress of past gatherings of family members before the captives were released from Iran.
A glimpse of what the hostages have endured was provided by Richard I. Queen of Lincolnville, Me., who was released July 11 because of an illness, later diagnosed as multiple sclerosis.
Mr. Queen, who was vice consul at the American Embassy in Teheran, said at the time of his release that the hostages were often moved from place to place but were not relentlessly propagandized or subjected to physical mistreatment. He also said that, after a twomonth period that was a ''bad time,'' he became used to life as a hostage and read a great deal.
 
Ticker-Tape Parades Opposed
One of those concerned about the readjustment of the freed Americans, Dr. Herbert C. Modlin of The Menninger Foundation in Topeka, Kan., said he hoped that the nation would not celebrate the hostages' return with the ticker-tape parades and large celebrations typical of a hero's welcome. Lionizing the hostages, he feared, would again set them apart as being different.
The State Department's plans include welcoming ceremonies in Washington that are expected to last two or three days. Most of the freed hostages will then be granted a 30-day leave.
''Of course, the nation has been involved in their fate for months,'' Dr. Modlin said. ''I don't discount that for a moment. The returning hero response is perfectly natural, but it would not be the best thing for them, considering the difficult psychological work they have ahead of them.''
 
Little Known About Conditions
Brian Michael Jenkins of the Rand Corporation suggested that hostages often felt more bitterness about experiences they had after being released than while they were incarcerated. He studied 77 incidents of international terrorism that occurred between Jan. 1, 1968, and June 30, 1975. Of the 348 hostages taken in that time, 250 were released unharmed. Mr. Jenkins used interviews with 40 of them to prepare an unpublished report for the State Department and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
''Much, in some cases most, of the former hostages' anxieties and bitterness are directed not toward the kidnapping itself but toward the post-release experience,'' Mr. Jenkins said, ''specifically the treatment they received after their release.
''The former hostage feels that he has gone through an experience which no one, save perhaps another former hostage, can understand,'' he continued. ''The experience is frequently cataclysmic. It may change the hostage's outlook on life itself. Some hostages have undergone profound religious experiences or a deepening of religious faith.''
Mr. Jenkins added that embarrassment was common among hostages, while they were captives and afterward, and that feelings of guilt often arose from a sense of having ''collaborated'' with the captors more than was necessary for survival.
 
Recognition May Be Expected
''It appears in some cases that the former hostage is treated in much the same way as a rape victim,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''Both of them are told not to talk about it; the entire episode is to be swept away, kept in the closet. Both kinds of victims also tend to feel that they are on trial.''
The hostage who is kidnapped because he is a symbol of the United States Government might expect to get some official recognition for his experience, Mr. Jenkins has found.
''No one feels that being kidnapped is simply part of the job, and many resent the somewhat cavalier attitude they feel they may have received upon their return,'' he said. ''Many former hostages complained that they were treated like social pariahs, as if they were lepers. These are their own words.''
Aside from emotional scars, Mr. Jenkins reported that the hostages he spoke to had suffered nervous disorders, such as trembling hands, insomnia and memory lapses. For some, previously existing physical conditions were exacerbated by the kidnapping.
Even as long as five years later, ''anniversary reactions'' may strike the former hostages, according to Dr. Steve R. Pieczenik, a Bethesda, Md., psychiatrist and a former deputy assistant Secretary of State who specialized in crisis management and combatting terrorism.
 
Memories Could Bring Problems
Triggered by subtle cues in the environment, Dr. Pieczenik explained, memories of the event might set off physical traumas, from mild gastric distress to something as serious as a heart attack. Therefore, he recommended that the hostages' health be monitored for a protracted period.
Dr. Robert Jay Lifton, professor of psychiatry at Yale University, said in an interview that the political and historical elements of the Iranian crisis entered into the psychology of all concerned.
''America's actual history with the Shah is unfortunate,'' Dr.  Lifton said. He predicted that some of the hostages would suffer resentment of their own country, guilt and confusion if the ''facts and details of American historical involvement'' were told to them by their captors while they were under duress and in a vulnerable mental condition.
''I think it's important for their psychological well-being to be permitted to recover from their ordeal and evolve their own points of view,'' Dr. Lifton said. ''Efforts to impose points of view on them could be confusing and harmful.''
No other group of hostages in the 20-year history of modern terrorism has been held longer than 30 days, which makes the Iran situation ''very peculiar,'' according to Martin C. Arostegui of Risks International, a company in Alexandria, Va., that specializes in studying terrorism.
Ezzatt Fattah, professor of criminology at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, who cites catamnestic studies, that is, the aftereffects of victimization, as his special area of interest, expects a total recovery for the hostages.
 
Several Factors in 'Healing'
''The human psyche has a very powerful healing effect,'' Dr. Fattah said in a telephone interview. ''People are able to forget victimization, but their success in doing so depends on the amount of violence involved, the duration of the event, the treatment received, the individual's personality to begin with and how well he was prepared for this eventuality.''
Dr. Fattah said he was surprised in this instance that so few precautions had been taken to protect the American Embassy, or to provide the personnel with an escape plan. He also assailed their pre-service training as ''totally inadequate.''
Bruce Tully, a special agent with the State Department, said that such training was provided members of the foreign service in an eight-hour Counter-Terrorism Seminar, which he coordinated. The course material ranged from United States policy abroad to what to do if a bomb was lobbed into an embassy. Advice from psychologists and Government officials on how to survive being taken hostage was also included.
The State Department apparently has recognized the inadequacy of these discussions. According to Richard Higgins, a press officer for the State Department, the course has been renamed ''Coping With Violence Abroad,'' and expanded to two days of lectures, including a ''hostage survival segment designed to give information on first aid and psychological survival.'' The new course was offered for the first time early this month, Mr. Higgins said.
 
Psychiatrist Helps Families
The 29 returning hostages who are State Department employees will be seen by Dr. Herbert C. Haynes, the psychiatrist who heads the department's Mental Health Services Team. Dr. Haynes has spoken to the families of the hostages, both in Washington and by telephone, advising them on the problems they have encountered, which include insomnia, loss of appetite, depression, irritability and, for the children, problems in school.
The State Department reported recently that social workers meeting with the hostages' families have found depression to be the most common problem. The stress has been more difficult for the parents of captives than for spouses, the social workers said.
Charles R. Figley, director of the Family Research Institute at Purdue University, last winter assembled a team on ''Families of Catastrophe'' to make recommendations to the State Department about its dealings with the hostages' families. The group submitted its report last March.
The families have been told by the State Department's experts that the hostages would ''need a form of group dynamics to best face and get on with normalization later in their lives,'' Louisa Kennedy, whose husband, Moorhead, was a hostage, said in a CBS News interview Monday. ''And frankly, between you and me,'' she added, ''I think the hostage families are going to need it, too.''
Dr. Figley said that the families might have suffered more than the hostages themselves, whose major problem in the long captivity was probably boredom.
 
Reunion 'Not Immediate Solution'
Noting that the return of the hostages could potentially be as stressful as their seizure, members of the family catastrophe team reported that a reunion was not an immediate solution to pain.  However, Graham Spanier of Pennsylvania State University, another member of the team, warned against treating the families as ''emotional cripples.''
''The family is a living system,'' Dr. Figley said. ''Any time you lose or add a member, regardless of the circumstances, you need time to regain your equilibrium.''
Edna J. Hunter, director of the family research center at the United States International University in San Diego, predicted that the first two months after the reunion of the hostages and their families could be the most stressful, since they would have to relax the fantasies that they had cultivated of each other as ideal people.
''All of us come away from catastrophe with fallout,'' Dr. Figley said. ''It takes a long time to heal, but the best environment for that is a loving family.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Hostages arriving in Algiers


End of Document