NFNS feels the moves on J&K and Ladakh are decisions of political convenience
The Sentinel
August 7, 2019 Wednesday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 375 words
Byline: Our Correspondent
Body


KOKRAJHAR: The National Federation for New States (NFNS), a conglomeration of different organizations of various States that are demanding new states, expressed speculation that the creation of new Union Territory in Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh was due to increasing violence and terrorism in the valley.

The Federation, however, said it believed that the manner in which the Ministry of Law and Justice had issued the notification on Monday invoking powers under Article 370 (1) of the Constitution, it was obvious that creation of Union Territories of Ladakh without a legislature and Jammu and Kashmir with legislature was a decision of political convenience.

In a statement issued by the president of the NFNS, Swapnajit Sanyal and general secretary Promod Boro, it was stated, "It is also obvious that the Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) has sufficient majority in both the Houses to create new States/Union Territories. It is also in favour of creation of small states as per its Bhubaneswar Convention of 1996. It cannot have any excuse for not creating other states that are demanding separation from the existing ones.

"However, the present exercise gives an impression to the common man that only if there is terrorism and violence, there is a compulsion to create new States/Union Territories and they are so created. This sends a dangerous and wrong signal and can encourage violence in parts where small states are being demanded," said Swapnajit Sanyal and Promod Boro.

On the contrary, the leaders of the NFNS said the basis for creating new States/Union Territories should be to help the local people live safer, happier and more fulfilling lives.

Therefore, it was time that the government should immediately create the states of Bodoland, Gorkhaland, Vidarbha, Tipraland, and autonomous state of Karbi Anglong and consider initiation of process for creation of such other states that bring out better distribution of resources and opportunities and fully implement Article 14 of the Constitution of India, it added.

The leaders said the NFNS hoped that there would be peace in the valley and the Government of India would take care of the protection of land (from corporates), identity and culture of the indigenous population of the region.

Load-Date: August 7, 2019


End of Document