NIC to decide whether to shut Fort Sherman Institute Anti-terrorism and hostage survival school has yet to pay off for college
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 18, 2003 Saturday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 374 words
Byline: Taryn Brodwater Staff writer
Body


The fate of the Fort Sherman Institute could be decided Wednesday evening.
 North Idaho College's board of trustees is scheduled to hear a
 recommendation from NIC President Michael Burke on whether to continue
 financial support for the anti-terrorism and hostage survival school.
 By Wednesday's meeting, the institute will probably have used all of the
 $138,000 that trustees budgeted for this fiscal year, said NIC's Robert
 Ketchum.
When the institute opened in 2001, with $100,000 seed money from the
 college, it was touted as a potential moneymaker.
 But the institute has yet to deliver.
 The college has come under criticism for its funding of the institute. Last
 year, NIC covered a nearly $500,000 shortfall.
 College faculty passed a resolution in September questioning the unbudgeted
 spending at a time when tuition has increased 20 percent and college employees
 have gone without raises.
 Trustees will receive a list of clients and potential clients at
 Wednesday's meeting. That list will not be made available to the media until
 after the college's lawyer reviews it, NIC spokesman Kent Propst said Friday.
 While the list includes several public agencies, Propst said it also
 includes private businesses that might not want to be identified as clients of
 the institute.
 Recently, Sen. Mike Crapo sent a letter to the U.S. Senate's sergeant at
 arms, pushing for members of Congress to get training from the institute.
 Ketchum, who oversees the institute and its director, recommended to Burke
 that the college continue funding Fort Sherman Institute through the fiscal
 year ''or go ahead and let it close at this point."
 ''Grinding this thing along month-to-month with complete uncertainty is not
 good for client acquisition or the staff involved," Ketchum said.
 ''You can't go to federal customers and say, 'We're going to be canceled
 any moment now."'   Wednesday's meeting will also include updates on Aging
 and Adult Services; fall enrollment for NIC's Distance Education, off-campus
 and Workforce Training Center programs; and the Athletic Review Committee.
 The college's legislative agenda for the 2004 legislative session will also
 be introduced.
 The meeting begins at 6 p.m. in the Driftwood Bay Room of NIC's Edminster
 Student Union.

Notes

Taryn Brodwater can be reached at (208) 765-7121 or by email at tarynb@spokesman.com.  

Load-Date: October 22, 2003


End of Document