NIC program to offer a degree of security;
 College may be first in nation to offer course work in anti-terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 24, 2001 Wednesday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE HANDLE; Pg.B1
Length: 612 words
Byline: Julia Silverman, Staff writer
Dateline: COEUR D'ALENE
Body


Two months before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, before airport
 security workers were on the front lines and postal workers were exposed to
 anthrax, local military survival training specialist David Dose approached
 North Idaho College with an idea.
 What if the college were to become one of the first academic institutions
 in the nation to offer an anti-terrorism training program?
 After all, Dose said then, the world was changing, and it wasn't only elite
 Air Force pilots and specially trained ground forces that needed the tools to
 survive in a world where terrorism was a grim reality.
''The military and the government sometimes believe only certain folks are
 at a high enough risk to spend the money to train somewhere, but now a whole
 lot of Americans could find themselves on the front lines," Dose said.
 Even back in July, the college was intrigued. And so on Tuesday, a month
 and a half after the attacks that made Dose's point better than he ever could,
 the college announced plans to launch its new anti-terrorism and work force
 security program, officially called the Fort Sherman Institute for Human
 Protection.
 The college is putting up $100,000 to finance the program and also will
 seek private and state grants to defray costs.
 The program will be aimed at those who might confront terrorism on the job.
 That could include anyone from local law enforcement to state or federal
 agencies looking to outsource employee training, to corporate workers planning
 to travel abroad, Dose said Tuesday.
 Teachers will be members of the military and other colleagues of Dose, who
 has consulted for the Department of Defense on specialized survivor training
 while based at Fairchild Air Force Base, near Spokane.
 College officials could not find any other U.S. academic institution that
 offers a similar program, said Robert Ketchum, the college's assistant vice
 president for instruction.
 Organizers are hoping that courses will begin in the next few months, once
 enough students sign up. They envision three levels of courses, which will
 each run over a few days.
 The first level, at a cost of $900, targets those at moderate risk of
 encountering terrorism and will address anti-terrorism safety mechanisms,
 preparing for overseas travel, how to recognize threats, personal protection
 measures and the basics of surviving a hostage situation, among other topics.
 The second set of courses, for $600, is for people in more high-risk
 situations, and include sessions on how to negotiate with terrorists and
 captors, the psychology of captivity and how to understand the politics that
 surround a hostage situation.
 The third set is for agency leaders or corporate executives who may be
 responsible for setting policy on terrorism and emergency situations, and
 costs $10,000 for eight people.
 The program will be based at NIC's Workforce Training Center in Post Falls,
 and could expand to include other facets, such as:
 A yearly conference on work force protection issues in Coeur d'Alene;
 Specialized training for public school educators who are developing safety
 policies for their schools;
 A two-year degree program in transportation and airport security.
 Survival training exists in the Inland Northwest, via the survival school
 at Fairchild, but that is restricted to the military. Private companies and
 individuals do anti-terrorism and work force security work, but have few
 academic competitors.
 ''The president has called for help, the office of homeland security has
 called for ideas," said Dose, who starts work at NIC on Thursday. ''This is
 our idea. I want to see Idaho become one of the first states in the union to
 join in the campaign against terrorism."

Load-Date: October 25, 2001


End of Document