NICARAGUAN VOTE: 'FREE, FAIR, HOTLY CONTESTED'
The New York Times
November 16, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 320 words
Body


To the Editor:
Senator David Durenberger, in ''As Nicaraguans Prepare to Vote: Expect a Farce'' (Op-Ed, Nov. 2), states that opposition political rallies were ''harassed and broken up by Sandinista thugs.''
I recently spent six weeks in Nicaragua, under the auspices of the New Institute of Central America, an exchange program with headquarters in Cambridge, Mass., living with a Nicaraguan family and traveling around the country.
James Philliou letter disputes Sen David Durenberger Nov 2 Op-Ed article predicting that Nicaraguan elections would be farceI was in Masaya on Sept. 22 and witnessed one of these publicized ''harassments.''
Dr. Arturo Cruz, the leader of the Democratic Coordinadora, whom Senator Durenberger describes as a popular political figure, arrived, unannounced, and addressed about 50 of his supporters at the headquarters of the Social Democratic Party.
Within minutes, several thousand Masayans gathered and began chanting anti-counterrevolutionary slogans. I had the opportunity to talk with several of the people opposing Dr. Cruz and found that they were housewives, students, artisans, teachers and shopkeepers.
They had one thing in common: they believed that Arturo Cruz is collaborating with the Reagan Administration's effort to destabilize and ultimately overthrow the Nicaraguan Government. Many of the ''thugs'' had brothers, fathers or sons who had been killed by the U.S.-backed counterrevolutionaries, or ''contras.''
Because of the protection of the Sandinista police, Dr. Cruz delivered his speech unmolested. Among the crowd, Sandinista Front activists used their loudspeaker and credibility with the people to call for restraint and discipline.
What one participant called an effort to show Dr. Cruz that ''he can't manipulate our electoral process,'' was reported in La Prensa and by the U.S. media as an example of Sandinista ''terrorism.''
 
JAMES PHILLIOU Washington, Nov. 3, 1984


End of Document