NICARAGUAN, IN U.N., REBUKES U.S. OVER CONTRAS
The New York Times
July 2, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 520 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 1
Body


The Nicaraguan Foreign Minister told the Security Council today that the vote by the House of Representatives to provide military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels ''constitutes a declaration of war, carries with it dangerous and unforseeable consequences and is one more step in the direction of sending United States troops to Nicaragua.''
The Foreign Minister, the Rev. Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann, said that because of the vote last week to send $100 million in military and other aid, ''now United States military personnel will openly train this mercenary army and supply it with heavy weapons, transports and everything needed to implement this policy of terrorism.''
Addressing a meeting of the Security Council called by Nicaragua to expose what it called the Reagan Administration's ''aggression'' against its seven-year-old revolution, the Foreign Minister accused Washington of a policy of state terrorism in its attempt to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.
''The great North American power, which says it struggles against terrorism, has its own army of terror, paid to murder, to destroy, to terrorize,'' he said. ''We find ourselves confronted with an avoidable reality: the conversion of state terrorism into official policy and an imminent escalation of intervention by the United States in Central America.''
 
No Resolution Planned
Nicaragua will not introduce a resolution before the Council, according to Nora Astorga, the chief representative of Nicaragua.
With no pending resolution, the session will amount to little more than an ideological debate. Thirty speakers are scheduled to address the Council.
Vernon A. Walters, the chief American representative, who has spent much of the last few months on secret political missions away from the United Nations, returned today to strongly criticize Nicaraguan policy.
''It is about time we ceased being fooled by Sandinista propaganda,'' Mr. Walters said. ''It is about time we recognized that it is Nicaragua's aggression which is the source of the conflict in Central America.''
 
Refers to El Salvador
Charging Nicaragua with ''active, deliberate, substantial and sustained'' support for ''subversion'' in Latin America, Mr. Walters said Nicaragua has tried since 1979 to overthrow the Government of El Salvador. He said Honduras has also been the target of Nicaraguan subversion by means of ''hundreds of cross-border military incursions into Honduras.''
The Nicaraguan Foreign Minister, in his speech, also criticized the American rejection of the decision by the International Court of Justice against the United States last week.
The Court, the judicial arm of the United Nations, ruled that the Reagan Administration had broken international law and violated Nicaraguan sovereignty by aiding the anti-Government rebels, or contras.
''The United States Government, with this new phase in its terrorist policy, not only violates international law, not also acts directly against the Contadora peace initiative by blocking its finalization, but also opens wide the doors to a warlike escalation that could lead to a general conflagration in the region,'' he said.


End of Document