NICARAGUAN, AT A RALLY, ACCUSES U.S. OF TERROR
The New York Times
July 20, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 861 words
Byline: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, July 19
Body


President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, addressing a vast crowd on the sixth anniversary of the Nicaraguan revolution, asserted today that it was the United States, not Nicaragua, that was supporting terrorism.
The Nicaraguan leader rejected Reagan Administration charges, the latest of which were made in a diplomatic note delivered this week, that Nicaragua was backing terrorists.
''Nicaragua has neither practiced nor supported terrorism, nor has it been involved in any terrorist act,'' Mr. Ortega said.
He said Nicaraguans were ''victims of United States terrorism'' because anti-Government guerrillas backed by the United States had attacked targets inside Nicaragua.
Nicaraguan Pres Daniel Ortega Saavedra, addressing vast crowd in Managua on sixth anniversary of Nicaraguan revolution, rejects Reagan Administration charges and asserts that US, not Nicaragua, is supporting terrorism; photos (M)'Who Blew Up the Oil Tanks?'
''Who blew up the oil tanks in Corinto?'' Mr. Ortega asked the crowd as he recalled several of the most spectacular rebel attacks.
''Who mined Nicaraguan ports?'' he went on. ''Who bombed Sandino Airport? Who published the C.I.A. crime manual? So who are the terrorists?''
His references were to the Central Intelligence Agency's involvement in placing mines, a rebel bombing attack on the country's main airport by a plane purportedly provided by the C.I.A., and publication of a manual on guerrilla warfare prepared by the C.I.A. for Nicaraguan rebels.
In his speech, Mr. Ortega read from the American diplomatic note, which warned that the United States ''should be expected to react accordingly'' if American personnel in Honduras were attacked.
The note said Washington had intelligence reports indicating that Nicaraguan-backed individuals were planning such attacks. It also asserted that Nicaragua had given unspecified assistance to the Salvadoran insurgents who killed four American marines and two civilians along with seven other people in San Salvador last month.
 
World Court Ruling Is Asked
President Ortega challenged Washington to allow the International Court of Justice in The Hague to decide whether Nicaragua is terrorist or a victim of terrorism. The Reagan Administration has said the court, also known as the World Court, is not an appropriate organ to deal with such questions.
After stepping to the podium and waving his military cap, Mr. Ortega estimated that 500,000 people, nearly 20 percent of the country's population, had come to the rally celebrating the anniversary of Sandinista rule.
There was a festive air at the open plaza, where many demonstrators had arrived during the night. They gathered around picnic baskets, waved red and black flags and listened to popular Nicaraguan bands.
''It looks as if some people who should be out guarding places came here instead,'' Mr. Ortega said.
The clandestine rebel radio had threatened to disrupt observations of the anniversary, and security was heavy in Managua all week. There were no reports of rebel actions in or near the capital.
If the turnout at the rally suggested that the Sandinistas retain an enthusiastic popular base, the number of foreign dignitaries reflected problems in foreign relations. No heads of state were present, and most countries were represented by low-level delegations.
An announcer said helicopters that flew overhead included Soviet-made MI-24 gunships, considered among the most effective anti-guerrilla weapons. The MI-24's are believed to have been delivered to Nicaragua last year, but they are not known to have been used in combat and had not been shown publicly until today.
Young people, many of them Sandinista activists, dominated the crowd.
''It's a duty to be here if you are truly Nicaraguan,'' said Jorge Cruz, 14 years old, a member of the Sandinista High School Students' Association and his local Sandinista Defense Committee. He said he had come with a group of friends ''to show that we are not afraid of imperialism.''
 
Foreigners in the Crowd
Many foreigners were present, including several hundred Americans. Derrick Adams, a political activist from Oakland, Calif., said he had come to Nicaragua ''to show support for their right to decide their own future and what kind of society they want for themselves.''
Opposition leaders joined the Sandinistas this week in assessing the effect of six years of revolutionary rule. The Democratic Coordinator, a coalition of opposition groups that boycotted last year's national election, issued a statement charging that the Sandinista National Liberation Front was seeking ''to implement a totalitarian system in our country by force of arms'' and to make Nicaragua ''an instrument of Soviet imperialism.''
The opposition newspaper La Prensa said the Sandinistas deserved credit for promoting social equality, expanding women's rights, decentralizing economic power, inspiring national pride and mobilizing people to work together. But it said the Government had not dealt fairly with minorities, had alienated the Roman Catholic hierarchy, had restricted press freedom, had spent excessively on weapons and had adopted Marxist policies not appropriate for underdeveloped countries.

Graphic

 
Photo of rally marking the sixth anniversary of the Sandinista Government in Managua (Agence France Presse); Photo of Daniel Ortega addressing rally (Agence France-Presse)


End of Document