NJ Transit to address terrorism;
A study said the agency was ill-prepared to deal with an attack. Staff will get $1 million in training.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 15, 2002 Friday


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: REGION; news
Length: 308 words
Byline: Wayne Parry Associated Press
Body


NEWARK - Responding to a report that found its police force was unprepared to deal with terrorist attacks, NJ Transit will train 8,000 employees on how to prevent and respond to terrorism.
The agency will spend $1 million on the training effort, which will begin in April and last six to eight months.
The move came after William Bratton, a former New York City police commissioner hired by NJ Transit to study its police force and recommend improvements, found that the agency's police force was ill-equipped to deal with terrorism.
"As the world as we know it has changed after Sept. 11, anything we can do to better know what's happening and better prepare ourselves is invaluable," NJ Transit spokeswoman Penny Bassett-Hackett said. "It stresses the importance of making sure everyone is aware of things that could impact us and making sure we're as prepared as we can possibly be."
Kroll Inc., a New York security company, will conduct the training, which will include exercises that present employees with a hypothetical terrorist attack.
About 2,000 police officers and managers, including bus supervisors and rail superintendents, will receive eight hours of training. An additional 3,000 bus drivers, train conductors, and others who work directly with the public will get four hours of training. Support staff will get two hours, and other employees in less sensitive jobs will receive written information on security concerns.
"While the focus will be on a terrorist attack, we also want to train our employees on what is not a terrorist attack," Bassett-Hackett said. "Our mission as a transportation agency is to get people where they need to go in a safe manner, and disruptions for whatever reason interfere with that."
NJ Transit plans to seek reimbursement for at least some of the training through the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Load-Date: March 15, 2002


End of Document