NO ANSWERS ON CRASHES RUSSIANS LOOKING AT TERRORISM, OTHER POSSIBILITIES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 26, 2004 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 584 words
Byline: C.J. CHIVERS AND ERIN ARVEDLUND, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


Russian investigators scrambled yesterday to discover what caused two passenger jets to crash almost simultaneously shortly after taking off from Moscow on Tuesday night, killing at least 89 people and raising fears that terrorists might have infiltrated the nation's most modern airport in a highly coordinated act.
 As night settled over salvage crews removing human remains from debris fields where the planes came down, the authorities said they were examining a range of possible causes, including mechanical failure, bad fuel, pilot error, foul weather, sabotage and terrorism. The breadth of their list underscored that no clear causes had emerged, leaving open the possibility that the crashes had been an awful coincidence -- a case of two jetliners leaving the same airport terminal and suffering catastrophic accidents minutes apart.
Airport security was increased throughout Russia amid indications that one of the planes had been hijacked. Fears of foul play were driven not only by the improbable circumstances of the crashes but by reports that the crew of the second airliner, Sibir Airlines Flight 1047, had activated an emergency signal indicating that the plane had been hijacked just before it disappeared from radar screens.
 Ilya Novokhatsky, an executive for the Moscow office of Sibir Airlines, which owned and operated the Tupolev-154 passenger jet that crashed near the city of Rostov-on-Don en route to the Black Sea port of Sochi, said in a telephone interview that Russian authorities had notified the airline of this not long after the crash.
 Sibir Airlines also provided journalists a text of the telegram they said had been sent to the company's air traffic center from the main office of Russia's federal air traffic controllers. The telegram noted that the radar marks of the two aircraft "disappeared simultaneously." It added: "On one of them the hijack alarm worked."
 A spokesman for President Vladimir Putin, Dmitri Peskov, said he was aware of the hijack report, and that it was being investigated as part of a special commission assembled by Putin to examine the causes of the crashes.
 "We're not excluding anything," he said.
 Russian officials said flight data recorders had been recovered at both crash sites, and that an initial assessment of their contents could be available by today. There were also reports that the planes carried cockpit voice recorders as well.
 No answer seemed to provide a ready explanation, and some signs were contradictory, including witness accounts that said the jets had exploded in the air. These accounts do not square with a traditional hijacking and suggested that the aircraft might have been destroyed by devastating in-flight mechanical failures, or had been brought down by bombs.
 Russia, which has been engaged for several years in a war against rebels in its southern republic of Chechnya, has been struck by terrorism for several years. Some of the previous terror acts in Moscow -- including the bombing of an apartment building in 1999, the seizure of the Nord-Ost theater in 2002, and a subway bombing this February -- have been spectacular. But there have been no previous attacks against civilian aircraft.
 Although it has not always been clear who was behind past attacks, Shamil Basayev, an elusive one-legged commander of the rebels often falls under suspicion. Basayev took credit for planning the theater seizure and then appeared in a videotape broadcast in July, in which he vowed to continue the insurgent war.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alexander Blotnitsky/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images: WERE TERRORISTS TO BLAME?/Russian rescuers search the wreckage yesterday of the Tupolev jet that crashed near Gluboky. Investigators are trying to discover what caused two passenger jets to crash almost simultaneously shortly after taking off from Moscow on Tuesday night, killing at least 89 people and raising fears that terrorists might have infiltrated the nation's most modern airport in a highly coordinated act. (Photo, Page A-1)

Load-Date: August 26, 2004


End of Document