No bail for suspect in bombing attempt Man at Wrigley Field wanted fortune and fame, not terrorism, his supporters say.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 23, 2010 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A19
Length: 432 words
Byline: By MICHAEL TARM • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


CHICAGO - A 22-year-old Lebanese immigrant accused of placing a backpack he thought contained a bomb near Chicago's Wrigley Field is no terrorist, just someone seeking quick fortune and fame in America, his attorney and a friend said Wednesday.
But a federal judge denied bail for Sami Samir Hassoun, determining that he is dangerous and a flight risk.
"It's hard to imagine a more serious crime. ... Although it was thwarted, it had the potential to kill many people," U.S. District Judge Susan Cox said Wednesday afternoon at Hassoun's detention hearing.
Prosecutors allege Hassoun took a fake bomb given to him by undercover FBI agents and dropped it Sunday in a trash bin near the home of the Chicago Cubs baseball team. Although harmless, the device appeared ominous - a paint can fitted with blasting caps and a timer.
Earlier Wednesday, restaurant owner Joseph Abraham, a friend of Hassoun's, said that Hassoun was well-educated but also prone to big boasts, lies and bluffs. Those may have led Hassoun to plant the bogus bomb, Abraham said.
"Half of the stuff he told you you couldn't believe - lies to show people he was a big shot," said Abraham, 49. "I think what got him into trouble was he was bluffing, and he got caught in a bluff."
Outside the courtroom, attorney Myron Auerbach also described his client as prone to embellish. He said Hassoun had difficulty backing away from dangerous situations; but Auerbach insisted, "My client is not a terrorist."
The judge set Hassoun's next court date for Sept. 30. Auerbach is seeking a psychological evaluation for Hassoun, although Auerbach told the judge he believed his client was competent to stand trial.
Hassoun was charged Monday with attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction and of an explosive device. If convicted on the first charge, he could face life in prison.
An informer tipped off authorities about Hassoun. At least two FBI undercover agents then got in touch, posing as co-plotters.
The complaint also says Hassoun waffled about his plans and motivations, talking about profiting monetarily. He also discussed wanting to spark revolution in Chicago, and he spoke of poisoning Lake Michigan or assassinating Mayor Richard M. Daley.
Prosecutors told the judge Wednesday that Hassoun was deadly serious about the plot.
"This is not a matter of talk or bravado," prosecutor Joel Hammerman said. "When the moment of action arrived ... he did so without hesitation."
But Auerbach raised the possibility that authorities tried to entice his client into committing the crime. He said he was weighing a potential entrapment defense.

Load-Date: September 24, 2010


End of Document