No country will be safe from terror until all are
University Wire
September 7, 2004 Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Daily Lobo via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 296 words
Byline: By Marisa Demarco, Daily Lobo; SOURCE: U. New Mexico
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. 
Body


Two messages were prominent at the GOP convention. One was terrorism's growing presence in the world. The other was found in the president's acceptance speech, which said things were going well, and he is the best man to keep the country on track.
He's a war president, he said. He will build a safer America.
The Daily Lobo ran three briefs Wednesday related to acts of terrorism around the world. A bus explosion in Israel killed 16. A suicide bomber blew herself up outside a subway station, killing 10. Hundreds died in the school in Beslan, Russia. More reports come across the AP nearly every day.
The Lobo asked you on Friday: Can the war on terrorism be won? The problem with this question is it only skims the issue's surface. The definition of terrorism confounds how a person will answer.
Terrorism is not the result of a single ideology. It is not a simple plague that can be eliminated with enough bombs, troops or military operations. There is no antidote for terror. Terror and terrorism were redefined by America after Sept. 11, 2001, but depending on who is telling the story, terrorism can go by many names.
Just like the war on drugs, there can't be a war on terrorism. What is now called terrorism occurs around the world in various forms and is the result of long-standing, widespread political issues specific to each country it arises in.
As a result, not only can a country not win a war on terrorism, it can't really fight one. Bush has vowed to keep America safe, but no country in the world will be safe until they all are. That's not a task that calls for additional military operations.
But I do understand the problem. What would our government tell residents mourning the loss of loved ones if Beslan was a town in America?
(C) 2003 Daily Lobo via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 7, 2004


End of Document