NO CRUISE MISSILE SOLUTIONS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 27, 1995, Thursday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. C1
Length: 599 words
Byline: By ROBERT BURNS The Associated Press
Body


The Oklahoma City tragedy has pulled the rug out from under traditional ways of thinking about terrorism as a national security problem.
The unmatched might of the American military and the global reach of U.S. intelligence agencies are of little use in fighting native-born terrorists inside our own borders.
The CIA can't legally use its satellites and spies to monitor domestic hate groups, and no amount of warships, nuclear missiles and jet bombers can make a difference if the threat is a single bomb placed by homegrown terrorists.
Throughout the Cold War, national security was defined almost entirely by the fight against communist expansion, the threat of massive attack by the Soviet Union. The tools to respond were pretty obvious: armed forces to deter, and if necessary, answer an attack, and spy networks to provide warning.
The same tools were used when terrorism struck. For example, when President Reagan concluded that Libya was behind the bombing of a Berlin disco frequented by U.S. servicemen in 1986, he sent warplanes to bomb Tripoli. In June 1993, President Clinton ordered a Navy cruise missile attack on Baghdad after deciding that Iraq had tried to kill former President Bush in Kuwait.
How do you retaliate for Oklahoma City?
Perhaps more importantly, how do you get advance warning of a domestic terrorist attack in the way the CIA is supposed to warn of a foreign military attack?
"The issue of what is security has now changed," said Richard Shultz, director of international security studies at Tufts University's Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.
Terrorism, of course, has long been a threat to Americans' security. But it was assumed that the attacks would come from abroad. And so, naturally, the U.S. military and the CIA and other intelligence agencies had key roles.
Bomb attacks to make a political point certainly aren't new to this country, either. And while the Oklahoma City case is not necessarily a harbinger of more widespread domestic terrorism, the scale of the destruction from this single bomb has driven home the point that old remedies no longer apply.
Rep. Larry Combest, chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said in a recent interview that it's time to start thinking of new ways to deal with domestic terrorism, as distinct from assaults on American targets from abroad.
"With the greatest military might in the world you cannot prevent these things," the Texas Republican said, whether the terror originates at home or abroad.
Roy Godson, president of the National Strategy Information Center in Washington, told a congressional committee just days before the Oklahoma City bombing that the United States is ill-prepared to deal with nontraditional terrorism.
"We are not used to dealing with this type of threat," Godson said.
Part of the solution, he said, is to give law enforcement more powers, and to supplement that with more effective and creative use of other government agencies.
"The alternative is to be caught flat-footed again and again unable to respond until the bombs have exploded," Godson said.
As horrible as the Oklahoma City disaster was, it was not what U.S. authorities would consider a worst-case example a terrorist attack using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. It is one of the paradoxes of the post-Cold War world that while the threat of global nuclear war has all but disappeared, the risk of a terror group getting and using a nuclear bomb may have grown.
Defense Secretary William Perry has said the Pentagon sees a realistic possibility that within the next decade a terror group will use a nuclear weapon.

Load-Date: April 27, 1995


End of Document