NO DEAL ON HOSTAGES IS ONLY DEAL FOR U.S.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 4, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 522 words
Byline: William Raspberry
Body


WASHINGTON (REST) How can President Bush look at Robert Polhill and Frank Reed - sallow, emaciated and brutalized from three years' imprisonment in a Lebanese dungeon - and not do anything he can to secure the release of the remaining hostages?  The answer is that the president knows what the anguished families may find difficult to accept: The interests of the hostages must take second place to the interests of America.  To begin with, paying off participants in international terrorism only encourages more terrorism and creates a basis for more hostage-taking, whether the payoff is warmer relations between our government and theirs, intensification of pressure on Israel to hand over Moslem terrorists or the release of confiscated money to the hard-pressed Iranian government.  Furthermore, Bush realizes what his predecessor did not: There are no moderates in the Iranian regime. As Alireza Jafarzadeh of the People's Mujahedeen (the main Iranian opposition group) put it this week, President Hashemi Rafsanjani is merely ''a terrorist who has run out of ammunition.'' The terrorism continues. In recent weeks, two opponents of Tehran's fundamentalist government have been gunned down, allegedly by agents of the government. On March 14, Hossein Mir-Abedini, a senior member of the Mujahedeen, was shot by gunmen in Turkey en route to the Istanbul airport. And last week, Kazem Rajavi, the brother of Massoud Rajavi, leader of the Mujahedeen, was slain in a hail of automatic gunfire as he was driving toward his home in Geneva.
But even if the Iranian government continues terrorist attacks against the Mujahedeen, isn't it possible that Rafsanjani's desire for closer relations with the United States provides a basis for negotiating the release of American hostages?  The problem is, if hostages are allowed to be exchanged, one by one, for U.S. concessions, Iran and its collaborators will keep a supply of tradeable hostages. Indeed, that is the best explanation for the kidnapping of the present hostages.  ''The Iranians were just restocking for the time when they thought they would need more hostages to replace those who were being given away for arms (in Irangate),'' says Martin Kramer of Tel Aviv University, an acknowledged expert on Shiite fundamentalism.  Rafsanjani is asking that Bush repeat the error of the Reagan administration in dealing with Tehran. Reagan said it never occurred to him that he was offering arms for hostages. Bush would be under no such illusion.  If he offers concessions for the release of two hostages, he would be hard-pressed to withhold further concessions for more hostages. And if that happens, Iran and its co-conspirators would be foolish to give up all the hostages until they got everything they wanted.  Bush, to his credit, has played it just right - a restrained thanks to Iran and Syria for their role in securing the release of Polhill and Reed, coupled with a firm ''no deal.'' The message from the White House is clear and correct: The easiest way for Iran and Syria to gain international respect is to act respectably.  Copyright 1990 Washington Post Writers Group

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document