No excusing domestic terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 3, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 4
Length: 433 words
Byline: the TH Editorial Board
Body


where we stand A tax protester's suicide attack against the Internal Revenue Service, which killed one government employee, was an outrage. For an Iowa congressman to excuse it in any way is unconscionable. Less than two weeks ago, a tax protester locked in a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service burned his house and then crashed his airplane into a Texas office building housing IRS employees. 
One government worker was killed and more than a dozen injured. The toll does not include the uninjured who are left traumatized by the experience. And, of course, the service center in Austin sustained extensive damage. In some quarters, pilot Joseph Stack is being regarded as a hero for the anti-tax cause. Had the pilot been with al-Qaida, the attack would have been described as terrorism. But since the man responsible was an American enraged over his debt, he's a hero? That's an outrage. Think and say what you will about U.S. tax law or the IRS. But to kill and wound Americans in the cause is an outrage. Then, just in case matters aren't bad enough, we have U.S. Rep. Steve King offering excuses or justification for murder. That's unconscionable. An interviewer asked King, a longtime opponent of the IRS and one-time target of an IRS audit, about the Austin attack. He said in part: "I think if we had abolished the IRS back when I first advocated it, he wouldn't have had a target for his airplane. And I'm still for abolishing the IRS." After explaining how he thinks a national sales tax is the better option, King continued: "It's sad that this happened down in Texas, but by the same token the IRS is an agency that is unnecessary, and when the day comes when we abolish the IRS it will be a happy day for all Americans." That's it? The attack is "sad," but the victims had it coming because they work for the federal government? Let's see. There are some Americans who hold federal lawmakers in low esteem. Does that mean they are free to physically attack elected officials, their aides or their families? Meet Vernon Hunter. A 20-year military veteran who served two tours in Vietnam. Family man. Volunteer safety coordinator at work. A guy who, on a hot day, took Gatorade to the trash collectors working his neighborhood. Church usher. And, since the mid-1990s, Vernon Hunter was an IRS employee. He was a collections manager. For that "offense," Joseph Stack killed him. Heaven help our democracy when members of Congress try to explain away acts of domestic terrorism. The ends do not justify the means. Editorials reflect the consensus of the Telegraph Herald Editorial Board.

Load-Date: March 3, 2010


End of Document