NO END IN SIGHT FOR BASQUE TERRORISM
The New York Times
August 24, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1430 words
Byline: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BILBAO, Spain
Body


A recent surge in terrorism by the Basque separatist group E.T.A. has underlined how the 18-year-old group remains one of the most effective and elusive terrorist organizations in Europe and a thorn for Spain's young democracy.
An army colonel was shot and killed near here this month. Since mid-July, 12 members of the paramilitary Civil Guard were killed by a car bomb in Madrid, an E.T.A. squad staged a grenade attack against the Defense Ministry and two guardsmen were killed by a booby-trap bomb near this Basque industrial city.
According to the police, 32 people have died in E.T.A. attacks since the beginning of the year.
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez, vowing to wipe out E.T.A., has counterattacked with increased police force, offers of limited amnesty and heightened cooperation from France in handing back terrorist suspects and closing an E.T.A. sanctuary there.
No End Is in Sight
But although E.T.A. appears weakened, officials say no end to the violence appears in sight. The crackdown has aggravated bitter historical differences between Madrid and the Basque region, apparently fanning what had been shrinking popular Basque sympathy for the group.
Worse, according to many Basques in this mountainous region of green-hued valleys and gritty industrial seaports, the violence has deepened an economic crisis and demoralized many of the more than two million Basques.
''The society is traumatized,'' said Jose Maria Vizcaino, president of the Basque Business Confederation. ''People are quick to radicalize. Labor problems turn to burning trucks right away. Demonstrations quickly become violent. Police overreact.''
The region is hardly terrorized. The area around the scallop-shaped Bay of San Sebastian is jammed with Spaniards on vacation.
But hardly a day has gone by in the last month that E.T.A. sympathizers have not demonstrated. A street festival in Vitoria, the Basque capital, turned into an all-night melee as E.T.A. sympathizers threw firebombs and nearly 100 people were injured.
 
Terrorism Began in 1968
Terrorism by E.T.A., whose initials in the Basque language stand for Basque Homeland and Freedom, began in 1968 against the dictatorship of Francisco Franco. For centuries, Castillian monarchs had stood before a still-revered oak stump in Guernica and sworn to respect limited Basque autonomy. Franco, reflecting old fears in Madrid of Basque independence, ended the autonomy and even banned the use of the Basque language.
Since Franco's death in 1975, Spain's democratic Governments have moved to restore autonomy, and the Basques and people in other regions have increasingly taken on the power to raise taxes, control schools and the like.
But E.T.A. has refused to recognize that Spain has changed. Of the 523 people killed by E.T.A. in the last 18 years, about 480 fell victim after Franco died, according to the Interior Ministry.
In addition to amnesty for itself and the withdrawal of Spanish police forces from the Basque region, E.T.A. has demanded Basque self-determination, leftist economic programs and the incorporation of neighboring Navarre into the Basque domain. Navarre has a large but minority Basque population. Most Basques Reject E.T.A.  Opinion polls show that most Basques reject E.T.A., but efforts to root it out are complicated by support for the group from a leftist political party called Herri Batasuna. The party won 17 percent of the Basque vote in June elections and jumped from two to five seats in Parliament.
In Herri Batasuna's bare, walk-up headquarters here, a poster showed a rifle scope's crosshairs on a Civil Guardsman's back. A Member of Parliament, Jon Ydigoras, a lean former steelworker, said the party was not the political arm of E.T.A. but did share ''parallel programs.''
He also justified E.T.A.'s violence. ''What others consider terrorism,'' he said, ''is for us an armed response to the Spanish Government.''
In the words of a former E.T.A. member, it is a response of ''white-glove terrorism.'' More than two-thirds of the group's victims have been policemen, military men or top businessmen.
 
No 'Anti-American Stuff'
''One of E.T.A.'s strengths is that it keeps its objectives focused,'' a Western intelligence analyst said. ''They don't mess around with this anti-imperialist, anti-American stuff. They go straight for what they say oppresses them - the Civil Guard and the Spanish Government.''
The police admit they know little about the group's internal workings. Estimates of the number of members range from 200 to 500, organized in cells. Only several dozen, however, are thought to be gunmen. The rest are believed to provide arms, false documents and other support. Spanish and other Western experts say a directorate of 8 to 10 men oversees E.T.A., but there is little information on who or where they are.
Many of the group's members are university dropouts, say people who have studied the group. Witnesses of E.T.A. shootings are often surprised that the gunmen seem clean cut. One woman often accompanies two men in a hit squad.
Spanish jails hold nearly 500 people convicted of being E.T.A. members, but recruiting appears to continue apace. Apparently adding to its attraction to many youths is a 22 percent official Basque unemployment rate, 2 points above the national average, as the region's old industries like steel and shipbuilding decline.
 
International Links Fade
In its early years, E.T.A. was closely linked with the Irish Republican Army, and some members were trained in Southern Yemen and Libya, according to experts on the group. But after several ideological schisms, the surviving faction, called E.T.A. Militar, has forsaken most international links.
Spanish officials and Western experts say the group is now is almost exclusively home trained and home financed, getting money from robberies, kidnappings and a ''revolutionary tax'' extorted from businessmen.
Ramon Jauregui, Madrid's representative in the Basque region, acknowledges that the Government's Civil Guard campaign against E.T.A. is hindered because many Basques resent the Guard as Franco's old enforcers.
Although torture is much reduced from the days of Franco, Amnesty International and moderate Basque leaders say beatings and the use of electric shocks are not uncommon. Many of the abuses are said to take place during the 10 days that an E.T.A. suspect can be held incommunicado under a new anti-terrorist law, which is popularly opposed here as discriminatory.
''If an E.T.A. member knocked on the door and said the police were chasing him, 80 percent of the Basque people would hide him,'' said Iosu Pascual, a Herri Batasuna city councilor in Renteria.
 
French Cooperation Grows
The new hope of Prime Minister Gonzalez lies in French cooperation. The conservative Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, moving to shut down an E.T.A. base in France, has deported 5 of the nearly 700 self-exiled Basques there back to Spain in the last few weeks, ordered many others to leave and exiled to Gabon a suspected top E.T.A. leader, Domingo Iturbe Abasolo.
But moderate Basque leaders say the Spanish and French crackdowns are doomed to fail. ''E.T.A. has considerable social support in Herri Batasuna, which is why you can't overcome it with just police means,'' said Juan Maria Bandres, head of the pacifist Basque Left Party.
Xabier Arzallus, head of the governing, moderate Basque Nationalist Party, said E.T.A. had been in touch with him about a possible negotiated end to the fighting. He and other moderates flatly oppose E.T.A. negotiations on political matters. But they said the group was weakened and appeared willing to talk on more limited concerns such as amnesty.
''E.T.A.'s offers are very acceptable,'' Mr. Arzallus said. ''But Madrid thinks it can force a surrender, which E.T.A. will never do.''
Mr. Gonzalez set off a bitter political debate here this month when he refused any negotiation.
 
A Larger Disillusionment
For many Basques, meanwhile, the bickering is part of larger disillusionment. They say verbal attacks by and against Madrid and jealous rivalries among the moderates reflect an irresponsible lack of unity and leadership, allowing E.T.A. and Herri Batasuna to step into the breech.
''Madrid is inflexible because basically it does not trust Basque intentions,'' said Alejandro Echevarria, editor of Correo Espanol, a leading newspaper here. But he said moderate Basque leaders fed that suspicion by being ambiguous in terming Basque independence both desirable and impractical.
''In the end,'' he said, ''the problem is Basque identity. Where are we going? What do we want?''

Graphic

 
Photo of graffiti on a plaza in Bibao, Spain with background writing listing the demands of E.T.A., the Basque terrorist group (NYT/Edward Schumacher)


End of Document