No Freedom for Man Staying Silent in Terrorism Inquiry
The New York Times
June 22, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 781 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


A Federal judge in Manhattan has refused to free an Orlando, Fla., man who was jailed last month for refusing to testify before a Federal grand jury investigating Osama bin Laden and his suspected role in worldwide terrorism.
The judge, Robert P. Patterson Jr., issued his order last Wednesday, after the witness, Ihab M. Ali, reiterated in court that he would not testify. Mr. Ali had earlier cited religious reasons as a basis for his refusal and has been held in the Metropolitan Correctional Center since May 19. The case had been handled under a secrecy order until last week's hearing. A transcript was made public yesterday.
The jailing of Mr. Ali is just one of the latest developments in the Federal investigation of Americans who are suspected of involvement with Mr. bin Laden, a Saudi exile. He has been indicted in the bombings of United States embassies last August in Kenya and Tanzania as well as other acts of terrorism.
Last week, for example, the Government revealed for the first time that it was investigating "co-conspirators" of Mr. bin Laden in Orlando, Fla., according to a newly released indictment. Prosecutors have also been investigating people in Arlington, Tex., and in California, records show.
In recent months, moreover, a number of Muslims from Texas, the Washington area and California have been subpoenaed by the grand jury or questioned by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, according to some of their lawyers.
"They want to see if there's a network here," said Lynne F. Stewart, who represents Khader Ibrahim, a Texas man who testified for several hours last week.
Ms. Stewart said that Mr. Ibrahim, a friend of Wadih el-Hage, a Texan who has been indicted and is in custody, had nothing to hide. "He is a small businessman who befriended a fellow Muslim, and that's where it begins and where it ends," she said.
Ms. Stewart and two other lawyers who said their Muslim clients had been questioned or subpoenaed, criticized the breadth of the investigation.
Stanley L. Cohen, who represents Moataz Al-Hallak, the imam of the Islamic Society of Arlington, Tex., where Mr. el-Hage was a member, said his client considered refusing to testify. But Mr. Al-Hallak then decided to answer the questions "because he felt an imperative that the grand jury get a view of his world," Mr. Cohen said, "a view that they were otherwise denied, that as a man, a Muslim, an imam, a community leader, there's nothing to fear from him."
Mr. Cohen added: "He wouldn't know Osama bin Laden if he knocked at the door and tried to sell him cookies."
Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, had no comment on the criticism or the case.
The five defendants who are in custody in New York are scheduled to appear for arraignment today before Judge Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court. Nine other defendants, including Mr. bin Laden, remain at large, while another is fighting extradition from Britain.
The indictment released last week does not indicate how many people are being investigated in Orlando or elsewhere, but suggests that prosecutors suspect there was an active cell in Florida.
It says, for example, that in February 1997, an unnamed conspirator in Orlando wrote a letter in code to Mr. el-Hage -- who is described as Mr. bin Laden's former personal secretary -- volunteering "to help bin Laden."
Several months later, the indictment says, a conspirator in Orlando -- it does not say whether this was a different person -- sent a coded message to Mr. el-Hage to tell Mr. bin Laden "to be careful about possible apprehension by American authorities."
The indictment does not say whether Mr. Ali, the Orlando man who was jailed for refusing to testify, is one of the conspirators.
Mr. Ali's lawyer, Ashraf W. Nubani, said his client denies any wrongdoing. He said that Mr. Ali refused to testify last May 19 for religious reasons, based on his conviction that he should not answer questions that could unjustly harm other Muslims. In court last Wednesday, after Mr. Ali again refused to testify, Mr. Nubani renewed his arguments to Judge Patterson, the transcript shows, adding that Mr. Ali also feared for the safety of his family in Egypt and mistrusted the Government's motives.
Mr. Nubani said that his client believed that the Government was using "guilt by association" to harass Muslims, the transcript shows.
A Federal prosecutor, Michael J. Garcia, told Judge Patterson that the Government had offered Mr. Ali the possibility that he and his family could enter the Witness Protection Program.
But Mr. Nubani said that his client would not change his mind and that he himself would continue to seek Mr. Ali's release.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 22, 1999


End of Document