NO FAIL-SAFE SECURITY;
CONGRESS SHOULD RESIST RUSH TO EXPAND ANTI-TERRORISM LAWS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 30, 1996, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 435 words
Body


If the FBI had been authorized to tap every public telephone in Atlanta, it might have prevented Saturday's bomb explosion at Centennial Olympic Park that killed two people and injured 111.
But then, it might not. There is no doubt, though, it would have violated the privacy of countless innocent U.S. citizens.
With public anger and revulsion soaring in the aftermath of the Atlanta bombing and the TWA jumbo jet disaster, President Clinton has called on Congress to expand federal wiretapping powers, something lawmakers properly refused to do last spring.
Mr. Clinton also urged Congress to require taggants - chemicals added to explosives that permit them be to be traced after they have been detonated in black and smokeless powders. This is a sensible provision the president failed to get in his original anti-terrorism bill.
The existing anti-terrorism law requires that taggants be used in all plastic explosives, but not in common explosives, such as the powder used in the Atlanta bomb or chemicals used to make the bomb that destroyed the Oklahoma City federal building.
The president's request for authority to permit the FBI to conduct ''roving wiretaps'' on all telephones used by a suspected terrorist was opposed by an unusual coalition of conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats who correctly argued that the proposal was an intrusion of privacy that would encroach on constitutionally protected liberties of America's citizens.
What was true in the spring is just as true today. The freedoms that Americans enjoy undoubtedly make the nation vulnerable to terrorism, both domestic and international. But if those freedoms are surrendered in the name of security, terrorists would gain a greater victory than they dared to dream.
The security measures taken in Atlanta for the Olympic Games were extraordinary. Yet, the unthinkable happened, dispelling any lingering notion that America was immune from random terroristic violence.
There is little doubt that there will be demands for increased security at public events in the future. Measures such as searches and identification checks, traditionally abhorred by Americans, must be endured if they discourage terrorist acts.
Congress and the American people should realize, however, that there are limits to what can be done. No amount of troops, metal detectors or identification checks can assure absolutely fail-safe protection for the public.
 
A stampede to enact new and dubious anti-terrorism laws - greatly expanded wiretap authority for the federal government, among them - could do great harm to civil liberties.  Let's not overreact.

Load-Date: August 2, 1996


End of Document