No goal Security kills civil liberty in Boston
The Breeze: James Madison University
April 22, 2013 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 479 words
Byline: By Lucas Wachob | Contributing columnist
Body


After a horrific crime like the Boston Marathon bombing, it's natural to try to find a moment of reassurance: in our strength, our security and our way of life. That's why the outpouring of relief and congratulations to police officers among Americans following the capture of the second bomb suspect isn't surprising. However, we also need to look critically at this manhunt and what it suggests about the poor state of law and civil liberties in America.
Boston made serious sacrifices of their civil liberties to accomplish a relatively unremarkable feat. It's not deeply impressive to me that thousands of police, given 22 hours and to patrol a shut-down city, apprehended one teenager who had escaped from a shootout the night before where his older brother was killed. 
Millions were ordered to stay locked inside, SWAT teams marched door-to-door, public transportation was shut down and major events were postponed or canceled. Without evidence linking the bombing to international terrorism, what was the justification for this? 
Our rights and our expectations about our rights have undeniably eroded in the face of security concerns in the past two decades. It seems that because this attack "smelled" like foreign-orchestrated terrorism, we let Boston become a warzone in search of one criminal. Opponents of the Patriot Act and the War on Terror warned us a decade ago that seemingly temporary abridgements of our rights, even in the name of fighting a legitimate evil, would create intolerable avenues for the expansion of permanent state power. And indeed, a decade later, with the hunt for one murderous teenager prompting the shutdown of a major American city, we see before our eyes the lowering of the bar for totalitarianism. 
There are certainly aspects of the tragedy worth taking pride in. The first responders and the cops who ran toward the explosion to help are heroes, no doubt. The police should be commended for apprehending Dzhokhar Tsarnev alive, giving us a chance to learn a lot more about what happened and why. And I'm sure there are countless stories of people helping each other during the crisis that we won't hear during coverage of police chases and interrogations.
None of this, however, negates or contradicts that the handling of the Boston Marathon bombing shows a nation eager to exercise police power, and a populace willing to accept it, with the Constitution regarded as little more than a contemptible speed bump. When we remember the Boston Marathon bombing, we'll undoubtedly recall the horror of the bombs, the tragedy of the killed and wounded, the heroics of the responders and the fear and thrill of the manhunt. 
We must not forget the less visceral, but equally important, sides of the story: the continued erosion of due process and civil liberties, and the expansion of a muscular security state that hasn't proven its value.

Load-Date: January 16, 2018


End of Document