NO INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ISIS IN SIGHT
Tampa Bay Times
October 13, 2017 Friday
Politifact.com Edition


Copyright  2017 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 0; POLITIFACT
Length: 434 words
Byline: ALLISON COLBURN
Body


Call for an international conference to defeat ISIS
"As president, I will call for an international conference focused on this goal. We will work side-by-side with our friends in the Middle East, including our greatest ally, Israel."
* * *
Sources:
A campaign rally in Youngstown, Ohio
Subjects: Terrorism
* * *
Trump-O-Meter: STALLED
As part of his counterterrorism plan, President Donald Trump promised he would convene a conference between world leaders to help develop a coordinated plan to defeat ISIS.
"As president, I will call for an international conference focused on this goal," Trump said during a campaign speech in Youngstown, Ohio. "We will work side-by-side with our friends in the Middle East, including our greatest ally, Israel. We will partner with King Abdullah of Jordan, and President Sisi of Egypt, and all others who recognize this ideology of death that must be extinguished."
No such conference has taken place, and the White House didn't respond to our request for a status update.
So we took a look at what Trump has done so far to help bring international counterterrorism efforts to the same table.
In the past year, Trump has met with world leaders on dozens of occasions to discuss terrorism and other global issues, including meetings with King Abdullah II and Egyptian President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi.
He also reaffirmed the United States' commitment to counterterrorism at the G20 summit in July and has pushed NATO to increase its counterterrorism spending and efforts.
In May, Trump toured Europe and the Middle East, where he called for international cooperation to fight terrorism. During his stop in Riyadh, Trump signed a $110 billion arms deal with the Saudi Arabian government and, along with Sisi and Saudi King Salman bin Abdulaziz, inaugurated the Global Center for Combating Extremist Ideology, which monitors terrorist propaganda.
These regular conferences and meetings with foreign leaders are typical for a U.S. president.
But we haven't yet seen any initiative to bring world leaders together for a conference to discuss terrorism. We'll look for any updates on this promise, but for now we it Stalled.
* * *
Sources:
Search of WhiteHouse.gov archives, conducted Oct. 11, 2017
G20 Germany 2017, "The Hamburg G20 Leaders' Statement on Countering Terrorism," July 2017
The Atlantic, "So, What Was the Deal With the Orb?" May 22, 2017
The Wall Street Journal, "Trump Voices Commitment to NATO," April 12, 2017
The Economist, "What did Donald Trump achieve in the Middle East?" May 25, 2017
Foreign Policy, "Trump's 'Secret Plan' to Defeat ISIS Looks a Lot Like Obama's," May 31, 2017

Graphic

 
VIDEO

Load-Date: October 17, 2017


End of Document