No litmus tests for FBI's anti-terror jobs; Supervisors are not mandated to have a background in Arabic, the Middle East or international issues
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 22, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. e15
Length: 508 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


FBI Director Robert Mueller says he doesn't believe his counterterrorism supervisors need to have a background in Arabic, the Middle East or international issues.
"Let me tell you that we want to develop that within the bureau, but making that an absolute requirement - if you do not have it you would be precluded from advancing in counterterrorism - no," Mueller testified recently in an employment lawsuit.
Mueller described his own expertise in Middle Eastern terrorism as having been "relatively limited" when he took over the FBI a week before the Sept. 11 attacks.
Mueller also testified he didn't give any guidance to his top managers to seek out the bureau's most experienced counterterrorism agents to work on the war on terror immediately after Sept. 11, saying he expected those managers to make good choices.
"It was in their hands as to how they did that," Mueller said in a wide-ranging deposition obtained by The Associated Press. Some supervisors were brought in without any terrorism training while some agents who were more knowledgeable about al-Qaida were brought from New York to work on the suicide hijackings investigation, officials said.
Most of the men Mueller appointed to run the war on terror testified that they didn't believe Middle East and terrorism experience had been important for choosing the agents they promoted, the AP reported Sunday.
Gary Bald, the bureau's executive assistant director in charge of terrorism, testified he had to get his terrorism training on the job when he came to headquarters two years ago. When asked about his grasp of Middle Eastern culture and history, he replied: "I wish that I had it. It would be nice."
When shown Bald's statements, Mueller defended his selection by saying Bald had run the FBI's Baltimore office, which had a counterterrorism program, and also had run the Washington sniper shootings investigation.
"Running the office gave him some exposure to terrorism," Mueller answered. "Yes, I think absolutely it would give, contribute to his ability to handle counterterrorism."
The testimony was given in a lawsuit brought against the FBI by agent Bassem Youssef, considered by some to be one of the FBI's most accomplished pre-Sept. 11 terror-fighting agents. He claims he was passed over for top jobs in headquarters despite his expertise.
The testimony has concerned both Republicans and Democrats in the Senate, who are comparing the FBI's actual practices in the war on terror with its sworn promises to Congress and the American public.
"Why would the FBI hire people to run the counterterrorism division who don't know anything about counterterrorism?" Senate Finance Committee Chairman Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, a frequent FBI critic, asked Monday.
After conducting interviews with FBI field agents in the war on terror, the staff of the independent commission that reviewed Sept. 11 failures reported, "Many field agents felt the supervisory agents in the counterterrorism division at headquarters lacked the necessary experience in counterterrorism to guide their work."

Load-Date: June 22, 2005


End of Document