No negotiations until terrorism ends - Correction Appended
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,; LETTERS
Length: 270 words
Body


TO THE EDITOR:
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is correct when he says no negotiations until the terrorism stops. Terrorism, violence or anti-Semitism are not gestures of peace.
#FALTER.MAYBT#
Recently, Mahmoud Abbas, the New Palestinian Prime Minister, made some remarks about the road map to peace, stating that Israel must accept it without conditions because the United States has and because he, alone, cannot stop the violence because of ongoing Israeli military operation. That's nonsense.
Let's get some facts here: Most of those who make up the Palestinian Authority are the ones involved in terrorism. There would be no military operations by the Israelis if there were no suicide bombings, which is terrorism by Palestinians against Israelis.
Mahmoud Abbas has to dictate not to Ariel Sharon about accepting the road map without conditions, but should be dictating to Arafat and the Palestinians what course of action they should be taking.
Arafat personally ordered a terrorist act at Kfar train station that killed one more Jew the same day Abu Mazen took office -- an act just to let everybody know he still controls things. At the same time, he showed that Abbas is irrelevant.
Also, Hamas spiritual leader Yassin rejected the road map, saying it was a plan to liquidate the Palestinian cause. What cause? The cause of terrorism and violence against Israel.
Both these leaders discredited Mahmoud Abbas. Sharon was right -- you cannot have peace until you have a partner for peace. Listen to him! If anything, Arafat and Hamas should both be made irrelevant and be eliminated!
Charlie Faltermayer
New Providence
Correction

The letter should have read: "Recently, Mahmoud Abbas, the new Palestinian prime minister, made some remarks about the road map to peace, stating Israel must accept it without conditions because he and the Palestinians cannot stop the violence because of ongoing Israeli military operation. That is nonsense."
Correction-Date: June 5, 2003

Load-Date: June 13, 2003


End of Document