NO ONE WANTED THE MAN ONCE MOST FEARED
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
August 16, 1994, Tuesday


Copyright 1994 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Nation-World; Pg. A3
Length: 645 words
Byline: NEWSDAY
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

-- In the end, Carlos became a pitiful caricature of his youth, a besotted, womanizing and increasingly careless gun-for-hire whom nobody wanted to employ.
The mastermind behind some of the most audacious terrorist acts of the 1970s, he spent the last decade in Syria trying unsuccessfully to sell his services to his hosts or anyone else, according to U.S. officials and counterterrorism specialists. He became more and more erratic and visible to intelligence services as time went on.
"He was an old man dreaming the dreams of his youth," said Vincent Cannistraro, who retired in 1990 as director of the CIA's counterterrorism center. "He kept coming up to the Syrians with all sorts of ideas, and the Syrians would say, 'Yeah, and now go back home and be a good boy.' "
Another ex-CIA officer remembers Carlos the Jackal when he was the world's most-feared terrorist. "To some extent he portrays himself as a revolutionary, and to some extent he is a hired gun. But he is a hell of a good pro and he's been able to pull off these things rather successfully," said David Whipple, a former national intelligence officer for counterterrorism. "He is unmatched in his field. He has been out in it so long, he's been guilty of so many outrages that he is unmatched."
In the early 1980s, the Syrians gave Carlos safe haven for services that included the bombing in Paris in 1982 of an anti-Syrian newspaper that resulted in the death of a woman. The French want to try him on that charge. He already has been sentenced in absentia to life imprisonment for the killing of two French security officers who wanted to question him about missile attacks on airliners at Orly Airport in 1975.
Other radical Moslem countries also rejected his services. Even the Iranians turned him down two years ago for being "too communist and too atheist," said an intelligence official.
So Carlos, who had a soft spot for scotch, went on extended drinking binges, frequently assaulted his wife, the former Magdalena Kopp, once a German Red Army Faction terrorist, and would attack close friends, the U.S. sources said.
He was also indiscreet in his trysts, and Mideast intelligence services routinely tracked his whereabouts as he consorted with other women. When he was arrested in Sudan, he was living with another "wife," a Jordanian.
"It's fair to say that at some point he became kind of an embarrassment to the Syrians," a State Department official said.
In addition, according to Donald Winters, a recently retired 33-year veteran CIA officer, "terrorism is no longer in vogue." So, bowing to pressure from the French, Syria finally booted him out last winter.
Two decades ago many terrorists clamored for his services, particularly secular ones whose objective was the creation of a Palestinian state.
The son of a Marxist Venezuelan lawyer, Carlos was born in October 1949 as Ilich Ramirez Sanchez. After some schooling on revolutionary thought and practices in Cuba and Moscow, Carlos cut his teeth on terrorism in the early 1970s when he joined the rejectionist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.
His first two terrorist acts were botches.
On Dec. 30, 1973, he shot a prominent Zionist, Edward Sieff, the president of the Marks and Spenser department stores in London. But the one round hit Sieff's front teeth, deflecting much of its power. The second round jammed. Sieff survived.
The following month Carlos threw a bomb at an Israeli bank in London. But his aim was hurried and the bomb bounced off a door. The explosion was absorbed by a counter; a typist was injured.
His most spectacular feat was the kidnapping of ministers from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries at its headquarters in Geneva in 1975. While some have ascribed the the massacre at the 1972 Munich Olympics to Carlos, intelligence officials and the Israelis say he was not a part of that operation.

Load-Date: April 17, 1995


End of Document