No one said fighting terrorism would be easy ; On the anniversary of Sept. 11, we must hold sacred our freedoms as we fight to protect them
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 11, 2003 Thursday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a4
Length: 359 words
Byline: TELEGRAPH HERALD EDITORIAL
Body


In the two years after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Americans have learned some hard lessons.
We have discovered that rooting out terrorism is harder than anyone - including President Bush - would have believed.
That does not mean the action taken so far has been wrong. The American military toppled the Taliban and at least forced Saddam Hussein underground. Our leaders should be commended for going after these people.
But the war is not over. Unfortunately, the end is not in sight.
As we remember the victims in New York, in Pennsylvania and in Washington, D.C., American soldiers are attacked as they work to maintain order in Iraq. In the last month alone, four massive bombs in Iraq have killed or wounded hundreds and destroyed the U.N.'s Baghdad headquarters.
When it comes to declaring war on terrorism, the clich is true: It is easier said than done.
The military is not the only entity paying a price. Citizens are paying - literally. President Bush this week requested another $$ @87 billion for the chore. 
With rising costs and casualties, it is understandable that many Americans question the manner in which the war on terrorism is being pursued. These citizens should not be dismissed as unpatriotic or sympathetic toward terrorists.
In America, there is room for more than one opinion on how to best combat terrorism. Opposing views do not threaten the process; indeed, if considered, they could improve it. Democracy depends on many and varied voices.
Likewise, Americans should be extremely cautious about government taking away constitutional rights under the guise of fighting terrorism. Because someone speaks up and challenges an unconstitutional move, such as those found in the Patriot Act, does not mean that person is soft on terrorism. Neither Attorney General John Ashcroft nor any other government official should be allowed to set standards for patriotism - defined as whether a citizen agrees with the official.
On the second anniversary of the events that changed the United States - and all Americans - forever, it is vital to remember that constitutional freedoms should not be a casualty in the war on terrorism.

Load-Date: September 11, 2003


End of Document