No Playing a Tough Guy This Time
The New York Times
October 29, 2020 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 29
Length: 1095 words
Byline: By Peter Beinart
Body


In 2016, he benefited from voters' fear of terrorism. But this year, Americans are more worried about threats closer to home.
The presidential debate on Thursday between Donald Trump and Joe Biden featured a glaring absence: Neither candidate mentioned Mosul. In their final showdown four years ago, Mr. Trump and Hillary Clinton name-checked that Iraqi city -- from which the United States had recently helped expel the Islamic State -- a whopping 23 times. 
  Mosul's newfound obscurity illustrates a shift that jeopardizes Mr. Trump's re-election. He's running in the first presidential compaign of the post-''war on terror'' era.
  It's hard to overstate how much jihadist terrorism has receded from public consciousness over the past four years. In July 2016 -- when the Islamic State still controlled large swaths of Iraq and Syria, and had recently inspired gruesome attacks in Europe and the United States -- Americans told the Pew Research Center that they considered terrorism the election's second most important issue, after the economy. When Pew posed the same question this summer, terrorism wasn't even on its list of options. When Pew asked Americans in 2016 which topics they wanted to hear about most in the presidential debates, ''keeping the U.S. safe from terrorism'' came in first. In this year's two presidential debates, the word ''terrorism'' hasn't been uttered.
  Four years ago, the public's anxiety about terrorism benefited Mr. Trump. During the primaries, his poll numbers spiked after attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif. During the general election, he benefited as well. It wasn't because his counterterrorism agenda was more credible than Hillary Clinton's. Nor was he, by conventional standards, necessarily more hawkish. What he proposed was a kind of vengeful retrenchment. His vow to ''bomb the hell out of'' the Islamic State -- even as he denounced Mrs. Clinton for supporting the Iraq invasion -- appealed to voters exhausted by America's protracted wars in the Middle East yet still terrified by jihadist terrorism.
  Mr. Trump's bluster, combined with his party and gender, made him seem more hawkish. And when Americans fear foreign dangers, candidates who appear more hawkish generally prosper. As Shana Kushner Gadarian, a political scientist at Syracuse University, has concluded after surveying American elections between 1980 and 2004, ''in a threatening environment, Americans reward candidates and parties perceived to hold hawkish positions'' and ''punish candidates perceived to be dovish.'' In 2016, according to exit polls, voters who deemed terrorism ''the most important issue facing the country'' favored Mr. Trump by 17 points.
  All of which helps explain why Mr. Trump -- who this year cannot campaign against the Islamic State -- has auditioned China for the role of overseas menace. He has called President Xi Jinping America's ''enemy.'' He has repeatedly accused Mr. Biden of wanting to ''surrender'' to China. He has called the coronavirus outbreak ''an attack'' that's ''worse than Pearl Harbor.'' He has even said battling it makes him a ''wartime president.''
  But it hasn't worked. Although China's approval rating in the United States has plunged, Mr. Trump hasn't persuaded Americans to see the coronavirus as the epidemiological equivalent of the Islamic State, a murderous foreign foe that should be battled primarily overseas. Part of Mr. Trump's problem is that while he can call it the ''China plague,'' the coronavirus has no actual nationality. It's hard to conjure in a jingoistic television ad. As Professor Gadarian pointed out to me, the president has also undermined his scare strategy by telling Americans that Covid-19 isn't that dangerous. How menacing can China be if its ''Pearl Harbor'' attack ''affects virtually nobody''?
  As a result, ''the war on terror'' era has ended, and no equally chilling overseas story line has replaced it. According to a recent poll, Americans are more likely to blame their own government, not ''foreign governments,'' for the coronavirus. And when The New York Times recently asked voters for their opinions on eight campaign issues, national security didn't even make the list.
  The domestic focus of this year's race particularly hurts Mr. Trump among older voters. In 2016, according to Pew, they were the age group most afraid of terrorism -- and most of them favored Mr. Trump to combat it. This year they are the demographic most fearful of and endangered by the coronavirus -- and they disapprove of how Mr. Trump has handled the pandemic. That helps explain why, according to Morning Consult, Americans aged 65 and older are a remarkable 23 percentage points less likely to support Mr. Trump now than they were four years ago.
  If history is a guide, 2020 constitutes an interregnum until a new threat emerges in the public consciousness. In the past, whenever the American public's fear of overseas threats has waned for an election or two, it has eventually returned, sometimes with even greater force. In 1976, Jimmy Carter benefited from the superpower détente that made the Soviet Union appear less frightening. But he lost to the hawkish Ronald Reagan four years later, after the Soviets invaded Afghanistan and Iranians overran America's embassy. Bill Clinton triumphed during the inward-looking 1990s; George W. Bush won a wartime victory in 2004. The American public's fear of terrorism dipped between 2008 and 2012, and then surged again with the Islamic State's rise.
  In the years to come, Republicans may ride fears of China into the White House, as they once rode fears of the Soviet Union and jihadist terrorism. In this campaign, they have already succeeded in making cooperation with Beijing a dirty word. But for the moment, with more than 220,000 Americans dead from the coronavirus and more than 12 million out of work, most Americans aren't focused on defeating foreign powers. Unfortunately for Donald Trump, they're focused on defeating those in power at home.
  Peter Beinart (@PeterBeinart), a professor of journalism and political science at the Newmark Graduate School of Journalism at the City University of New York, is the editor at large of Jewish Currents and a fellow at the Foundation for Middle East Peace.
  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/28/opinion/trump-biden-foreign-policy.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: October 29, 2020


End of Document