No place in Islam for terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 26, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 546 words
Byline: By Elaine JarvikDeseret News staff writer
Body


Six years ago, when he first heard that a federal building in Oklahoma City had been bombed, Iqbul Hussein began praying. "Let it not be a Muslim," he beseeched Allah. Six weeks ago, Hussein found himself offering up the same prayer.
Hussein, an instructor in the sociology department at the University of Utah, knew what life would be like for American Muslims if the terrorists that attacked New York and Washington on Sept. 11 proved to be followers of Islam. And in the weeks that have followed, like all innocent American Muslims, he says, he has had to prove his patriotism again and again.
"Why is that so?" he asked his audience Thursday at a panel discussion at the U.'s Hinckley Institute of Politics. "Why is it only with Muslim Americans? How come after the Oklahoma bombing Christians didn't have to prove their patriotism?"
The complexities of being a Muslim in America were among the issues tackled at Thursday's panel, "Understanding Islam." To be an American Muslim now is to feel "shocked, angered, ashamed and immensely sad," he said.
Nothing can justify what terrorists did on Sept. 11, says Hussein, who is originally from Bangladesh. But it is desperation that breeds terrorism, he says, and it is this desperation that America must now address.
Without trying to "understand and eliminate" the injustice that some Muslims feel about American policies in the Middle East -- its support of Israel at the expense or Palestinians, its sanctions against Iraq, its support of dictators, he says --"any military action will prove futile" and may strengthen the hands of the terrorists.
Without specifically mentioning the current U.S. bombing of Afghanistan, Hussein wondered "if cooler heads will prevail in the days ahead." He then quoted Mahatma Gandhi: "An eye for an eye, and soon everyone would be blind."
As many Muslims have reiterated in the past six weeks in panels such as this, Hussein told his audience that "there is no place in Islam" for terrorism against innocent people. "It's not Islamic terrorism, it's terrorism," he said. But what about Islam's history of conquest, the audience wanted to know?
Panel moderator Bernard Weiss, U. professor of Middle East studies, answered that "all monotheistic religions seek to prevail over the world." In regard to the use of power to further religious causes, "I tend to see more similarity" between Islam and Christianity than differences, he said.
Like all religions based on scripture, he added, Islam is subject to interpretation and is hardly monolithic. "Islam is no more monolithic than Christianity," added U. history professor Peter Slugett. "Christianity encompasses Jerry Falwell and the pope."
The diversity of Islam was underscored by panelist Tahera Qutbuddin, an assistant professor of Arabic literature at the U., who spoke about "the experience of being a Muslim woman, perhaps one of the most misunderstood aspects of Islam."
The way women are treated in various Muslim countries is more a manifestation of culture as religion, she said. In Afghanistan, women are denied education and health care. But in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan, women have been democratically elected heads of state.
The Quran, she said, declares women to be on equal spiritual footing with men.
E-MAIL: jarvik@desnews.com  

Load-Date: October 26, 2001


End of Document