No retakes in this job
Daily News (New York)
January 3, 2014 Friday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22
Length: 779 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


Freshly sworn in as New York police commissioner, Bill Bratton announced that John Miller, best known as a television news correspondent, will take over Monday as the city's top terror fighter.
Miller has Bratton's trust and respect, and that counts for something, given Bratton's standing as a law enforcement professional. Still, Miller's government service pales in comparison with that of those who served on Ray Kelly's team.
Still more, as he names Miller deputy commissioner for intelligence, Bratton is leaving up in the air the fate of the position of deputy commissioner for counterterrorism, a post that performed distinct duties that Kelly found to be invaluable.
After a cloud of confusion created by Bratton at his first press conference, the department may or may not have a deputy commissioner for counterterrorism and Miller may or may not take over at least some of the oversight exercised by the holders of the now-vacant position.
Bratton and Miller have their work cut out - and enormous it will be -in building confidence that a newly staffed and structured NYPD will be equally effective in heading off terror attacks. The department's tactics earned even the respect of Al Qaeda-type Islamists who reported on its developments in their in-house journals.
Bratton said Miller will be a "phenomenal addition," and Mayor de Blasio said of Miller, "I think he brings tremendous experience."
That includes a long relationship with Bratton, who hired Miller as NYPD press spokesman during Bratton's short-lived commissionership under Mayor Rudy Giuliani.
After returning to TV news, Miller followed his old boss to Los Angeles, serving LAPD Chief Bratton as a ranking aide who helped beef up that department's anti-terror capabilities.
He then took over public affairs for the FBI and moved on to the U.S. Director of National Intelligence, before starting over again in TV news.
Now, Miller steps in for the departed David Cohen, who built the intelligence division after 9/11.
Cohen came to the NYPD after more than three decades at the CIA, including five years as head of the section that prepared analyses for Washington leaders, including the President, and two years as deputy director of operations. Few in America have more experience in gathering and synthesizing intelligence.
Miller is a cub in comparison. And his duties would daunt Hercules. The NYPD intelligence division has a criminal intelligence section, which handles traditional anti-crime duties as well as contributing to counter-terrorism; an intelligence and operations and analysis section, which gathers terror-related information worldwide and on the streets of New York; a public security section that protects dignitaries; and a municipal security section, that protects public officials.
Independently cultivating terror watchfulness globally and on the streets of New York, the division headed off 16 plots aimed at the city.
All of that now becomes Miller's life's work - plus possibly more if Bratton eliminates the complementary job of deputy commissioner for counter-terrorism. The leader of this group led the 135 detectives who participate in the Joint Terrorism Task Force, the federal-local team that partners to bust terror plots.
Four men served as deputy commissioner for counter-terrorism under Kelly, each having a resume far more impressive that Miller's.
The first, Frank Libutti, was a three-star Marine Corps general who later became undersecretary of U.S. homeland security.
The second, Richard Falkenrath, developed homeland security policy and threat assessment after 9/11 in the Bush White House.
The third, Michael Sheehan, was a special forces officer who commanded counterterrorism in Panama, worked as a counterinsurgency advisor in El Salvador, and was confirmed by the Senate as State Department counterterror coordinator.
The fourth, Richard Daddario, was a former federal prosecutor who handled domestic and international terror cases and served as a liaison to Russian law enforcement on terrorism.
After each resignation, Kelly studied combining the roles of deputy commissioner of intelligence and deputy commissioner for counterterrorism. Each time Kelly rejected the move, concluding both that the jobs were too big for one person and that he need multiple sources of coordinated information.
Daily for almost 12 years, the two deputy commissioners briefed Kelly for at least an hour on the very latest terror-related information, trends, and investigations. Lives were saved at those sessions.
Grant Miller smarts and dedication. And then hope that Bratton is right that his in-and-out-of-television confidant is up to his no-margin-for-error responsibilities.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: January 3, 2014


End of Document