No signs of U.S.-based terrorism links to airliner plot, Chertoff says
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 12, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 287 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Investigators have uncovered no signs of U.S.-based terrorists linked to a plot to blow up airliners headed to the United States, Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff said Friday.
"Currently, we do not have evidence that there was, as part of this plot, any plan to initiate activity inside the United States, or that the plotting was done in the United States," Chertoff said.
The arrests led the government to put the U.S. on its highest threat alert for flights headed to the United States from the United Kingdom. But Friday, Chertoff said his department was looking to adjust some of the new traveling restrictions to "somewhat reduce any additional inconvenience." He provided no details.
Even so, Chertoff cited the possibility of other terrorists or sympathizers, saying, "So I'm not prepared to let my guard down."
He said that over the longer term, officials would examine the threat involved in this week's plot -- some common chemicals, which, when combined, can form deadly explosives.
Earlier Friday, President George W. Bush's homeland security adviser refused in a television interview to rule out the possibility that some plotters may be in the United States. "There are leads that the FBI is running," said the adviser, Frances Fragos Townsend. "We are looking for connections between anyone in the United States and the plotters in the U.K., but we don't have any evidence that there is an active threat or cell here," she said.
Though British officials have arrested two dozen suspects, several remain at large. Among them are people suspected of being the ring leaders of the London plot.
Hundreds of FBI agents tracked down leads around the United States in the past few weeks, but found no plotters.

Notes

 Bomb plot foiled 

Load-Date: August 12, 2006


End of Document