No substitute for peace
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 14, 1986, Tuesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Pg. 16
Length: 613 words
Byline: By Joseph C. Harsch
Body


THE sad thing about President Reagan's campaign against Muammar Qaddafi is that even if the campaign succeeded totally (which is conceivable but unlikely), it would have only negligible and marginal effect on the real purpose of the operation, which is to stop international terrorism.
No matter how much of a role Colonel Qaddafi himself played in the attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports, he is not essential to the Palestinian terrorists who carried out the attacks. Like the IRA terrorists in Ireland, the Palestinian terrorists ''swim'' in a friendly community, more or less where they will.
There are two essential facts about terrorism arising from the Arab-Israel conflict. One is that no matter how vigorous are differences among the Arabs themselves, they all unite in sympathizing with the Palestinian struggle against Israel. The other is that an entire generation of young Palestinians has grown up either in refugee camps or under Israeli police.
Abu Nidal is identified as being the driving and planning force behind most of the recent acts of terrorism involving the Middle East. He is the product of a refugee camp. Like most others of his generation, he has grown up among an older generation which repeats daily the story of its own flight from the territory that is now Israel. The younger Palestinians have taken in with their mother's milk a deep, implacable resentment against Israel and Israelis.
Those who have grown up inside Israel's military frontiers have had a different experience but a similar result. They have grown up under the watchful eye of an Israeli police force. To them, Israel is the ever-present enemy which can arrest them at will, and often does.
In other words, there is an enormous pool of young Palestinians ready and eager to go to war against Israel under the leadership of someone who will give them an assignment. There is no shortage of young candidates for the terrorist bands, ready to spend their own lives to do injury to Israel and Israelis.
The State Department says that Abu Nidal first worked out of Iraq, then transferred to Damascus, and ''may'' during the past 12 months have moved some of his operations to Libya. The hardest evidence of Qaddafi complicity in his operations is that the terrorists who were caught at the Rome and Vienna airports carried Tunisian passports which Tunisia says were confiscated from Tunisians previously working in Libya.
But would Abu Nidal's operations be blocked or ended if Colonel Qaddafi were to be unseated and a pro-Western government set up in his place in Libya?
Even if it were possible to bomb whatever training centers Colonel Qaddafi has provided in Libya, and unseat Qaddafi himself and capture Abu Nidal in the process, there would still be thousands of eager young Palestinians wanting to fight Israel, and Israel's supporters and suppliers. And they would be looking for some other leader as bold and ruthless as Abu Nidal.
And any group of Palestinians setting forth on some operation aimed at Israel or Israelis outside Israel or any target that could injure Israel directly or indirectly will move freely throughout the Arab community. Even the most moderate and pro-Western Arab governments which deplore acts of violence and dissociate themselves from Abu Nidal and Muammar Qaddafi could not prevent Palestinian terrorists from moving around among their people. In the eyes of the Arab community, and most Muslims as well, the Palestinians are ''freedom fighters,'' to be aided if possible.
There is only one way to end the terrorism that has roused President Reagan to his campaign against Qaddafi. That would be to secure peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors.


End of Document