No terror plot cited in charges
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 23, 2013 Thursday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2013 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 521 words
Byline: RANDY FURST; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Montevideo man, 24, who was arrested in what the FBI said was a foiled terror plot, was charged with possessing "destructive devices."
Body


The FBI did not hold back two weeks ago, announcing that it had foiled "a terror plot" in Montevideo, Minn., that "potentially" saved several lives.
But a federal grand jury indictment, made public Wednesday, contained no reference to a plot, nor was Buford "Bucky" Rogers indicted under federal terrorism statutes.
Rogers, 24, was charged with four counts by the grand jury: possessing a firearm - a semi-automatic rifle - which is prohibited because he was convicted of third-degree burglary in 2011, and three counts of possessing "unregistered destructive devices."
The devices listed were two Molotov cocktails, two "black powder and nail devices," and a pipe bomb.
Asked why there was no mention of terrorism in the indictment, Jeanne Cooney, the spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office in Minneapolis, said Wednesday, "It outlines the evidence we have at this time in this case. Beyond that we won't comment."
Rogers' attorney, Andrew Mohring, who blasted federal authorities for misstating the evidence and violating court rules during a hearing on May 8, declined to comment, as did Kyle A. Loven, chief counsel for the FBI.
The indictment offered no details about what prompted the FBI to execute a federal search warrant on the Rogers family home in Montevideo on May 3.
However, three days later, J. Christopher Warrener, special agent in charge of the Minneapolis division of the FBI hailed the arrests in a news release, stating that the "cooperation between the FBI and its federal state and local partners enabled law enforcement to prevent a potential tragedy in Montevideo."
Federal sources told the Star Tribune at that time that Rogers had been involved in discussions of an attack on the Montevideo Police Department.
The letters "B.S.M.," which stands for Black Snake Militia, were spray-painted on the family's residence on the north side of Montevideo.
Federal sources said the group had about six to eight members, including Rogers and his father.
The mobile home is the group's home base, Jeffrey Rogers, Buford's father, has said. Buford Rogers lives across town with his girlfriend and their young son. The Rogerses' home is merely a meeting place for a group of family, friends "and whoever wants to join" their self-made militia, which preaches against government intrusion into citizens' lives, Jeremy Rogers said.
He said he thought the allegations against his son were false and that his son had been "railroaded."
Pretrial publicity
At Rogers' detention hearing in St. Paul on May 8, Mohring criticized the pretrial publicity - including "a great deal of misinformation"- noting that his client was at that time being charged with a single count of being a felon in possession of a firearm.
Prosecutor Charles Kovats Jr. responded that his office had followed the rules and he would do his best to get others from the prosecution team to follow them.
U.S. Magistrate Judge Jeanne Graham replied that she did not have a written request for a gag order, but if she was properly briefed and presented with a motion, she'd consider it.
Staff writer Abby Simons contributed to this report.
Randy Furst · 612-673-4224

Load-Date: May 29, 2013


End of Document