NO TALKS SCHEDULED BETWEEN PAKISTAN AND INDIA;
 INDIAN PRIME MINISTER DEMANDS CRACKDOWN ON TERRORISM FIRST
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 4, 2002 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 776 words
Byline: RAJIV CHANDRASEKARAN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Dateline: KATMANDU, Nepal
Body


India's prime minister said yesterday that his government was making "all efforts" to avoid a war with Pakistan, but he said he had no intention of holding talks with Pakistan's president at a regional summit here.
 With the nations locked in a massive military standoff along their shared border, Pakistan has called for bilateral discussions to defuse tensions. President Bush, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and other world leaders also have urged the nuclear-armed neighbors to begin a dialogue.
 But Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee ruled out a meeting here, saying that Pakistan first needs to take more aggressive actions against Islamic militants in Pakistan blamed by India for terrorist strikes, including an attack on the Indian Parliament last month.
"We are not against talks," he said. "But cross-border terrorism must end to create an atmosphere for dialogue."
 Vajpayee also played down fears that India, which has deployed tens of thousands of troops and ballistic-missile batteries along its border, would mount a military strike against its neighbor.
 "War is not a must," Vajpayee said in India before flying to Katmandu for a gathering of South Asian leaders. "Efforts are being made to avoid war through diplomatic channels. If that succeeds, there will be no need to opt for other alternatives."
 Indian Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh also indicated for the first time that his nation would be willing to give Pakistan time to crack down on Islamic extremist groups, many of which have been assisted by Pakistan's military and intelligence service. India, he said, recognizes that Pakistan will not be able to immediately dismantle "edifices of terrorism that it has either permitted or constructed over the past two decades."
 Over the past week, Pakistan has arrested about 100 Islamic militants, including the leaders of two groups that India has blamed for the Parliament attack.
 Yesterday, Singh praised Pakistan's actions as "welcome steps in the right direction," but said efforts to target militants needed to continue. He also urged Pakistan to make "a much more purposeful and much more forthright declaration against terrorism."
 Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, said he was heading to the meeting of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation "with an open mind" and holding out hope that the two nations could "work to ease the current tensions through dialogue."
 But he again warned that Pakistan would respond with force if attacked.
 "Pakistan wants peace and de-escalation, but should a mistake of attacking Pakistan be made, they would regret their decision," Musharraf said before traveling to China, where he held consultations with Premier Zhu Rongji.
 Musharraf opted to fly to Nepal via China, a longtime ally of Pakistan's, because India has closed its airspace to Pakistani planes.
 Although India said it would be willing to make an exception for Musharraf, he decided to accept China's offer of a chartered flight from Beijing to Katmandu.
 Indian officials said they have not dismissed the possibility of lower-level talks with Pakistan here, perhaps between both nations' foreign ministers. But just how those discussions might be initiated remains unclear.
 Neither country appears to want to make the first move. Singh said yesterday that he had not received a formal request from Pakistan for a bilateral meeting and insisted he did not come to the summit "to conduct India-Pak relations."
 A Pakistani official said his government does not believe "there is any need for any invitation. They just have to talk."
 The Pakistani official said he believed Musharraf and Vajpayee likely would talk tomorrow during a retreat in a village outside Katmandu that is limited to the leaders of the seven nations participating in the summit. (Leaders from Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Bhutan and the Maldives also are expected to attend.)
 "They have to sit together," the official said. "They have to spend time together. They will certainly talk."
 A senior Indian official said a meeting between the two men could be very tense, potentially embarrassing their Nepalese hosts. Vajpayee and Musharraf last met in India in July, but differences over Kashmir, a Himalayan territory claimed by both nations, caused those talks to fizzle.
 In a reminder of the deep-seated tensions between the countries, Singh denounced Pakistan for failing to act on a list of 20 suspected terrorists that India gave to Pakistan on New Year's Eve.
 Pakistani officials have said they will not detain any of the suspects until India provides evidence to support its allegations, which, the officials said, India has not done.

Load-Date: January 4, 2002


End of Document