No time to waste attacking terrorism at its roots
University Wire
March 23, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 The Pitt News via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 703 words
Byline: By Erik Jansen, The Pitt News; SOURCE: U. Pittsburgh
Dateline: PITTSBURGH 
Body


I was just reading an Associated Press story discussing Pat Robertson's newest revelation - all this time we have spent fighting terror since the terrorist attacks in 2001 has apparently been grossly misdirected. According to the evangelical news broadcaster of "The 700 Club," the real terrorist we should be going after is Satan. It all makes sense to me now. As President Bush has stated, we're fighting the terrorists, the "Axis of Evil" "over there" so we don't have to fight them here. So why not skip the intermediate step of invading sovereign states and start military actions at the root of all terrorism in the world?
I want to call on all of my fellow Pitt students to begin a massive letter writing campaign to our congressional representatives. Tell them it's time the United States of America - One Nation Under God - fulfills its moral imperative and destiny. That's right, ladies and gentlemen: It's time to invade hell.
Pat Robertson stated, according to the Associated Press, "These people are crazed fanatics, and I want to say it now: I believe it's motivated by demonic power. It is satanic and it's time we recognize what we're dealing with." As it is our national foreign policy to make no distinction between terrorists and those who provide support for terrorists, this "demonic power" that the terrorists utilize must be stopped. At the source.
Now, I'm sure there are going to be some longhaired hippie liberals out there saying we should all just get along and leave hell the hell alone. Well, to these naysayers I reply, it's only a matter of time before these demonic forces learn to navigate large waterways. After all, as President Bush has stated, "oceans can no longer protect us." When the fire and brimstone begin raining down on U.S. cities, when the mighty Mississippi runs red with the blood of good Midwestern folk, it will be too late.
Now, there are perhaps a few logistical problems to be worked through before a full-scale military invasion of hell can begin. For instance, the use of incendiary devices is most likely going to be in vain. Also, there may be some major conflicts of interest with some of the Halliburton execs - although they may be less inclined to skim money off the bottom line when they are contracted to rebuild their own country.
With the decline in the Catholic priesthood, it may also become difficult to keep the Army and Marines fully supplied with SuperSoakers full of holy water - which, as everyone knows, are in fact the most effective weapon against both vampires and demons. Also, the retrofitting of Marine troop carriers to navigate oceans of fire may prove to be somewhat difficult.
Then there is the problem of intelligence. There are conflicting reports as to what exactly the ground conditions in hell are like. Our most reliable sources point to a rather arid, extremely hot environment for which the war in Iraq will prove great training. However, according to an Italian intelligence report compiled by Dante Alighieri, the outer mountainous regions are indeed arid, but hell's interior is occupied by a large frozen lake. If the report, titled "Inferno," is found to be true, the lake could be quite a blessing. Once the interior of the realm is reached, there will be a constant water supply, and soldiers with downtime will surely enjoy the ice fishing.
Historically - and ironically - U.S.-hell relations can best be described as "cold." Similar to Cold War operations, both the United States and hell have had extensive espionage programs in effect for quite some time. However, in recent years, hell has become much more brazen in its efforts to undermine U.S. hegemony both on our own soil and around the globe. According to Pat Robertson, the rise in Islamic fundamentalism is perhaps the largest covert operation ever undertaken by Satan's Dark Forces - the elite wing of hell's general army of demons.
However, new, uncorroborated evidence also points to a high-ranking executive official with close ties to Satan. When asked to confirm the report, President Bush had no comment and VP Dick Cheney replied, "All hail the dark lord."
Rain fire, brimstone and hate mail down upon Erik at erj2@pitt.edu.
(C) 2006 The Pitt News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 23, 2006


End of Document