No time off for Silva's detective Allon Gabriel Allon returns in his 12th adventure. FICTION - BOOKS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 22, 2012 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A&E; Pg. D6
Length: 315 words
Byline: By Harry Levins • Special to the Post-Dispatch
Dateline: 0 
Body


At one point in "The Fallen Angel," an Israeli scholar raises his eyebrows at Gabriel Allon, one-time agent and assassin for Israeli intelligence.
" 'I thought you were retired.'
" 'So did I,' Gabriel said, 'but for some reason, I never seem to stay retired.'"
And so Allon returns unretired in this tale, the 12th in which author Daniel Silva has cast him in the lead role. The story opens in the Vatican, where Allon is using his cover trade as an art restorer. One evening, a young art expert on the Vatican staff kills herself - or so it seems. A key aide to the Pope has his doubts that the death was a suicide, and so does Allon. Soon, the aide relays a request from the Pope: would Allon use his skills to find the killer?
Allon's sleuthing turns up evidence of criminal traffic in ancient pieces of art - and of a connection to Islamist terrorism. As Allon puts pieces together, he must face terrorist plots in Vienna and in Jerusalem, where Allon tags along as a bodyguard to the visiting Pope.
As with the earlier books in the series, "The Fallen Angel" presents Israel and its people as long-suffering Good Guys. The political tone may put off some readers, although author Silva presents that tone in crackling dialogue. In this sample, Allon's former intelligence chief muses about Islamist terrorism to his star agent:
" 'The world doesn't seem to notice or care that they target our people whenever it suits them. But if we respond in kind, we're branded as rogue gunslingers.'
" 'They are worse things they could call us.'
" 'Like what?'
" 'Weak,' replied Gabriel."
---
'The Fallen Angel' A novel by Daniel Silva Published by Harper, 416 pages, $27.99
DANIEL SILVA When - 7 p.m. Wednesday Where - St. Louis County Library, 1640 South Lindbergh Boulevard How much - Free More info - 314-994-3300; slcl.org
---
Harry Levins of Manchester retired in 2007 as senior writer of the Post-Dispatch.

Notes

 FICTION 

Graphic

 
 Photo - Book cover of 'The Fallen Angel' by Daniel Silva 

Load-Date: July 23, 2012


End of Document