No U.S. visa for Arafat
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 18, 1989, Monday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; columns; Pg. 8A; COLUMN
Length: 704 words
Byline: GEORGE F. WILL
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON - Nine months after a diplomatic debacle, the United States    is in danger of making matters worse. The Bush administration, which is    relentlessly and sometimes obnoxiously eager to underscore the obvious    - that it is not the Reagan administration - may well pick up where the    Reagan administration left off in appeasing the Palestine Liberation    Organization (PLO).
 
     The question is: What will happen if Yasser Arafat requests a visa    to visit his kindred spirits, of which there are all too many, at the    United Nations?
 
     Late last autumn, to enable it to do what it had long wanted to do    - deal directly with the PLO - the State Department became Arafat's    lyricist, coaxing him to sing the right (well, the State Department's    idea of the right) words. The three U.S. conditions were recognition of    Israel, acceptance of U.N. Resolution 242 and renunciation of    terrorism. The PLO did none of the three, but feigned agonies of    surrender, so State ruled that it had done all three.
    The PLO slightly softened its rhetoric of implacable hostility    toward Israel, hostility still enshrined in the PLO covenant, which    declares Palestine "indivisible" and vows "elimination of Zionism in    Palestine." The PLO "accepted" Resolution 242 (as the PLO    misconstrues it to require complete withdrawal to the 1967 borders).
 
     But the PLO accepted 242 in the context of "relevant" U.N.    resolutions. These - "Zionism is racism," and the rest - have the    cumulative meaning of mandating Israel's destruction.
 
     Today, as 10 months ago, the PLO, speaking to its constituencies,    reassures them that its diplomatic maneuvers are merely part of a    phased approach to the liquidation of Israel. The two-stage, two-state    strategy is to reduce Israel to indefensible borders by means of a PLO    satrapy on the West Bank, and then use violence.
 
     Regarding terrorism, the PLO said: We never have used it, we    promise to stop using it, and attacks against Israelis are not    terrorism. Since then, the PLO has increased terrorism in three ways.
 
 There have been more attacks across the border, including squads from    the Fatah faction. PLO radio from Baghdad incites and praises terrorism    within pre-1967 Israel, such as the act of plunging an Israeli bus into    a ravine. And there has been a sharp increase in murders of moderate    Palestinians - 89 so far - on the West Bank.
 
 
   Concerning whether the PLO is a terrorist organization, State's    position is: It cannot be such an organization because we are talking    with it and we are not allowed to talk with terrorists. State also says    the PLO is an "umbrella organization" and that Fatah is one faction    bound by Arafat's supposed renunciation of terrorism. How does State    verify compliance? The point of the PLO "umbrella" structure is to    allow appeasement-minded Westerners to say they cannot trace a thread    of responsibility for Palestinian terrorism.
 
     Six months ago, Arafat reaffirmed the PLO goal of "the complete    liberation of the Palestinian soil and the establishment of a    Palestinian state over every part of it." Five months ago the head of    the PLO's Political Department said: "The recovery of but a part of    our soil will not cause us to forsake our Palestinian land. . . . We    shall pitch our tent in those places which our bullets can reach. . . .
 
 This tent shall then form the base from which we shall later pursue the    next phase."
 
     Three months ago, the leader of the PLO's second largest faction    said: "The establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and    Gaza will be the beginning of the downfall of the Zionist enterprise. .    . . (Our goal) is the complete liberation of the national Palestinian    soil." Last month the Fatah conference in Tunis reaffirmed that the    1948 partition of Palestine was a "crime."
 
     The Bush administration, which prides itself on believing that all    differences are splitable, cannot imagine implacability, and therefore    cannot recognize it in the PLO. Or so say critics, who hope they are    not proved correct by a visa for Arafat.
 
  Washington Post Writers Group       

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document