NO VISITORS FOR JAILED AMERICAN;
PERU BAN COVERING REBELS INCLUDES WOMAN CONVICTED OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 25, 1997, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 579 words
Byline: JAMES ANDERSON, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body


A ban on visits to jailed members of the Tupac Amaru rebel group holding 73 hostages in Lima applies to an American woman convicted of terrorism last year by a secret military court, her attorney said yesterday.
Because of the ban, Lori Berenson's mother yesterday canceled a trip to Peru to visit her daughter at the windswept Yanamayo maximum-security penitentiary high in the Andes, where the younger Berenson is serving a life sentence.
A New York City native, Berenson, 27, was convicted Jan. 11, 1996, of helping Tupac Amaru rebels in a foiled plot to kidnap congressional representatives. She denied the charges. Her parents and other supporters say she was in Peru working as a journalist and was unwittingly caught up with a group she believed had sworn off armed struggle.
Rhoda Berenson said she didn't know if her daughter was aware of the visitor ban or that her mother's trip had been canceled. ''That's kind of scary,'' she said in a phone interview from New York.
Peru's government imposed the ban shortly after leftist guerrillas seized the Japanese ambassador's residence Dec. 17. Officials said they wanted no communication between the hostage-takers and their colleagues in prison.
The guerrillas demand freedom for at least 300 Tupac Amaru rebels in Peruvian jails, but it isn't clear if Berenson is on their list. Several released hostages have said their captors named her as one of those the government must release.
President Alberto Fujimori refuses to trade prisoners for hostages. Yesterday, Fujimori's government sought to unnerve the defiant rebels by sending armored cars past the occupied Japanese ambassador's house for the first time since the 38-day hostage siege began.
The International Red Cross, which is carrying messages between the two sides and providing humanitarian relief to the hostages, temporarily suspended its activities at the siege site, saying it should have been informed of the police plans. But after Red Cross representative Michel Minnig met with police officials, the hostages received their daily ration of food and water only a few hours late.
Minnig claimed that all hostages were in ''good'' health, but pressure is growing for a top judge to be released on medical grounds. The Lima College of Lawyers published a message from key hostage Moises Pantoja, who lost his post as Supreme Court President while captive, written to his family from inside the residence.
''I can hardly walk,'' he wrote. ''When I do, I lose my balance. My feet, hands and fingers have all gone hard. My arthritis stops me from reading, and I can barely write.''
Attorney Grimaldo Achahui said prisoners' lawyers are exempt from the visitor ban, and he planned to visit Berenson next month. He said he hadn't had contact with her since the hostage crisis began because she has no phone privileges.
''Her health is good, but she has absolutely nothing. She only has access to some books that have no political content,'' he said.
Berenson can receive letters, but only after they are reviewed by Peruvian officials, Achahui said.
Her family last visited her in December before the siege.
Berenson's family and the U.S. State Department objected to her trial in a secret military court. Achahui said yesterday that he was working to obtain a new trial in an open civilian court.
 
U.S. Embassy spokesman Fred La Sor said U.S. officials haven't asked permission to visit Berenson since the hostage seizure.
Reuters News Service contributed to this report.

Load-Date: January 28, 1997


End of Document