NO WORD IF THE CLOUDS PARTED, BUT GOD SPOKE
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 27, 2008 Friday
2 Tampa Edition


Copyright  2008 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 1B; TALK OF THE BAY
Length: 409 words
Body


God Lucky Howard landed in jail last week after Tampa police said he sold drugs near a church, among other places. He was supposed to plead his case for reduced bail Thursday before an earthly judge. God was present. His attorney wasn't, so the hearing was delayed until next week. But first, Hillsborough Circuit Judge Walter Heinrich had a question: "Is this a nickname? God Lucky? Is this a real name?" It was hard to hear God's answer. "Interesting," the judge said. "I've never seen that before." Heinrich looked at God's case file. "Let's see why we're here, to see if you're getting into heaven," the judge said. "Just kidding, of course."
$4 gas dampens July Fourth travel
With gas prices about $1 per gallon higher than a year ago, fewer Americans will hit the road over the Fourth of July holiday, according to AAA. An estimated 40.5-million Americans will drive or fly at least 50 miles from home, a decline of 1.3 percent or nearly 550,000 from a year earlier. That marks the first time this decade that AAA has forecast a decline in Fourth of July travel from the previous year. In the Southeast, travel by car for July Fourth will be down 1.3 percent and air travel will decline 2 percent, AAA said.
Rain to keep rolling in for weekend
Tired of the rain? Don't expect this weekend to give you a break. Forecasts call for afternoon thunderstorms throughout the weekend, with highs in the high 80s or low 90s. "Heat and humidity, with a sea breeze forming, will lead to more heavy afternoon and evening showers and thunderstorms each day," said Josh Linker, Bay News 9's meteorologist.
Al-Arian faces new indictments
Former University of South Florida professor Sami Al-Arian will be spending some more time in prison. A federal grand jury in Alexandria, Va., indicted Al-Arian on Thursday on two counts of criminal contempt for refusing to testify before a grand jury in a terrorism-related case. In December 2005, a jury in Tampa found Al-Arian not guilty of eight terrorism-related counts and deadlocked on nine others. Five months later, Al-Arian signed a plea agreement, pleading guilty to one count of helping associates of a terrorist group with nonviolent activities. Al-Arian has completed his nearly five-year prison term but remains in custody because he has refused to testify before a grand jury investigating Muslim charities and businesses. His attorneys had been negotiating his deportation, but Thursday's indictment puts that on hold.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: God Lucky Howard sought lower bail.

Load-Date: June 27, 2008


End of Document