No. 2 justice official defends new tools against terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 18, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 378 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department's second-ranking official on Saturday defended the tough but criticized new tools given federal investigators, law enforcers and prosecutors since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"What we need to do is be as aggressive as possible within the bounds of the law," Deputy Attorney General Larry Thompson told a convention of the Federalist Society, a conservative legal group.
Since the suicide hijackings, the identities and status of those detained in the investigation are being kept secret; federal agents are trying to question 5,000 foreign men, most from Mideast countries; new rules allow the monitoring of communications between some detainees and their lawyers; and President Bush has ordered the possible use of military tribunals to try foreign terrorist suspects.
Congress passed an anti-terrorism law giving authorities sweeping powers to conduct secret searches of homes and businesses, eavesdrop on telephone and computer activity, enforce money laundering laws, and detain foreigners suspected of terrorism. It also permits the sharing of information between federal agencies such as the FBI and the CIA.
While the measures have been criticized as encroaching too far on civil liberties, Thompson said the new law was sorely needed.
"We believe it is a measured and balanced approach," he said. "The new law is very important to us."
Fresh complaints from state and local police officials about the lack of willingness at the FBI to share information in the terrorism investigation show that the often frosty relationship between federal and local law enforcement has not warmed entirely.
Thompson said the attacks had "a transforming effect" on the Justice Department. Before, the department meticulously handled crime scenes and evidence and reluctantly shared information with other law enforcement -- all in an effort to prevent tainting of future prosecutions.
But, he said, "That's now what we're about now."
The department is switched its focus solely to the disruption of terrorist plans and prevention of future attacks -- with little worry about compromising cases, Thompson said.
"The potential loss of civilian lives that we face … is unprecedented," he said. "I think that's what the American people expect of us."

Load-Date: November 18, 2001


End of Document