Nobody Won in Nicaragua
The New York Times
November 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk; editorial
Length: 405 words
Body


Only the naive believe that Sunday's election in Nicaragua was democratic or legitimizing proof of the Sandinistas' popularity. The result was ordained when opposition parties tamely accepted terms that barred them from power. This plebiscite will not end the struggle for pluralism in Nicaragua. But neither can it serve as justification for recent American policy.
The Sandinistas made it easy to dismiss their election as a sham. Their decisive act was to break off negotiations with Arturo Cruz, an opposition democrat whose candidacy could have produced a more credible contest. He sought delay until January but was denied time to deliver a truce from the U.S.-armed ''contra'' rebels.
The opposition to Daniel Ortega, the Sandinista presidential candidate, was finally shrunk to four small left-wing groups and factions of two traditional parties. Even so, and after five years of unchallenged power, the Sandinistas appear to have won less than two-thirds of the vote. That means a 90-member National Assembly could begin to provide a forum for real debate - if the regime honors its promise to hold periodic elections and to respect press freedom and political assembly.
Nicaraguans know to be skeptical about such promises. The Sandinistas defending their election sound much like the dynasty they overthrew. ''The trouble with Americans is that they judge everything by United States standards,'' President Anastasio Somoza once declared. ''The people voted for me because I have won their affections. . . . There is sanitation, schools and communications and mechanization of agriculture.''
One crucial fact of history, however, is that the Somozas' fraudulent elections produced little outrage from Washington. The United States' tolerance of them is not an argument for silence now, but it does require a greater respect for Nicaraguan sensibilities about the past.
The struggle for democracy in Nicaragua should not be confused with the security interests of the United States. Whether Mr. Ortega and his more rigid associates can still be lured from the Cuban model is unclear. But the political contest can be fought by diplomatic and economic means. It does not warrant U.S.-sponsored invasion or terrorism.
More serious American action would be appropriate only if the Sandinistas become a security threat to the region. Until they clearly are, they should be dealt with as ideological adversaries, not military enemies.


End of Document