NOLD: Drones provide accuracy, less mortality against terrorism
Daily Nebraskan: University of Nebraska-Lincoln
March 29, 2013 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 1112 words
Byline: Zach Nold
Body


In the 1970s, people believed we would be traveling to other planets and driving flying cars by now. Even though they were mistaken, they understood technology was going to evolve and change our every day lives. We now have cell phones, home computers and GPS systems we use every day. Yet, for all the technology we have there is still the age-old question of: When is there too much technology?
In recent weeks drones - and more specifically MQ-1 predator drones - have come under fire from politicians and foreign nations pertaining to their usefulness, but more specifically their proper use. The debate about the proper use of drones has become so heated that Rand Paul filibustered the senate floor for about 13 hours, inspiring the nation to look at how drones are used.
He argued that no drone should be used on American soil to target U.S. citizens without a fair trial. He is right; this would go against the constitution and rights we hold as Americans. The idea of a predator drone being used on American soil is very disturbing, and no one should ever entertain the idea of using such military intervention here on U.S. citizens.
However, I can understand how an extreme advancement in drone technology (i.e., absolute precision targeting with less than one percent collateral damage) and proper protocol (i.e., a standard of operations that states who can use drones and in what situations they're allowed to be used) could allow law enforcement to use lethal drones to help stop crime. Such situations would include taking out a maniac who doesn't want to be apprehended - someone who is harming others and doesn't look like he will stop. However, I don't believe we have quite reached this level of technology, nor do we have protocols properly outlined.
With drone use outlawed on American soil, a lingering question remains: What about American citizens who are known terrorists overseas? These terrorists are technically American citizens, and I can certainly understand how some people believe we shouldn't kill them without fair trial. However, once someone is a terrorist, I don't view them as a citizen of any country.
If you are a terrorist, and anywhere but on American soil, you should be put down by any means necessary. A drone strike is an easy and effective way to get that job done. However, if a terrorist works from within America, we should abstain from drone use no matter the conditions. Americans revere our country as anything but a warzone, and the idea that everyone in the U.S. deserves a fair trial resonates with all Americans.
If the terrorist is in another country, then it's a different story. We must remember that it doesn't matter what country a terrorist is from, we don't negotiate with terrorists. Of course, this leads to drone strikes in foreign nations who have sovereignty, which can lead to issues with those countries. According to the Washington Post, 41 percent of Americans think we should use drones on American terrorist overseas, compared to the 52 percent who think we shouldn't.
These countries where terrorists choose to hide need to be reminded that our drone strikes don't just protect America, they are also curbing terrorism in their countries as well. Pakistan is a country where, due to our interests in Afghanistan, many drone strikes have taken place. However, in recent weeks U.N. officials have stated that the U.S. has indeed breached Pakistan's sovereignty. I disagree; terrorists in Pakistan have already breached their sovereignty, even if they're from their own country. Once you are a terrorist you are no longer a law-abiding citizen. These terrorists need to be eliminated to ensure safety for the Pakistani people and surrounding nations. Frankly, it will also save Pakistan the trouble of having to send their military after an insurgent cell, which will save them lives, time and money.
So, what constitutes as a bad time to use drones? The answer to this question will change from mission to mission, but there are ethical advantages to using drones over manned aircraft.
First, drones don't put our pilots in danger, which is a huge advantage, and a reason why the future of warfare will rely heavily on drones.
Secondly, the precision with which a drone can strike greatly reduces collateral damage. This is due to their capability to stay on target for long periods of time, waiting for the perfect opportunity to strike, and their ability to divert missiles at the last second if needed. In fact, a column in the New York Times states how drones have a lower rate of civilian casualties than Pakistani military intervention. Political scientist Avery Plaw considered drone deaths in four separate instances in Pakistan and found the highest rate of civilian casualties to be 20 percent. This is significantly lower than when the Pakistani military goes after a terrorist cell with soldiers, in which 46 percent of the deaths are civilian deaths on average.
Finally, as discussed earlier, the definition of sovereignty will not be violated if followed by old rules of war. This is because no human with hostile intention from another nation will have to enter that nation's space. Of course, this point is hotly debated. If the drone strike isn't carried out properly it could cause collateral damage, which may ignite a national backlash.
What it really comes down to when we question whether a drone strike is necessary is the intelligence behind the strike. If the person we have killed is a known terrorist then we shouldn't have any problems with it. Terrorists gave up their rights when they decided to harm others. It doesn't matter if it's a bullet, missile or knife used to kill a target, the outcome will be the same: death. So, if you take issue with a certain human being's death, scrutinize the intelligence and the person who made the final decision. The means to the end doesn't matter; it's the decision behind the action one must scrutinize.
Drones are the future vestibules of warfare, and we must train good men and women to operate them. They are useful when it comes to surveillance and eliminating enemy combatants, but should not be used on American soil in today's world. It seems that drones are fast becoming the easiest means by which accurate and quick kills can be obtained on the battlefield. We shouldn't focus on the lethal capabilities of the drones, but rather the intelligence behind the kill orders.
Zach Nold is a senior English major. Reach him at opinion@dailynebraskan.com
This is a part of the Daily Nebraskan's point/counterpoint, featured once a week. To see the other side, read Dillon Jones' article on how military drones infringe upon American rights.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document