Nonsensical War on Drugs, Terrorism
University Wire
May 3, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 The Post via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 664 words
Byline: By Daniel Donatelli, The Post
Dateline: Athens, Ohio
Body


We are in a War on Drugs. We are in a War on Terrorism. We are in a War on Common Sense.
By virtue of philosophy, let me work your way through these two absurd efforts in my attempt to highlight the impossibility and uselessness of using force to fight wars of ideologies.
Ohio U.
I see commercials/propaganda nearly every day that tell me purchasing drugs essentially arms terrorists that will eventually kill me, my mother, a dozen marines and then stuff the dog they just kicked to death with cocaine to be shipped back across the border and into the hands of the 12-year-old children depicted in said commercials.
I read articles nearly everyday from radicals and extremists who go off on tangents describing the horrors of the war on drugs, the death and disease this war is causing in Colombia, and furthermore, the ineffectual results of Good Intentions from your Big Brother government (who is only looking out for the well-being of the country).
A War on Drugs is nonsensical. Essentially, we are at war with harmful chemical substances and the "evil-doers" who illegally ship them into our country. We are at war with physiologically addictive substances and the men who take advantage of America's surplus of money and comfort. We are at war with TEMPTATION and the people who use temptation to fund their vices and goals.
This is the oldest battle in the history of humanity, and America has taken it upon itself to solve this problem by prohibiting the rock. By that I mean the old adage that if you kick a rock and your foot hurts, you don't blame the rock for the pain (though most people do, particularly your government). Prohibition of drugs ("All rocks are illegal, therefore nobody will kick them") does nothing but arm the very men we are trying to defeat on the other side of the coin in our other inevitable loss -- The War on Terrorism. And by the way, aren't I funding terrorism when I buy gasoline?
Anyway, War whether on Drugs or Terrorism, appears to be using my money in funding one of the two "necessary evils," and in my opinion, hopeless efforts. My taxes feed the farcical War on Drugs that I never asked to be waging. My money funds the government drug-keeper-awayers who take it upon themselves to crop-dust countless fields of cocoa plants in Colombia in hopes of thwarting the importation of cocaine into the United States. These same crop-dusting procedures are effectually poisoning the locals whom are simply trying to "get by" through farming the only plant they know for certain will provide them a steady income.
The government would have me believe that any time I'm at a gathering where there are illegal substances, I am celebrating the victory of Sept. 11th with my terrorist brothers by funding terrorism through the purchase of said illegal substances. Here's a thought it didn't take me very long to put together: Everybody will always have disdain for Americans and some (or most) will want something bad to happen to us. This is not a War on Terrorism: it is a War on HATRED for Western Society. In actuality, it instead should be a War of American Apologies and Clearing American Intentions.
The War on Terrorism, too, creates another contradiction and impossible task. By taking up arms against the philosophy of other cultures, we are further spinning the cycle of violence. We are criminalizing, persecuting and murdering the fathers of the children of tomorrow. This is how it has been throughout history, and it is the Sept. 11 violence that is a result of the dissention over such hegemonic treatment.
We've waged a physical war on Temptation and Hatred… How ambitious of us.
My open letter to America: The two wars you are so eagerly fighting have no end in sight because you are using military actions to solve problems that are a result of poor philosophy. Quit blaming the rock for your pain when it is the ideologies and values that make you kick it in the first place.
(C) 2002 The Post via U-WIRE

Load-Date: May 3, 2002


End of Document