Noose on terrorism tightened
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 22, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION;
Length: 358 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


The more international support the United States can get for the war on terrorism, the better the chance for success.
This war involves far more than just action on the battlefield. Terrorism isn't constrained by geography. It will go wherever it's allowed. That includes financial institutions around the world.
Thankfully, the civilized nations are taking steps to strongly curtail terrorists' ability to accumulate wealth -- wealth that would undoubtedly be used for destructive purposes worldwide.
Saturday at a conference in Ottawa, Canada, finance ministers from the Group of 20 (G-20), including the United States, the European Union, China, Russia and Saudi Arabia, approved an "action plan on terrorist financing."
The support of Saudi Arabia is particularly significant as it faces considerable internal pressure from hard-line Muslims who support Osama bin Laden, who is a Saudi exile.
In part, the plan will coordinate global efforts and resources to cut off funds for organizations such as bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network.
The G-20 nations agreed to move quickly on the plan, which includes making public lists of terrorists with frozen assets and maintaining organizations in each country capable of tracking terrorist financing.
Preventing terrorist organizations from obtaining substantial funding is essential if they are to be neutralized.
The commitment must be a long-term one. President Bush has been up-front since the day the terrorists hijacked four U.S. airliners on Sept. 11 in saying that the war against the terrorists will be long.
The world community must convince terrorists that their way of life is unacceptable. Shutting off their financial resources is one of the ways to do that. Going after them militarily is another way, which the United States is doing quite well, according to reports, in Afghanistan, the base of bin Laden and his al-Qaida terrorist network.
While more needs to be done to dismantle the various terrorist organizations, a number of countries, led by the United States, are proving that their actions are as strong as their words.
The latest example is what took place in Canada over the weekend.

Load-Date: November 22, 2001


End of Document