NORIEGA BOUNTY DEFENDED AS COMBATING TERRORISM JUSTICE DEPARTMENT HOT LINE; JAMMED WITH TIPS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 22, 1989, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1C
Length: 585 words
Byline: William H. Freivogel Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON THE STATE DEPARTMENT acknowledged Thursday that it knew of no precedent for the U.S. or any other country putting a bounty on a nation's ruler, as it has for Manuel Antonio Noriega.  But, a spokesman for the department's Panamanian task force noted, '''Neither is there a precedent'' for a ruler being indicted.  The Justice Department has set up a Noriega hot line to receive tips on the whereabouts of the deposed Panamanian leader.  The telephone number is 202-633-1000. But those eager to collect their money will have to be patient. The telephone number was busy much of Thursday afternoon.  U.S. military officials said Thursday that they were checking out tips putting Noriega in 12 different places within Panama and three different countries - Mexico, the Dominican Republic and Colombia.  President George Bush defended the bounty at a press conference Thursday, saying, ''If there is some incentive for some Panamanian to turn him in that's . . . a million bucks that I would be very happy to sign the check for.'' Bush called Noriega ''a fugitive drug dealer'' and said, ''His picture will be up in every post office in town, that's the way i t works.'' Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney offered a similar defense of the bounty, saying, ''He's similar to the drug lords in Colombia.'' House Speaker Thomas Foley, D-Wash., supported the reward. He said it might ''shorten the conflict and save lives on both sides . . . I think if a million dollar bounty produces that and saves one life, American or Panamanian, it's more than worth it.''
White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said that the decision to offer a bounty was made by the joint group of top officials who oversaw the Panamanian operation.  ''We have a long history of offering rewards for information on terrorists, so this is not something new,'' said Fitzwater.  Since 1984 the United States has offered rewards to anyone who furnishes information that leads to the frustration, resolution or prevention of terrorist acts against U.S. personnel or property. The government offers rewards for the capture of international drug dealers also.  The reward for terrorists and drug dealers was $500,000 until earlier this month, when the International Narcotics Control Act raised it to $2 million.  That means that the $1 million reward for Noreiga is actually less than that for other fugitives.  The State Deparment's Bureau of Diplomatic Security and the Office of Counterterrorism administer the anti-terrorism reward program.  In addition to offering the general reward for information that foils a terrorist incident, the State Department is offering $2 million for information on about 10 terrorist incidents, says Andrew Laine, a State Department spokesman.  Among them: The 1988 killing of Capt. William E. Nordeen, a U.S. military attache in Greece.  The killing of four Marines and two civilians in San Salvador in 1985.  The hijacking of TWA Flight 847 in 1985.  The bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland a year ago.  Laine said that the United States had not yet paid a reward in a terrorism incident but was considering payment in several cases. He would not give details.  Noriega is not the first Latin American outlaw to become of the object of a search by the United States Army. In 1916 President Woodrow Wilson sent Gen.  John Pershing to capture Francisco ''Pancho'' Villa after the Mexican general turned bandit attacked a town in New Mexico, killing 16 Americans. Villa eluded Pershing's troops.

Graphic

 
Graphic; LOGO: CONFLICT IN PANAMA

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document