Normalizing war in America
Montana Kaimin: University of Montana
March 12, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 466 words
Body


Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, war has become something like an annual event, said Andrew Bacevich to audience at the University of Montana's Presidential Lecture Series. 
"The United States has cultivated military supremacy, not strength, supremacy," Bacevich said Wednesday night. 
Bacevich spent the first half of his adult life in the US Army and is currently a professor of international relations at Boston University.
The nation became "normalized to war" somewhere between the Cold War and today, Bacevich said. Since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the United States has increased its reliance on military intervention to solve problems, he said.
Before the fall of the two towers, the base budget for military spending equaled $287 billion, Bacevich said. The budget request released by the Pentagon last week had a base budget of $522 billion.
The country's increase in military spending is a result of the mindset that crisis is imminent and so war must be perpetuated, Bacevich said, citing President Bush's speech post 9/11 in which he stated the country "must go on the offense and stay on the offense."
The word "militarism" is often attached to the notion of German and Japanese cultures of the past, Bacevich said. America should now be included in that list, he said.
"Open-ended conflict has continued even if it is no longer labeled as the 'War Against Terror,'" he said.
UM Professor Richard Drake said he saw the aftermath of the 2001 attacks enter his classroom. In 1990 his course History of Terrorism had roughly 65 students. The years following 9/11 his class enrollment grew to roughly 300, Drake said.
Drake said his class's growth was a reflection on the nation's immediate spike in interest on the causes of war and acts of terrorism.
The series is an outlet for students to search for information on their interests such as international relations, Drake said.
"We're off the beaten path here and while that's one of the things we love about Montana it is particularly important for us to hear outside opinions on these current-day issues," Drake said.
After the lecture, Bacevich said campuses are filled with students who have grown up relying on technology - something he said they should be careful about. Many Americans now constantly hunger for things done fast and precisely, he said.
The age of information applied to foreign affairs has transformed the image of war to be a "tidy solution to complex problems," he said.
This age has also created a time when military action is used as a means to spread the American way of life, he said.
"Americans once knew instinctively that military power was a poison, not without its occasional need but a poison all the same," Bacevich said. "In our time, oblivious to the potential consequences, we have lost sight of that truth." 

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document