Normally, I like to be carded Effort to combat terrorism at work is puzzling to me
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 28, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1C
Length: 441 words
Byline: Don Surber
Body


NEWTON'S third law of bureaucracy is that for every action there is an overreaction.
Which is why I am seated at my desk with an identification card alligator clipped to my tie. This stops terrorism how?
Mind you, I am not complaining. Most of my colleagues are doing that for me.
Their battery of complaints reminds me of Gold Hat's line from the movie, "The Treasure of the Sierra Madre":
"Badges? We ain't got no badges. We don't need no badges. I don't have to show you any stinking badges!"
Well, now we do have badges and we do have to show them.
On Tuesday, Charleston Newspapers required all its employees to wear their ID cards while on duty.
I have no problem with it. Gives me something to dangle from my tie.
All I ask is this stops terrorism how?
The badges amuse me. I am touched once again by the milk of human foolishness. I would like to say this is the dumbest thing I ever encountered, but I cannot lie.
We have not changed much over the years. Witness the story I heard the last time I visited Glenville. Come to think of it, it was also the first time I visited Glenville.
I was with the Parkersburg News. A photographer and I went to Gilmer County to gather some feature stories. We stopped at his parents' house for lunch.
His father talked about the past and World War II. He surprised me by telling me that Glenville had blackouts. He was surprised that I was surprised.
Why, what if the Nazi bombers missed Washington, he reasoned. They would have to dump their bombs somewhere. Glenville would be the likely target.
His story reminded me of another story from my wife's Uncle Milford. His veracity often is inverse to his sense of humor.
He grew up in Nobe, Calhoun County. One night, his family spotted a plane circling the hill. They all went outside to look. After a few minutes, Milford whipped out a cigarette to smoke.
Don't light that match, Granny admonished him. He might think it is a signal to land.
Milford tells the story much better.
Well, that must have worked. The plane did not land there.
Come to think of it, the Nazis never bombed Glenville so maybe these badges will work.
Still, I wonder, this stops terrorism how?
There is talk of national ID cards. Instead of handing out easily forged badges, we should try other things.
Perhaps we should round up people who are in the nation on expired visas.
Perhaps we should arm pilots and replace stewardesses with Marine drill sergeants. It sure beats our present plan of having unarmed passengers storm the cockpit.
My problem with national ID cards has nothing to do with civil liberties. It has everything to do with effectiveness.
My question remains. This stops terrorism how?
-30

Load-Date: September 29, 2001


End of Document