Northern Ireland's terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 07, 2001, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 14A; EDITORIAL
Length: 328 words
Body


Even for those almost inured to the madness after 30 years of street warfare, the attacks this week by Protestant thugs on Catholic school girls were shocking displays of the moral emptiness pervading Northern Ireland.
Here's how the world saw the issues of arms decommissioning and Home Rule playing out -  terrified children and their parents weaving through police lines to a Catholic school, as a mob of Belfast Protestants threw rocks and bottles, screaming at the 6-year-olds: "Scum!, Scum!"
On Wednesday, one of the Protestant militants threw a pipe bomb at police escorting the school girls; two police officers were seriously injured, and dozens of students and parents fled in terror. The Belfast neighborhood of Ardoyne erupted in riots. All week, the schoolchildren who weren't frightened away walked past armored vehicles and burned-out cars to get to their school.
THUGS
The scenes were all too reminiscent of those decades ago in Little Rock, Montgomery and many other places in the South, where white mobs terrorized black children and their families during the early days of school desegregation. How can any child survive such trauma and leave behind all fear and malice? No wonder Northern Ireland's Protestant and Catholic neighborhoods have no lack of teenagers willing to hurl insults, bricks and petrol bombs.
On Monday, several Catholic parents stopped to argue with angry Protestants, leaving their children exposed to danger in the street. Entire generations have been taught by example that sectarian hate and violence are normal adult behavior.
British and Irish leaders are gridlocked because neither side has the courage to persuade its people to accept the limits of a negotiated settlement. Both sides fan unrealistic hope. Then reality hits, and schoolgirls are attacked. This is an old trick; punishing an enemy by harming his child. Leaders on both sides need to decide whether it's today's terrorists or tomorrow's generation they care about.

Load-Date: September 7, 2001


End of Document