North Korea Says U.S. Will Lift Sanctions
The New York Times
September 4, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 447 words
Byline: By CHOE SANG-HUN
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 3 
Body


North Korea announced Monday that the United States had agreed to lift economic sanctions and remove it from a list of countries accused of sponsoring terrorism, a move that would satisfy one of the North Korean government's principal conditions for giving up nuclear weapons.
  But a State Department spokeswoman in Washington said she did not have confirmation of the North Korean announcement, and Christopher R. Hill, the chief American envoy, made it clear in comments on Sunday that the North Koreans still had work to do before the United States would take the country off the terrorism-sponsor list.
  Mr. Hill said Sunday that North Korea would detail and disable its nuclear programs by the end of the year, an action that  would be a diplomatic victory for the Bush administration.
  ''The U.S. agreed to take political and economic compensation measures such as deleting the D.P.R.K. from the list of terror-supporting nations and fully lifting sanctions imposed under the Trading with the Enemy Act,'' a spokesman for the North Korean Foreign Ministry told the country's official Korean Central News Agency on Monday. The spokesman was using the initials for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the North's formal name.
  North Korea, in turn, discussed ''taking practical measures to neutralize the existing nuclear facilities in the D.P.R.K. within this year and agreed on them,'' the spokesman said. ''This has laid a groundwork for making progress at the plenary session of the six-party talks to be held in the future.''
  The developments followed a weekend meeting between Mr. Hill and his North Korean counterpart, Kim Kye-gwan, in Geneva. 
  In talking to reporters on Sunday, Mr. Hill said, ''One thing that we agreed on is that the D.P.R.K. will provide a full declaration of all of their nuclear programs and will disable their nuclear programs by the end of this year, 2007.''
  Whether to offer the North rewards -- including oil and, eventually, removal from the list of state sponsors of terrorism and diplomatic recognition -- has been the subject of a six-year-long struggle within the Bush administration.
  But most of the administration hawks who have opposed such offers, such as the former American ambassador to the United Nations, John R. Bolton, are now gone. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has given Mr. Hill more latitude to negotiate with the North Koreans outside of six-party talks that have been held on and off for years. 
  Those talks  also include China, Japan, South Korea and Russia, and are expected to resume in mid-September. The weekend meeting in Geneva was cast as a prelude to any agreement reached at the six-party talks.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 4, 2007


End of Document