North & South: Industrial Progress Reducing Poverty (and Terrorism)
Economic Thinking
October 23, 2018 Tuesday


Copyright 2018 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2018 Economic Thinking, USA All Rights Reserved
Length: 1336 words
Byline: Gregory Rehmke
Body


[Updated from earlier post on earlier freedom vs. equity value debate topic]
For students researching and debating the foreign aid reform and international terrorism debate topics, Elizabeth Gaskell's novel, North and South is food for thought. The novel contrasts the traditions and values of the "old order," the aristocratic south of England with the "new order," the rapidly industrializing north. In the south people know their place and society is stable. But in the manufacturing towns in the north of England, textile mills are transforming society, offer higher wages but disrupting traditions and social stations. The fast expanding textile industry bring risks too, with busts following booms.
Across the developing world, industry along with international trade and investment are transforming traditional and long-impoverished societies. North and South looks at the conflicts and challenges as northern England industrialized in the mid-1800s. After long delay, that industrialization, now part of globalization is spreading prosperity (and conflict) across Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
In addition to the novel, the BBC miniseries is now streaming on Netflix.
Wikipedia says of North and South:
The serial is based on the 1855 Victorian novel North and South by Elizabeth Gaskell and takes place in the years surrounding the Great Exhibition of 1851. It was adapted for television by Sandy Welch and directed by Brian Percival.
North and South (Gaskell novel) · Daniela Denby-Ashe · Elizabeth GaskellGaskell (1810-1865) examined social issues and some of her novels were deeply critical of industrialization. North and South, originally serialized by Charles Dickens, compared the rural and aristocratic south of England with the rapidly industrializing north.North and South is recommended as an alternative view to the anti-capitalism in Dickens' novels. Gaskell wonderfully portrays both the labor and business sympathetically. Innovative textile machinery raises productivity and though factory owners conspire to slow wage increases, they compete against each other for labor, offering higher wages and better working conditions. Workers become less deferential to aristocrats as their increased incomes and economic freedoms allow them more food, larger homes, better clothing, and more choice of employment.Johan Norberg's Vietnam segment in his Globalisation is Good documentary shows much the same progress and conflict as Vietnam industrialized in the early 2000s. The video discusses the transformation of Taiwan from poverty to prosperity through international investment and trade, and year of low-wage labor in factories, just a century after the industrialization process portrayed in North and South. Next Norberg travels to Vietnam to investigate industrialization and globalization there (link to YouTube).  For debaters with the foreign aid reform topic, consider that some U.S. foreign aid program and policies work to slow and distort the ongoing process of industrialization and globalization.Critics of capitalism are, no surprise, are also critics of international capitalism (globalization). Consider this American Foreign Relations take on the globalization and WTO riots in Seattle in 1999:
The 1999 World Trade Organization summit in Seattle, Washington, vividly revealed the wide opposition to globalization, drawing a huge force of protesters from both poor countries and wealthy ones. Many of the protesters would agree with the arguments of Jeremy Brecher and Tim Costello, who have asserted that the WTO "work[s] hand-in-hand with the IMF and the World Bank to impose the Corporate Agenda on developing countries." This corporate agenda, they write, seeks "to reduce all barriers to downward leveling of environmental, labor, and social costs" The American Friends Service Committee went so far as to claim that globalization "has undermined basic rights, cultural and community integrity, the environment, and equity ... [and] caused economic insecurity." Critics point out that it has also lessened the importance of nations that once could use their resources or strategic locations as bargaining chips for aid, and has helped to create global disasters like the banking crisis in Asia in 1997-1998. 
So, is industrialization and globalization allowing billions around the world to earn higher incomes, or is capitalism and global trade somehow grinding the world's poor deeper into poverty? These are questions are worth researching as students debate foreign aid, legal immigration and international terrorism.
Debates today over globalization and international trade reflect political and economic debates that have erupted over the last 150 years. Many, many books try to analyze living conditions of working families through the Industrial Revolution. Here is part of an entry in the Concise Encyclopedia of Economics:
At one time, behind the debate was an ideological argument between the critics (especially Marxists) and the defenders of free markets. The critics, or pessimists, saw nineteenth-century England as Charles Dickens's Coketown or poet William Blake's "dark, satanic mills," with capitalists squeezing more surplus value out of the working class with each passing year. The defenders, or optimists, saw nineteenth-century England as the birthplace of a consumer revolution that made more and more consumer goods available to ordinary people with each passing year. The ideological underpinnings of the debate eventually faded, probably because, as T. S. Ashton pointed out in 1948, the industrial revolution meant the difference between the grinding poverty that had characterized most of human history and the affluence of the modern industrialized nations. No economist today seriously disputes the fact that the industrial revolution began the transformation that has led to extraordinarily high (compared with the rest of human history) living standards for ordinary people throughout the market industrial economies. [Source]
North and South gives us a glimpse of this vast spirit of enterprise as cities like Manchester were industrializing. New factories generated vast pollution, but pollution decreased as  newer and more efficient machinery was developed and deployed (pollution was wasted energy! unburnt hydrocarbons!). Stunning gains in productivity led to a rapid fall in the price of cloth and clothing, as new automated looms could make in hours what hand looms took days or weeks to produce. A challenging environment for factories facing lower margins and higher labor costs, but great news for everyday people eager for more than one or two sets of clothing. Elites were upset that everyday people could afford nice cotton clothing that looked more and more like the linens only the wealthy with servants could afford.The workers are earning more, but also having larger families. Are their earnings just, or are they being cheated by factory owners? Could forming unions and threatening strikes push wages higher, or would unions and strikes disrupt wage and productivity gains? That's a question for today in the U.S. and around the world, just as it was in England in the 1850s. Riots and terrorism around the world today are similar to the industrial violence of the 19th Century. People were poor and blamed their poverty on the ruling elites.After building his successful enterprise, the business hero of North and South decides to get the education he couldn't afford and didn't time for as a young man. He hires a retired minister from the south of England to tutor him. As he learns though evening discussions with his tutor, he also discusses social issues and social justice with the minister's daughter. She is unhappy to have had to move from her quiet rural life in the south of England to the rude, free-wheeling, chaotic busy word of the industrializing north.They discuss freedom, justice, and the plight of the poor. They fight and disagree about ideas and the world around them. And maybe they will fall in love.
 

Load-Date: July 16, 2019


End of Document