North Africa oil firms warned of terrorism
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 17, 2011 Saturday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 840 words
Byline: staff and wire reports
Body


WASHINGTON -- The United States said on Friday that it has warned oil companies operating in NorthAfrica of an al-Qaida terrorist plot in which shoulder-launched missiles would be fired at their headquarters or planes. 
Government officials also said yesterday that the United States would take an increasingly active role to secure thousands of rocket launchers, mines and small arms from deposed dictator Moammar Gadhafi's once vast arsenal in Libya. 
The U.S. Embassy in Algeria received information about the threat and quickly alerted potential targets, the State Department said in a statement. 
The warning highlights the urgency of the Obama administration's effort to help Libya's opposition government lock up as many weapons as possible to prevent them from fueling an insurgency or falling into the hands of al-Qaida operating across North Africa. 
As an urgent measure, the administration is sending several additional weapons experts to Libya to help train local units to locate and destroy weapons. Top focus is on the estimated 20,000 shoulder-launched missiles, called MANPADs, which Gadhafi assembled during his four-decade rule. The weapons can shoot down helicopters or civil jetliners. 
"My team has no higher priority than addressing this threat," said Andrew Shapiro, a State Department official in charge of political-military affairs. "We are utilizing every possible tool to reduce the availability of loose missiles from Libya." 
The decision to increase weapons-related aid comes after U.S. officials received a request yesterday from Libya's National Transitional Council for greater assistance in securing Gadhafi's former stocks of conventional weapons. The dictator, who is still at large, halted his weapons-of-mass-destruction programs in 2004. 
U.S. and international officials believe his leftover stocks of chemical and nuclear material are safe -- and in a form that cannot be made quickly into weapons. 
MANPADs, however, pose a serious danger. 
The Soviet-era, man-portable, air defense systems require no special training to operate. Officials say prices have fallen on the regional black market, suggesting that some of Gadhafi's stores have been sold. The country's new leaders, who are struggling to establish a government, have failed to secure many of the weapons caches. Witnesses have watched looters, former rebel fighters or anyone with a truck carry them away. 
Fred Abrahams, a special adviser for Human Rights Watch, said groups have been pushing Libyan rebels, the United States and NATO for weeks to do more to fight weapons proliferation. 
"They all really missed the boat," he told The Associated Press. "We're seeing some progress now, but of course, so much is already gone." 
For depots looted, Libyan authorities should work with local brigades to turn in land mines, surface-to-air missiles and other "unnecessary weapons" to a central storehouse that would be easier to monitor -- perhaps with United Nations support, said Abrahams. 
Journalists and human rights groups have discovered huge weapons depots around Tripoli since the former rebels swept into the capital Aug. 21. Many of the sites remain poorly guarded. 
In other developments 
-- Anti-Gadhafi forces were forced to retreat from the town of Bani  Walid, 90 miles southeast of the capital Tripoli and one of the last  strongholds of the ousted Libyan leader. In a televised audio message,  Gadhafi's spokesman said loyalists had inflicted heavy losses on  fighters in Bani Walid, and were prepared for a long fight. "The battle  is far from over," Moussa Ibrahim said in comments broadcast on  Syria-based Arrai television station. 
-- In Gadhafi's home town of Sirte, a key prize in the Libyan  conflict, revolutionary forces took control the airfield and residential  areas on the outskirts. 
-- The United Nations voted to give Libya's seat to the transitional  authorities. The move, which faced only minor opposition, clears the way  for National Transitional Council (NTC) chief Mustafa Abdul Jalil to  attend the U.N. General Assembly in New York next week. 
-- The government of Niger said it would not send Gadhafi's son,  Saadi, back to Libya, saying there was no guarantee the 38-year-old  would receive a fair trial. Saadi Gadhafi, who was a special forces  commander, is the subject of a U.N. sanction for commanding military  units involved in repression of demonstrations. 
-- British RAF jets have carried out their biggest raid on Libya,  destroying more than 20 targets in a day, the London-based Daily  Telegraph reported. SAS troops were operating alongside MI6 and CIA  officers, attempting to hunt down Gaddafi, his sons and other former  regime leaders, according to the newspaper. 
-- Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan came to Tripoli to  meet the new government, stopping to join Friday prayers and address a  small crowd in the city's Martyrs' Square. He joined in calls for  Gadhafi and his supporters to lay down their arms and warned the  "oppressors" in Syria that they also would not survive. 

Load-Date: September 17, 2011


End of Document