North Korea helps to recover 14 sets of U.S. remains
USA TODAY
August 15, 2000, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 686 words
Byline: Bill Nichols
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- Veterans groups say they have just completed their
most successful field operation ever in North Korea, where they
recovered 14 sets of remains of U.S. troops killed in the Korean
War with full cooperation from the communist government.
At the same time, Clinton administration officials are on the
verge of dismissing a much ballyhooed proposal by North Korean
leader Kim Jong Il to suspend Pyongyang's missile program if the
United States agrees to launch North Korean satellites.
"It was a joke," Kim is quoted in South Korean newspapers this
week as saying about the proposal he made last month to Russian
President Vladimir Putin when Putin visited Pyongyang, North Korea's
capital. Putin then conveyed the offer to President Clinton at
the annual economic summit of the world's industrial powers.
Kim's proposal has taken on great significance because of international
opposition to plans for a U.S. missile-defense shield, a system
that would be largely aimed at countering the potential missile
threat from North Korea and Iran.
These two conflicting signals are the latest puzzling actions
taken by the enigmatic regime in Pyongyang, which has seemed in
recent months to be on the verge of taking a more moderate course.
On the positive side, veterans groups are delighted with the level
of access and cooperation that has led to the recent recovery
of remains of U.S. troops.
"It's been a tremendous year for us with recovery of remains
 . . . with total cooperation from the North Koreans,"
says Frank Meterski of The Chosin Few, a veterans organization.
He says that 26 sets of remains have been recovered this year,
and three more field missions are scheduled. Compare that with
42 sets of remains recovered in the previous five years, a period
in which Meterski says there were constant battles over access
with North Korea.
The recovery of the remains is not the only hopeful sign coming
out of the Korean Peninsula.
Today, long separated family members -- 100 each from North and
South Korea -- will cross their countries' borders to reunite
with wives, husbands, mothers and fathers for the first time since
the Korean War 1950-1953. This historic exchange was worked out
during a summit in June between Kim Jong Il and South Korean President
Kim Dae Jung.
Kim Jong Il also made news over the weekend by telling a group
of visiting South Korean media executives that he would open ties
with Washington if the United States removed North Korea from
its list of states that sponsor terrorism.
Previously, Kim always had insisted that relations with the United
States could only be normalized if Washington severed its military
ties with South Korea.
Though administration officials hope for the best when it comes
to North Korea, there is still skepticism in Washington, where
officials are waiting until Pyongyang takes concrete steps to
demonstrate its seeming change of heart.
Even before Kim's offer to suspend Pyongyang's missile program,
which he reportedly made to the same group of South Korean media
executives, State Department officials say they had neither seen
nor heard anything from Russia or North Korea to indicate that
the missile proposal was serious.
State Department spokesman Philip Reeker says the administration
remains ready to discuss such a proposal, if it is a serious offer.
"We strongly encourage any concrete action that North Korea may
take to achieve progress in addressing the concerns that the international
community has" about its missile program, he says.
On the issue of the terrorism list -- North Korea is one of seven
countries branded as sponsors of terrorism by the United States
-- State Department officials indicate that the administration
would consider establishing official ties with North Korea if
it takes specific steps to renounce terrorist activity.
The chief reason North Korea remains on the list, U.S. officials
say, is that it harbors four or five Japanese Red Army members
who hijacked a Japanese plane in 1970.
Michael Sheehan, U.S. coordinator for counterterrorism, went to
Pyongyang last week for talks about the terrorism list. Reeker
called the meeting "productive," but did not disclose details.

Load-Date: August 15, 2000


End of Document