North Koreans Confirm Pledge to Disable Plant
The New York Times
October 13, 2008 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 902 words
Byline: By CHOE SANG-HUN and HELENE COOPER; Choe Sang-hun reported from Seoul, and Helene Cooper from Washington.
Dateline: SEOUL, South Korea 
Body


North Korea welcomed its removal from Washington's list of terrorism sponsors and confirmed on Sunday that it would resume disabling its main nuclear weapons complex and allow international monitors back to the site. 
  Washington's decision to take North Korea off the list of state sponsors of terrorism, announced Saturday, is an important symbolic gesture for the North, an isolated and poverty-stricken country, removing one of hurdles to gaining a measure of international acceptance. But there is much in Washington's tortuous relationship with North Korea that stays the same, including economic sanctions against the North. 
  President Bush said in June that he was prepared to take North Korea off the terrorism list in recognition of the country's commitment to halt its development of nuclear weapons. The offer languished for months as administration officials tried to persuade North Korean officials to allow a strict inspection program to verify that the country was keeping its word.
  In the end, the administration won only some concessions. The State Department said that the new agreement called for American inspectors to be granted access not only to declared nuclear sites, but also, ''based on mutual consent,'' to sites where the United States suspected nuclear activity. 
  In the past, once accords were reached, North Korea and the United States have disagreed about what was promised. The North Korean position on Sunday came in the form of remarks attributed by the Korean Central News Agency, a state organ, to an unnamed spokesman for the Foreign Ministry. The remarks confirmed the State Department's understanding that the North Korean government would return to its earlier work disabling the plutonium plant at its Yongbyon compound. But it did not mention inspections at undeclared nuclear sites. 
  Kim Sook, the South Korean nuclear envoy, said Sunday that American officials had resorted to ''indirect and condensed terminology'' to facilitate a compromise, and that he believed the two sides shared an understanding of the wording. 
  In part to fend off criticism that they did not get enough concessions from North Korea, Bush administration officials were quick to cite the long list of punitive restrictions still in force. Indeed, reporters at the State Department news conference Saturday morning were handed the list of sanctions before they were given the fact sheet that said North Korea was being removed from the terrorism list.
  ''North Korea remains subject to numerous sanctions resulting from its 2006 nuclear test, its proliferation activities, its human rights violations and its status as a Communist state,'' Sean McCormack, a State Department spokesman, said. 
  The list of trade prohibitions is long.
  It includes a ban on exports of nuclear and missile-related items, heavy conventional arms and ''luxury goods,'' which the United Nations Security Council imposed in retaliation for North Korea's detonating a nuclear device in October 2006. How to apply the ban on luxury goods was left to each country to determine as it saw fit; the United States tried to tailor its ban to deprive the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, of the types of goods he was reported to like most. The list included DVD players and big flat-screen television sets. 
  John R. Bolton, a former United States ambassador to the United Nations and a sharp critic of the deal that was announced on Saturday, argues that even if taking North Korea off the terrorism list is symbolic, it  could encourage foreign investment there.
  ''By taking them off the terrorism list, you remove one of the legitimizers of the other sanctions,'' Mr. Bolton, a former under secretary of state for arms control and international security, said Sunday. ''For North Korea, that was important, because it makes them look like more of a normal nation.'' 
  Worries about granting legitimacy to North Korea also appeared to color reactions in Japan. 
  Japanese leaders had wanted to use possible removal from the terrorism list as leverage to force the North to address concerns over abductions of Japanese citizens decades ago. Although the State Department emphasized that both Mr. Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice had spoken with their Japanese counterparts, the country's finance minister, Shoichi Nakagawa, said he doubted that Japanese officials had been fully consulted beforehand.
  Still, on Sunday, Prime Minister Taro Aso said that Japan and the other countries negotiating with North Korea in ''six-party talks'' on its nuclear program would have ''ample opportunity'' to discuss the kidnappings. ''We have not lost any leverage at all,'' the Japanese prime minister was quoted as saying. 
  The South Korean government hailed the agreement as an important breakthrough, stopping North Korea from making good on threats to reactivate its nuclear weapons program. 
  Some hawkish members of the governing party in Seoul, which won a majority in elections in April with a promise to get tough on the North, complained that North Korea had been allowed to slip off the terrorism list without apologizing for the bombing of a South Korean passenger jet in 1987, in which 115 people were killed. 
  North Korea was put on the terrorism list after South Korea arrested a woman who later said she was a North Korean agent and had planted a bomb on the jet. North Korea has denied involvement. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 13, 2008


End of Document