Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo, Derek Russell column
Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)
October 6, 2017 Friday


Copyright 2017 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
Length: 612 words
Byline: Derek Russell, Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo
Body


Oct. 06--More than 50 people are dead and 500 injured simply from attending an outdoor concert.
The Route 91 Harvest Festival in Las Vegas, featuring such acts as Eric Church, Sam Hunt and Jason Aldean (who will be performing at the BancorpSouth Arena later this month) became the target of Stephen Paddock on Sunday, when he opened fire from his 32nd-floor hotel room overlooking the event.
It is yet another example of people being murdered while being entertained -- much like "The Dark Knight Rises" shootings in Aurora, Colorado in 2012, where James Holmes killed 12 and injured more than 70, or the Pulse nightclub shootings of 2016, which was the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history before this past weekend's.
It is another reminder that places like venues for concerts and films, schools or places of worship are no longer safe from stray bullets.
Unfortunately, bullets aren't the only thing Paddock had stored up on Sunday. There were 23 weapons found in his hotel room, but he also had 50 pounds of explosives material as well as 1,600 rounds of ammunition in his car in the Mandalay Bay hotel parking lot. In addition to Route 91, Paddock had also booked a hotel room overlooking the Lollapalooza music festival in Chicago as well as rooms over the the Life is Beautiful festival (also in Vegas) prior to Sunday's shooting.
And here we are, again. Having the same debate. The same frustration. The same anger, disappointment and sorrow.
Hashtags are created, people change their Facebook photos and ... life goes on. Some of you reading this may have already forgotten about Sunday's events until your eyes landed on this column. That's how desensitized we've become to these tragedies. Orlando's nightclub shootings seem so long ago when, in actuality, it was just June of last year.
Some events, like the red carpet premiere of the film "Blade Runner 2049" and the New York Comic Con presentation of Marvel's upcoming "The Punisher" Netflix series have been canceled following Sunday's massacre, either out of concerns of safety or respect. More entertainment that is being squashed as a result of terrorism.
"But the shooter wasn't a terrorist," you might say. I'd argue that anyone with that amount of ammunition, with that kind of heavy artillery that is unwarranted, using it to inspire terror into a crowd of 22,000 people, is absolutely a terrorist.
And Nevada law would back me up.
According to NRS 202.4415, an "act of terrorism" is defined as "any means that involve the use or attempted use of sabotage, coercion or violence which is intended to: cause great bodily harm or death to the general population; or cause substantial destruction, contamination or impairment of: any building or infrastructure/natural resource to the environment."
So, yes, Stephen Paddock was someone who created terror. Maybe he didn't have extremist, foreign ties and maybe he didn't fit a federal profile, but because of his terrorism and his availability to purchase more than 30 firearms in the past year without harsher restrictions and laws, concert-goers that were enjoying a night of music under the stars died Sunday.
If schools aren't safe, if concerts aren't safe, if churches aren't safe, if movies aren't safe -- what's next? What location will it take for the ubiquity of mass shootings to be tackled?
W. Derek Russell is a columnist and the Daily Journal's arts and entertainment reporter. Contact him @wderekrussell on Twitter or email him at derek.russell@journalinc.com
___ (c)2017 the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) Visit the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) at www.djournal.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: October 6, 2017


End of Document