North Dakota builds terrorism response team
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
February 26, 2000, Saturday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2000 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 608 words
Byline: Jeff Hansel
Body


A terrorist attack in sparsely populated North Dakota might seem unlikely. But the state's rural terrain makes it an ideal setting to secretly assemble a bomb, grow a deadly virus or store nerve gas, said state epidemiologist and North Dakota Air National Guard Lt. Col. Larry Shireley.
 'If you get some strange or unusual deaths or illnesses, this could be a terrorist activity,' he said. 'We've been working to develop a statewide response.'
Remote areas along the Canada-North Dakota border make the state an attractive delivery route for terrorists bringing illicit materials into the country.
 A terrorist car crash or other mistake could have serious public health ramifications.
 To prepare for such events, the North Dakota Weapons of Mass Destruction Civil Support Team began training in October as a rapid response unit.
 'We are the first unit in the Guard that has been designed to be a joint army and air guard,' said Army National Guard Capt. Sean Johnson, the unit's operations officer. If nuclear, biological or chemical weapon use is suspected, the 22-member unit would be activated by the governor.
 Johnson said guard members would go to the scene, assess the situation and advise the incident commander on a response plan and what materials are needed.
 'Weapons of mass destruction are deadly, but the best way to think about it is a haz-mat (hazardous materials) incident, with an attitude,' Johnson said. Hazardous material incidents are routinely handled by fire department personnel when such things as fuel leaks, minor chemical spills or volatile methamphetamine labs are discovered.
 The state Department of Health received three grants to help prepare for such events on a larger scale, focusing on terrorist activities.
 A grant of $ 187,000 is being used to increase laboratory capabilities to identify outbreaks caused by bio-terrorism attacks. A health alert network will use $ 129,000 to improve communication and training for local public health officials, and an $ 83,000 grant is being used to increase surveillance to detect abnormal events.
 During an incident, 'there would be instructions through the regular warning system as to what people should do,' said Ken Jarolimek, North Dakota Division of Emergency Management training manager. Full-scale simulations of a terrorist event are planned to keep officials prepared, he said.
 Officials who might be involved during a terrorist event include police officers, firefighters, city and state officials, security guards and hospital and ambulance personnel.
 Shireley said NBC events are difficult to handle because emergency workers risk exposing themselves to the material when helping victims. Chemical events, such as the release of a nerve gas used in warfare, are a problem because multiple injuries happen quickly.
 Biological diseases and other agents, however, can be more elusive, he said. If smallpox, plague, cholera, typhoid, yellow fever or anthrax were released during a major public event at a place like the Fargo Dome or the Bismarck Civic Center, it could take time for people to get sick. By then, some of those exposed may have traveled a great distance.
 Victims would show up at clinics and hospitals in a variety of locations and diagnosis would be difficult. 'The quicker we can respond effectively, the better the outcome is going to be,' Shireley said.
 Officials say it's important for them to know what to do if an incident occurs, but residents should feel confident because the state is prepared.
 'We need to be cautious. But I don't think we need to be scared. We need to have some faith in our system. The system will work,' Jarolimek said.

Load-Date: February 28, 2000


End of Document