North Korea ousts U.N. nuclear inspectors
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 25, 2008 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 396 words
Byline: By Barbara Demick and Julia Damianova Los Angeles Times
Dateline: VIENNA, Austria 
Body


North Korea kicked out U.N. weapons inspectors from a plant that previously produced weapons-grade plutonium and notified the nuclear watchdog that it would restart operations as early as next week, the International Atomic Energy Agency said Wednesday.
The moves mean that the North could be reprocessing plutonium in a matter of months.
This latest provocation by North Korea kills what little hope remained that the administration of President George W. Bush could complete a denuclearization deal in his remaining months in office. Although the regime has been warning for weeks that it would restart nuclear activities, the speed and extent of its moves have been discouraging.
For at least the time being, the three nuclear inspectors will remain at the sprawling Yongbyon nuclear compound, but they will not be allowed in the most important facility: the reprocessing plant that produces the deadly heart of the nuclear bomb. At the insistence of the North Koreans, the inspectors removed seals and surveillance cameras that had been installed last year to ensure the plant was mothballed.
"This work was completed today. There are no more ... seals and surveillance equipment at the reprocessing facility," spokeswoman Melissa Fleming said in a statement at the atomic energy agency's headquarters in Vienna. She also said that the North Koreans had notified the agency that they intended to "introduce nuclear material to the reprocessing plant in one week's time."
There was no immediate comment from Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, but in recent weeks officials there have made it clear that they are angry that the United States has not followed through on a promise to remove North Korea from a list of "terrorism-sponsoring" nations.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Robert Wood labeled North Korea's moves "very disappointing."
"Their actions serve only to isolate the North Koreans from the rest of the international community," he said. "We strongly urge the North Koreans to come back into compliance with their international obligations."
Bush announced in June that he would recommend the lifting of the terrorism-sponsor designation as a reward for North Korea's submission of a detailed inventory of its nuclear program. But the administration has not been satisfied with the document and is asking for additional verification before making the move.

Load-Date: September 25, 2008


End of Document