North Korea Added to Terror List
The New York Times
January 21, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 398 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20
Body


The United States today put North Korea on its list of nations that support international terrorism, citing its role in the bombing of a South Korean jetliner last November that left 115 people dead.
In announcing the Administration's decision, the State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, accused the North Koreans of failing ''to live up to the standards of civilized behavior'' because of their complicity in terrorist acts, including the Korean Air bombing, which killed more people than any other terrorist incident last year. ''The evidence of North Korean culpability is compelling,'' he added.
Much of the evidence against North Korea is based on the confession of a North Korean woman who said under lengthy interrogations that she and a male accomplice planted a time bomb on the plane on orders from Kim Jong Il, the son of North Korea's leader Kim Il Sung, to disrupt this year's Olympic Games in Seoul and to foment unrest in South Korea.
Mr. Redman said the United States was working with South Korea to encourage the international community to take retaliatory measures to ''register our common outrage at this act of mass murder,'' and called on all nations to register condemnations of North Korea. He declined to say whether the United States would call for a condemnation of North Korea in the United Nations Security Council.
The Administration's action was prompted in part because the bombing, in which no Americans were killed, has received far less attention than other terrorist incidents, especially those involving the Middle East.
The United States will also put an end to substantive discussions between American and North Korean officals on neutral territory, which Secretary of State George P. Shultz authorized last March. A number of these meetings have taken place since then, although they produced no specific results, according to Mr. Redman.
The issuance of visas to North Korean nationals will also be further restricted, mainly to the few diplomats who visit the United Nations where North and South Korea have observer missions but do not enjoy membership.
Placing North Korea on the terrorism list will now require the United States to vote against loans to North Korea by international lending organizations.
North Korea joins Iran, Libya, Syria, Cuba and Southern Yemen on the State Department list of countries promoting international terrorism.


End of Document