North Korea Pursues Restarting Atomic Plant
The New York Times
September 23, 2008 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 288 words
Byline: By REUTERS
Dateline: VIENNA 
Body


North Korea has asked the International Atomic Energy Agency to remove seals and cameras from its main nuclear complex, the agency's chief said Monday.
  North Korea said on Friday that it was working on restarting the Yongbyon complex, the center of its atomic bomb program, which it had been dismantling under a much delayed disarmament-for-aid deal with five countries. 
  North Korea asked the agency's inspectors Monday to remove seals and surveillance equipment to enable them to carry out tests at the reprocessing plant, Mohamed ElBaradei, the agency's director, told a meeting of the I.A.E.A. Board of Governors. Last month, North Korea said it planned to restart Yongbyon because the United States had not removed it from its terrorism blacklist. 
  Early this month, North Korea made minor but initial moves to restart the plant, U.S. officials said. 
  ''Agency inspectors have observed that some equipment previously removed by North Korea during the disablement process has been brought back. This has not changed the shutdown status of the nuclear facilities at Yongbyon,'' Mr. ElBaradei said. Diplomats have said that such a restoration would take at least several months.
  ''I still hope that conditions can be created for North Korea to return to the Non-Proliferation Treaty at the earliest possible date and for the resumption of comprehensive safeguards,'' Mr. ElBaradei told the closed meeting in Vienna. 
  North Korea's Foreign Ministry had said that work was under way to restore Yongbyon's facilities ''to their original state.'' Washington has said it will remove the country  from the terrorism list once North Korea allows inspectors to verify claims its government made about its nuclear arms production. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 23, 2008


End of Document