Norwalk graduate retires from Navy after 28 years
Norwalk Reflector, Ohio
November 22, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 The Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio)
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 517 words
Byline: Lynannevucovich, Norwalk Reflector, Ohio
Body


Nov. 22—NORWALK — After dedicating 28 years of his life to the U.S. Navy, Norwalk native Master Chief Michael Doughty Jr. is looking forward to his retirement. Four months after graduating from Norwalk High School in 1992, he joined the Navy.
"I've been around the world four times, I circumnavigated the globe four times," Doughty said. "It was on a ship and went around the world twice and twice in airplanes."
Doughty retired from the Navy at the end of October and in his time earned the highest rank and ran the maintenance department for the squadrons.
"I was in charge of all the repairs on aircraft, making sure they were safe, make sure everyone was trained, and equipped," he said. "To be an administrator, being in charge of maintenance is not normal. There are only two of us in the entire Navy."
One of his biggest accomplishments, Doughty said, is his four children who have been able to go to college.
"Being able to come from a small family with not a lot of income, to join the military and see the world," he said. "I had a great career, my last command was the best command I've ever been in."
Someone who pushed him to join the Navy was Doug Bores, a fellow graduate. Doughty loves to point out that he was the reason he enlisted but ended up staying in the Navy longer than Bores.
Doughty's awards include two Meritorious Service Medals, five Navy Commendation Medals,  five Navy Achievement Medals, nine Good Conduct Medals, two National Defense awards, five Global War on Terrorism awards, Humanitarian Service Medal, nine Sea Service Deployment Ribbon awards and numerous other unit awards and citations.
Doughty currently resides in Oak Harbor, Washington with his wife Lacy, and his four children Orenda, Clayton, Leana, and Daniel. He now works on base as a senior logistics analyst.
"We won every maintenance award that you could win this year, and it was just a great way to go and say that that I've done everything I needed to do and move on to a civilian career," Doughty said.
He said he's looking forward to traveling the country and world, without having to worry about being told where to go. He said he's looking forward to wearing whatever he wants, too.
Doughty said he got his work ethic from his mother, Cathy Burdue, who showed him that hard work pays off.
"No matter what I did, good or bad, she always supported me in my decisions and is always quick to lend an ear when I actually call," he said.
Doughty said he saw how hard his mother worked to provide for their family and he's thankful for everything she's taught him.
"The world is bigger than just a little small town and it doesn't take an education to find something that you're really good at. Don't let your family means dictate whether you do or don't do something," he said. "You can go far, you can become financially stable. You can go around the world you can see countries that you'd never, never would have thought you would ever get to see."
___ (c)2020 the Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio) Visit the Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio) at www.norwalkreflector.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: January 8, 2021


End of Document