NOT EVERYTHING'S A TERRORISM ISSUE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
January 11, 2003 Saturday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8A
Length: 452 words
Body


Controversialist and media hog Arianna Huffington has decided to take advantage of anti-terrorist sentiment to get some attention.
With admirable promotional skill, she has managed to get reams of media reports on some television ads she has bought, even though the ads haven't run yet.
The ads hold that the American addiction to low-gas-mileage SUVs is a boon to terrorists because the money we spend on gasoline makes its way to terrorists.
One ad shows various people discussing their SUVs and saying, "I helped hijack an airplane. . . . I helped blow up a nightclub. . . . So what if it gets 11 miles to the gallon? . . . I gave money to a terrorist training camp in a foreign country." Another ad: "This is George. This is the gas that George bought for his SUV. This is the oil-company executive that sold the gas that George bought for his SUV. These are the countries where the executive bought the oil that made the gas that George bought for his SUV. And these are the terrorists who get money from those countries every time George fills up his SUV." Ms. Huffington has been lambasted for demonizing average Americans who drive SUVs. She denies the charge, saying she drove one herself until 9/11, after which she came to her senses. Still, she is laying one mighty big guilt trip on them. Moreover, if she had wanted to make the ads less divisive, less an act of war by some Americans against other Americans, she could have. Clearly, she wanted the attention that comes with divisiveness.
The point of her ads is pathetic. She holds out the hope to Americans that they can do something meaningful about terrorism by driving high-gas-mileage cars. This is something one can believe if one is determined to. In truth, though, terrorism money can come from anyplace. And the Arab oil multizillionaires have all manner of ways of continuing to sell their oil. The idea that the solution to terrorism is to make the Arab countries poorer is highly dubious.
There is real danger in Ms. Huffington's pandering to war fever. If some Americans tie everything to terrorism - even the cars people drive - they justify others doing the same thing. If they say driving an SUV makes one a supporter of terrorists, they give license to those who would say opposing the Iraq war or staunchly defending civil liberties makes one a supporter of terrorists. Those charges are absurd (and ugly), too.
Ms. Huffington used to be a conservative activist. Now she pushes for electric and hybrid cars, in common cause with liberals.
A little ideological eclecticism is a good thing. But if she's going to be making such bizarre, weak, divisive and irresponsible arguments, the liberal cause was better off when she was a conservative.

Load-Date: January 14, 2003


End of Document