Notes on the Death of a Dictator
The New York Times
October 21, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 34; LETTERS
Length: 344 words
Body


To the Editor:
The killing of the notorious Libyan dictator Muammar el-Qaddafi on Thursday marks the end of a long struggle for the people of his embattled nation.
For more than four decades the citizenry was ruled by a man known for repression, iron-fisted rule, the fomenting of terrorism and savagery.
Colonel Qaddafi made a peace of sorts with the United States, renouncing terrorism and the production of weapons of mass destruction, turning over individuals suspected in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, and paying compensation to the victims' families.
He got the last laugh, though, by securing the release by our purported friends and allies in the Scottish government of the only person convicted in the murders.
To see the convicted terrorist welcomed back to Libya as a hero was sickening to civilized human beings who believe in justice.
Let us hope that the new leader of Libya, the devil we do not know, will be better than the one we did know.
OREN M. SPIEGLER Upper St. Clair, Pa., Oct. 20, 2011
To the Editor:
Nice work by the Obama administration. It helped save the Libyan people from massacre at the hands of a dictator, but without taking the brunt of the military or financial burden. Libya's dictator was removed from power and killed, but not by American soldiers, so we are not morally obligated to rebuild Libyan society or infrastructure.
People in the Middle East can have another positive example of government change without feeling like victims of ''American imperialism.'' A textbook example of what limited intervention and fostering democracy should look like. Brilliant job.
DANA DUNBAR Columbus, Ohio, Oct. 20, 2011
To the Editor:
Muammar el-Qaddafi's death should be a wake-up call to autocrats across the Middle East and beyond. You have two options: You can yield your power like President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and face exile or prison, or cling to power and have images of your bloodied corpse circulate the globe.
PETER FRIED Brighton, Mass., Oct. 20, 2011

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 21, 2011


End of Document