Nothing wrong with less funds for homeland security here
The Bismarck Tribune
September 20, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 8a
Length: 474 words
Body


We should be embarrassed.
North Dakota has accepted millions of dollars from the federal government to promote homeland security. The amount is declining, and that may be exactly what is needed to force jurisdictions to prioritize and identify real needs when seeking grants.
It's not to insinuate that all jurisdictions have spent frivolously, although it's hard to imagine how Rolette County could keep a straight face while spending $2,789 on a color laser printer in the name of "terrorism incident prevention equipment."
The North Dakota Department of Emergency Services has administered the grant funds through its homeland security division. There was a generous $18.5 million to spend in 2003, but the amount has shrunken to less than $6.7 million for 2007. Of course, the department's position is that every penny has been well spent.
The division has had to certify that the local jurisdictions were shopping for items having federal homeland security approval. If the item is listed in the 197 pages of authorized equipment, then the prime responsibility was borne by the local governing body or agency to be conscientious about whether the purchase really was legitimately needed.
Just because an item's on the list doesn't mean the local fire or police department could further security within its acreage of homeland.
It rightly should be acknowledged that the list is more fun to read than the old Monkey Ward's catalogue.
The listing, 03WA-01-UCUT, is underwater cutting/welding equipment. What rescue squad wouldn't covet that, and perhaps sometime put it to good use? The animal handling and veterinary first aid supplies are more of a puzzlement: 16AR-00-CHUT, chutes, cattle and hog, portable; and 16AR-00-SPEC, speculum, swine mouth.
Then the casual browser is jolted and brought down to earth by the realization that this is serious business. The supplies for dealing with chemical or biological terrorism could be a matter of life or death. Likewise, the bomb disposal robot is anything but a toy for an overgrown kid.
That's why the reports of grant money having been spent on such routine things as traffic cones is disturbing.
Maybe Billings County's local emergency planning committee has the right idea. On Sept. 25, the committee will meet and talk about spending this year's grant money. The public is invited to the event at Medora.
The public should know and be involved with how homeland security grant money is spent. You wouldn't think the county needed to buy four hazmat suits to the tune of $3,664, but they come in handy and not just in situations of terrorism. According to the Associated Press, the fire chief crawled into one of them while dealing with a truck leaking a hazardous chemical along Interstate 94.
It would be reassuring to taxpayers to trust that every purchase made by every entity is equally as useful.

Load-Date: September 20, 2007


End of Document