Novels explore the allure of Islam -- and terrorism; Americans are at the center of two thought-provoking books
USA TODAY
April 29, 2010 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. 5D
Length: 574 words
Byline: Carol Memmott
Body


American Taliban
By Pearl Abraham
Random House, 258 pp., $25
---
American Subversive
By David Goodwillie
Scribner, 309 pp., $25
In 2001, Americans reacted with shock and dismay to media images of John Walker Lindh, a 20-year-old American arrested during the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan. Lindh, who would come to be known as the American Taliban, was charged as an enemy combatant. Later we would learn he had spent time at an al-Qaeda training camp.
The big question: How could this happen?
Two new novels delve into the psyche of "homegrown" terrorists. Both imagine how seemingly innocent and non-radical individuals get caught up -- knowingly or not -- in violent acts against fellow Americans.
American Taliban by Pearl Abraham is clearly inspired by Lindh's story. Abraham's portrayal of John Jude Parish is grounded in the 19-year-old's naivete and compliant demeanor. An avid surfer and skateboarder, Parish is a likable all-American boy.
But his life takes a radical turn when he's drawn, through online chat rooms, into a fascination with Islam.
Eventually, with his parents' blessing, he decides to spend a semester at a university in Pakistan, where he can study Arabic and fulfill a yearning to learn firsthand about Muslim religion and culture.
Parish's adventure begins in 2000. We follow him from classrooms in Pakistan and then to a mountain training camp followed by a miles-long trek into Afghanistan with other young men.
And then, 9/11 strikes.
There are many things to recommend Abraham's novel: the purity and innocence that drives Parish on his quest for adventure and learning; the window it opens into the world of Islam and its magnificent culture and literature; the story of Parish's parents and how their son's eventual disappearance brings them to the brink of insanity.
It's a story as preposterous as it is credible.
The U.S.-based terrorists at the center of American Subversive by David Goodwillie bring to mind Timothy McVeigh, whose infamy grew out of his participation in the deadly Oklahoma City bombing 15 years ago.
But because a woman is a central character in this novel, Goodwillie's book also evokes chilling images of blond and blue-eyed American Colleen LaRose, aka "Jihad Jane," who was arrested in March on charges of plotting with Islamic radicals.
In American Subversive, Paige Roderick, a young woman left emotionally bereft by the death of her brother in Iraq, undergoes a gradual radicalization that grows out of her grief and her conviction that she can make the world a better place.
What is at first a minor involvement with an environmental activist group evolves into her active participation with an underground group reminiscent of the Weather Underground.
Played against the backdrop of Roderick's evolution is the story of Aidan Cole, a New York City blogger whose dreams of becoming an important journalist appear doomed -- until someone e-mails him a photo of Paige and points to her involvement in the bombing of a Manhattan building that housed a private equity firm.
What then plays out is Roderick's re-evaluation of her participation in escalating acts of violence and Cole's examination of his own life and the choices he makes as a person and as a member of society after 9/11.
The novel is thoughtful and dead-on in its presentation of our post-recession, digitally obsessed, self-centered and seemingly morally bankrupt culture.
It raises the question: "What would I do in a similar situation?" 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP
PHOTO, B/W
PHOTO, B/W

Load-Date: April 29, 2010


End of Document