Now Congress should declare war on terrorism
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
November 7, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 1085 words
Byline: Mike Stollenwerk
Body


On Oct. 31, House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert ordered the United Sates House of Representatives closed after anthrax attacks on the Capitol Building. Not since President James Madison fled the British Navy and a burning White House during America's first congressionally declared war (the War of 1812) have enemy forces forced a branch of the federal government to cease operations.
Accordingly, after the years of terrorist attacks upon the United States and its allies around the world finally culminated in the synchronized employment of multiple weapons of mass destruction against our homeland, the president and the Congress of the United States have committed the country to war.
Or have they?
#STOLLEN.BRUT#
Article I of the U.S. Constitution states that "The Congress shall have power to declare war." Constitutional issues aside, as a practical matter, America's scorecard at sustaining, let alone winning, large undeclared wars is poor at best.
If there is to be a U.S.-led campaign against terrorism, there should be a congressional Declaration of War. Moreover, direct enemy attacks upon the legislature itself and the executive's recent declarations that (despite a paucity of future bombing targets in Afghanistan) "this war will last years" and "knows no borders" provides a historical opportunity for the legislature to reclaim its war powers.
The manner in which the branches of the federal government share war powers is unique among the nations of the world. Although the legislature holds the power to declare war, the judiciary has upheld the executive's prerogative as commander in chief to prosecute wars as long as the legislature has appropriated funds to resource the effort.
Notably, in the famous Prize Cases of 1863, the Supreme Court went even further. After Lincoln's Navy seized Confederate-bound vessels three months before Congress recognized the Civil War, the Supreme Court upheld the executive's wartime behavior, and ruled that if the nation is attacked, the president is "bound to accept the challenge without waiting for any special legislative authority."
The 1964 Gulf of Tonkin Resolution helped propel the United States into what was initially a very popular (but undeclared) war in Vietnam. Years later, that campaign was not only extremely unpopular and unsustainable, but also widely held as a perversion of constitutional power by the executive with the tacit agreement of a pusillanimous legislature.
Senator Jacob Javitts of New York noted in 1973 that "The power of decision...had not been stolen, it had been surrendered." Historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. wrote that the imperial presidents who prosecuted the Vietnam War had little trouble from Congress, which lacked "the courage to use the power it had."
American political reality was not lost on Hanoi's political elites, who held on long enough to clearly win a shooting war with the United States. Modern American presidents can easily enter the United States in war, but only Congress can credibly signal U.S.  tenacity to stay the course once the initial political thrill of combat wears off.
While no one prays for more Tarawas or Dresdens, it's apparent that after the morning of Sept. 11, neither the executive nor the legislature entertains expectations of recent American military "business as usual."
A retreat from the next Mogadishu under the final protective fires of non-lethal weapons, and "checking fire" when the next group of enemy peaceniks assemble to sing "Kumbahya" on top of a military target are simply out of the question.
So if the United States is serious about making war, why not signal it with a congressional declaration?
Few will argue the need to declare war every time the US employs military forces in combat. Out of over 200 occasions of American military combat operations abroad, Congress has declared war five times (six if you count the actions of the second Continental Congress).
Implicit in the history of U.S. war making is an idea that Declarations of War are reserved for unique circumstances that require credibly signaling broad and sustainable agreement between the legislature and the executive to all audiences, foreign and domestic.
Recent undeclared U.S. wars in Korea, Vietnam and Southwest Asia are correlated with the mustering of "use it or lose it" military forces, international coalitions and American public support.
The resultant, mixed war record is perhaps kindly scored at "1/1/1."
A Congressional Declaration of War on terrorism is essential to mobilize and sustain durable domestic and diplomatic support for military power not characterized as "use it or lose it," but rather "use it and use it and use it."
Once a declaration is issued, Congress has proven its commitment to both the war aims and the troops, and is actually freer to torment the president with oversight and criticism, while resuming debate on the domestic agenda -- just ask Lincoln or Roosevelt.
Rep. Barbara Lee of California justifies her lone vote against a joint resolution backing a military response to terrorism based in part upon the notion that Congress should not cede its war powers to the executive. Perhaps she has a point -- let's face it, the executive has been making undeclared war for the last 55 years, and this crisis provides an opportunity for the legislature to re-assert its constitutional role in war making.
In a recent commentary, former Secretary of State Henry A.  Kissinger makes the point that under present circumstances "half measures are likely to do more harm than good."
After over a month of U.S. bombing in Afghanistan, Sen. John McCain now argues the need to "get on with it" and intensify the war in Afghanistan. Sen. Joe Lieberman wants to "see this war to the finish" and target Iraq and Saddam Hussein.
Both congressmen could more credibly express their desire for a deeper and wider war though the constitutional mechanism foreseen as necessary and proper by the Founding Fathers.
The argument for a congressional Declaration of War rests partly on the principle that the action is the proper role of Congress in war making. Mainly however, the case rests upon the fact that in the rich context of American history and political tradition, making war without a Declaration of War is a half measure unto itself.
------
Major Stollenwerk is a Lancaster County native. Formerly a divisional war planner, he is currently an Army Research Fellow in California. The views in this commentary are the author's, and not necessarily those of the U.S. Army.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Major Mike Stollenwork

Load-Date: November 21, 2001


End of Document