NSA data critical to U.S. drone strikes; Documents show CIA relies heavily on intel, review finds
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 18, 2013 Friday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 26
Length: 402 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Highlight: Report: Documents show close collaboration of NSA and CIA in drone strike program
Body


 - The National Security Agency has been extensively involved in the U.S. government's targeted killing program, collaborating closely with the CIA in the use of drone strikes against terrorists abroad, The Washington Post reported after a review of documents provided by former NSA systems analyst Edward Snowden.
In one instance, an email sent by the wife of an Osama bin Laden associate contained clues as to her husband's whereabouts and led to a CIA drone strike that killed him in Pakistan in October 2012, the Post reported.
While citing documents provided by Snowden, the Post reported that it was withholding many details at the request of U.S. intelligence officials who cited potential damage to ongoing operations and national security, the paper reported.
The documents make clear that the CIA-operated drone campaign relies heavily on the NSA's ability to vacuum up enormous quantities of email, phone calls and other fragments of signals intelligence, or SIGINT, the newspaper said.
The NSA created a secret unit known as the Counter-Terrorism Mission Aligned Cell, or CT MAC, to concentrate the agency's vast resources on hard-to-find terrorism targets, the Post reported.
The documents provided by Snowden don't explain how the bin Laden associate's email was obtained or whether it was obtained through the controversial NSA programs recently made public, including its metadata collection of numbers dialed by nearly every person in the U.S. 
Instead, the Post said its review indicates that the agency depends heavily on targeted network penetrations to gather information that wouldn't otherwise be trapped in surveillance nets the NSA has set at key Internet gateways.
The U.S. has never publicly acknowledged killing bin Laden associate Hassan Ghul, according to the Post. The al-Qaida operative had been captured in 2004 and helped expose bin Laden's courier network, a key development in the effort to locate bin Laden. Ghul then spent two years in a secret CIA prison and returned to al-Qaida after the U.S. sent him to his native Pakistan in 2006.
U.S. forces killed bin Laden at his Pakistan hideout in 2011. That same year, the Treasury Department named Ghul a target of U.S. counterterrorism sanctions after he had helped al-Qaida re-establish logistics networks. Obtained during a monthslong effort to find Ghul, the email from his wife erased doubts U.S. forces had found him, the Post said.

Load-Date: October 18, 2013


End of Document