NSA threatens our liberty; Cal and Bob consider Snowden's leaks and the need to thwart terrorism
USA TODAY
June 13, 2013 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 999 words
Body


BOB: It is remarkable that Edward Snowden, a 29-year-old consultant to the National Security Agency with no high school degree and who once was employed as a security guard, was able to reveal two secret programs of the agency and expose the inner workings of one of America's most secretive institutions. Those programs intercepted the phone records and e-mails of U.S. citizens despite most having no connection to terrorist activity.
CAL: We can't have individuals like Snowden and Pfc. Bradley Manning, who is now on trial for his disclosures to WikiLeaks, applying their own political agendas and moral code to classified information. That plays into the hands of our enemies and will cause chaos in intelligence circles. Still, like you, I am very concerned about the intrusion on our privacy and the erosion of our liberties by government.
BOB: I realize that Snowden will likely be prosecuted to the full extent of the law, but I think his exposure of what our government is doing is good. The Fourth Amendment to the Constitution protects our personal records and guarantees they will be free from government intrusion. Every American should thank him for disclosing these programs to the press.
CAL: In his new book, A Government of Wolves: The Emerging American Police State, attorney John Whitehead paints a chilling portrait of a nation in the final stages of transformation from a constitutional republic to an authoritarian regime, complete with surveillance cameras, drug-sniffing dogs, SWAT team raids, roadside strip searches, blood draws at DUI checkpoints, drones, tasers, privatized prisons, GPS tracking devices, zero tolerance policies, overcriminalization and free speech zones. Whitehead's book reveals the inner workings of an increasingly pervasive surveillance state, including the NSA's program to track the communications of all Americans and map the daily activities of all people in the United States. There must be a balance between legitimate security and overbearing government. This is Orwellian.
BOB: Cal, intercepts of data about private phone conversations aren't anything new, they have been taking place for years. During my time in the Carter White House, when I had access to information about national security investigations, what I saw was limited to information related to foreigners and specific U.S. citizens who were threatening our national security interests. I never once saw information about an unrelated American citizen caught up in the intercepts.
CAL: That's part of the problem, Bob. You were a senior official working for the president, Snowden was a junior government contractor working for Booz Allen Hamilton, a strategy and consulting firm. The government has a serious problem if someone at his level, sitting at a computer in his home in Hawaii, can access so much top secret information.
BOB: Ever since 9/11 and the USA Patriot Act and the explosion of new security organizations, the American people have seen their liberties eroded. Not to mention jersey barriers surrounding our most revered monuments and historic sites, including the White House and the Lincoln and Jefferson memorials. For the first time in history, the main door of the Supreme Court has been locked.
CAL: Yes, and more and more federal agencies have SWAT teams. And what's with all of that ammunition the Department of Homeland Security has been buying? Never has "I'm from the government and I'm here to help you" sounded more like that song by The Police: "Every move you make ... every breath you take ... I'll be watching you."
BOB: Look at the record. Despite lots of intelligence, the FBI missed indicators leading up to 9/11. Despite Internet traffic between Fort Hood suspect Nidal Hasan and terrorists, the CIA missed it. And despite being warned by the Russians twice about the Tsarnaev brothers before the Boston Marathon bombing, the FBI missed them as well.
CAL: Hasan might have been stopped were it not for political correctness and oversensitivity because of his Muslim faith, but that's another issue. You're right, though. Good police work at the local level, along with citizens reporting suspicious behavior, would be better than government reaching into more areas of our lives. Once liberty is lost, it's difficult to regain. To their credit, the government says it has thwarted a number of terrorist attempts.
BOB: Yes, there have been successes against terrorism, and terrorists will continue to attack us and most likely they will sometimes succeed despite our best efforts. But if we continue to hide behind security walls they will have, in effect, defeated us.
CAL: I hope we don't become like Israel and forced to live with terror in our midst. We ought to be doing a better job of monitoring the types of people we let into the country and not admit those from nations that are breeding grounds for fanaticism.  Clerics who teach hatred and incite people to destroy America and kill should be deported if they are not U.S. citizens, or at the very least closely monitored. The president has declared that this war on terrorism, "like all wars, must end", but no war is over if one side is still fighting. The terrorists haven't surrendered, and the radical ideology that drives them remains as powerful as ever. Edward Snowden may have aided and abetted them.
BOB: It has been almost 12 years since 9/11. This country has the unique ability to carry on. Yes, we will always remember the lessons of 9/11, but we should never allow our way of life to be determined by Muslim fanatics.
CAL: Agreed. The Founding Fathers warned us about excessive government. It was Benjamin Franklin who said, "Any people that would give up liberty for a little temporary safety deserves neither liberty nor safety." Ronald Reagan put it more succinctly, "Concentrated power has always been the enemy of liberty." The government has become too powerful. We have a Constitution. It's time for our government to return to the boundaries originally set for it. 

Graphic

 
photo Charles Dharapak, AP National Security Agency headquarters at Fort Meade, Md.

Load-Date: June 13, 2013


End of Document