NSA misused domestic surveillance, papers show; Secret court judge so piqued he nearly killed program
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 11, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 7
Length: 330 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO  
Body


Government officials accessed for nearly three years data on thousands of domestic phone numbers they shouldn't have and then misrepresented their actions to a secret spy court to reauthorize the government's surveillance program, documents released Tuesday show.
The Obama administration had earlier conceded that its surveillance program scooped up more domestic phone calls and emails than authorized. Until Tuesday, the depths of the program's abuse were unknown.
According to the documents released by the administration, a spy court judge in 2009 was so fed up with the government's overreaching that he threatened to shutter the surveillance program designed to fight terrorism. Judge Reggie Walton said in March 2009 that he had lost confidence in officials' ability to legally operate the surveillance program.
The NSA told the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court that month that from a technical standpoint, there was no single person who had a complete technical understanding of how the program's computer system worked.
Walton issued his blistering opinion after discovering government officials had been accessing domestic phone records for nearly three years without reasonable, articulate suspicion that they were connected to terrorism. For instance, he noted that only 1,935 phone numbers out of 17,835 on a list investigators were working with in early 2009 met that standard.
Walton said the government's excuse that analysts thought his order applied only to archived phone records strained credulity, and he ordered the National Security Agency to conduct an end-to-end review of its processes and policies and also ordered closer monitoring of its activities.
Later in 2009, a Justice Department lawyer reported to the spy court a likely violation of NSA surveillance rules. The lawyer said that in some cases, it appeared the NSA was distributing sensitive phone records by email to as many as 189 analysts, but only 53 were approved by the court to see them.

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document