Nuclear terror is treaty focus
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 14, 2005 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A13
Length: 380 words
Byline: Edith M. Lederer ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


The General Assembly approved a global treaty yesterday aimed at preventing nuclear terrorism by making it a crime for would-be terrorists to possess or threaten to use nuclear weapons or radioactive material.
A resolution adopted by the 191-member world body by consensus calls on all countries to sign and ratify the "International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism." The treaty will be opened for signatures Sept. 14 and must be ratified by 22 countries to come into force.
"By its action today, the General Assembly has shown that it can, when it has the political will, play an important role in the global fight again terrorism," U.S. deputy ambassador Stuart Holliday told delegates after the vote. "The nuclear-terrorism convention, when it enters into force, will strengthen the international legal framework to combat terrorism."
The treaty makes it a crime for any person to possess radioactive material or a radioactive device with the intent to cause death or injury, or damage property or the environment. It would also be a crime to damage a nuclear facility.
Threatening to use radioactive material or devices - or unlawfully demanding nuclear material or other radioactive substances would also be a crime. Accomplices and organizers would also be covered by the convention.
Countries that are parties to the treaty would be required to make the acts criminal offenses under their national laws, "punishable by appropriate penalties which take into account the grave nature of these offenses."
Russia launched the campaign for a treaty to combat nuclear terrorism more than seven years ago, when Boris N. Yeltsin was president. But it was stymied for years because countries said the draft convention was trying to define terrorism - an issue that has deeply divided the United Nations.
Diplomats said the roadblock was broken after the drafting committee's last formal meeting in November, when the 57-member Organization of the Islamic Conference decided the new treaty could focus on criminalizing specific actions related to nuclear terrorism as similar treaties have done.
The drafting committee then quickly agreed on a text April 1, leaving the difficult issue of defining terrorism to a new overall convention on terrorism still under debate.

Load-Date: September 12, 2005


End of Document