Nuclear terror threat goes 'POOF'; As 9/11 recedes, we're losing focus on a danger with unimaginable consequences. But we can still help stop it.
USA TODAY
October 29, 2012 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 622 words
Byline: Michael Levi and Micah Zenko
Body


President George W. Bush called it his "ultimate nightmare." Sen. John Kerry, running for president in 2004, said that it was "the greatest threat that we face." They were both talking about the terrifying possibility that a terrorist group could acquire a nuclear weapon and attack the United States. Yet this year, over the course of three presidential debates, the issue barely surfaced. That is dangerous: Nuclear terrorism remains one of the very few vital risks to America, and the next president, whoever he is, will need to work vigilantly to prevent it.
Fears about the prospect of nuclear-armed terrorists date to the 1970s, and more recently to the immediate aftermath of the Cold War, when strategists feared that a crumbling Soviet empire might be unable to protect its vast stocks of weapons-grade uranium and plutonium. Over the next decade, though, many people's concerns subsided as their attention turned to a series of crises of the day.
They were jolted out of that slumber on Sept. 11, 2011, when al-Qaeda revealed an appetite for mass destruction and demolished the old dictum that terrorists wanted "a lot of people watching, not a lot of people dead."
Post-9/11 focus
In the years that followed,  Bush pumped money and diplomatic muscle into efforts to secure nuclear weapons and materials around the world. Barack Obama, upon entering office, seized on nuclear terrorism as a priority, turbocharging previous initiatives and launching a series of Nuclear Security Summits to galvanize global efforts to prevent it.
Yet if the recent debates are any indication, the cycle of shock and trance is setting in again, as politicians and the public tire of worrying about the threat. Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney referred to it obliquely Monday night when he claimed that Russia is abandoning Nunn-Lugar, a core U.S. program aimed at securing nuclear materials.  Obama quickly asserted that it would be "unacceptable" to allow Iran "to be able to provide nuclear technology to non-state actors" and then moved on. This is a far cry for the attention that nuclear terrorism received in the past.
Crying 'wolf'?
This can partly be explained by excessive hype about the possibility that terrorists might acquire nuclear arms, particularly prominent in the years after 9/11. With no attack in the years since, some might be tempted to recall the boy who cried wolf. That has made warnings about nuclear terrorism less powerful today.
But one needn't believe that a nuclear attack is probable to conclude that it should be a top-tier priority. Nuclear terrorism, however unlikely, is one of the few prospects that could truly devastate the USA. An atomic bomb detonated in a crowded downtown area could kill hundreds of thousands of Americans promptly. On this scale, no other  threat -- such as fears of a cyber Pearl Harbor or ongoing turmoil in the Middle East -- compares.
Act now
The good news is that there are still steps that the U.S. and the world can take to reduce the odds of a catastrophic attack. The United States should work with the thirty-four countries that still have weapons-useable nuclear materials to remove those whenever possible. It should help others reduce the risk that corrupt or extremist workers at nuclear facilities could divert any dangerous materials that remain. The next president should also broker a new agreement with Russia to build on the gains of the past  20 years in securing the former Soviet arsenal.
The threat of nuclear terrorism has diminished markedly over the past decade, but it has not been eliminated. The next U.S. president will still face a vital challenge that he cannot ignore.
Michael Levi and Micah Zenko are fellows at the Council on Foreign Relations. 

Graphic

 
photo DMITRY ASTAKHOV, AFP/Getty Images 2009 photo President Obama and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev have signed arms treaties and participated in Nuclear Security Summits.

Load-Date: October 29, 2012


End of Document