NUDE ARTWORK ON A MAGAZINE COVER PROMPTS OUTRAGE AND DEBATE IN EGYPT
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 2, 1994 Wednesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: FEATURES ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. E03
Length: 741 words
Byline: Mona Eltahawy, REUTERS
Dateline: CAIRO
Body


A Gustav Klimt nude of Adam and Eve on a magazine cover has ignited a cultural war in Egypt.
The turn-of-the-century painting by the Vienna artist was the subject of a long parliamentary attack on Culture Minister Farouk Hosni that shocked intellectuals and sparked a debate on freedom of expression in an increasingly conservative environment.
Parliamentarian Galal Gharib told a rowdy assembly Hosni was responsible for the immorality of modern Egyptian culture and asked women members of parliament to leave so he could prove it.
The women stayed put and Gharib pointed to a photograph of the "offending" painting, which appeared on the cultural magazine Creativity, and spoke of a play with homosexual characters as examples of what was culturally rotten in Egypt.
Gharib motioned a no-confidence vote against Hosni but Gamal el-Ghitani, editor-in-chief of the weekly Culture News, wrote that the real target of the assault was Egyptian culture. "Unless every owner of a pen or a brush and every innovator stands up to such attacks, no one will be able to write a word, compose a tune, or paint a color," Ghitani warned.
Nobel Laureate Naguib Mahfouz joined hundreds of prominent Egyptian writers in signing a statement condemning what they considered Gharib's "cultural terrorism."
The uproar in parliament has highlighted the fear of many intellectuals that the showdown between the government and Muslim militants fighting to overthrow it would spill over into cultural circles and dictate the boundaries of freedom.
Intellectuals often complain the government, accused by the Muslim fundamentalists of being godless, was trying too hard to outdo the militants by imposing a stricter Islamic line and censorship in movies and artwork.
"I reject any authority outside the art world imposing restrictions. Today it may be al-Azhar (Egypt's primary Islamic institution), tomorrow it may be the army. Only an artist can be the source of judgment on art, not a religious, governmental or political entity," said artist Adel el-Siwi. When a journalist for a cultural publication asked him recently if art was sinful, Siwi refused to answer, saying he was an artist, not a theologian.
Fundamentalists regard films and theater as sinful because they show torrid love affairs, sex scenes and drinking and other behavior deemed immoral. Militants have killed at least one writer and threatened many others for their secular views.
Many writers and intellectuals are on the militants' death list and have been under tight government protection since the 1992 murder of secular writer Farag Foda, who was gunned down by militants for his anti-fundamentalist views. British author Salman Rushdie, ordered killed by Iran's Islamic leader for his blasphemous novel Satanic Verses, found a sympathetic ear among many Egyptian intellectuals who said his book should not be banned.
Intellectuals shake their heads in disbelief at a recent case in Egypt in which fundamentalist lawyers demanded an end to the happy marriage of secular academic Nasr Hamed Abu Zeid on the grounds that he has renounced Islam through his books. The lawyers argued that Abu Zeid was an apostate and therefore his marriage to a Muslim woman was automatically annulled.
"This (Gharib's) barbaric attack, taking cover behind religion, is part of a plan aimed at destroying the Egyptian mind. Egypt's culture is its protection against outside influence," said writer Fathia al-Assal.
Other academics have stressed that nudity and erotica are not new to Egyptian culture but have been there from ancient Egyptian times and can even be found among the great works of Islamic literature. "If the excuse of nudity was applied to everything then we would have to destroy most of the relics that we are proud of," wrote Ghitani.
Ibrahim Issa, writing in Rose al-Yusif magazine, reminded Gharib of Sheikh al-Nafzawi's Perfumed Garden, a medieval Islamic erotica manual on a par with the Kama Sutra, an Eastern work on the pleasure of sex.
Only Fahmi Howeidi, the sole pro-Islamist columnist allowed to air his views in the semi-official al-Ahram newspaper, came to Gharib's defense. He accused the intellectuals of overreacting and asked, "Who is terrorizing who?"
"Are we exaggerating when we say that Egypt is in a sad state, that we live in the shadow of Islamic militancy that practices terrorism in the streets, which is matched by secular militancy that practices terrorism via the media?" Howeidi wrote.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document