Nukes Real danger is terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 04, 2001, Tuesday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 346 words
Byline: Gzedit
Body


WHILE President Bush keeps pushing the silly GOP plan to spend perhaps $ 1 trillion of taxpayer money for a space shield against incoming foreign missiles, the real danger to America lies in smuggled nuclear bombs.
Terrorists such as those who blasted New York's World Trade Center have shown that they'll gladly incinerate "The Great Satan," America. These fanatics aren't able to launch intercontinental missiles - but they can hide bombs in trucks, boats or car trunks.
The New York Times remarked Monday:
"While the Bush administration is worrying about potential missile threats from North Korea, Iran or Iraq, it must not neglect the more immediate danger posed by tons of inadequately secured Russian plutonium. Any country trying to develop nuclear weapons would love to steal a few pounds of the bomb-making material. Yet the White House is considering indefinitely delaying a plan worked out with Moscow last year to begin disposing of the Russian plutonium."
Russia has more than 160 tons of plutonium, half in warheads and half in dubious storage facilities. As that country struggles with economic chaos, some Russian military insiders might be tempted to sell a few hundred pounds to a renegade nation, which might use it to put a crude nuclear device into the hands of "holy warriors."
If that occurred, Washington or New York could vaporize in a mushroom cloud.
Under the plan negotiated by the Clinton administration, America and Russia each would eliminate 34 metric tons of plutonium, chiefly by mixing it with uranium and burning it in power reactors.  Some U.S. plutonium would be converted into radioactive glass logs and buried. But now the Bush White House wants to stall this agreement, claiming that the disposal is too expensive.
Talk about penny-wise and pound-foolish. How expensive would it be to cope with nuclear devastation in a major U.S. city? How much would a million American lives be worth?
Instead of pouring vast sums into questionable space interceptors, the Bush administration should stick to the sensible effort to lower the risk from terrorism.

Load-Date: September 5, 2001


End of Document