NUMBER OF WORLD TERROR VICTIMS ROSE LAST YEAR
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MAY 1, 1997 Thursday SF EDITION


Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A25
Length: 302 words
Byline: George Gedda, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


While international terrorist incidents dropped to a 25-year low last year, the number of casualties reached a near-record 311 dead and 2,652 wounded, the State Department reported yesterday.
The higher casualty toll reflected a continuing trend toward more ruthless attacks on noncombatant targets and the use of more powerful bombs, said the report, which is released annually.
It said Iran "remained the premier state sponsor of terrorism," conducting at least eight dissident assassinations outside Iran in 1996.
Briefing reporters, Ambassador Philip Wilcox, the State Department's top counterterrorism official, said "rogue elements" in Iran are not responsible for these activities.
Instead, he said, "they are sanctioned at the very highest levels. Iran has sought, by exporting terrorism and subversion, to create instability in the Persian Gulf region and elsewhere."
According to the report, there were 296 acts of international terrorism last year, 144 fewer than in 1995.
The worst incident was a bombing carried out by a Sri Lankan separatist group that killed 90 and wounded more than 1,400. Although there were no foreign perpetrators, Wilcox said the incident was international in character because it claimed the lives of many foreigners.
Among the year's other significant attacks was the truck bombing at a U.S. military housing facility near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, that killed 19 U.S. citizens and wounded about 500 people.
It was believed to be the highest number of U.S. citizens killed in a single act of international terrorism since the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland, in which 189 U.S. citizens were among the 270 dead.
All told, 24 Americans died in terrorist incidents last year - the 19 in Saudi Arabia and five in bus bombings and drive-by shootings in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document