Nunn sounds warning on nuclear terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 28, 2005 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 327 words
Byline: JULIA MALONE
Body


Washington --- Former Sen. Sam Nunn said Monday that the United States and other countries "could face disaster" unless they heighten efforts to keep nuclear bomb-making materials out of the hands of terrorists.
"The terrorists are racing, and we are somewhere between a walk and a crawl," the Georgia Democrat told a forum organized by former members of the 9/11 commission to measure progress on security recommendations they issued a year ago in a report that became a best-selling book.
Nunn, who as a senator co-authored a U.S. program that helps the former Soviet states dismantle or secure their nuclear stockpiles, said that responsibility for safeguarding the world's nuclear materials lies largely with the United States and Russia. On a scale of 1 to 10, he rated that effort at "3."
Nunn laid out a nightmare scenario in which a terrorist group detonates a nuclear bomb in one city and then announces that it is going to blow up another. "That's the kind of horror we would face," said Nunn, who is now chief executive officer of the Nuclear Threat Initiative, a nonprofit group.
"We believe that . . .. seeing the danger is the first step to improving security, and that public understanding is absolutely essential if we are to meet these challenges head-on," Nunn said.
He urged the United States to resolve a long-standing dispute over legal liability that he said has "gummed up" the U.S.-aided drive to secure Russia's nuclear weapons stockpiles. Nunn said he was hopeful that the issue --- which involves who would pay if there was an accident while the materials are being secured --- would be settled when President Bush and Russian President Vladimir Putin meet next week at the annual G-8 summit in Scotland.
Despite his sobering assessment, Nunn said that some progress had been made, including the removal of all nuclear weapons from the former Soviet states of Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus and Libya's decision to give up its nuclear ambitions.

Load-Date: June 28, 2005


End of Document