Nutter, you can't compare gun violence with terrorism
The Philadelphia Daily News
November 20, 2015 Friday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2015 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL OPINION; DN Opinion; Pg. 18
Length: 715 words
Byline: BY AARON JOLLAY

Daily News Staff jollaya@phillynews.com, 215-856-5915
Body


MAYOR NUTTER recently did some semantic gymnastics with the word "terrorism." In an Associated Press interview Monday following a meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors in Washington, he said gun violence in American cities was a form of "domestic terrorism" and comparable to international terrorism.
 While all gun deaths are unacceptable, it is a serious stretch to equate everyday criminal violence in America with vast international terrorism conspiracies such as ISIS. He is correct that both have the effect of making citizens feel afraid and insecure. But there is a difference between terrorist acts and domestic violence, and what defines that difference is political agendas. 
 Some incidents are obvious. Shootings at military sites, regardless of the gunman's mental state, serve a clear purpose of delivering a political statement against our nation. Violence at houses of worship might also carry a clear political aim against a specific religion. Even shootings at schools, theaters or shopping malls may be seen as political statements against society. However, to lump in criminals who kill in the course of robbery or to settle scores amongst themselves is not just technically incorrect, it diminishes the reality that there are people who have a world view that drives them to violence against innocents to achieve a political end.
 Nutter specifically defined domestic terrorists as "criminals that threaten the health, safety and welfare" of our citizens. That is much too broad a definition. People who drive recklessly or even pour toxic chemicals into our sewer system that will eventually reach our waterways can fit that description, too.
 So, if our run-of-the-mill domestic murderers, vandals and thieves are terrorists by virtue of putting our communities in fear, what do we call law enforcement in places like Ferguson, Mo.? They made the black community of that town feel afraid and insecure, and like real terrorist groups they were organized and armed as if a real war was upon them. Their political goal was to subjugate the community and continue to derive funding from them over minor violations. Would we go so far as to call such police departments terrorist cells? 
 Violent criminals are a scourge, to be sure. However, they are not a terrorist group with a clear political goal in mind, trying to coerce society into giving in to their demands. They're just greedy, callous, violent bastards. You won't see them committing suicide bombings or taking hostages, the latter at least not on a regular basis. What they gain by making communities uneasy is a level of freedom to continue their illegal activities. They do not want American troops out of a foreign country, aid to Israel to cease, achieving some right-wing ideological objective, or other actual goals of real terrorists. 
 We should not rush to use the term for what is really random, heartbreaking, wanton murder. We can address the crisis of gun deaths in America without grouping them in with mass killings designed to instill fear into our population. The Paris attackers have little in common with a drive-by shooting in terms of both scope and objective. Corner drug dealers aren't blowing themselves up in public convinced heavenly glory awaits them on the other side. If all the criminals decide to join up and start claiming territory and killing those who resist like Daesh, a/k/a ISIS, has done in Iraq and Syria, then by all means call them terrorists.
 Nutter wants federal and local officials to work closer together to address gun violence in our cities, much like they have done in the name of preventing terrorist attacks. This sounds like a good suggestion. Some detailed policy points would be welcome, but I doubt the NSA spying on our phone calls and emails is going to put a dent in the problem. We need to empower community voices against violence, provide better programs to keep youth off the streets and focused on their future, and pass comprehensive gun legislation to keep firearms out of the hands of known criminals and those too mentally unstable to be trusted with the rights granted by the Second Amendment.
 Words have power. Using them with disregard for their fundamental meaning is no way to score political points.
 Aaron Jollay is a Daily News copy editor. 

Load-Date: November 20, 2015


End of Document