Nutter names panel to review ethics policies
The Philadelphia Inquirer
October 7, 2008 Tuesday
CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B05
Length: 344 words
Byline: By Marcia Gelbart

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Mayor Nutter yesterday announced the members of a new task force that will evaluate city ethics policies and recommend fixes to Philadelphia's five-year-old campaign-finance law. 
"When I campaigned last year, it was on a pledge to restore citizens' trust in government," Nutter said, standing between his chief integrity officer, Joan Markman, and his inspector general, Amy Kurland.  
"We've made some progress," Nutter said, "but we are not there yet." 
Nutter announced the creation of the task force 12 days ago, and he chose eight city leaders, in addition to himself, to name one appointee each. He also called for a report to be delivered to him and City Council President Anna Verna by Feb. 1. 
The panel will be chaired by former federal prosecutor Michael Schwartz, Nutter's appointee. Schwartz, now with the Pepper Hamilton law firm, investigated former city treasurer Corey Kemp, who is serving a 10-year prison sentence on corruption charges. 
Other task force members are: 
Nolan Atkinson of the Duane Morris law firm, who was appointed by J. Whyatt Mondesire of the Philadelphia branch of the NAACP. 
Stephanos Bibas of the University of Pennsylvania Law School, appointed by Penn Law School Dean Michael Fitts. 
Heidi Gold of Ross Associates, appointed by Kelly Green of the League of Women Voters in Philadelphia. 
Brian McCormick of the Sheller law firm, appointed by Committee of Seventy president Zack Stalberg. 
Elizabeth McElroy, political director of the Philadelphia Council AFL-CIO, appointed by Philadelphia AFL-CIO president Pat Eiding. 
Al Mezzaroba, former CEO of the Convention Center, appointed by Verna. 
Stephanie Resnick of the Fox Rothschild law firm, appointed by Michael Pratt, chancellor of the Philadelphia Bar Association. 
Edward Turzanski, a senior fellow with the Center for Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism and Homeland Security at the Foreign Policy Research Institute, appointed by Mark Schweiker, president of the Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce. 
Contact staff writer Marcia Gelbart at 215-854-2338 or mgelbart@phillynews.com. 

Load-Date: October 7, 2008


End of Document