NY grapples with terrorism gap; Big firms left in lurch for property, workers' comp
Crain's New York Business
February 17, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 23
Length: 631 words
Byline: jacqueline s. gold
Body


The New York state government is struggling to fill in the gaps left by last year's federal terrorism insurance law.
Because of the large number and high value of properties in Manhattan, hundreds of big companies here are having trouble getting affordable property and workers' compensation coverage, despite the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act that was signed into law in November by President George W. Bush.
Gregory Serio, the state's superintendent of insurance, is working with insurance firms and large employers to craft solutions to the complex problems.
He has also publicly taken on the insurance industry for its decision to charge more for terrorism coverage in New York.
When the industry recently cited New York City as one of the locations at highest risk for terrorism, Mr. Serio blasted the ranking, saying that it appeared to punish big cities. He called the increases expected for properties here ''outrageous'' and questioned the industry's grounds for deciding that New York City is more likely to sustain a future attack.
The new federal law was supposed to make terrorism insurance available and affordable. The program now requires the federal government to pick up 90% of the costs of claims from a terrorist attack that results in more than $10 billion worth of damage.
Insurers at risk, too
For companies in some areas of the country and for smaller businesses, the law is doing its work. But New York is turning out to be an exception. Insurance companies say the destruction of another large building and the deaths or injuries of thousands of workers would devastate them, even if they were picking up only 10% of the damages.
''After Sept. 11, we've limited the risk we'll take in any one ZIP code,'' says Susan Rivera, president of Ace INA Holdings Inc., the Philadelphia subsidiary of Bermuda-based insurer Ace Ltd., which sells workers' comp and property insurance.
The problems are particularly thorny in the workers' compensation market. Insurers calculate that claims from a terrorist attack could amount to anywhere from $300,000 to $1 million per employee affected. Of the $40 billion to $50 billion estimated cost of the Sept. 11 disaster, $2 billion is attributed to workers' compensation claims.
Firms with more than 500 employees in the same location are facing skyrocketing premiums, with increases as much as tenfold.
American International Group Inc. is one of the only major insurance companies willing to underwrite workers' compensation for New York City's large businesses, though it will do so for a limited number of them.
Many New York City employers have turned to the New York State Insurance Fund as a last resort. But the fund, which failed to return phone calls, cannot provide the same quality of service that a private insurer can, and its coverage is generally just as expensive, says Craig Simon, senior vice president at Willis Group, a broker. ''Large employers need a regular carrier,'' he insists.
Coupling carriers?
Companies might be able to get workers' comp at lower rates if they could take a tiered approach, cobbling together coverage from several different carriers. Currently, though, the New York Compensation Insurance Rating Board prohibits companies from using more than one insurer for such coverage. Mr. Serio is negotiating to change that.
The tiered approach has helped in the property insurance market. But because insurers are reluctant to take on too much risk in any given area, the owners of such landmarks as the Empire State Building and Rockefeller Center are having difficulty buying sufficient coverage to replace their properties if they are destroyed.
Mr. Serio has been considering solutions in which groups of properties may be able to get coverage through a mixture of self-insurance and traditional coverage.

Load-Date: February 21, 2003


End of Document