NY mosques labeled terrorist organizations; NYPD investigated Muslims, planted spies, kept files
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 29, 2013 Thursday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 9
Length: 651 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body


 - The New York Police Department has secretly classified entire mosques as terrorist organizations, a designation that allows police to use informants to record sermons and spy on imams, often without specific evidence of criminal wrongdoing.
Designating an entire mosque as a terrorism enterprise means that anyone who attends prayer services there is a potential subject of an investigation and fair game for surveillance.
Since the 9/11 attacks, the department has opened at least a dozen terrorism enterprise investigations into mosques, according to interviews and confidential police documents. The TEI, as it is known, is a police tool intended to help investigate terrorist cells and the like.
Many TEIs stretch for years, allowing surveillance to continue even though the department has never criminally charged a mosque or Islamic organization with operating as a terrorism enterprise.
The documents show in detail how, in its hunt for terrorists, the department investigated countless innocent New York Muslims and put information about them in secret police files. As a tactic, opening an enterprise investigation on a mosque is so potentially invasive that while the department conducted at least a dozen, the FBI never did one, according to interviews with federal law enforcement officials.
The strategy has allowed the department to send undercover officers into mosques and attempt to plant informants on the boards of mosques and at least one prominent Arab-American group in Brooklyn, whose executive director has worked with city officials, including Bill de Blasio, a front-runner for mayor.
De Blasio said Wednesday on Twitter that he was deeply troubled NYPD has labelled entire mosques & Muslim orgs terror groups with seemingly no leads. Security AND liberty make us strong.
The revelations about the department's massive spying operations are in documents recently obtained by The Associated Press and part of a new book, Enemies Within: Inside the NYPD's Secret Spying Unit and bin Laden's Final Plot Against America. The book by AP reporters Matt Apuzzo and Adam Goldman is based on hundreds of previously unpublished police files and interviews with current and former department, CIA and FBI officials.
The disclosures come as the department is fighting off lawsuits accusing it of engaging in racial profiling while combating crime. Earlier this month, a judge ruled that the department's use of the stop-and-frisk tactic was unconstitutional.
The American Civil Liberties Union and two other groups have sued, saying the Muslim spying programs are unconstitutional and make Muslims afraid to practice their faith without police scrutiny.
Mayor Mike Bloomberg and Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly have denied those accusations. Speaking Wednesday, Kelly reminded people that his intelligence-gathering programs began in the wake of 9/11.
We follow leads wherever they take us, Kelly said. We're not intimidated as to wherever that lead takes us. And we're doing that to protect the people of New York City.
The department did not limit its operations to collecting information on those who attended the mosques or led prayers. The department sought also to put people on the boards of New York's Islamic institutions to fill intelligence gaps.
One confidential department document shows police wanted to put informants in leadership positions at mosques and other organizations, including the Arab American Association of New York in Brooklyn, a secular social-service organization.
Linda Sarsour, the executive director, said her group helps new immigrants adjust to life in the United States. It was not clear whether the department was successful in its plans.
Sarsour said she felt betrayed.
It creates mistrust in our organizations, said Sarsour, who was born and raised in Brooklyn. It makes one wonder and question who is sitting on the boards of the institutions where we work and pray.

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document