NYC Blast That Injured 29 Not Linked to International Terrorism, Governor Says
The Lion's Pride: Saint Leo University
September 19, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAIMENT; Pg. 1
Length: 540 words
Body


A tense calm was restored within minutes as police began closing off nearby blocks and moving onlookers away.
Law enforcement sources said the pipe bomb was hidden in a bin near the course of a scheduled 5km race in support of the US Marines and sailors in Seaside Park, down the east coast from NY. Subway stations in the area may be open as early as tomorrow morning, Cuomo said.
New York City new Police Commissioner James O Neill, who had his first day at the city's police chief on Friday, that the "exact cause of the explosion has not yet been determined" and personnel from the police department, FBI, bomb squad and counter- terrorism departments are on the scene. "In other words, we find no ISIS connection, et cetera", said Cuomo in reference to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, also known as ISIL. The devices contained different materials and didn't appear to be connected, officials said, but added that they weren't ruling anything out yet.
Anthony Stanhope, 40, a songwriter who lives a block away from the bombing, said he needed more answers before he could feel safe. Gov.Andrew Cuomo said it didn't appear to be linked to global terrorism. "Teams from the strategic response group as well as the critical response command", he said. No injuries were reported and no surrounding buildings appeared to be damaged.
"At this time there is no evidence of an global terrorism connection with this incident, but it is very, very early in the investigation", Cuomo said.
Members of the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force were investigating the blast along withNew York Police Department detectives, fire marshals and other federal investigators.
An explosion on a residential street in the Chelsea neighborhood injured 29 people.
Shideler said the fact the police found two bombs - and a possible third device - strongly points to terrorism. Using flashlights, trained dogs and robots, they scoured the area, even calling in aheavy weapons unit for assistance.
De Blasio tried to calm any fears among nervous New Yorkers, saying the explosion had no terrorist connection and wasn't related to a pipe bomb explosion earlier Saturday in New Jersey that forced the cancellation of a charity run. On "Face the Nation", he called the incident a "wake-up call to how vulnerable we all are" and added, "The threats are real and will continue".
Martinez said he and Abero, who is pregnant, were driving through Chelsea when the explosion lifted their vehicle off the ground, damaging its left side. "I know where I have made errors and I will not make the same mistake next time".
He described the city as the "No. 1 target in the world" and said police had foiled 20 terrorist plots against the city in recent times. "Thought I was close to not seeing my son again, that was the scariest part". All of the injured have been released from the hospital. I knew something was wrong, people ran from 23rd street and I ran with them. He said the scene was one of chaos. "Then we could smell smoke. A few friends of mine saw glass there".
Another eyewitness said he was having dinner when the explosion occurred.
The explosion was so loud, it rocked area buildings.
"They are terrorism, though, there's no doubt about that", Mr Christie told CNN.

Load-Date: January 9, 2017


End of Document