NYPD: Terrorist threat more complex than ever
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 10, 2014 Wednesday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 434 words
Byline:  By COLLEEN LONG Associated Press 
Body


NEW YORK • Airstrikes in Iraq, ongoing unrest in Syria and the beheadings of two American journalists are casting a long shadow over the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
While there is no specific threat against New York ahead of Thursday's commemoration, the rising power of disparate militant groups around the world presents the most complex terrorism danger since the twin towers were destroyed, New York intelligence officials said this week.
"It is layer upon layer upon layer - not all coming from the same place or ideology," said John Miller, the New York Police Department's deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism.
That differs from five years ago, when the risk was chiefly from al-Qaida, Miller said. Now, he said, the threat is also coming from the well-funded, high-tech "mass marketing of terrorism" - affiliate groups, foreign fighters, uprising militants and the idea of "al-Qaida-ism."
"When you look at the level of sophistication, the amount of slickness applied to their video production, the amount of thought that goes into creating a narrative," he said, "They're doing the same kind of thing as we've seen in commercial publishing or in the ad industry."
New York remains the top target, and that makes preparing for big events, including the U.S. Open tennis tournament, the United Nations General Assembly and the Sept. 11 commemoration, that much more critical, officials said. Plus, President Barack Obama plans to outline this week an expanded U.S. campaign against militants in Iraq and Syria after the beheadings of American journalists James Foley and Steven Sotloff.
New York Police Commissioner William Bratton said the department was prepared.
"We will, as always, ramp up intelligence gathering and visibility," Bratton said. That means thousands of officers in specialized teams, bomb-sniffing dogs who can detect not only the scent of a bomb but the vapors of a moving target, undercover officers and teams of police using radiation detection devices and other high-tech tools.
Intelligence officers around the globe will be reporting in regularly and monitoring events around the world.
The private anniversary ceremony will be held on the National September 11 Memorial & Museum plaza on Thursday morning. The tribute has centered on reading the names of the nearly 3,000 people killed in New York, at the Pentagon and near Shanksville, Pa., in the 2001 attacks, as well as recognizing the six people killed in the 1993 trade center bombing.
But for the first time, the memorial plaza will be open to the public this year from 6 p.m. to midnight.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this Sept. 11, 2013, file photo, the World Trade Center flag is presented as friends and relatives of the victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks gather at the National September 11 Memorial at the World Trade Center site, for a ceremony marking the 12th anniversary of the attacks in New York. New York City police plan heavy security for the anniversary ceremony on Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. (AP Photo/Jason DeCrow, File)  FILE - In this Sept. 11, 2013 file photo, a police officer provides security at the National September 11 Memorial at the World Trade Center during ceremonies marking the anniversary of the terrorist attacks in New York. New York City police plan heavy security for the anniversary ceremony on Thursday, Sept. 11, 2014. (AP Photo/Allan Tannenbaum, Pool, File) 

Load-Date: September 10, 2014


End of Document