NYPD spying claim spurs more soul-searching
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 20, 2011 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 408 words
Byline: By DAVID CRARY • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


NEW YORK - In the months after the 9/11 attacks, America's visceral reaction was to gird for a relentless, whatever-it-takes quest to punish those responsible and prevent any recurrences.
To a striking extent, those goals have been achieved. Yet Americans have also learned about decisions and practices that placed security on a higher plane than civil liberties and, in the view of some, above the rule of law.
It's by no means the first time in U.S. history that security concerns spawned tactics that troubled Americans. But the past decade has been notable for the scope and durability of boundary-pushing practices.
Abroad, there were secret prisons and renditions of terrorism suspects, the use of interrogation techniques that critics denounced as torture, and the abuse of detainees at Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison and elsewhere.
At home, there has been widespread warrantless wiretapping authorized by the National Security Agency and the issuance of more than 200,000 letters ordering an array of Americans to turn over confidential records.
Now new information has emerged about the New York Police Department's intelligence operations - ramped up after the attacks in ways that critics say amount to racial and ethnic profiling, though the department denies that charge.
Since August, an Associated Press investigation has revealed a vast NYPD intelligence-collecting effort targeting the city's Muslims. Police have conducted surveillance of entire Muslim neighborhoods, monitoring where people eat, pray and get their hair cut. Dozens of mosques and Muslim student groups were infiltrated. The CIA helped develop some of the programs.
The FBI also has intelligence-gathering operations that target Muslim and other communities. Both the bureau and the NYPD defend the programs as conforming to guidelines on profiling, while critics brand the tactics as unconstitutional and ineffective.
Some feel the perpetual balancing act of safety vs. civil liberties has been knocked askew since 9/11. In a recent assessment of national security response to the attacks, the ACLU faulted policies it said had undermined the Constitution.
"We lost our way when, instead of addressing the challenge of terrorism consistent with our values, our government chose the path of torture and targeted killing ... of warrantless government spying and the entrenchment of a national surveillance state," its report said. "That is not who we are, or who we want to be."

Load-Date: December 29, 2011


End of Document