O'CONNOR'S REMARKS ON IRELAND START FUROR IN BRITAIN
The New York Times
March 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 891 words
Byline: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS
Body


Remarks by Archbishop John J.  O'Connor during his St. Patrick's Day mass on Saturday have generated a storm of criticism from British officials and newspapers who construed them as encouraging violence in Northern Ireland.
London newspapers have underscored portions of the Archbishop's homily that drew fire from the British officials. While denouncing all violence, Archbishop O'Connor upheld those who ''legitimately struggle for justice'' in Ireland and appealed to world governments to demand that ''the oppression and violence'' in the region cease.
Some in Britain read these remarks as an endorsement of attacks against British rule. In addition, some officials attacked the Archbishop for publicly embracing Peter King, an open supporter of the outlawed Irish Republican Army, during the St. Patrick's Day parade. The Archbishop's remarks caused no noticeable adverse reaction in New York.
New York Abp John J O'Connor's remarks at St Patrick's Day generate storm of criticism from British officials and press commentators who charge he encourages Northern Ireland violence by publicly embracing IRA supporter Peter King and by approving those who 'legitimately struggle for justice'; archdiocese says he sought to endorse peaceful solution; O'Connor had recalled late predecessor Terence Cooke's refusal to review parade led by IRA supporter (S)
Nicholas Scott, Britain's second- ranking official in Northern Ireland, said Sunday that he was ''disappointed'' in the greeting extended to Mr. King.
The Daily Mail called it ''the handshake of shame'' in an editorial. It added: ''With his lips he condemns terror. With his hand he slaps it on the back. New York's Roman Catholic Archbishop is a disgrace to the church he serves.''
 
Conservative M.P.'s Remarks
Jill Knight, a Conservative Member of Parliament from Edgbaston, construed some the Archbishop's remarks on justice as an incitement to terrorism.
''When an important leader of the church like the Archbishop of New York appears to speak out in favor of terrorism, violence, murder and maiming,'' the Conservative said, ''one despairs for the future of Christianity.''
Responding for Archbishop O'Connor, Rev. Peter G. Finn, the archdiocese's director of communications, said last night that although officials had not yet seen the British comments, the Archbishop's statements were ''unequivocally opposed to violence on any and all sides of the dispute.''
The Archbishop, he said, did not express an opinion on the merits of British rule, and was simply endorsing a peaceful solution to the conflict.
 
Embrace a 'Courtesy Gesture'
The Archbishop's embrace of Mr. King, Father Finn said, was a ''courtesy gesture'' extended to other leaders of the parade. Moreover, Father Finn said, the Archbishop had made it very clear before the parade ''that his presence was nonpolitical and not supportive of violence of any kind.''
''How one can then conclude anything to the contrary is a little confusing,'' Father Finn said.
Last Saturday, Archbishop O'Connor, in his homily before the congregation in St. Patrick's Cathedral, recalled that two years ago his predecessor, Terence Cardinal Cooke, had refused to appear on the steps of the cathedral to review the Fifth Avenue parade. The Cardinal was responding to the the choice of an avowed backer of the I.R.A. as the parade's grand marshal.
Archbishop O'Connor said his decision to review the event from the steps could be taken by some as implying ''support for violence and terrorism.''
He continued: ''Nothing could be farther from the truth. I reiterate and re- emphasize publicly what I have said repeatedly before, I cannot accept, I cannot support or encourage support of the violence in Ireland by whomever perpetrated.''
 
Violence Further Condemned
The Archbishop said he deplored both the violence ''of those who shed blood and engage in acts of terrorism'' and ''the violence of those who rob a people of justice, deprive them of their birthright and inflict on them continuing indignities.''
''I cannot and I will not condemn or indict those who legitimately struggle for justice and for their human rights in Ireland,'' the Archbishop continued. ''But I must condemn and I do condemn once again in the strongest terms, all acts of violence by whomever or against whomever they are perpetrated and all acts of terrorism as well.''
Calling for an end to the strife, Archbishop O'Connor said he spoke ''as a bishop, not a politician.''
''But the moral course is clear,'' he said, ''the time has come and is long overdue for those great nations of the world, truly dedicated to liberty and justice for all, to raise their voices loudly and clearly and unmistakably in the forums of the world or privately and quietly but persuasively, as they see fit, to demand that the oppression and slaughter cease.''
The Archbishop was part of the four- member delegation of American bishops that visited Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland last October. The bishops urged a political solution to Northern Ireland's problems.
At that time, Archbishop O'Connor said the problems should not ''be seen merely as a restraint of violence on the part of the Provisional I.R.A. or anyone else, but to look much more carefully and with much greater and careful concern at the provocation of violence, the injustices that are alleged to underlie the violence.''


End of Document