O'Neill discusses impact of terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 15, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. b6
Length: 567 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


More terrorist attacks, the possibility of war with Iraq and corporate scandals have all put pressure on the U.S. economy, but Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill said the country is holding up.
"We have had a lot to endure in our economy and I believe we have demonstrated something very important about our country and about the American people and the resilience and the powerful strength in our country," O'Neill said to about 200 members of the Greater Des Moines Partnership, a business organization.
Housing, automotive and agriculture sectors of the economy remain strong while telecommunications, computer and airline industries are struggling, he said.
On the good side, inflation is nonexistent and interest rates remain at 40-year record lows.
"I am confident that we will return to 3 to 3.5 percent growth rates by the end of this year, and that growth will create jobs and renew our prosperity," he said.
O'Neill predicted that no new corporate scandals would surface that would further shake investor confidence.
"I personally believe the CEO awful scandals are behind us. That doesn't mean that the court cases are over or we'll not be treated with the daily perpetrator walks, but I think the identification of the more colossal cases where people abuse their authority and responsibly is largely behind us," he said.
O'Neill, who has been touring recently in support of Bush administration policies, said concerns about possible future terrorist attacks and military action in Iraq are having an impact on the economy.
He said developers have had difficulty insuring their projects against terrorism since Sept. 11.
The administration has asked Congress to enact terrorism risk insurance legislation, but it so far has failed to gain approval.
"Today, over $$ @15 billion in construction projects are not going forward because of the lack of terrorism risk insurance," he said. "Finishing this legislation is the single thing we could do in Washington to create jobs in the short run." 
He said 300,000 jobs would be created if the bill is passed.
O'Neill said the threat of more terrorist acts continues to hang over the nation. He said it took no more than $$ @500,000 for the Sept. 11 terrorists to hijack four commercial jets and crash three of them into buildings. 
He said the ease with which terrorists accumulated the money highlights the importance of going after the financial resources and shutting them down around the world as Bush has proposed.
Speaking later to a group of employees at a John Deere farm machinery factory in Ankeny, O'Neill said the United States must bear the cost of fighting Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein.
"If the President decides on a military engagement with Iraq, we will endure and we will win quickly and we can afford it. Our freedom is priceless," he said.
"What's important right now is individual freedom and liberty and handing it down to our children just the way we got it from the people who are underneath those white crosses at Arlington National Cemetery."
O'Neill also spoke to the Cedar Rapids Rotary Club, where he appeared with Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa, who is seeking re-election in November, and Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa.
O'Neill said that despite the need for America to expand overseas markets for American goods, don't expect to see normal trade relations with Cuba any time soon.
"I don't see a political momentum to change it right now," he said.

Load-Date: October 16, 2002


End of Document