Obama Picks A Prosecutor In Brooklyn
The New York Times
January 21, 2010 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 33
Length: 324 words
Byline: By A. G. SULZBERGER
Body


The White House announced on Wednesday that President Obama would nominate Loretta E. Lynch as United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, setting her up for a return to a post she held at the end of the Clinton administration. 
  In May, Senator Charles E. Schumer, a New York Democrat who serves on the Senate Judiciary Committee, recommended Ms. Lynch's nomination. ''Loretta Lynch is a prosecutor par excellence,'' Mr. Schumer said Wednesday in a statement. ''She is brilliant, dedicated and the perfect fit to again take up the reins in the Eastern District.''
  Based in Brooklyn, the Eastern District also includes Queens and Staten Island, as well as Nassau and Suffolk Counties. The office has about 175 prosecutors who are responsible for a variety of cases, including drug trafficking and terrorism.
  Ms. Lynch, who could not be reached for comment, has held a range of positions in the Eastern District, where she first began working in 1990. During her tenure as head of the office, from 1999 to 2001, she oversaw the Abner Louima police brutality case and its aftermath.
  Since her departure, the office has shifted its focus away from the drug and organized-crime cases for which it was best known and toward white-collar crime and terrorism cases, said Daniel C. Richman, a former federal prosecutor who teaches criminal law at Columbia University. Still, Ms. Lynch's background, he said, ''certainly allows her to come to the job with a real familiarity with the office.''
  The post, one of five for which Mr. Obama announced nominees on Wednesday, is currently held by Benton J. Campbell, a Bush appointee who has served since 2007.
  Ms. Lynch is a partner at Hogan & Hartson, a private law firm that focuses on commercial litigation, white-collar criminal defense and corporate compliance issues. She is also a member of the New York State Commission on Public Integrity, an ethics and lobbying oversight body.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 21, 2010


End of Document