Obama on terrorism
The Pacifican: University of the Pacific
February 26, 2015 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 396 words
Byline: Thomas Levy
Body


In a recent speech made at the White House, President Barack Obama remarked that terrorism by way of Islamic extremism is due mainly to "grievances" suffered by the Muslim community spanning the last 2,000 years.
This idea states that modern terrorism inflicted upon the western world by radicalism sprouting from the Middle East is driven by the fact that Muslims have been repressed time and time again. Not only is this simply untrue, but President Obama's speculations are borderline distasteful, as he implies that a particular group of Muslims act only on their feelings of historical devaluation.
On one hand, we have seen a major influx of anti-Islam sentiment in the United States in the last 15 years. The Obama administration has done a satisfactory job at curbing Islamic-based terrorism here at home after the former administration alienated Muslims.
Luke Colbert '16 recognizes that Obama "was not dealt the greatest hand" in respect to mutual trust between - and social outlook of - citizens nationwide. The recent attack in Chapel Hill, N.C. suggests that terrorism is neither race, faith or geographically based, and that we are entwined with our own internal struggles against terror. Colbert added, "We are making strides in the right direction," but the American Muslim community has a right to be concerned.
Terrorism carried out by Radical Islam in the most recent decades cannot be from something that happened only weeks ago; it must instead derive from something seeded more deeply. In his speech, the president made note that neither education or lack thereof, nor poverty and wealth, contribute to people embracing "violent ideology."
Over the centuries, Muslims rich and poor have set up various empires and caliphates spanning the Middle East and Europe. America and its allies have recognized the last century as the end of the age of conquering empires and have embraced a new era of global cooperation. Specific groups in the Middle East have not yet acknowledged this and continue on with Old World conflict.
Morgan Smallwood '15, for one, believes the current administration "has not done enough to prosecute those involved in the last eight years of terrorism and war."
Obama has not invested enough time or effort to view the current Middle Eastern threat as a centuries-old conflict; he must understand that his enemies are not fueled by self-pity.

Load-Date: February 26, 2015


End of Document