Obama Team To Keep Focus Of Agencies On Terrorism
The New York Times
March 26, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 996 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON and NEIL A. LEWIS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The Obama administration is moving to solidify one of the most significant shifts of resources put into place under President George W. Bush: the transformation of the Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation into agencies where the top priority is counterterrorism rather than conventional law enforcement.
  Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. and other Justice Department officials have emphasized that they will not cut resources allocated to national security in the foreseeable future, and the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Robert S. Mueller III, told lawmakers on Wednesday that ''we have no intention of retreating from preventing a terrorist attack on American soil as our No. 1 priority.''
  The Obama administration's decision to maintain current levels of national security staffing comes as officials acknowledge, as Mr. Mueller did in his testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee, that the shift of agents to counterterrorism and intelligence duties after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, has seriously complicated other efforts. Those include demands for resources to combat corporate and financial fraud and a deadly drug war across the border with Mexico.
  ''The logical consequence of cannibalizing our criminal program to augment our national security efforts is that we have reduced the ability to surge resources within our criminal branch,'' Mr. Mueller said. 
  He added, in response to lawmakers' questions, that the bureau needed more agents to address financial fraud and crime related to drug trafficking.
  The administration's position underscores the extent to which Mr. Obama's legal team has found itself following many of the Bush administration's counterterrorism policies, even as Mr. Holder has asserted that the Justice Department will differ markedly by being more respectful of civil liberties and constitutional limits.
  Mr. Holder told reporters recently that the Obama administration hoped to hire more agents and prosecutors for what he called the ''traditional side'' of the Justice Department. But those increases will not be made ''at the expense of the national security component,'' Mr. Holder said. ''I mean that component still has to be a very healthy, robust part of the department.''
  That posture seems likely to keep alive a debate that has simmered behind the scenes in recent years largely within the ranks of intelligence and law enforcement agencies. At issue is whether the country is well served by assigning nearly half of the F.B.I.'s 12,000 agents to terrorism and intelligence work, as has been the case since shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks.
  That debate has gained steam since the economic crisis, with lawmakers and others criticizing the F.B.I. as not putting enough resources into bank, mortgage and securities fraud, and pointing out that some of the most significant actions have been taken by state prosecutors, rather than federal ones.
  In Wednesday's hearing, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, expressed dismay that the F.B.I. had not devoted more agents to investigating mortgage fraud.
  ''Can you tell us exactly what the situation is, why agents are reduced and what the position of your agency is?'' Mrs. Feinstein asked. ''I can tell you, in California, it is a big problem.''
  Several current and former F.B.I. officials have said privately that while they believe Al Qaeda still hopes to strike inside the United States, those aspirations have not evolved into serious plots. A result, they said, is that too many agents are chasing too few credible leads. The officials would not be quoted by name criticizing the direction of the agency. 
  Some agents complained that they spend far too much time chasing marginal tips. One official said that a running joke in the bureau was that agents assigned to counterterrorism were the fittest because they could spend more time in the gym.
  Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat who has questioned whether enough money has been allocated to fight the spillover of crime along the Mexican border, said it was difficult for any public figure to advocate a reduction in counterterrorism resources.
  ''No one wants to say we're not going to do national security at full-tilt,'' Ms. Lofgren said. 
  She said she hoped that the Obama administration would broaden the definition of national security to include combating drug cartels and gun smuggling rings.
  While the F.B.I. does not handle immigration issues, Ms. Lofgren noted a parallel concern that the Department of Homeland Security was similarly obliged to devote an outsize share of its resources to immigration enforcement in response to political concerns.
  Some critics, including former Vice President Dick Cheney, have already warned that Mr. Obama's policies have made the United States more vulnerable to terrorists. 
  Mr. Cheney said in a recent interview on CNN that Mr. Obama was ''making choices that, in my mind will, in fact, raise the risk to the American people of another attack.'' Mr. Cheney cited few specifics but referred to what he said was a return to the Clinton administration's approach of treating terrorism as a law enforcement problem, rather than a war. 
  As the Bush administration was vastly increasing the number of agents assigned to counterterrorism, financial fraud prosecutions dropped. Justice Department statistics show that the number of prosecutions of frauds against financial institutions fell 48 percent from 2000 to 2007 while securities fraud cases decreased 17 percent -- though F.B.I. officials said agents focused on larger cases with greater impacts. 
  The 2009 budget, the final Bush spending plan, gave the F.B.I. 377 additional agents, bureau officials said. Of those, 100 will be assigned to criminal investigations including white-collar cases, 70 will be used in cybersecurity projects and 207 will be allocated to national security, including counterterrorism and intelligence. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: The F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III, left, and Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. say they will not cut back on national security, despite the strain on other law enforcement efforts. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 MANUEL BALCE CENETA/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A19)                     

Load-Date: March 26, 2009


End of Document