Obama says nuclear terrorism the top threat to the U.S.
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
April 7, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 568 words
Byline: Robert Burns and Anne Flaherty Associated Press
Body


 WASHINGTON ? Rewriting America's nuclear strategy, the White House on Tuesday announced a fundamental shift that calls the spread of atomic weapons to rogue states or terrorists a worse threat than the nuclear Armageddon feared during the Cold War. The Obama administration is suddenly moving on multiple fronts with a goal of limiting the threat of a catastrophic international conflict, although it's not yet clear how far and how fast the rest of the world is ready to follow. 
In releasing the results of an in-depth nuclear strategy review, President Barack Obama said his administration would narrow the circumstances in which the U.S. might launch a nuclear strike, that it would forgo the development of new nuclear warheads and would seek even deeper reductions in American and Russian arsenals. His defense secretary, Robert Gates, said the focus would now be on terror groups such as al-Qaida, as well as North Korea's nuclear buildup and Iran's nuclear ambitions. "For the first time, preventing nuclear proliferation and nuclear terrorism is now at the top of America's nuclear agenda," Obama said, distancing his administration from the decades-long U.S. focus on arms competition with Russia and on the threat posed by nuclear missiles on hair-trigger alert. "The greatest threat to U.S. and global security is no longer a nuclear exchange between nations, but nuclear terrorism by violent extremists and nuclear proliferation to an increasing number of states," he said, spelling out the core theme of the new strategy. Obama's announcement set the stage for his trip to Prague Thursday to sign a new arms reduction agreement with Russia. And it precedes a gathering in Washington next Monday of government leaders from more than 40 countries to discuss improving safeguards against terrorists acquiring nuclear bombs. In May, the White House will once again help lead the call for disarmament at the United Nations in New York during an international conference on strengthening the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Congressional Democrats hailed Tuesday's announcement, but some Republicans said it could weaken the nation's defense. Rep. Buck McKeon of California, the top Republican on the House Armed Services Committee, said the policy change could carry "clear consequences" for security and he was troubled by "some of the language and perceived signals imbedded" in the policy. Two leading Senate voices on nuclear strategy, Arizona Republicans John McCain and Jon Kyl, criticized the Obama policy's restrictions on using nuclear arms to retaliate against a chemical or biological attack. "The Obama Administration must clarify that we will take no option off the table to deter attacks against the American people and our allies," the senators said in a joint statement. From the start of his term in office, Obama has put halting the spread of atomic arms near the top of his defense priorities. But during his first year, he failed to achieve a significant breakthrough on arguably the two biggest threats: Iran and North Korea. Obama's current push for arms control initiatives is designed to strengthen international support for strengthened nonproliferation efforts. "Given al-Qaida's continued quest for nuclear weapons, Iran's ongoing nuclear efforts and North Korea's proliferation, this focus is appropriate and, indeed, an essential change from previous" policy, Gates said. 

Load-Date: April 7, 2010


End of Document