OBAMA SETS SECURITY PLAN; MCCAIN ADDRESSES NAACP
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 17, 2008 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-5
Length: 643 words
Byline: JOSH MEYER AND PETER NICHOLAS, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. 
Body


Illinois Sen. Barack Obama yesterday criticized the Bush administration for failing to protect the American people from weapons of mass destruction, and said he would take aggressive measures as president to lessen the threat from nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and cyber terrorism.
Mr. Obama unveiled what he described as a comprehensive national security strategy in a speech at West Lafayette's Purdue University, while leading a panel of academic experts and present and former politicians whose view of global threats largely tracked his own.
The presumptive Democratic presidential nominee also released a nine-page document on "Confronting 21st Century Threats," in which his campaign said the White House, Congress and some U.S. allies have succumbed to a mind-set of "conventional thinking [that] has failed to adapt to a world of new threats."
"The danger ... is that we are constantly fighting the last war, responding to the threats that have come to fruition, instead of staying one step ahead of the threats of the 21st century," Mr. Obama said.
Meanwhile, in Cincinnati yesterday, Mr. Obama's Republican rival, Arizona Sen. John McCain, told the NAACP and some skeptical black voters that he would expand education opportunities, partly through vouchers for low-income children to attend private school.
The likely GOP presidential nominee addressed the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the nation's oldest civil rights organization.
Mr. Obama was joined in the Purdue panel discussion by two potential running mates, Sen. Evan Bayh, D-Ind., and former Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., who has spent much of his political career lobbying for more safeguards against proliferation of nuclear weapons and materials.
Some initiatives described in Mr. Obama's comments and a detailed position paper were characterized by some current and former U.S. counter-terrorism officials and experts as being extremely expensive, unrealistic or already under way.
"This would take a serious investment of time and money and a major diplomatic effort," said Art Keller, a CIA expert on weapons of mass destruction proliferation until 2006.. "It's like saying everyone should eat well; it's not going to happen necessarily, and it's easier said than done."
The Democrat has spent the past two days talking at length about national security issues, as part of a campaign push to challenge public perceptions that he wouldn't make as strong a commander-in-chief as Mr. McCain.
An ABC News/Washington Post poll this week showed that while 72 percent of Americans -- and most Democrats -- believe that Mr. McCain would make a good commander-in-chief, only 48 percent think Mr. Obama would.
Many proposals Mr. Obama unveiled yesterday focused on the need to reduce the dangers of nuclear terrorism. He pledged, for instance, to increase U.S. funding by $1 billion a year to more aggressively secure nuclear weapons materials and strengthen policing and interdiction efforts aimed at dismantling nuclear trafficking networks. He also vowed to convene a summit on preventing nuclear terrorism and set a goal of a world free of nuclear arms.
In greeting the NAACP group, Mr. McCain praised Mr. Obama's historic campaign, but said the Democrat is wrong to oppose school vouchers for students in failing public schools. It is time, Mr. McCain said, to use vouchers and other tools like merit pay for teachers to break from conventional thinking on educational policy.
Mr. Obama has dismissed support for private school vouchers for low-income Americans, Mr. McCain said.
"All of that went over well with the teachers union, but where does it leave families and their children who are stuck in failing schools?" the Republican asked. "No entrenched bureaucracy or union should deny parents that choice and children that opportunity."

Notes

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Load-Date: July 17, 2008


End of Document