Obama: War on terror being fought 'on the wrong battlefield" 
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 15, 2007 Sunday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 12
Length: 478 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


OELWEIN (AP) - Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Barack Obama, D-Ill., argued Saturday that the U.S. is fighting on the wrong battlefield and that President Bush's failed policies had left the nation facing a greater threat from terrorism. 
Obama said Bush has talked tough on terrorism but made choices that let Osama bin Laden and his top deputies remain free. Obama said the military should begin reducing the number of troops in Iraq and turn its attention to al-Qaida strongholds. 
"We cannot win a war against the terrorists if we're on the wrong battlefield," said Obama. "America must urgently begin deploying from Iraq and take the fight more effectively to the enemy's home by destroying al-Qaida's leadership along the Afghan-Pakistan border, eliminating their command and control networks and disrupting their funding." 
Obama spoke during his 15th trip to Iowa, where precinct caucuses begin the presidential nominating process. He opened his day with a sun-splashed rally on the shores of a lake in Oelwein, then planned events in Elkader and Manchester. 
He was also scheduled to join candidates Joe Biden and John Edwards at a Democratic workshop in Peosta. 
Obama focused on the threat of terrorism just days after a new U.S. intelligence assessment warned that al-Qaida has succeeded in rebuilding its strength. 
"What I would say is that as a consequence of bad decisions we are more at risk and less safe than we should have been at this point, given all the resources we have spent and the U.S. lives that have been lost," said Obama. 
Obama said the Bush administration has erred by choosing to fight a war in Iraq rather than concentrate on Afghanistan, where he said al-Qaida has strengthened itself. 
"They have entirely regrouped along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border," said Obama. "The threat of terrorism has actually increased and we've seen a massive spike in terrorist activity, in part because we did not finish the job in Afghanistan and were distracted by a war of choice in Iraq." 
Obama continued to talk tough on terrorism later in the day, as he packed about 300 people into a school gymnasium in Manchester, even with a popular county fair running just across the street. 
"When I am president of the United States I will make this pledge: Nobody will work harder to go after those terrorists who will do the American people harm," Obama said. "But that requires a commander in chief who understands our troops need to be on the right battlefield, not the wrong battlefield." 
Obama wrapped up his day of campaigning in Peosta, where he was the third presidential candidate to speak at a day-long workshop of eastern Iowa Democratic activists. 
The event was designed to energize the party's base headed into next year's election. 
"All of you who believe in a better America, thank you for taking the time," Obama said. "You are not alone."

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document