Obama, Cheney make valid points on fighting terrorism
USA TODAY
May 27, 2009 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 499 words
Body


Watching  President Obama and former vice president Dick Cheney discuss, in separate speeches Thursday, the past, present and future tactics of intelligence gathering, national security  and enhanced interrogation techniques was truly breathtaking ("Guantanamo plan takes more shots," News, Friday).
Obama  spoke in specifics about closing  the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the law regarding the capture and questioning of suspected terrorists, the ability to gather intelligence, and the obligation of this administration to protect the United States against another  terrorist attack.
Then Cheney made his case that after Sept. 11, 2001,  another terrorist attack did not  take place on U.S. land during the Bush administration.  He also argued that enhanced interrogation techniques were necessary  for  terrorists  suspected of having information of impending attacks.
As an independent voter, I agree with  Obama and Cheney on certain national security issues. The bottom line:  We must be vigilant and must have every available legal remedy at our disposal to gather information and intelligence, and to take military and covert actions when justified.
Rich Unger
Sarasota, Fla.
Torture hurts U.S. image
I don't think some Americans care whether safeguarding the country requires torturing suspects. They don't realize that torture is illegal or that it increases the likelihood U.S. soldiers will be tortured ("Put American lives first," Opposing view, Obama, Cheney speeches debate, Friday).
They don't understand that torture is simply not a good way to get information because they imagine  it as portrayed in the movies or  on TV shows such as 24. In reality, under physical torture people will lie and say anything to make the pain stop.  Interrogators collect a mountain of incorrect information that wastes time and resources on wild goose chases.
Torture damages America's moral image and undermines our credibility. How can we portray the battle against terrorists as good vs. evil when we also use evil methods?
Cheney says that on 9/11 he was afraid, sitting in a White House bunker.  After 9/11 the whole country was afraid, and people who are afraid can do evil things. But an America that decides it needs to torture to defend itself is not America anymore.
Samuel Curry
Park Forest, Ill.
Voice of opposition
The editorial "A course correction, not a retreat, on fighting terrorism"  supports using tactics that uphold U.S. values and says that is "clearly the direction the nation voted for in November, when both Obama and GOP nominee John McCain campaigned on eliminating torture and closing Guantanamo" (Our view).
But if both candidates advocated the same approach to these issues, where was the choice for the voters? Or did I simply miss the referendum: Do you favor closing Guantanamo?
If the majority of the voters had been against closing Guantanamo, how would they have expressed that opinion in the last election? A write-in vote for Dick Cheney?
Tom Lawrence
Tulsa 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, J. Scott Applewhite, AP
PHOTO, B/W, Mark Wilson, Getty Images

Load-Date: May 27, 2009


End of Document