Obama is asked to shift focus; Homegrown terrorist groups as dangerous now as Klan once was
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
June 27, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 20
Length: 338 words
Byline: Sean Cockerham and William Douglas

McClatchy Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


 - The horrific mass shooting in Charleston, South Carolina, is raising questions about whether President Barack Obama is prepared to launch the kind of effort against extremist groups that the government launched against the Ku Klux Klan in an earlier era.
Tracking homegrown extremist groups was an emphasis after the 1993 Waco siege and the Oklahoma City bombing two years later. But after Sept. 11, 2001, the FBI has shifted its focus to international terrorism.
The allocation of resources across different forms of terrorism has been skewed toward jihadi terrorism, said Richard Cohen, president of the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks right-wing extremist groups. The government has allowed the threat of other forms of terrorism to take a backseat.
Like Ku Klux Klan lynchings of the past, the Charleston shooting appears designed not just to kill individuals but to create terror among African-Americans.
Rep. Jim Clyburn, D-S.C., a longtime civil rights activist, said the federal government is going to have to do more to infiltrate extremist groups. Clyburn brought up the example of efforts against the Klan in the 1960s and 1970s.
These groups cannot be allowed to continue to float around, they're ratcheting things up. People have been ignoring this stuff and now all of a sudden nine people are dead, Clyburn said.
Dylann Roof, who is charged with killing nine African-Americans at a prayer meeting, cited the white supremacist group Council for Conservative Citizens in his purported online manifesto.
The Department of Homeland Security issued a report in 2009 warning of a growing threat from right-wing extremism. But the report drew criticism from conservatives and veterans groups who said it unfairly singled out returning military veterans as possible recruits.
The analyst who wrote the report, Daryl Johnson, said his domestic terrorism team was disbanded and he left the agency. Johnson, who now does consulting work, said he rates the DHS efforts on homegrown extremist groups as poor, not serious.

Load-Date: June 27, 2015


End of Document