OBAMA WEIGHS RESPONSE TO SONY 'CYBERVANDALISM'
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 22, 2014 Monday
Main Edition


Copyright 2014 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 1
Length: 813 words
Byline: Josh Lederman Associated Press
Dateline: HONOLULU 
Body


President Barack Obama says the United States is reviewing whether to put North Korea back on its list of state sponsors of terrorism as Washington decides how to respond to what he calls an "act of cybervandalism," not one of war, against a movie company.
 Sony Pictures Entertainment, which said it canceled the theatrical release of "The Interview" after distributors refused to show it, pledged to find a way to get the film out. "How it's going to be distributed, I don't think anybody knows quite yet," a Sony lawyer said. The comedy involves a plot to assassinate North Korea's leader.
 Obama is promising to respond "proportionately" to an attack that law enforcement blames on North Korea. "We're not going to be intimidated by some cyberhackers," he said.
 The president said the U.S. would examine the facts to determine whether North Korea should be placed back on the terrorism sponsors list.
 "We're going to review those through a process that's already in place," Obama told CNN's "State of the Union" in an interview broadcast Sunday. "I'll wait to review what the findings are."
 While raising the possibility of a terrorism designation, Obama also asserted, "I don't think it was an act of war. I think it was an act of cybervandalism that was very costly, very expensive. We take it very seriously."
 Obama's description drew immediate scorn from two Republicans who are longtime critics of his foreign policy.
 "It is a new form of warfare, and we have to counter that form of warfare with a better form of warfare," Arizona Sen. John McCain said.
 Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina called it "an act of terrorism" and favored reimposing sanctions and adding North Korea to the terrorism list. The U.S. needs to "make is so hard on the North Koreans that they don't want to do this in the future."
 North Korea spent two decades on the list until the Bush administration removed it in 2008 during nuclear negotiations. Only Iran, Sudan, Syria and Cuba remain on the list, which triggers sanctions that limit U.S. aid, defense exports and certain financial transactions.
 But adding North Korea back could be difficult. To meet the criteria, the State Department must determine that a country has repeatedly supported acts of international terrorism, a definition that traditionally has referred to violent, physical attacks rather than hacking.
 North Korea threatened to strike back at the United States if Obama retaliated, the National Defense Commission said in a statement carried by the country's official Korean Central News Agency.
 The U.S. is asking China for help as it considers how to respond to the hack. A senior Obama administration official speaking on condition of anonymity said the U.S. and China have shared information about the attack and that Washington has asked for Beijing's cooperation.
 China wields considerable leverage over North Korea, but Obama has accused China of carrying out cyberthefts, too.
 In the CNN interview, taped Friday in Washington before Obama left to vacation in Hawaii, he renewed his criticism of Sony's decision to shelve "The Interview," despite the company's insistence that its hand was forced after movie theaters refused to show it.
 Obama suggested he might have been able to help address the problem if given the chance. "You know, had they talked to me directly about this decision, I might have called the movie theater chains and distributors and asked them what that story was," he said.
 Sony's CEO has disputed that the company never reached out, saying he spoke to a senior White House adviser about the situation before Sony announced the decision. White House officials said Sony did discuss cybersecurity with the federal government, but that the White House was never consulted on the decision not to distribute the film.
 David Boies, a Sony lawyer, said "The Interview" is "going to be distributed, and what Sony has been trying to do is to get the picture out to the public," while protecting the rights of company employers and moviegoers.
 Boies appeared on NBC's "Meet the Press," Graham was on CBS' "Face the Nation" and McCain spoke on CNN.
SIDEBAR:
KOREA THREATENS U.S.
 SEOUL, South Korea - President Barack Obama is "recklessly" spreading rumors of a Pyongyang-orchestrated cyberattack of Sony Pictures, North Korea says, as it warns of strikes against the White House, Pentagon and "the whole U.S. mainland, that cesspool of terrorism."
 Such rhetoric is routine from North Korea's massive propaganda machine during times of high tension with Washington. But a long statement from the powerful National Defense Commission late Sunday also underscores Pyongyang's sensitivity at a movie whose plot focuses on the assassination of its leader Kim Jong Un.
 The National Defense Commission, led by Kim, warned that its 1.2 million-member army is ready to use all types of warfare against the U.S.

Load-Date: December 24, 2014


End of Document