Obama, Cheney and the Terror Fight
The New York Times
May 23, 2009 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; LETTERS
Length: 1386 words
Body


To the Editor:
  Re ''Obama Would Move Some Terror Detainees to U.S.'' (front page, May 22):
  President Obama is indeed treading a fine line between our national security and the values espoused by our Constitution where it is difficult to say which one overrides the other. 
  With due respect, one has to bear in mind that while framing the American Constitution our forefathers may not have ever imagined the threat and scope of global terrorism, which has become a reality. Nevertheless, the fear of this should not end up in a knee-jerk reaction, which eventually resulted in policies and laws put forth by the Bush administration that further stoked distrust and anger against America.
  President Obama is right in calling it a ''surgical approach'' in formulating national security strategy. I would go one step further and call it a ''neurosurgeon's approach.'' I fully agree with the president that due process of law should not be compromised, and I think that in cases where terrorism evidence is prima facie, prolonged detention should be lawfully invoked.
  Atul M. Karnik Woodside, Queens, May 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  The contrast between the Obama and Bush administrations could not be greater, as witnessed by the speeches on national security by President Obama and Dick Cheney on Thursday.
  Mr. Obama tapped the ideals that once made America the moral inspiration of the world. Mr. Cheney drew his power from fear, suspicion of foreigners and the false comfort offered by authoritarianism.
  President Obama appealed to the better angels of our nature. Dick Cheney appealed to the worst.
  Fred LaMotte Steilacoom, Wash., May 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  Former Vice President Dick Cheney's glib rejection of the ''middle ground'' in the fight against terrorism is nothing more than a recapitulation of Barry Goldwater's misguided 1964 notion that ''extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice.'' The formulation is as entirely wrongheaded now as it was then, and Americans should repudiate it just as decisively as they did nearly a half-century ago.
  Robert D. Madoff Minneapolis, May 22, 2009
  To the Editor: 
  On 9/11, some 3,000 people were murdered. This was not just an attack on a military installation like Pearl Harbor, but represented the basest form of human behavior. 
  Every American deserved to believe post-9/11 that his government was doing everything possible to forestall another such attack, and frankly, anything less than an all-out interrogation of arrested terrorists would have represented criminal dereliction of the government's fundamental responsibility to protect its citizens. 
  Belated criticism of those efforts years after the fact ignores the legitimate fears gripping the country in 2001 and the years after and represents a classic and disgraceful ''second guess'' of American decision makers.
  A. E. Harazin  Amherst, Mass., May 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  Re ''The Real Path to Security'' (editorial, May 22):
  The debate on torture and Guantanamo Bay poses an important question for the United States and that is, that it is one thing to have a constitution or laws, and entirely another matter when it comes to carrying them out in trying times when abandoning those laws and principles would seem most expedient. For totalitarian governments the choice is easy, but for democratic ones it is a moment of truth. 
  There was a reason German soldiers preferred to be captured by American forces during World War II, and this was because they knew how they would be treated in United States custody as opposed to being captured by the Russians. If we were to agree with Dick Cheney's argument, that choice easily made by the Germans years ago would be a difficult one to make today. 
  The true character of a nation or person is not best measured on a pleasant day, but rather it is made manifest on days when all precepts are tested to the core.
  Nonso Umunna Baltimore, May 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  The real danger with the Cheney philosophy is that, in his view, the ends justify the means. When does it stop? If you excuse waterboarding by saying it saves American lives, why not even more severe forms of interrogation?
  It doesn't seem that we've reached that point yet, but under duress it's not hard to imagine unless we as a nation say that torture of any kind is not permissible in our society.
  Norm Rosenblatt  San Francisco, May 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  Your May 21 front-page article ''1 in 7 Detainees Rejoined Jihad, Pentagon Finds'' cites ''terrorism experts'' asserting a 14 percent recidivism rate that is far lower than that among American prisoners, which can be as high as 68 percent. This is fuzzy number-crunching.
  More than half of American prisoners' ''recidivism'' is due to technical parole violations: curfew violations, reporting failures, failed urine tests or for minor offenses. The more serious the original conviction, the longer the parole period and the more scrutiny given to the offender. 
  A convicted murderer arrested for a D.U.I. is likely to be sent back to prison and hence misleadingly counted as a murderer who has ''recidivated.'' 
  The solution to the problem of the detainees must be found in reaffirming the constitutional principle that we cannot hold six innocent persons in order to incapacitate one guilty person. Period. 
  Ronald L. Kuby New York, May 21, 2009
  The writer is a criminal defense and civil rights lawyer.
  To the Editor:
  How comforting that the Pentagon is able to determine, without the mess and fuss of any trials, that some released detainees have ''rejoined'' the terrorists, meaning that they are known for certain to have been terrorists in the first place.
  That was, of course, what trials were supposed to establish. The detainees were in fact not known ''terrorists'' but terror suspects whose actual involvement in terrorist activity it was to be the prosecution's job to prove.
  If these people cannot be tried in ordinary civilian or even military courts and if the military, which will run the tribunals that are supposed to try them, has already made up its mind that they're all guilty and all that remains is to fill in the details, what's the point of trying them at all?
  Just lock 'em up and throw away the key -- and the Constitution with it.
  Eric B. Lipps Staten Island, May 21, 2009
  To the Editor: 
  The debate about how ''enhanced interrogation'' undermines the judicial system and America's position in the world misses a crucial point. If waterboarding is O.K. for the C.I.A., how long will it be before the F.B.I. starts using it domestically? And if the F.B.I. is using it, how long will it be before local police start using it to extract confessions from suspects?
  When that happens, what kind of society will we be living in? The people who defend this kind of thing never talk about that.
  Michael Califra New York, May 22, 2009
  To the Editor:
  Re ''Changes Planned for Guantanamo Trials May Lead to Familiar Challenges'' (news article, May 19):
  The Obama administration has embarked on a fool's errand trying to devise military commissions that are seen as fair. Any criminal tribunal specially designed for a select group of defendants will be inherently suspect because it violates the Golden Rule -- giving them fewer rights than anyone else in United States courts to challenge evidence against them or to prevent the use of dubious confessions.
  Whatever marginal benefit the administration sees in such due process shortcuts will be vastly outweighed by thepublic relations costs. Tailor-made military commissions, in any guise, will help the accused continue portraying themselves as ''warriors'' rather than as ''criminals'' as they shift public attention from the heinous crimes on trial to the fairness of the proceedings.
  Regular federal courts have a long history of successfully prosecuting terrorist crimes. To convict someone of conspiracy to commit terrorism requires proof of only a criminal agreement between two or more people and a single step, no matter how innocuous, to advance that plan. If the government cannot make that modest factual showing in regular court, it should release the suspect, not railroad him to ''justice'' in a substandard tribunal.  Kenneth Roth Executive Director Human Rights Watch New York, May 19, 2009

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY EDEL RODRIGUEZ)                                              

Load-Date: May 23, 2009


End of Document