Obama, Singh Discuss U.S.-Indo Strategic Partnership
RTT News (United States)
November 24, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 382 words
Body


(RTTNews) - President Barack Obama welcomed Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to the White House on Tuesday, speaking with him about advancing the relationship between the U.S. and India and improving the nations&apos; strategic partnership.
Speaking to reporters after their meeting, both leaders stressed the importance of creating human capital for the future development of both countries, especially in regard to climate change and energy security.
Obama said that both the U.S. and India are committed to new clean energy initiatives, reduced poverty through sustainable development and the elimination of subsidies for fossil fuels, and added that both countries aim to work together to help develop new world energy policies at the coming climate change conference in Copenhagen.
Singh added that both countries have an important opportunity to develop the green economy of the future, and he stressed the importance of substantial efforts to address and prevent climate change.
The prime minister also said that the Indo-U.S. partnership is essential to addressing other global challenges such as terrorism and economic development.
On the subject of terrorism, Obama said that both the U.S. and India would deepen their operations against trans-national threats and both countries&apos; intelligence agencies would work closely to "eradicate" terrorist activity in the regions surrounding India.
The leaders also discussed expanding trade and investment between the two countries in order to create jobs and stimulate the global economy.
Both Obama and Singh also discussed nuclear non-proliferation and combining their nations&apos; efforts to achieve a "shared vision of a world without nuclear weapons" and ensure that other nations strive to reach a goal of nuclear disarmament.
During his remarks, President Obama also briefly touched on the establishment of food security initiatives designed to increase farm output and reduce hunger as well as the establishment of a new disease detection center in India, before reaffirming America&apos;s commitment to its partnership with India.
"You will have no better friend and Partner than the United States of America," he said.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 18, 2010


End of Document