OBAMA TO KEEP TRIBUNAL SYSTEM; PRESIDENT SAYS HE WILL REVAMP THE TERRORISM POLICY CREATED BY BUSH
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 16, 2009 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 820 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear and Peter Finn, The Washington Post
Body


WASHINGTON -- As a candidate for president, Barack Obama offered himself as a clear alternative to Bush-era anti-terrorism policies. Governing has proven muddier.
Yesterday, President Obama announced that he would revamp, rather than reject, the system of military tribunals that former President George W. Bush created to try terrorism suspects. Earlier in the week, Mr. Obama indicated that he would fight the release of photos depicting alleged abuse of detainees during Mr. Bush's tenure.
The reaction has been fierce. The American Civil Liberties Union accused Mr. Obama of "stonewalling tactics and opaque policies" after the photo decision. And yesterday, the group threw Mr. Obama's own words from the campaign back at him: "You can't put lipstick on a pig," they said of his efforts to revamp the commissions. Human rights groups vowed to fight Mr. Obama in court.
Early moves to ban torture and shutter the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba -- decisions hailed by human rights groups here and abroad -- have been followed by others that left many of his most ardent supporters disappointed and angry.
Mr. Obama backed Mr. Bush's wiretapping program, expanded the war in Afghanistan and opposed prosecution of those involved in alleged torture of detainees -- a refusal that continues to echo as the country publicly debates the effectiveness of past interrogations.
Yesterday's announcement was a unmistakable reversal for a man who, as a candidate, had promised to shelve the military commissions and called their use under Mr. Bush an "enormous failure."
"I have faith in America's courts," Mr. Obama said last Aug. 7. "I have faith in our JAGs [military Judge Advocate General attorneys]. As president, I'll close Guantanamo, reject the Military Commissions Act, adhere to the Geneva Conventions. Our Constitution and our Uniform Code of Military Justice provide a framework for dealing with the terrorists."
His message in reversing his stance yesterday was more muted. "Military commissions have a long tradition in the United States," Mr. Obama said in a statement. "They are appropriate for trying enemies who violate the laws of war, provided that they are properly structured and administered."
Top Obama aides insist that the president is staying true to his principles by ending torture, winding down the Iraq war and closing Guantanamo. But they describe as "excruciating" the weight of the responsibility that Mr. Obama feels to keep the country safe.
"The president has made some enormous strides in changing the direction of our policies," senior adviser David Axelrod said. "But implementing them has its challenges, because you constantly have to balance equities and responsibilities and make decisions that are in the best interest of the country's security in a way that's consistent with our values."
Inside the administration, the debate over the military commissions was rigorous, with Mr. Obama eventually siding with the generals and other military officials who feared that bringing some detainees before regular courts presented enormous legal hurdles and could risk acquittals.
That argument, presented to Mr. Obama by his top national security aides, prevailed over Justice Department prosecutors who argued that federal courts or long-established military courts-martial could ensure the swift and successful prosecution of captured terrorism suspects, including Khalid Sheik Mohammed, the self-proclaimed mastermind of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
FBI teams that reinterviewed detainees at Guantanamo beginning in early 2007 to obtain fresh testimony, free from the taint of earlier coercive interrogation, did not provide Miranda warnings to those detainees. Some in the administration argued that the failure to do so was a major barrier to shifting some cases to federal court.
The decision jolted back to life one of the most controversial elements of his predecessor's terrorism-fighting arsenal, and leaves the administration at odds with some core supporters, who argued that Guantanamo-style tribunals in any form should be junked. Reviled by human rights groups as illegitimate and described by their defenders as an essential tool to prosecute some terrorism suspects, the military commissions long ago became a lightning rod in a global debate on how best to combat terrorism.
White House officials stressed that Mr. Obama has long expressed support for properly run military commissions, and that his criticism of the Bush-era tribunals has always been that they failed to provide appropriate rights for detainees.
"The president has been consistent in his views on this issue and been consistent on what was lacking in order to ensure justice, in order to ensure protection, and most of all to ensure that this process goes forward with and doesn't see repeated legal stalls in going through the court system," White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said in his daily briefing.

Load-Date: May 19, 2009


End of Document