Obama Administration: Avoiding fearful words
Richmond Times-Dispatch: Blogs
November 24, 2012 Saturday


Copyright 2012 Media General Communications Holdings, LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 956 words
Byline: ROBIN BERES
Body


Recent news reports of the federal government's handling of deadly attacks against Americans bring to mind the words of Irish playwright Oscar Wilde: "Life imitates art far more than art imitates life." The amount of fiction and acts of illusion the Obama administration has employed to avoid using the word "terrorism" read like a chapter out of a "Harry Potter" book.
In the fantastical series by J.K. Rowling, the entire wizarding world of Britain lived in terror of the evil sorcerer Voldemort. None dared utter his name out loud, terrified that doing so would bring the wrath of the Dark Lord upon them. Instead, the ghastly creature was referred to as "You Know Who" or "He Who Shall Not Be Named."
 The world of Harry and friends was governed by the Ministry of Magic. Throughout the series, the fictional ministry was depicted as an incompetent, sometimes corrupt, bureaucracy. Its leaders seemed incapable of recognizing the dangers that threatened the wizard world and incompetent at handling actual crises. The minister of magic, Cornelius Fudge, and his administration were quite concerned about public opinion and didn't hesitate to use friendly media sources to spread their propaganda.
 In real life, refusing to name evil for what it is or ignoring it in hopes that it goes away seldom works out.
 On Sept. 11, 2012 , a heavily armed militant group attacked a U.S. diplomatic mission and nearby CIA annex in Benghazi, Libya. The U.S. ambassador to Libya, Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans were murdered during the attack.
 For days following the rampage, the Obama administration refused to call the deadly assault an act of terrorism, instead blaming it on the trailer of some shadowy movie whose existence can't even be confirmed. But that didn't stop Secretary of State Hillary Clinton from strongly condemning the video and claiming the buck stopped with her.
 Much of the nation seemed to buy the administration's fantasy that the attacks were spontaneous and unplanned. And the White House did a bang-up job of keeping the storyline going. It wasn't until the Nov. 16 testimony of now-resigned CIA Director David Petraeus that Congress and the American people learned that CIA reports clearly stated from the start that al-Qaida-linked groups were involved in the attacks.
 But somehow those comments about terrorism and al-Qaida magically disappeared from the reports. Maybe Team Obama thought that naming You Know Who (al-Qaida) aloud and stating the attacks were definitely an act of You Know What (terrorism) might frighten Americans. (Or perhaps might endanger the president's re-election odds.) As of this writing, no one seems to know who was responsible for editing (or using a vanishing potion) on those reports.
 In another chimerical move by the administration, on Oct. 22, Defense Secretary Leon Panetta again refused to classify the 2009 Fort Hood, Texas, shootings by an Islamic jihadist as an act of terror. Earlier this October, a coalition of 160 shooting victims and family members released a chilling video pleading for the Pentagon to consider a reclassification of the horrific event.
 Despite already facing criticism for its own shifting storyline about the Benghazi attacks, the Pentagon is adamant that it will not change its definition of the incident. Apparently Panetta is concerned that it might bias the case against the accused shooter, Nidal Hasan.
 According to Pentagon press secretary George Little, "the Department of Defense is committed to the integrity of the ongoing court-martial proceedings of Maj. Hasan and for that reason will not at this time further characterize the incident." Hasan, who continues to receive Army paychecks and military benefits, has been charged with premeditated murder and attempted murder.
 Because the Pentagon insists on characterizing the incident as workplace violence, military members who were killed or injured are ineligible to receive the Purple Heart. The medal is generally awarded to military members who have been wounded or killed in any action against an enemy of the United States.
 Sgt. Alonzo Lunsford was shot six times that day. He has lost sight in his left eye but today is just grateful that he is alive. Army Reserve Capt. Dorothy Carskadon still carries a bullet in her leg and shrapnel in her head.
 Both soldiers wonder why their comrades killed that day are not included in national and state lists of fallen heroes like others killed in the war on terror. Both wonder why the dead and wounded do not qualify for Purple Hearts.
 When Hasan opened fire in that Army medical processing facility, killing 13 people and wounding 32 others, dozens of people report that they clearly heard him shout "Allah Akbar." And no one who worked with Hasan or had been in a position of authority above him was particularly surprised when they learned of his rampage.
 When (and if) Hasan's case ever actually makes it to trial, prosecutors will no doubt point to emails and conversations between the defendant and al-Qaida representatives. The terror angle is unavoidable. The Pentagon's refusal to call it an act of terror certainly isn't going to serve as some magic potion that ensures the accused murderer gets a fairer trial.
 Al-Qaida is alive and well. It has extensive networking capabilities and autonomous underground cells in some 100 countries, including Yemen, Somalia, Nigeria, Iraq and even here in the U.S. The deadly organization continues to recruit and plot attacks against Americans and American interests. And the sooner this administration levels with the American people on that score, the sooner we can one day close the book on this bloody chapter in our national storyline.
 mberes@timesdispatch.com (804) 649-6305

Load-Date: December 19, 2013


End of Document