Obama wants Congress to delay Hood inquiries
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 15, 2009, Sunday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3A
Length: 487 words
Byline: Philip Elliott, The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - President Obama on Saturday urged Congress to hold off on any investigation of the Fort Hood massacre until federal law enforcement and military authorities have completed their investigations into the shootings at the U.S. Army post in Texas, which left 13 people dead.
On an eight-day Asia trip, Obama turned his attention home and pleaded for lawmakers to "resist the temptation to turn this tragic event into the political theater." He said those who died last week on the nation's largest Army post deserve justice, not political stagecraft.
"The stakes are far too high," Obama said in a video and Internet address released by the White House while the president was flying from Tokyo to Singapore, where Pacific Rim countries were meeting.
Army psychiatrist Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, 39, was charged Thursday with the massacre. Army investigators say Hasan is the only suspect and could face additional charges.
Obama already had ordered a review of all intelligence related to Hasan and whether the information was properly shared and acted upon within government agencies. Several members of Congress, particularly Michigan Rep. Peter Hoekstra, the top Republican on the House Intelligence Committee, also have called for a full examination of what agencies knew about Hasan's contacts with a radical Muslim cleric in Yemen and others of concern to the United States.
Hoekstra confirmed this week that government officials knew of about 10 to 20 e-mails between Hasan and the radical imam, beginning in December 2008.
A joint terrorism task force overseen by the FBI learned late last year of Hasan's repeated contact with the cleric, who encourages Muslims to kill U.S. troops in Iraq.
The FBI said the task force did not refer early information about Hasan to superiors because it concluded that he wasn't linked to terrorism.
Lawmakers, however, already have announced that they want their own investigations and were frustrated with what they view as a less-than-forthcoming administration.
Rep. Howard McKeon, R-Calif., said he wants to go ahead with an investigation by the House Armed Services Committee, where he is the top Republican. He said he wants an investigation that won't compromise law enforcement or military investigations that are continuing on separate tracks.
In the Senate, Sen. Joe Lieberman, a Connecticut independent, said his Homeland Security Committee is opening an investigation.
Obama said he is not opposed to hearings eventually, but he pressed lawmakers to hold off until the inquiries now under way are officially completed.
"There is an ongoing investigation into this terrible tragedy," Obama said. "That investigation will look at the motives of the alleged gunman, including his views and contacts.
"We must compile every piece of information that was known about the gunman, and we must learn what was done with that information. Once we have those facts, we must act upon them."

Load-Date: November 16, 2009


End of Document