OBAMA CITES SAFETY FLAWS; PRESIDENT VOWS TO FIX 'HUMAN AND SYSTEMIC FAILURES' THAT LED TO JET INCIDENT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 30, 2009 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 970 words
Byline: CARRIE JOHNSON, KAREN DEYOUNG AND ANNE E. KORNBLUT, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama said yesterday that a "mix of human and systemic failures" allowed a Nigerian student allegedly carrying an explosive to board an airplane on Christmas Day, and he vowed to quickly fix flaws that could have doomed a flight carrying nearly 300 passengers and crew members.
The president and his top advisers now believe there is "some linkage" with al-Qaida, and the administration is "increasingly confident" that the terrorist group worked with suspect Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab to secure the deadly chemical mixture that he took aboard Northwest Airlines Flight 253, a senior administration official said yesterday.
The government also had intelligence suggesting a possible attack on the United States by al-Qaida around Christmastime, White House officials said.
Mr. Obama's stark remarks came two days after Mr. Obama's homeland security secretary, Janet Napolitano, said that information provided by the suspect's father before the failed bombing plot was so vague that it did not merit further investigation. Ms. Napolitano also said that "the system worked" in this incident, drawing a political outcry from GOP lawmakers and national security experts.
As the Obama administration reviewed the government's actions yesterday, investigators in Yemen visited an Arabic language institute attended by Abdulmutallab and asked about his ties to a mosque in the capital's historic section.
In the United States, FBI agents conducted fresh interviews of each passenger on the Detroit-bound flight and focused their attention on Mr. Abdulmutallab's past six months, a time when investigators suspect that the Nigerian student grew increasingly radicalized, according to two federal officials who spoke on condition of anonymity so as not to interfere with the ongoing investigation.
Over the past year, Mr. Abdulmutallab intensified electronic communications with the extremist Yemeni-American cleric Anwar al-Aulaqi, the federal sources said. Mr. Aulaqi also corresponded with the Army major accused of responsibility for the Fort Hood massacre last month, officials have said.
From his vacation spot in Hawaii, the president blamed lapses in sharing information after Mr. Abdulmutallab's father alerted the U.S. embassy in Nigeria last month about his son, who had embraced radical views and cut off ties to the prosperous family. Government officials said they already have identified faulty systems and failures to follow procedure, and Mr. Obama has demanded preliminary results of a review by tomorrow.
"It now appears that, weeks ago, this information was passed to a component of our intelligence community but was not effectively distributed so as to get the suspect's name on a no-fly list," Mr. Obama said, adding, "Had this critical information been shared ... the suspect would have never been allowed to board that plane for America."
The president added later, "A systemic failure has occurred, and I consider that totally unacceptable."
Intelligence officials said they were eager to improve their system to close whatever gaps the Abdulmutallab case may have exposed. But several expressed puzzlement and some irritation over Mr. Obama's reference to "bits of information available within the intelligence community" that, if "pieced together," might have "triggered red flag" about the Nigerian.
"Abdulmutallab's father didn't say his son was a terrorist" when he visited the U.S. embassy in Nigeria, "let alone planning an attack. Not at all," one U.S. intelligence official said. "I'm not aware of some magic piece of intelligence that suddenly would have flagged this guy -- whose name nobody even had until November -- as a killer en route to America, let alone something that anybody withheld."
The "bits of information" apparently referred at least in part to Mr. Abdulmutallab's two previous visits to the United States -- to the Washington area in the summer of 2004, and to Houston, for what officials said was a "religious conference" in August 2008.
Although those travels, and Mr. Abdulmutallab's U.S. entry visas, were available on separate databases, they had not been given any terrorism significance and thus were not included in the terrorism database maintained by the National Counterterrorism Center. Under existing guidelines, NCTC officials would have had no reason to seek out non-terrorism information about him based on his father's concerns.
Officials said that their reviews in response to Mr. Obama's order will be twofold. Mr. Obama has said he wants by tomorrow everything the U.S. government has found out about Mr. Abdulmutallab from its own data and from foreign governments since Christmas Day, as well as exactly what the suspect did during his previous visits to this country and elsewhere, including Yemen, and whom he associated with.
What is expected to be a longer review, led by John Brennan, the White House deputy national security adviser and counterterrorism chief, will look at whether changes are needed in the database and watch list systems that failed to flag Mr. Abdulmutallab as an imminent security risk and to place him on an airline watch list.
The seriousness of the lapse, and Mr. Obama's reference to both "human and systemic" failures, appear to have revived resentments within the intelligence community, particularly between the CIA and the Director of National Intelligence. The DNI, created as part of the post-9/11 intelligence reforms, usurped the CIA's position as the head of the intelligence community, while creation of the NCTC imposed a sometimes uncomfortable level of collaboration on the CIA and others.
"The United States government set up NCTC to connect the dots on terrorism," the intelligence official said. "If somebody thinks it could have been done better in this case, they know where to go for answers."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Paul Ellis/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images: A combination of images shows an airport employee, left, demonstrating a full body scan at Manchester Airport in Manchester, England, and a computer screen showing the results of such a scan. The scan can detect concealed objects and explosives. Such scanners have not been deployed at most airports because they are considered invasive of a person's privacy

Load-Date: December 30, 2009


End of Document