Obama on offense; West Point speech touts restraint in foreign policy
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 29, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 20
Length: 423 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WEST POINT, N.Y.  
Body


In a broad defense of his foreign policy, President Barack Obama declared Wednesday that the U.S. remains the world's most indispensable nation, even after a long season of war, but argued for restraint when it comes to military adventures.
Standing before the newest class of officers graduating from the U.S. Military Academy, Obama said, I would betray my duty to you, and to the country we love, if I sent you into harm's way simply because I saw a problem somewhere in the world that needed fixing or because I was worried about critics who think military intervention is the only way for America to avoid looking weak.
Obama's speech signaled a concerted effort by the White House to push back against those critics who contend that the president's approach to global problems has been too cautious and has emboldened adversaries in Syria, Russia and China. It's a criticism that deeply frustrates the president and his advisers, who say Obama's efforts to keep the U.S. out of more military conflicts are in line with the views of the American public.
In a direct challenge to his critics, Obama declared: I believe in American exceptionalism with every fiber of my being. But what makes us exceptional is not our ability to flout international norms and the rule of law; it's our willingness to affirm them through our actions.
Even as the U.S. emerges from the two wars that began after Sept. 11, 2001, Obama said terrorism remains the most direct threat to U.S. security. But he argued that as the threat has shifted from a centralized al-Qaida to an array of affiliates, the U.S. response must change, too.
Rather than launching large-scale military efforts, Obama called for partnering with countries where terrorist networks seek a foothold. That effort includes a new $5 billion fund to help countries fight terrorism and to expand funding for Defense Department intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance, special operations and other activities.
Obama cast the bloody civil war in Syria as more of a counterterrorism challenge than a humanitarian crisis. He defended his decision to keep the U.S. military out of the conflict but said he would seek to increase support for the Syrian opposition, as well as neighboring countries, including Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq, that have faced an influx of refugees and fear the spread of terrorism.
In helping those who fight for the right of all Syrians to choose their own future, we also push back against the growing number of extremists who find safe haven in the chaos, Obama said.

Load-Date: May 29, 2014


End of Document