Obama removes Cuba from state sponsor of terror list
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 15, 2015 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 547 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


WASHINGTON • President Barack Obama will remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism, the White House announced Tuesday, a key step in his bid to normalize relations between the two countries.
The terrorist designation has been a stain on Cuba's pride and a major stumbling block for efforts to mend ties between Washington and Havana.
In a message to Congress, Obama said the government of Cuba "has not provided any support for international terrorism" over the last six months. He also told lawmakers that Cuba "has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in the future."
Cuba will officially be removed from the terrorist list 45 days after the president's message was sent to Congress. Lawmakers could vote to block the move during that window, though Obama would be all-but-certain to veto such a measure.
Tuesday's announcement comes days after Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro met on the sidelines of a regional summit in Panama. The historic talks marked the first formal meeting between the leaders of their countries in a half-century.
The U.S. has long since stopped actively accusing Cuba of supporting terrorism. When Obama and Castro announced a thaw in relations in December, the U.S. president expressed his willingness to remove Cuba from that list.
However, he held off on making a final decision amid indications that the White House was reluctant to grant Cuba's request until other thorny issues - such as restrictions on U.S. diplomats in Havana - were resolved.
The president's final decision followed a State Department review of Cuba's presence on the list.
Removing Cuba from the terrorist list could pave the way for the opening of a U.S. Embassy in Havana and other steps. Administration officials said they were optimistic about the prospects of opening the embassy, but did not provide any specific updates in timing.
Cuba was designated a state sponsor of terrorism in 1982 because of what the White House said was its efforts "to promote armed revolution by organizations that used terrorism."
Those efforts included support for leftist guerrilla groups in Central and South America that carried out attacks on civilians in their efforts to overthrow U.S.-backed governments.
State Department reports on the terrorist list specifically mention Cuba sheltering members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, and the Spanish Basque separatist group ETA. Cuba has also given shelter to black and Puerto Rican militants who fled to the island after carrying out attacks in the United States.
Cuba renounced its direct support for foreign militants years ago, and is sponsoring peace talks between the FARC and Colombian government.
Most of the terrorist list's direct legal impact is on relatively narrow issues that don't affect Cuba due to the long-standing trade embargo on the island and deep historical enmity between the two nations.
However, Cubans say the listing has badly damaged their ability to conduct international financial transactions by frightening banks away from doing business with the communist government. Those who do businesses with state sponsors of terrorism are vulnerable to lawsuits in U.S. courts.
The remaining countries on the terrorist list are Iran, Sudan and Syria.

Graphic

 
 A vendor gives a thumbs up to the camera as he sells shoes and paintings of Cuba's revolutionary hero Ernesto "Che" Guevara in Havana, Cuba, Tuesday, April 14, 2015. President Barack Obama will remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism, the White House announced Tuesday, a key step in his bid to normalize relations between the two countries. (AP Photo/Desmond Boylan)  In this Saturday, April 11, 2015 photo, U.S. President Barack Obama, right, smiles as he looks over towards Cuban President Raul Castro, left, during their historic meeting, at the Summit of the Americas in Panama City, Panama. The leaders of the United States and Cuba held their first formal meeting in more than half a century on Saturday, clearing the way for a normalization of relations that had seemed unthinkable to both Cubans and Americans for generations. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais) 

Load-Date: April 16, 2015


End of Document