Obama huddles with Pakistani leader; President says they are 'committed to working together' to end tension
USA TODAY
October 24, 2013 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 502 words
Byline: Aamer Madhani, USA TODAY,
Body


President Obama met with Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on Wednesday and offered optimism that the U.S.-Pakistani relationship, which has been largely shaped by mutual distrust in recent years, has turned a corner.
The meeting, the first between the two leaders, comes after the relationship hit rock bottom more than two years ago in the aftermath of the killing of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan.
In an appearance before reporters at the end of their Oval Office meeting, Obama said that the relationship was a crucial one even as there "inevitably will be some tensions between our two countries and occasional misunderstandings" as the two nation's battle terrorism -- much of which emanates from inside Pakistan's borders.
"It's a challenge," Obama told reporters after the meeting. "It's not easy. And we are committed to working together and making sure that rather than this being a source of tension between our two countries, that it can be a source of strength for us, working together in a constructive and a respectful way."
The meeting comes at an important time for Obama, who is preparing to wind down the long war in Afghanistan next year and must decide whether to leave a residual U.S. troop presence.
The Pakistanis, who have attempted to nudge the Taliban into peace talks with the Afghan government, have their own concerns about the future of the neighboring country after U.S. and NATO troops leave.
The Obama administration has made clear  that they believe the Pakistanis have not done enough to help the situation in Afghanistan during the course of the war.
Just months after the bin Laden raid, Adm. Michael Mullen, who was then the top U.S. military officer, even called Pakistan's powerful intelligence agency a "veritable arm" of the Haqqani militant network -- arguably the most powerful group attacking U.S. troops in Afghanistan.
Sharif appeared to try to assuage some of those concerns during his White House visit: "Let there be no doubt about our commitment for a peaceful and stable Afghanistan."
Obama, in turn, said that he promised to keep Sharif in the loop about his long-term strategy for Afghanistan and the region.
While Sharif has sought a warmer relationship since taking office in June, he has been outspoken about U.S. drone strikes targeting extremists in Pakistan's restive tribal region. He criticized the strikes in his address to the United Nations General Assembly last month, arguing that the civilian casualties from the strikes undercut Pakistan's "resolve and efforts to eliminate extremism and terrorism from Pakistan."
Sharif said Wednesday that he brought up his concerns about the drone program with Obama during their meeting.
Earlier this week, two human rights groups released reports critical of Obama's use of drones to target terrorists. The groups, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, argue that civilians are frequently killed in the strikes and question whether the program complies with international law. Obama has defended the program. 

Graphic

 
photo Pool photo by Dennis Brack

Load-Date: October 24, 2013


End of Document