Obama's legacy will be one of war and terrorism
USA TODAY
December 8, 2016 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 421 words
Body


Facebook
President Obama gave an optimistic assessment of the campaign against terror on Tuesday, thanking U.S. troops for their help in "breaking the back" of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
I don't think Obama had a foreign policy set in place to fight terror.
He did in the U.S., though, which I believe was to promote terror by bringing in a large number of refugees.
Thomas Davis
Obama believes that his weak response to terrorism is a solution. All it has done is embolden terrorists, allowing them to grow and undermine the safety of this country.
Lou Creola
Thanks to Obama's strategy, the Islamic State of terrorism is losing, badly, and we're minimizing anything that terrorists could use as tools to recruit more people to their efforts.
Terrorists are not emboldened. They would like nothing more than for the West to characterize this as an all-out war on Islam because that would push Muslims into their corner.
Josh McNeill
What we are doing now seems like putting a finger on a leaky pipe. Thus, I don't think we should be the only country fighting terrorism at the level that we are.
I think we should be generally keeping terrorism out of the U.S. When countries like Russia and China join us in fighting terrorism with the same intensity the U.S. is, then a more direct approach would be good.
Bruce Mort
For the president who said he was going to end all of the wars the U.S. was actively participating in, how can Obama's time in office be seen as anything but a failure?
Chad Clausen
All those immigrants entering Europe are a byproduct of terrorism, which was not dealt with under Obama's watch.
Terrorism has, can and will result in a major cultural displacement, which will threaten world order, especially when there is a leadership vacuum abroad.
Steven Ernest Cullen
Twitter
We asked our followers if they thought President-elect Donald Trump will be able to handle threats to national security effectively.
No, because someone who can't handle a tweet doesn't give me confidence he can handle a world crisis.
@Adampro941
Yes! Trump is choosing smart, savvy, experienced people for key positions. They will keep us safe.
@patrck1950
Trump can't even handle a "Saturday Night Live" parody. How the heck is he going to handle national security threats? Scary times!
@JoelStern7
Yes, I do and more effectively than now. Trump won't play games, and those pushing him will soon learn.
@RamonaRedden
I'm skeptical, given Trump's past performance. He seems too reactionary.
@Dharshi595
For more, follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday. 

Load-Date: December 9, 2016


End of Document