Obama says Boston bombings an act of terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 17, 2013 Wednesday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 703 words
Byline: From news services
Body


WASHINGTON • President Barack Obama pronounced the deadly Boston Marathon explosions an act of terrorism on Tuesday as individuals close to the investigation said the two bombs were made of pressure cookers packed with pellets, nails and metal shards that cut into the victims.
Speaking at the White House, Obama said investigators do not know if the attack was carried out by an international or domestic organization, or perhaps by a "malevolent individual." Three people were killed, including a boy, 8, and more than 170 were wounded.
In his second public statement in less than 24 hours after the explosions, the president said: "Clearly we are at the beginning of our investigation." He urged anyone with information relating to the events to contact authorities.
Individuals briefed on the investigation said the two bombs were made up of pressure cookers, packed with pellets, nails and shards of metal, presumably to inflict maximum injuries. The bombs were placed inside black duffel bags on the ground near the finish line of the annual race, they said, speaking on condition of anonymity because the investigation remains active and they were not authorized to be quoted by name.
Obama said investigators "don't have a sense of motivation yet" as they begin to evaluate the attack.
Despite the loss of life and limb, Obama declared, "The American people refuse to be terrorized."
As he had on Monday, he said those responsible for the attacks would be brought to justice.
The president had avoided labeling the incident a terrorist attack when he stood at the same White House lectern shortly after the explosions. Members of Congress quickly concluded on Monday afternoon that's what it was, and White House officials said the FBI was investigating the attack as a terror incident.
The administration's public assessment began to shift when Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel told Congress in a morning appearance that the attacks were "a cruel act of terror."
Appearing on television a short while afterward, Obama said the events in Boston were a "heinous cowardly act, and given what we now know about what took place, the FBI is investigating it as an act of terrorism."
"Any time bombs are used to target innocent civilians it is an act of terror. What we don't yet know, however, is who carried out this attack, or why. Whether it was planned and executed by a terrorist organization, foreign or domestic, or was the act of a malevolent individual. That's what we don't yet know."
The president praised those who had come to the aid of the injured.
"If you want to know who we are, what America is, how we respond to evil, that's it: selflessly, compassionately, unafraid," he said.
Obama stepped to the microphone after receiving a briefing at the White House from Attorney General Eric Holder, Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and other top aides.
CONGRESS REACTS
Congressional leaders reflected with grief on the tragic loss of life, but had few immediate answers as to the nature of the attack.
The flag over the U.S. Capitol was at half staff and there were signs of increased security on the grounds Tuesday.
House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said words can't express the "sorrow" lawmakers feel for the families that lost loved ones and for those who were wounded. The attack was a reminder "of just how vulnerable" we are, he said, "in this era of what I'll call modern warfare."
"We don't know who perpetrated this or for what reasons, but I'm confident that we'll get to the bottom of it," he said at a news conference. "It's a terrible day for all Americans, but we carry on in the American spirit. We will come together with grace and with strength."
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., acknowledged that there remain questions about "who did this and why," but said federal agencies are "investigating this attack as aggressively as possible."
Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky said the events ended a "complacency" that had set in, not unlike before the 9/11 attacks, for many in the nation.
"And so we are newly reminded that serious threats to our way of life remain. And today, again, we recommit ourselves to the fight against terrorism at home, and abroad," he said.

Graphic

 
 President Barack Obama speaks in the Brady Press Briefing Room of the White House in Washington, Tuesday, April 16, 2013, following the explosions at the Boston Marathon. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)  This Homeland Security Department pamphlet, from July 2010, distributed to police, fore, EMS and security personnel shows a diagram for rudimentary improvised explosive devices (IEDs) using pressure cookers to contain the initiator, switch and explosive charge. A person briefed on the Boston Marathon investigation says at least one of the explosives were in 6-liter pressure cookers and placed in black duffel bag. (AP Photo/Homeland Security Department)  President Barack Obama pauses while speaking in the Brady Press Briefing Room of the White House in Washington, Tuesday, April 16, 2013, about the Boston Marathon explosions. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)  President Barack Obama turns to leave after speaking in the Brady Press Briefing Room of the White House in Washington, Tuesday, April 16, 2013, following the explosions at the Boston Marathon. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)  President Barack Obama speaks in the Brady Press Briefing Room of the White House in Washington, Tuesday, April 16, 2013, following the explosions at the Boston Marathon. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak) 

Load-Date: April 17, 2013


End of Document