Obama may get a different reception in Berlin
USA TODAY
June 19, 2013 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 362 words
Byline: Sumi Somaskanda
Body


As a candidate, Barack Obama was greeted here five years ago by massive crowds and media adulation for his strident criticism of the wartime policies of President George W. Bush.
But when President Obama speaks here today,  he may find a different reception because of controversy over his government's surveillance program and his decision to maintain many of the anti-terrorism policies of Bush so loathed by the German left that swooned for Obama.
In 2008, Obama fever peaked when he was  in Berlin for  a foreign policy speech during his campaign.
More than 200,000 people turned out to see him speak at Berlin's Victory Column, waving U.S. flags and chanting "Yes we can!"
Obama described himself as a "fellow citizen of the world," and he promised to bridge the gap between the two trans-Atlantic powers that had, in his words, drifted apart.
That was then.
Today, the news media is full of stories over the global Internet anti-terrorism spying program of Obama's National Security Agency, a program that included the surveillance of German citizens. Germany has strict data-privacy laws.
Many analysts say Obama's popularity here was bound to fall given the high expectations placed on him.
"It was difficult to tell people here, also Americans, before he was elected that he wouldn't walk on water," said Josef Braml, an expert on trans-Atlantic affairs for the German Council on Foreign Relations, a think tank. "No matter who's going to be president, he or Romney would be blocked by at least one chamber in Congress."
Obama is still popular among most Germans. According to a recent poll conducted by the market research group Emnid, 85% of Germans believe Obama is a good president.
Today, Obama plans to hold talks with German Chancellor Angela Merkel before his invitation-only speech for 5,000 people.
Some Germans say the problem is not unrealized hopes for Obama, but the continent's subordinate status to the United States when it comes to global influence.
"I'm more disappointed as a European by Europe, that we're not more confident and stand behind our opinions, and that we, in my perspective, often take a back seat," Berlin-based entrepreneur Jan Schiele said. 

Graphic

 
photo OLE SPATA, AFP/Getty Images President Obama's limo drives by the Brandenburg Gate after his arrival Tuesday in Berlin. Obama will speak at the historic site today.

Load-Date: June 19, 2013


End of Document