Obama Issues Waivers on Military Trials for Foreign Qaeda Suspects
The New York Times
February 29, 2012 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 882 words
Byline: By CHARLIE SAVAGE
Body


WASHINGTON -- Last year, the Obama administration strongly objected to a Congressional mandate that foreigners suspected of being Al Qaeda operatives be held in military custody rather than go through the civilian criminal justice system.
On Tuesday, President Obama sought to have the last word, issuing waivers that would exempt sweeping categories of future prisoners from the requirement, which became law in December.
The rule, imposed by Congress, applies only to a narrow category of terrorism suspects: those who are not American citizens, who are deemed to be part of Al Qaeda or its allies and who are suspected of participating in a terrorist plot against the United States or its allies.
The provision, which the administration called unwise and unnecessary when it was proposed by lawmakers, became another flash point in the debate over whether terrorism suspects should be handled exclusively as wartime prisoners, as many Republicans argue, or whether the civilian criminal justice system should remain an option, a more flexible approach backed by the Obama administration.
The White House prepared the waivers as part of required guidelines instructing the executive branch on how to put the new rule into effect. The waivers would apply, according to the guidelines, to any case in which officials believed that placing a detainee in military custody could impede counterterrorism cooperation with the detainee's home government or interfere with efforts to secure the person's cooperation or confession.
The waivers would also cover lawful permanent residents who were arrested in the United States or whose actions occurred domestically, as well as those arrested by the state or local police, rather than the federal authorities.
Even with the exceptions, a senior administration official familiar with the procedures stressed that the mandate meant that executive branch officials would be forced for the first time to consider transferring a newly arrested terrorism suspect to military custody. That could expose the government to greater public scrutiny whenever it decided against the military option.
The rule was part of a bipartisan package of detainee-related measures shaped by the Senate Armed Services Committee in a deal between Senators Carl Levin of Michigan and John McCain of Arizona, the top Democrat and Republican on the panel. Proponents of the mandate stressed that it would not disrupt national security investigations, in part because it gave the president the power to waive the requirement if doing so was in the United States' security interests.
The Obama administration had strongly objected to the provision, but it was included in a major defense bill anyway. When Mr. Obama signed that measure on Dec. 31, he issued a signing statement blasting the detainee rule as ''ill conceived.'' He also vowed to interpret his waiver power to preserve a ''maximum measure of flexibility,'' foreshadowing the procedures issued on Tuesday.
The sweeping scope of the waivers outlined by the administration could reopen the debate over whether to handle noncitizen terrorism suspects as wartime prisoners rather than as criminal defendants.
The Bush administration designated two prisoners arrested inside the United States as ''enemy combatants'' and transferred them to a military brig. Both men -- one of whom, Jose Padilla, is an American citizen -- eventually were prosecuted in civilian courts. But the Obama administration has vowed to use traditional law enforcement agencies for all terrorism cases arising inside the United States.
The debate flared in particular around the case of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the Nigerian man who tried to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner on Dec. 25, 2009. After initially cooperating with interrogators from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Mr. Abdulmutallab did not speak to them for several weeks in January 2010 after he was given a Miranda warning. He eventually resumed talking and provided extensive information. He was later prosecuted in a civilian court, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to life in prison several weeks ago.
Under Mr. Obama's guidelines, if F.B.I. agents take someone like Mr. Abdulmutallab into custody and think there is probable cause to believe that the prisoner fits the definition of a terrorism suspect covered by the law, they are to notify the attorney general.
The attorney general, in consultation with other top members of the executive branch legal team -- the secretaries of state, defense and homeland security, the chairman of the military's Joint Chiefs of Staff and the director of national intelligence -- will discuss whether there is ''clear and convincing'' proof the prisoner is covered by the law.
If so, the officials are to consider whether the prisoner is covered by the waivers Mr. Obama is issuing. Even if not, the administration guidelines allow the attorney general to make other exceptions on a case-by-case basis.
All six members of an interagency national security team must agree before a prisoner is transferred to military custody, effectively giving any of them veto power over complying with the mandate. In addition, even if all six agree that a prisoner should be transferred to the military, the director of the F.B.I. must agree that the timing is right.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: During the Bush administration, Jose Padilla, center, an American citizen, was deemed an ''enemy combatant.'' President Obama prefers traditional law enforcement for such cases. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAN DIAZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)                                                               

Load-Date: February 29, 2012


End of Document