Obama revisits terrorism potential; There's no specific threat, he says at federal center
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 18, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 21
Length: 280 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: McLEAN, Va.  
Highlight: Obama says no specific, credible terror threats to US during holidays, but US must be vigilant
Body


 President Barack Obama said Thursday that U.S. intelligence and counterterrorism officials have received no specific credible information of a potential terrorist attack against the United States.
He said, however, that Americans must be vigilant this holiday season.
We cannot give in to fear or change how we live our lives, Obama said in brief remarks to employees at the National Counterterrorism Center. We will not be terrorized. We've prevailed over much greater threats than this; we will prevail again.
Obama spoke after a briefing by his national security team on the threat level, the effort to combat extremist groups and propaganda abroad, and steps to tighten scrutiny of people entering the U.S. on visas.
In a reminder of the limits of such assurances, Obama's remarks nearly echoed a statement he delivered just before Thanksgiving - one week before the shooting in San Bernardino, California.
Still, the White House has sought to ease public worries since that attack. This was the second security briefing the White House has highlighted this week. The president visited the Pentagon on Monday for an update on the U.S.-led fight against the Islamic State group in Iraq and Syria.
Thursday, Obama said he was briefed on the K-1 visa program, which one of the attackers in San Bernardino used to enter the U.S. in July 2014. He said the terrorism threat has evolved to include smaller groups or individuals, making detection harder.
He said the U.S. is focused on going after terrorists overseas, preventing terrorists from entering the country, and strengthening ties between law enforcement and local communities and the technology sector to prevent attacks at home.

Load-Date: December 18, 2015


End of Document