Obama Foreign Policy in Free-fall
Post-Gazette (Boston, Massachusetts)
October 12, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 Post-Gazette


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 426 words
Byline: Post Gazette staff
Body


After the raid that killed Osama bin Laden, John Brennan was all over TV spiking the ball for the takedown of the author of the 9/11 attacks. However, three weeks after the Benghazi attacks that killed four Americans, including out ambassador to Libya, he has gone M.I.A. It would be easy to say our top counter-terror advisor and Obama's terrorism czar has to go, but he is only one government official. It is the Obama policy that must go. Surprisingly, Defense Secretary Leon Panetta has admitted the September 11 deadly attack on our embassy was planned in advance and had nothing to do with a stupid movie. Finally, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton even had to come to the same conclusion based on the facts uncovered within 24 hours of the attack. However, Brennan appears to have had his mouth duct taped together by his silence.
According to a piece in Investor's Business Daily, "Brennan is Obama's point man for prosecuting his ill-advised 'surgical' war on al-Qaida, relying on drone strikes to hit selected targets. In 2010, Brennan announced the administration would use a 'scalpel' instead of a 'hammer' to go after terrorists." The Pentagon also said that our troops would be best used to "win the hearts and minds" of the locals.
Drones have failed and the killing of Osama was more like a one or two day news story, also failing in the fight against the terrorists out there bent on our destruction. It appears the U.S. government knew for months previous to this past September 11 that thousands of shoulder-fired missiles were falling into the hands of terrorists, but apparently those warnings seemed overlooked. Last year Obama stated, "We can say with growing confidence that we have put al-Qaida on the path to defeat." After the killings in Benghazi, the president also noted that there will be bumps along the road in our American policy goals, but four dead Americans are not mere bumps, they are American citizens murdered by our enemies.
Bin Laden maybe dead, as Vice President Joe Biden gloated to delegates at the Democratic convention a week before the deadly attacks, but al-Qaida is very much alive in Libya, the Sinai and all of North Africa. The FBI was sent to Benghazi to "investigate" the crime scene but agents as of October 3 still can't get to the consulate. They have been barred. Any forensic evidence is long gone or contaminated. Whatever fresh tracks were, they aren't anymore.
The president has to let John Brennan go because the buck stops at the White House. Our counter-terrorism policies need a good re-start.

Load-Date: March 8, 2014


End of Document