Obama says he has no plans to send troops to Yemen, Somalia President maintains that working with partners would be most effective.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 11, 2010 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 573 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


WASHINGTON - President Barack Obama says he has no intention of sending American troops to Yemen or Somalia.
Obama told People magazine in an interview to be published Friday that he still believes the center of al-Qaida activity is along the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
"I never rule out any possibility in a world that is this complex," Obama said. However, he said, "in countries like Yemen, in countries like Somalia, I think working with international partners is most effective at this point."
Terrorism concerns are rising in Yemen, at the bottom of the Arabian peninsula, and in Somalia, critically situated along key global shipping routes to Mideast oil fields. U.S. officials say they believe the suspect in the Detroit airliner attack received al-Qaida training in Yemen.
"I have no intention of sending U.S. boots on the ground in these regions," Obama said.
People magazine released on Sunday a transcript of the interview conducted Friday.
In San'a, Yemen, on Sunday, Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh said he was ready to talk to al-Qaida members who renounce violence, suggesting he could show them the same kind of leniency he has granted militants in the past despite U.S. pressure to crack down on the terrorist group.
Yemen is moving cautiously in the fight against al-Qaida, worried over a potential backlash in a country where anger at the U.S. and extremism are widespread. Thousands of Yemenis are battle-hardened veterans of past "holy wars" in Afghanistan, Bosnia, Chechnya and Iraq, and though most are not engaged in violence now, they preserve a die-hard al-Qaida ideology.
"Any movement against al-Qaida will lead to the fall of the Yemeni regime," warned Ali Mohammed Omar, a Yemeni who fought in Afghanistan in 1990-92 and says he met Osama bin Laden twice in that time.
If the U.S. or its allies become directly involved, "the whole (Yemeni) people will become al-Qaida. Instead of 30 or 40 people, it would become millions," he said in an interview.
Yemeni forces recently launched their heaviest strikes and raids against al-Qaida in years, and Washington has praised San'a for showing a new determination against al-Qaida's offshoot in the country.
The United States has increased money and training for Yemen's counterterrorism forces, calling al-Qaida in Yemen a global threat after it allegedly plotted a failed attempt to bomb a U.S. passenger jet on Christmas Day.
But Saleh's comments raised the possibility that he could continue a policy that has frustrated U.S. officials in the past - releasing al-Qaida militants on promises they will not engage in terrorism again.
Several have since broken those promises and are believed to have returned to al-Qaida's ranks.
"Dialogue is the best way ... even with al-Qaida, if they set aside their weapons and return to reason," Saleh said in an interview with Abu Dhabi TV aired late Saturday.
He said Yemen would pursue those who continued violence, but, "We are ready to reach an understanding with anyone who renounces violence and terrorism."
In the past, Yemeni officials have defended the reconciliation policy as a necessity, saying force alone cannot stop al-Qaida.
Saleh's government has been weakened by multiple wars and crises. It has little authority outside a region around the capital, and tribes dominate vast areas of the impoverished mountainous nation - many of them bitter at the central government for failing to develop their regions.

Load-Date: January 16, 2010


End of Document