Obama urges West Point grads to think globally; More to leadership than just military might, he says
USA TODAY
May 29, 2014 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 540 words
Byline: David Jackson, USA TODAY
Body


President Obama sought Wednesday to recast American foreign policy after more than a decade of war in Iraq and Afghanistan, outlining an approach built on alliances with other nations designed to combat terrorism and other global threats.
"America must always lead on the world stage," Obama told graduates of the U.S. Military Academy, but he added that "military action cannot be the only -- or even primary -- component of our leadership in every instance."
He added, "Just because we have the best hammer does not mean that every problem is a nail."
In a 46-minute address that ranged from civil war in Syria to the threat of climate change, Obama:
Proposed a new fund of up to $5 billion to help allies battle groups that engage in terrorism, calling it a prime example of multilateral action.
Said that more than a dozen years after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, terrorism remains "the most direct threat to America at home and abroad."
Announced that the administration is looking at ways to help train rebels in Syria battling Bashar al-Assad's government.
Defended his foreign policy against Republicans and others who claim he has been weak, saying that his critics are all too willing to use military force.
Obama, who campaigned for the presidency in 2008 by opposing the Iraq War and other actions of the George W. Bush administration, said that "I believe in American exceptionalism with every fiber of my being. But what makes us exceptional is not our ability to flout international norms and the rule of law; it is our willingness to affirm them through our actions."
Republican critics were unmoved.
Rep. Ed Royce, R-Calif., chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said the Obama administration has underestimated threats like the nuclear programs of Iran and North Korea. He said Obama has too often used "strong words" followed by "weak actions" against foes.
"President Obama's diplomatic efforts cannot work if our allies lack confidence in U.S. commitments, and our opponents do not fear U.S. warnings," Royce said.
Another frequent critic, Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., said Obama is attacking "straw men," while ignoring the real question of "how to combine our tools of soft power and hard power in order to avoid conflict, secure our interests and ideals, and meet our challenges through effective deterrence and diplomacy."
In his speech, Obama discussed efforts to strike a deal over Iran's nuclear program and confront Russia over its incursion into Ukraine. He praised last year's agreement with Syria to remove chemical weapons, reached after he called off a possible military strike against Assad's government.
Obama said the United States will keep helping Nigeria look for kidnapped schoolgirls, and he defended the use of drone strikes in terrorist havens like Yemen and Somalia.
"The question we face ... is not whether America will lead, but how we will lead," Obama said.
The speech came a day after Obama announced a final drawdown plan for Afghanistan after U.S. combat operations end later this year. In his commencement address, Obama told the West Point graduates that they will be the first class since 2001 not to be sent to combat theaters in Afghanistan or Iraq, though many challenges remain. 

Graphic

 
photo Jim Watson , AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: June 6, 2014


End of Document