Obama Supports Reauthorizing Patriot Act Provisions But Open To Reform
RTT News (United States)
September 15, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 872 words
Body


(RTTNews) - In a letter to lawmakers made public on Tuesday, the Obama administration revealed that it supports reauthorizing three expiring provisions of the Patriot Act, although it acknowledged that it is willing to consider proposals to add increased privacy protections.
The three provisions that are due to expire at the end of the year include the authorizations for roving wiretaps, the "lone wolf" provision, and the business records provision, commonly referred to as the "library" provision.
Commenting on the letter from Assistant Attorney General Ronald Weich, Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy (D-VT) said, "I am pleased that the Justice Department has signaled its willingness to work with Congress in addressing the expiring provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act."
"It is important that Congress and the executive branch work together to ensure that we protect both our national security and our civil liberties," he added.
Leahy also announced that the Senate Judiciary Committee would hold an oversight hearing to review the expiring provisions of the Patriot Act on Wednesday, September 23.
Senators Dick Durbin (D-IL) and Russ Feingold (D-WI) also released a joint statement Tuesday in which they said they welcome the Obama administration&apos;s willingness to consider reforms to the Patriot Act.
"We welcome the administration&apos;s willingness to consider additional safeguards for surveillance powers that have been vastly expanded in recent years," Durbin and Feingold said in their statement.
They continued, "Congress should revise the USA PATRIOT Act and related authorities to better protect the constitutional rights of American citizens, while preserving the powers of our government to fight terrorism."
"After the Inspector General reports documenting rampant misuse of National Security Letters, there can no longer be any doubt that granting overbroad authority leads to abuses," the senators added. "We must take this opportunity to get it right, once and for all."
Back on August 6, Durbin and Feingold sent a letter to Attorney General Eric Holder, in which they advocated reforms to the Patriot Act and related surveillance laws as part of the reauthorization of expiring provisions that the Senate will consider later this year.
In their letter, the Senators called for modifications to the Patriot Act similar to those outlined in the Security and Freedom Enhancement Act of 2005 and the National Security Letter Reform Act of 2007. They also urged that reforms to other surveillance laws, like the FISA Amendments Act, be considered.
"These PATRIOT Act sunsets give Congress the opportunity to finally get it right," Feingold said in the letter. "It has been eight years since the PATRIOT Act became law, and it is time to enact reasonable reforms to protect the rights and privacy of Americans while ensuring the government has the tools it needs to go after terrorist threats."
"As Congress begins discussion about the PATRIOT Act&apos;s reauthorization, we should focus on protecting the constitutional rights of American citizens while preserving the powers our government needs to fight terrorism," Durbin added.
"The great challenge of our age is combating terrorism while remaining true to our Constitution," he said. "Incorporating aspects of the SAFE Act in this year&apos;s reauthorization will help us to meet that challenge."
The two Senators argued that, in 2007 and 2008, the Department of Justice Inspector General issued reports reviewing the FBI&apos;s use of National Security Letters (NSLs) that identified serious misuse and abuse.
The Patriot Act, they said, granted the FBI unprecedented powers to obtain sensitive information about Americans without judicial review through the use of NSLs. Additionally, Congress failed to enact sufficient safeguards during the 2005 reauthorization process.
Durbin and Feingold said the changes they were proposing would reform the way NSLs are issued and overseen, protect the private business records of innocent Americans, and ensure the courts are able to serve as a check on the executive branch&apos;s surveillance authorities.
President George W. Bush signed the Patriot Act into law on October 26, 2001 in response to the September 11 terrorist attacks.
Under the Act, law enforcement agencies were granted increased abilities to search telephone, e-mail communications, medical, financial, and other records in order to uncover potential terrorist plots.
Additionally, the Act eased the restrictions on foreign intelligence gathering within the U.S. and expanded the definition of terrorism to include "domestic terrorism."
Though the Act passed both the House and Senate easily, it was criticized by many for infringing on civil liberties because of the freedom it gave law enforcement agencies to potentially invade the privacy of U.S. citizens.
Over the years since it was signed into law, the Patriot Act has undergone many revisions to address privacy concerns, but there are still enough of the much-debated provisions left that there are continued calls for further modification or outright not extending the Act.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document