Obama: Work globally; He calls for action on terrorism, climate in a speech in Berlin
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
July 25, 2008 Friday
Final Edition


Copyright 2008 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-9
Length: 553 words
Body


 Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama, addressing a cheering crowd of about 200,000 yesterday in Berlin, called for renewed worldwide cooperation to combat terrorism, global warming and poverty.
 Obama's speech was part of a push to bolster his stature on foreign-policy matters during a tour of the Middle East and Europe. Polls show the Illinois senator doesn't fare as well among voters on foreign-policy issues as his Republican opponent, Arizona Sen. John McCain.
 McCain tweaked Obama's trip yesterday by visiting a German restaurant in Ohio.
 "I'd love to give a speech in Germany. But I'd much prefer to do it as president of the United States rather than as a candidate for president," McCain told reporters after a meal of bratwurst with local business leaders at Schmidt's Sausage Haus und Restaurant in Columbus' German Village neighborhood.
* * * *
 Speaking near the site where President Ronald Reagan in 1987 called for the Soviets to tear down the Berlin Wall, Obama used similar imagery to call for the end of rivalries between rich and poor countries and between religious groups.
 "These now are the walls we must tear down," he said. "Now is the time to join together, through constant cooperation, strong institutions, shared sacrifice, and a global commitment to progress, to meet the challenges of the 21st century."
 Obama, who is in Germany on the fifth stop of his seven-country tour, said the U.S. and Europe "cannot turn inward" and instead must join together to "defeat terror and dry up the well of extremism that supports it."
* * * *
 "This is the moment when we must renew our resolve to rout the terrorists who threaten our security in Afghanistan," the Democrat said in his 30-minute speech.
 That could prove awkward for the German government and others who are trying to balance their commitment to the war in Afghanistan against polls saying that the mission is unpopular with Europeans.
 Germany has more than 3,000 soldiers in Afghanistan, mostly in the relatively peaceful north, and it repeatedly has resisted pressure from its NATO partners to send them to the volatile south.
 The German news magazine Der Spiegel wrote on its Web site: "He will call in help from the Germans, British and French in Afghanistan and Iraq. He is unlikely to let NATO off the hook - therein lies the peril of the engaging 'we' and the catchy 'Yes, we can.' "
* * * * 
 As Obama delivered his speech in Berlin, McCain said he was focusing his attention this week on economic issues, including soaring food and fuel costs. He has been busy campaigning and raising money in key battleground states such as Ohio.
 McCain said cultivating good relations with a new generation of European leaders was important.
 "A lot of these leaders are a lot more pro-American than their predecessors were," he said.
 McCain is scheduled to meet with the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan spiritual leader, today in Colorado.
 The two will meet in Aspen, where the Dalai Lama plans to address a symposium on Tibetan culture and its impact on global issues, the McCain campaign said yesterday.
 "I have been a great admirer of the Dalai Lama," McCain said. He called him a "transcendent national role model."
 The Dalai Lama has been based in India since he fled his Himalayan homeland in 1959 amid a failed uprising against Chinese rule.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 29, 2008


End of Document