Obama win on Guantanamo may be short-lived
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 24, 2014 Saturday
ONLINE EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 487 words
Byline:  from news services   
Body


WASHINGTON • President Barack Obama scored a rare win in his 5-year-old campaign to close the federal prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a Senate panel approved giving him the authority to transfer terror suspects to the United States if Congress signs off on a comprehensive plan to shutter the facility.
It's not a done deal, however, as top Senate Republicans vowed on Friday to do all they can to keep the Guantanamo facility open and leave the 154 detainees incarcerated.
The Senate Armed Services Committee wrapped up a defense bill Thursday that would authorize the transfer of terrorism suspects to U.S. soil "for detention, trial and incarceration, subject to stringent security measures and legal protections, once the president has submitted a plan to Congress for closing Guantanamo and Congress has had an opportunity to vote to disapprove that plan under expedited procedures."
The bill also authorizes the temporary transfer of detainees to a U.S. medical facility operated by the Defense Department "to prevent death or significant imminent harm."
Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., chairman of the Armed Services Committee, hailed the defense bill provision as a significant change in the long standoff between Obama's administration and bipartisan congressional opponents over the post-Sept. 11 prison for terrorism suspects.
Levin said the bill had "created a path to close Guantanamo."
The effort still faces resistance from Republicans and Democrats in Congress who have repeatedly and successfully fought White House efforts to move detainees to U.S. soil.
Sen. Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma, the top Republican on the Armed Services Committee, voted for the overall defense bill but is determined to work with his allies in the House to scuttle the provision.
Inhofe maintains that Guantanamo is the only option to house terrorism suspects.
If Obama offers a plan, "I'm hoping that anything that comes can be slow-walked till he's out of office," Inhofe said in an interview Friday.
JUDGE RULES ON PRISONER
A federal judge has lifted a temporary restraining order that had stopped the U.S. military from force feeding a hunger-striking prisoner at Guantanamo Bay, saying the man's life hangs in the balance.
Late Thursday night, U.S. District Judge Gladys Kessler said the military must be allowed to carry out force feeding in the case of Abu Wa'el Dhiab because of the "very real probability that Mr. Dhiab will die."
Attorneys for Dhiab are challenging force feeding during the hunger strike as abusive.
The Defense Department has said the military feeds prisoners against their will only to keep them alive, and follows all laws when it does so.
Kessler says the detainee is willing to be fed at a hospital at Guantanamo Bay if he can be spared what the judge calls the agony of having feeding tubes inserted and removed for each feeding. The judge says the Defense Department refused to make any compromise from current procedure.

Load-Date: September 2, 2014


End of Document