Obama meets families of USS Cole, Sept. 11 victims; The president says it is the first of many forums he will hold with victims' kin.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 7, 2009 Saturday


Copyright 2009 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: WEATHER; Pg. A2
Length: 244 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - President Barack Obama held an emotional meeting Friday, Feb. 6, with relatives of victims of the bombing of the USS Cole and the Sept. 11 attacks who still are waiting for justice to be served years after the deadly acts of terrorism.
Obama promised the roughly 40 individuals who attended that the meeting would be the first of many.
Some of the victims' family members said they welcomed Obama's gesture even though they aren't entirely convinced that his decision to close the Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, prison, where terrorism suspects are being detained, is the right thing to do.
Obama has expressed concerns that detainees have been held for years without trial. He has signed an executive order to close the facility within a year while the administration reviews other options for seeing that the detainees get their day in court.
Retired Navy Cmdr. Kirk S. Lippold, commanding officer of the Cole at the time of the Oct. 12, 2000, bombing, said he was disappointed when he first learned of the decision and remains skeptical. He also faulted Obama for not consulting the families ahead of time.
"In principle, his reason for closing it may be good," Lippold, a defense adviser to Military Families United, told reporters after the hourlong meeting.
Lippold said Obama's stance is "well-intentioned, but the problem I have remains that we still don't have any procedures" for what will become of the terror suspects after the detention center is closed.

Graphic

 
A small boat guards the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, in October 2000. President Barack Obama was spending time Friday, Feb. 6, with families of 9/11 victims and the 17 sailors killed in the bombing of the USS Cole after a senior Pentagon judge dropped charges against an al-Qaida suspect in the Cole attack being held at Guantanamo Bay. Associated Press photo by Hasan Jamali

Load-Date: February 9, 2009


End of Document