Obama revamps rules on detainees; Orders prison closed at Guantanamo Bay
USA TODAY
January 23, 2009 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 581 words
Byline: David Jackson and Richard Wolf
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Obama unleashed a passionate debate about the treatment of terrorism suspects by ordering sweeping changes in the rules for interrogation and the closing of the military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Acting swiftly on a campaign promise two days after his inauguration, Obama signed a series of executive orders Thursday that call for closing Guantanamo within a year and moving out its 245 remaining detainees, shuttering CIA prisons overseas, and prohibiting harsh interrogation techniques such as waterboarding, which gives the sensation of drowning.
In reversing policies set by the Bush administration, Obama said he wanted to send a message to the world that the United States will pursue the struggle against terrorism "in a manner that is consistent with our values and our ideals."
The actions set off a debate in Congress, where Republicans decried the possibility that terrorists such as Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, mastermind of the 9/11 attacks, would be transferred to military prisons in places such as California and Kansas.
"What do you do with these detainees?" asked Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., who doesn't want them at Fort Leavenworth in his state. "Now you're going to force that to be figured out in the next year."
Among the options for Guantanamo's detainees: transfer them to other countries or try them in court. About 525 detainees have been sent elsewhere, but a few nations, such as Germany, have balked. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said Obama's inauguration has made some European nations more willing to cooperate, presenting opportunities "that did not exist before January 20."
The administration will have to figure out what to do with detainees who can't be transferred or tried because of tainted evidence, according to the executive orders.
The Pentagon has identified U.S. prisons, Gates said, but he quipped that local lawmakers' "enthusiasm is limited."
Obama signed the orders after meeting with 16 retired military officers who argued that "torture and indefinite incarceration imperils the United States, imperils our troops," said retired rear admiral John Hutson, dean of Franklin Pierce Law Center in New Hampshire. "We're creating terrorists faster than we can kill them or incarcerate them."
Charles Stimson, former assistant Defense secretary for detainee affairs, said Obama is leaving open the option of holding some suspects indefinitely in military detention.
The order on questioning terrorism suspects says they are subject to international bans on torture and directs interrogators to follow the Army Field Manual, which forbids waterboarding.
The Bush administration credited the "enhanced" techniques with saving American lives. "It is going to weaken our ability to find out about potential terrorist attacks," said John Bolton, former U.N. ambassador in the Bush administration.
Obama also ordered a new review of a case involving a terrorism suspect being held in South Carolina. Ali al-Marri, a native of Qatar, is seeking to sue the government for his release, a right the Supreme Court has granted to detainees at Guantanamo.
Contributing: Tom Vanden Brook 

Where they are
Since 2002, more than 525 detainees have been released from Guantanamo Bay to other countries, including:
Afghanistan
Albania
Australia
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium
Denmark
Egypt
France
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Libya
Maldives
Mauritania
Morocco
Pakistan
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Tajikistan
Turkey
Uganda
United King-
dom
Yemen
Source: Department of Defense 

Load-Date: January 23, 2009


End of Document