OBAMA'S RESPONSE TO ISLAMIC STATE TERRORISM IS WEAK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 21, 2015 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2015 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 776 words
Body


WASHINGTON
Tell me: What's a suicide bomber doing with a passport? He's not going anywhere. And, though I'm not a religious scholar, I doubt that a passport is required in paradise for a martyr to access his 72 black-eyed virgins.
A Syrian passport was found near the body of one of the terrorists. Why was it there? Undoubtedly, to back up the Islamic State boast that it is infiltrating operatives amid the refugees flooding Europe. The passport may have been fake, but the terrorist's fingerprints were not. They match those of a man who just a month earlier had come through Greece on his way to kill Frenchmen in Paris.
If the other goal of the Paris massacre was to frighten France out of the air campaign in Syria - the way Spain withdrew from the Iraq War after the terror attack on its trains in 2004 - they picked the wrong country. France is a serious post-colonial power, as demonstrated in Ivory Coast, the Central African Republic and Mali, which France saved from an Islamist takeover in 2013.
Indeed, socialist President Francois Hollande has responded furiously to his country's 9/11 with an intensified air campaign, hundreds of raids on suspected domestic terrorists, a state of emergency and proposed changes in the constitution to make France less hospitable to jihad.
Meanwhile, Barack Obama, titular head of the free world, has responded to Paris with weariness and annoyance. His news conference in Turkey was marked by a stunning tone of passivity, detachment and lassitude, compounded by impatience and irritability at the very suggestion that his Syria strategy might be failing.
The only time he showed any passion was in denouncing Republicans for hardheartedness toward Muslim refugees. One hundred and twenty-nine innocents lie dead but it takes the GOP to kindle Mr. Obama's ire.
The rest was mere petulance, dismissing criticisms of his Syria policy as popping off. Inconveniently for Mr. Obama, one of those popper-offers is Dianne Feinstein, the leading Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee. She directly contradicted Mr. Obama's blithe assertion, offered the day before the Paris attack, that the Islamic State (aka ISIL or ISIS) was contained and not gaining strength. "I have never been more concerned," said Ms. Feinstein. "ISIL is not contained. ISIL is expanding."
Mr. Obama defended his policy by listing its multifaceted elements. Such as, "I hosted at the United Nations an entire discussion of counterterrorism strategies and curbing the flow of foreign fighters." An "entire" discussion, mind you. Not a partial one. They tremble in Raqqa.
And "We have mobilized 65 countries to go after ISIL." Yes, and what would we do without Luxembourg?
Mr. Obama complained of being criticized for not being bellicose enough. But the complaint is not about an absence of bellicosity but about an absence of passion, of urgency and of commitment to the fight.
The air campaign over Syria averages seven strikes a day. Seven. In Operation Desert Storm, we flew 1,100 sorties a day. Even in the Kosovo campaign, we averaged 138. Mr. Obama is doing just enough in Syria to give the appearance of motion, yet not nearly enough to have any chance of success.
Mr. Obama's priorities lie elsewhere. For example, climate change, which he considers the greatest "threat to our future." And, of course, closing Guantanamo. Mr. Obama actually released five detainees on the day after the Paris massacre. He is passionate about Guantanamo. It's a great terrorist recruiting tool, he repeatedly explains.
Mr. Obama still seems to believe that - even as the Islamic State has produced an astonishing wave of terrorist recruitment with a campaign of brutality, butchery and enslavement filmed in living color. Who can still believe that young Muslims are leaving Europe to join the Islamic State because of Guantanamo?
Mr. Obama's other passion is protecting Islam from any possible association with "violent extremism." The Islamic State is nothing but "killers with fantasies of glory." Mr. Obama can never bring himself to acknowledge why these people kill and willingly die: to advance a radical Islamist millenarianism that is purposeful, indeed eschatological - and appealing enough to have created the largest, most dangerous terrorist movement on Earth.
Mr. Hollande is trying to gather a real coalition to destroy the Islamic State, even as Mr. Obama touts his phony 65. For 11 post-World War II presidencies, coalition leading has been the role of the United States. Where is America today? Awaiting a president. The next president.
Charles Krauthammer is a syndicated columnist for The Washington Post (letters@charleskrauthammer.com).

Load-Date: November 23, 2015


End of Document