Obama sees progress in war on terrorism
The Salt Lake Tribune
December 16, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World; Local
Length: 347 words
Byline: By Ben Feller The Associated Press
Body


Washington » At the height of the war he escalated, President Barack Obama on Thursday declared major progress in turning back America's enemies in Afghanistan and Pakistan, promising U.S. troops will start coming home in July. Even so, he predicted four more years of combat, soberly warning that the gains could slip away.
Speaking to a nation weary of war, Obama said his year-old strategy was succeeding in its two primary military objectives: degrading the leadership of the Pakistani-based al-Qaida terrorists who attacked the United States; and breaking the strength of the Taliban militants who once provided them haven in Afghanistan.
Yet his internal war review underscored huge challenges -- from the terrorist sanctuaries in Pakistan to the desperate need for Afghanistan's government to offer basic services to its people and rid itself of corruption.
Put together, Obama's words and the report's findings underscore that his war strategy is here to stay.
On the issue that touches home most to millions of Americans, Obama stuck with his pledge that some U.S. forces would return home in July. But the scope of that withdrawal is expected to modest and its pace is unknown, as the transition to Afghan forces taking control of their nation is expected to last through 2014.
"I want to be clear: This continues to be a very difficult endeavor," Obama said from his White House podium, flanked by fellow leaders of the government. "But I can report that, thanks to the extraordinary service of our troops and civilians on the ground, we are on track to achieve our goals."
He then made a point to remind the nation what those goals are, a sign of how long this war has gone on -- launched nearly a decade ago, and often overshadowed during that time by the Iraq war and the U.S. recession.
"We will never waver from our goal of disrupting, dismantling and ultimately defeating al-Qaida," Obama said of the terror network that plotted the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks from Afghanistan.
There are roughly 100,000 U.S. troops in Afghanistan. Alt Heads:
Obama seesstrides in waron terrorism

Graphic

 
President Barack Obama delivers a statement in the Brady Press Briefing room in the White House in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 16, 2010, on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Annual Review . From left are Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Vice President Joe Biden, the president, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Joint Chiefs Vice Chairman Gen. James Cartwright. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais)
President Barack Obama delivers a statement in the Brady Press Briefing room in the White House in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 16, 2010, on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Annual Review. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais)
President Barack Obama walks with Vice President Joe Biden, and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, to the Brady Press Briefing room in the White House in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 16, 2010 to deliver a statement on the Afghanistan-Pakistan Annual Review. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais)
President Barack Obama delivers a statement in the Brady Press Briefing room in the White House in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 16, 2010, on the the Afghanistan-Pakistan Annual Review. From left are, Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Vice President Joe Biden, the president, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, and Joint Chiefs Vice Chairman Marine Gen. James Cartwright. (AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)
President Barack Obama, accompanied by Vice President Joe Biden, center, and Defense Secretary Robert Gates, gestures as he speaks about the Afghanistan-Pakistan Annual Review, Thursday, Dec. 16, 2010, at the White House in Washington. (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)

Load-Date: December 17, 2010


End of Document