Obama seeks help from U.S. Muslims
The Salt Lake Tribune
March 6, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World; Local
Length: 389 words
Byline: By Margaret Talev Mcclatchy Newspapers
Body


Sterling, Va. » Days before a congressional hearing into Islamic radicalization begins, President Barack Obama's deputy national security adviser said the administration also takes the threat seriously but is working in "partnership" with Muslim-American community groups.
"Muslim Americans are not part of the problem, you're part of the solution," Denis McDonough's told members of the All Dulles Area Muslim Society (ADAMS). He said the administration would make an announcement about its approach toward combating radicalization in "the coming weeks."
Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., on Thursday will convene a hearing on Islamic radicalization. King's plans have drawn controversy from critics who say King is singling out one religious group and could stigmatize ordinary Muslim Americans.
On Sunday, King said on CNN that al-Qaida is "attempting to recruit within the United States. People in this country are being self-radicalized. ... It's an international movement with elements here in the United States."
ADAMS Center Mohamed Magid and board member Rizwan Jaka said they oppose terrorism and radicalization but are concerned that King will marginalize the Muslim-American community.
McDonough did not mention King or his hearings directly in his remarks. He declined interview requests afterward.
Asked about the administration's position on King's hearing, McDonough said, "We welcome congressional involvement in the issue. It's a very important issue."
But Sunday's event was geared toward projecting an inclusive message. The program began with a flag and pledge of allegiance ceremony by Boy Scouts and remarks from Christian and Jewish leaders as well as Imam Magid.
"Preventing radicalization that leads to violence here in America is part of our larger strategy to decisively defeat al Qaeda," McDonough said.
  Alt Heads:
Obama seeks help from U.S. Muslims Rally held against the hearing
Some 300 people gathered in New York's Times Square to speak out against a planned congressional hearing on Muslims' role in homegrown terrorism.
People at the rally Sunday were carrying signs reading "Today I am a Muslim, too."
They heard from the imam who was an initial key supporter of plans to develop a mosque near ground zero. Imam Feisal Abdul Rauf says the real enemy isn't Muslims or Islam, it's extremism.
Source » The Associated Press

Graphic

 
Deputy National Security Adviser Denis McDonough speaks at an interfaith forum at the All Dulles Area Muslim Society in Sterling, Va., Sunday, March 6, 2011. McDonough praised American Muslims for helping fight violent extremism, but said they aren't cooperating enough with law enforcement to counter the radicalization of young followers by al-Qaida-linked groups. (AP Photo/Cliff Owen)
Peter King, R-N.Y. (AP Photo/Manuel Balce Ceneta, File)

Load-Date: March 6, 2011


End of Document