OBAMA: OFFICIALS FAILED TO 'CONNECT THE DOTS'; VOWS TO CHANGE SECURITY PROCEDURES TO IMPROVE SAFETY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 6, 2010 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 934 words
Byline: Christi Parsons and Sebastian Rotella, Los Angeles Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- An angry President Barack Obama yesterday said there had been "unacceptable" failures in the U.S. intelligence system that allowed an accused terrorist to board a U.S.-bound Northwest Airlines flight on Christmas Day, and vowed changes in security procedures and information gathering to avert future plots.
The president addressed top administration officials in unusually blunt terms in a lengthy afternoon session in which agency heads acknowledged shortcomings and laid plans for corrections.
"This was a screw-up that could have been disastrous," Mr. Obama told the officials, White House officials said later. "We dodged a bullet, but just barely. It was averted by brave individuals, not because the system worked, and that is not acceptable."
Administration officials did not rule out potential firings over the incident, although Mr. Obama admonished White House staffers and Cabinet chiefs in the closed session not to engage in "finger-pointing" in the failures.
Mr. Obama, speaking publicly later, outlined key reviews of airline screening procedures and of U.S. intelligence, and said findings and new measures would be announced in coming days.
While the president did not specify the measures affecting travelers, a national security official yesterday said some steps would be reminiscent of the period after Sept. 11, 2001, when travelers confronted bewildering new procedures and tightened security. Since the Christmas Day incident, federal officials have mobilized on several fronts in an effort likely to bring harder borders, the official predicted.
The aftermath of the failed attack is pushing the Department of Homeland Security to intensify its focus on terrorism, the issue that led to creation of a vast federal department with an array of enforcement duties and 230,000 employees, officials said.
On Monday, Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano dispatched two top aides -- Deputy Secretary Jane Holl Lute, her top intelligence official, and Assistant Secretary for Policy David Heyman -- on a world outreach effort to improve aviation security for U.S.-bound flights.
The two officials met with counterparts in Amsterdam, where the accused Nigerian bomber took off for Detroit. Western counter-terrorism officials have identified Amsterdam's Schiphol International Airport as a hub for travel of suspected extremists, including American militants headed to join fighters in Somalia, according to counter-terrorism officials.
Although security at the Dutch airport is considered good, previous cases suggest that extremists see the Netherlands as comparatively soft because of laws that restrict anti-terrorism enforcement, according to U.S. and European anti-terrorism officials.
The itinerary of Ms. Napolitano's deputies also includes Britain, Belgium, Israel, the United Arab Emirates, Singapore, Australia, Nigeria and Brazil. Their goal is to lay groundwork for accords to improve security technology and policies, said a Homeland Security official, who requested anonymity because the larger review is not yet complete. Countries such as Britain are already proposing to implement full-body scanners at airports.
The discussions overseas are also likely to focus on increased sharing of information about airline passengers. That issue has been a point of contention with the 26-country European Union. For years, European governments have cited strict privacy laws in resisting U.S. requests for more details about travelers departing from Europe.
Homeland Security is also likely to focus investigative resources on a review of potential dangers such as suspected extremists who have managed to obtain U.S. visas, the national security official said.
Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the Nigerian accused of trying to blow up the Amsterdam-Detroit flight, had a valid U.S. visa that was not revoked after a tip from his father that he had joined Islamic extremists in Yemen after studying three years in London.
In contrast, British authorities denied Mr. Abdulmutallab's request for a new student visa last year after determining that he had named a bogus college on the application. The denial resulted from a British immigration crackdown after a case this year in which Pakistani terrorism suspects entered Britain by posing as students.
The Homeland Security official declined to comment on potential new scrutiny of visa-holders and applicants. The State Department reviews visa applications, but Immigration and Customs Enforcement, which falls under Homeland Security control, plays a role in assessing and investigating suspected fraud.
Mr. Obama has placed counterterrorism advisor John Brennan in charge of a top-level review to examine terrorist lists and "red flags" the president said had been missed. Those included missed tips that Mr. Abdulmutallab had trained with al-Qaida, and that he might have been known as a prime operative.
"The U.S. government had sufficient information to have uncovered this plot and potentially disrupt the Christmas Day attack, but our intelligence community failed to connect those dots," Mr. Obama said, saying it was not a failure to collect intelligence, but a failure to "integrate and understand" information already in hand. "That's not acceptable, and I will not tolerate it."
Nonetheless, one senior administration official said the president was not looking to tear up the entire terrorism-detection system and start over, given that it "has worked well in the past."
Instead, the administration wants to "up our game" in preventing attacks in the future, said National Security Council chief of staff Denis McDonough.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: David Joles/Minneapolis Star Tribune: A backup of passengers in ticketing waits to fly out of Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport yesterday. A spokesman for the airport said nothing suspicious was found in a bag that prompted a partial evacuation of the airport.

Load-Date: January 6, 2010


End of Document