Obsession with Russia diverts Obama's attention; FROM THE RIGHTShe is a commentator and international political strategist.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 19, 2014 Thursday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: IDEAS & VOICES; Pg. A10
Length: 510 words
Byline: Rachel Marsden
Body


The fact that U.S. President Barack Obama is putting hundreds of boots back on the ground in Iraq to protect American interests is the result of some bad decisions and missed opportunities to correct course. Except that Russian President Vladimir Putin had already staked out the proper course - and the Obama administration seems intent on turning every action into a political spitball aimed at getting Putin's attention.
The administration's preoccupation with economic warfare against Eurasia has evidently come at the expense of other priorities, like terrorism. As a result, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), a Sunni terrorist group, is overtaking Iraqi cities and executing anyone in its way to overtaking Baghdad, threatening to undo nearly 10 years of American blood, sweat and tears.
It's all the tragic result of misplaced priorities - starting with Syria. The U.S. government had been funding various Sunni jihadists to make trouble for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad - a primary ally of Russia and Iran. Destabilizing Assad would help destabilize the Eurasian economic sphere. Russia's interest in Syria is economic - arms, energy and a naval port - and Iran's is ideological, given that the Syrian and Iranian governments are both Shia Muslim.
Putin understood anti-Assad forces were largely comprised of Sunni Islamic terrorist groups, and he warned America against supporting them beside their Sunni state-sponsors Saudi Arabia and Qatar. Putin defended Assad's right to kill these terrorist forces inside his own country. Obama responded by threatening U.S. action in Syria - until Putin stepped in to take responsibility for chaperoning Assad and getting any chemical weapons under control.
ISIS was one of the terrorist groups in Syria that beneeited from U.S. cash and equipment. Now, it has an army trying to overtake Baghdad. Who is America's inadvertent ally right now in saving Iraq? Syria. No.
Agence France-Presse reports that Assad's Syrian army has been attacking ISIS bases bordering Iraq at the behest of Baghdad, helping America save its investment in Iraq before Obama could even decide how to help. Maybe it's a good thing Obama listened to Putin and stopped short of bombing Assad.
Not that Obama stopped pestering Putin after the agreement with Russia on Syria. Before the Olympics in Russia earlier this year, America freaked out about the safety of the world's athletes in light of regional Sunni Chechen terrorist attacks masterminded by Doku Umarov. Putin responded by making sure Umarov was never heard from again - until word of his death leaked in March.
So terrorism was a priority for Russia, just as it was for America. Rather than capitalizing on the Olympics as a pretext for greater counterterrorism cooperation with Russia, Obama instead saw So-chi as the ideal time to make Putin's life miserable by fomenting a coup in Ukraine to overthrow the democratically elected Ukrainian government and upset the pro-Russian economic status quo.
While Putin was obsessing over terrorists, Obama was obsessing over Putin.

Load-Date: June 19, 2014


End of Document