Of 7 Iranians Released, None Have Ties to Terrorism, Obama Says
The New York Times
January 18, 2016 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 1031 words
Byline: By NICHOLAS FANDOS; Peter Baker contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- One was an aerospace expert convicted of helping Iran launch its first satellite into space. Another was a maritime engineer found guilty of providing navigation technology to the Iranians. And three men had ties to a company accused of illegally exporting millions of dollars in American technology with military applications to Iran.
They were among the seven Iranians accused or convicted of violating American trade sanctions against Iran and granted clemency by President Obama as part of a prisoner release between the two long-estranged nations. 
  More details about the seven men, six of whom are dual American-Iranian citizens, became known on Sunday, as the United States prepared to welcome several of its own citizens who had been detained in Iran.
  The semiofficial Fars News Agency in Iran identified the men as Nader Modanlo, Bahram Mechanic, Khosrow Afghahi, Tooraj Faridi, Arash Ghahreman, Nima Golestaneh and Ali Saboonchi. The State and Justice Departments declined on Sunday to comment on the exchange.
  In remarks at the White House on Sunday, Mr. Obama stressed that the seven men had not been charged with terrorism or other violent crimes, and he called their release a ''one-time gesture to Iran given the unique opportunity offered by this moment and the larger circumstances at play.''
  American officials also agreed to drop charges and lift Interpol arrest notices on 14 other Iranians outside the country who had been accused of sanctions violations. American officials had concluded, however, that they were never going to be extradited. Officials said that though none of the seven men had chosen to return to Iran at this time, they are free to do so.
  Scattered across the United States and, in most cases, highly educated, the Iranian-American men were accused of being involved in one way or another in aiding Iran technologically.
  The lone Iranian national, Mr. Golestaneh, 30, was extradited to the United States in 2015 and pleaded guilty to hacking a Vermont-based aerodynamics company and American defense contractor, Arrow Tech Associates, to steal software.
  Mr. Modanlo, the aerospace expert and a former NASA contractor living in Potomac, Md., was convicted in 2013 for his role in helping Iran launch its first satellite in 2005. A jury found him guilty of obstruction of bankruptcy proceedings and money laundering, and the judge in the case ordered Mr. Modanlo to forfeit the $10 million brokerage fee he received for facilitating a deal between Iran and Russia to launch the satellite.
  Mr. Saboonchi, of Parkville, Md., was convicted in 2014 of conspiracy and seven counts of ''exporting American-manufactured industrial products and services to Iran,'' with the help of co-conspirators in the United Arab Emirates and China, according to the F.B.I. Mr. Saboonchi had been serving a two-year sentence in Petersburg, Va. On Sunday his lawyers released a statement saying he was ''thrilled and grateful'' to return to his family and planned to remain in the United States.
  Mr. Ghahreman, the maritime engineer who had been living in Staten Island, was found guilty by a federal court in San Diego last year of participating in a scheme to buy and export military electronics and marine navigation equipment to Iran. Prosecutors said Mr. Ghahreman conspired to use a Dubai-based front company to help supply the Iranians, including with gyrocompasses used for swift boat navigation and electron tubes used for military airborne radar.
  Three of the men -- Mr. Mechanic of Houston, Mr. Afghahi, who was arrested while visiting family in Los Angeles, and Mr. Faridi of Houston -- were associated with the Iran-based Faratel Corporation and its American sister company, Smart Power Systems. Mr. Mechanic and Mr. Afghani, who co-owned the companies, were charged with illegally exporting millions of dollars in American technology to Iran and were being held in a federal prison in Houston while awaiting a trial. Mr. Faridi, the vice president of Smart Power Systems, had been free on bond.
  Joel M. Androphy, a Houston lawyer representing Mr. Mechanic, said on Sunday that his client had been caught not in an illegal action, but because of tensions between two nations, and was ''thrilled'' to be released.
  ''He was a victim of the animosity between the U.S. and Iran, that's all,'' Mr. Androphy said.
  Mr. Androphy said he was first approached by representatives of the Iranian Interests Section several months ago about the possibility of a prisoner swap. American officials quietly notified him on Friday that his client was being offered a pardon.
  David Gerger, another Houston lawyer who had worked closely with Mr. Androphy in representing Mr. Afghahi, said he had spent 24 hours in the prison warden's office beginning before dawn on Saturday waiting with ''on-again-off-again hopes and false starts.''
  ''He's a 72-year-old businessman, so this has been quite an ordeal,'' Mr. Gerger said of his client.
  Obama administration officials said on Saturday that they had been holding discussions with Iran about the prisoners for many months but they accelerated after the conclusion of the nuclear deal last summer. Iran proposed a swap but Mr. Obama was reluctant to trade people convicted of actual crimes for Americans who were unjustly held, officials said.
  Ultimately, Mr. Obama concluded that ''this was worth doing to bring our people home, that the risk was not substantial because these Iranians are not individuals related to terrorism or violent crime,'' said one of the officials, who briefed reporters on condition of anonymity to discuss the secret negotiations. ''In some cases they were nearing the completion of their sentences.''
  The negotiations were conducted with the assistance of the Swiss, who represent American interests in Tehran since the United States does not maintain an embassy there. It became clear in recent weeks that the two tracks -- the prisoner talks and the implementation of the nuclear agreement -- were converging in terms of timing, so the two sides decided to announce them together.
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/18/world/middleeast/a-look-at-the-seven-iranians-released-by-the-us.html

Load-Date: January 18, 2016


End of Document