OF ARAFAT, THE P.L.O. AND AMERICANS' MISDIRECTED SYMAPTHY
The New York Times
December 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 343 words
Body


To the Editor:
 Yasir Arafat's unexpected survival in the ruins of Tripoli has generated a spate of sympathetic statements suggesting that the P.L.O. was not all that bad and that it still has a positive role to play in future peace efforts.
Thus, unnamed Administration officials are cited in a news story (Dec. 6) as making the astonishing claim that ''U.S. diplomatic and military operations in the Middle East have suffered as a result of the pullout of P.L.O. guerrillas from Beirut last year'' because the withdrawal led to the collapse of a P.L.O. network of informants established by the C.I.A.
It is probably true that many in the P.L.O. were willing to sell information to the C.I.A. But the loss of these informants must be weighed against the crucial Israeli achievement of eliminating the P.L.O. infrastructure in Lebanon. The P.L.O.'s state-within-a-state in that country had served as the world headquarters of international terrorism; it had also provided a base for Soviet influence in the areas of Lebanon under P.L.O. control. All that was wiped out by the Israelis in the summer of '82.
The P.L.O.'s activities during the last two decades have spelled disaster for the Palestinians themselves, wreaked havoc in Lebanon, undermined U.S. policies and influence in the Middle East and caused the deaths of thousands of civilians, including American diplomats. If the P.L.O. is resuscitated after Tripoli, more of the same will surely follow.
It is regrettable, therefore, that some unidentified officials in the Administration have seen fit to leak statements clearly designed to shore up the P.L.O.'s sagging image.  These officials should be reminded of what professional law enforcement officials have long recognized: informants are usually drawn from the membership of criminal gangs. But this is hardly a reason to keep the gangs intact.
 
PHIL BAUM RAPHAEL DANZIGER New York, Dec. 6, 1983
The writers are, respectively, associate executive director of the American Jewish Congress and policy analyst of its Commission on International Affairs.
 
*


End of Document