OF ISRAEL, THE U.S. AND AN 'APOLOGIA FOR P.L.O. TERRORISM'
The New York Times
August 6, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 719 words
Body


To the Editor:
George Ball's perceptions of the American-Israeli relationship (Op-Ed July 28) are unfortunately as inaccurate as the facts upon which they are based. The former Under Secretary of State should know that Israel was established in 1948, 34 years ago - not 40 years ago - as he implied in his apologia for P.L.O. terrorism.
But more to the point, is it not absurd for a former American official to justify the P.L.O.'s intention to destroy America's most dependable ally in the Middle East, because he sees this aim to be its ''sole bargaining counter''?
President Reagan clearly indicated his understanding of the difference between the P.L.O. and Arab Palestinians when he decried the ''scourge of terrorism'' the P.L.O. represents. The extent of this scourge is now being thoroughly exposed by the capture of hundreds of P.L.O. documents and tons of war machinery pre-positioned in Lebanon for use by Soviet proxies or the Soviets themselves.
George Ball's perceptions of the American-Israeli relationship (OpEd July 28) are unfortunately as inaccurate as the facts upon which they are based.
That the P.L.O. is a Soviet proxy committed to destroying U.S. interests in the Middle East, as well as the homeland of the Jewish people, is too frequently forgotten. As a Soviet protege, it cannot be permitted to gain a foothold in the Middle East, or to accomplish by political manipulation what it failed to accomplish by terrorist acts.
Mr. Ball's attempt to provide excuses to legitimize the P.L.O. bespeaks a serious lowering of moral standards and a forsaking of America's fundamental democratic principles.
The P.L.O. is a terrorist organization, supported by the Soviet Union and linked to every revolutionary leftist movement - not to mention its ties to neo-Nazis - around the world.
Israel, like the United States or England, is a sovereign nation which does not require acceptance by such an organization for its existence. Nor is Israel, as a sovereign state, obligated to recognize or bestow legitimacy on any international terrorist group, be it the P.L.O. or Italy's Red Brigades. Mutual recognition between a legitimate state and a terrorist entity would be the height of folly - it is not required by international law or any universally accepted morality.
It is regrettable that certain members of Congress, or former American officials such as George Ball, permit themselves to be exploited by serving as messengers for international terrorists. At a time when American representative Philip Habib is in the midst of conducting delicate negotiations, the unwarranted intrusion by those sympathetic to the P.L.O. can only prove harmful to the prospects of obtaining a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Lebanon.
Mr. Ball's suggestion that the U.S. is an ''indulgent Big Brother'' to Israel is misleading. The United States has indeed been a source of important economic and military aid to Israel, but it has not been doling out charity. Israel has been dutifully paying back that aid.  Let us not underestimate the technological improvement Israel has made on U.S. weaponry, which we benefit from, the extraordinary intelligence data Israel has provided the U.S. and its NATO allies or the brilliant example Israel has shown as a developing nation fostering a vibrant democracy. All of this represents a contribution of the highest magnitude to the interest of the United States and our own security.
Mr. Ball's demand for Israel to ''fully consult us'' before acting in its self-defense shows a blatant disregard for Israel's sovereignty. One would doubt if the United States consulted with Israel while the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 threatened our own shores, or when two Libyan jets attacked U.S. Navy planes in international waters in 1981.
It is unfortunate that there are those who have difficulty identifying the true nature of the P.L.O. when its objectives are clearly defined in its own covenant. This document is a blueprint for Israel's liquidation and therefore must be taken very seriously.  Thus, the actions of Israel must be judged in this context, especially by the United States, which should appreciate that the Jewish State defends the very same principles of freedom that we, too, hold dear.
IVAN J. NOVICK, President, Zionist Organization of America, New York, Aug. 2, 1982


End of Document