Off-target bomb kills 2 Afghans
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 10, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: D; Pg. 5
Length: 403 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


KABUL, Afghanistan (AP) - A NATO bomb mistakenly hit a house 1½ miles off target Tuesday, killing two civilians and wounding 10 even as Afghanistan's president was saying that terrorism cannot be defeated if innocents are killed in coalition operations. Meanwhile, a roadside bomb killed an Afghan contract worker and three soldiers in the U.S.-led coalition elsewhere in eastern Afghanistan, the coalition said. No other details were released. 
A NATO statement said the bomb was aimed at a spot used by insurgents to fire rockets in eastern Khost province but the weapon malfunctioned and hit a civilian house. "An immediate investigation into the cause of the incident has been launched and further details will be forthcoming once established," the alliance said. Because of Afghanistan's mountainous terrain and few roads, foreign troops rely heavily on air power to combat Taliban and al-Qaida fighters. But airstrikes have been blamed for a series of civilian deaths, and President Hamid Karzai is pushing for a review of the use of U.S. and NATO air power. He raised that theme again Tuesday after attending the inauguration of Pakistan's new president, Asif Ali Zardari. "The war against terrorism will only be won if we have the people with us. There is no other way. In order for us to have the people with us, we must avoid civilian casualties," Karzai said. The mistaken NATO bombing came amid a dispute over a U.S. and Afghan special forces operation in the western village of Azizabad on Aug. 22. Afghan and U.N. officials say some 90 civilians died during fighting in the village. The U.S. initially said up to seven civilians were killed but announced Sunday that it is reinvestigating the incident after video images of victims came to light. The bodies of at least 10 children and many more adults covered in blankets and white shrouds appear in videos obtained by The Associated Press on Monday. Two grainy videos, apparently taken by cell phones, showed bodies lying side by side on a mosque floor, covered by floral blankets and black-and-white checkered shawls. A young boy lay curled in a fetal position; others looked as if they were asleep. It was impossible to verify conclusively that the videos showed the aftermath of the Azizabad battle, but the contents appeared to back claims by Afghan and U.N. officials that the U.S. operation killed far more civilians than the military acknowledged.

Load-Date: September 10, 2008


End of Document