OFFICIAL BELIEVES TERRORISM LIKELY IN FLIGHT 800 CRASH
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 26, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 752 words
Byline: Pat Milton
Body


EAST MORICHES, N.Y. (AP) - After reviewing black-box tapes containing
a "fraction-of-a-second sound" - then silence - investigators moved
closer Thursday to declaring that terrorism brought down TWA Flight
800, a source told The Associated Press.
"It was considered a 20-percent possibility that the explosion was
caused by mechanical failure, now it's down to a 5- or 10-percent
possibility," a source close to the investigation said. "Investigators
are holding out for physical evidence before they declare the probe
criminal."
The source, who spoke on condition of anonymity, made the remarks late
in the first day of study of the tapes from the flight data and
cockpit voice recorders.
In a briefing to the media on the results of a preliminary study of
the cockpit voice recorder, federal investigators said they had
detected a "fraction-of-a-second sound," then silence, 11 1/2 minutes
after takeoff.
Investigators said they could not immediately explain what the sound
was.
James Kallstrom, the FBI agent in charge, said investigators were
comparing the data to that from so-called black boxes in crashes
caused by bombs, such as the explosion of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie,
Scotland.
Vincent Cannistrano, the man who headed the CIA investigation into the
Lockerbie bombing, told the AP Thursday night that he got chills as he
heard federal officials describe the TWA tape.
"I got goosebumps because it reminded me so vividly of Pan Am 103,"
said Cannistrano, former CIA chief of counterterrorism operations.
He said that on the Lockerbie tape, there was also a normal
conversation and "then a crunching sound like the airplane breaking
up. That was the bomb.  A massive catastrophic event that cuts off
everything at once is probably a bomb, not a mechanical problem."
Earlier in the day, Kallstrom told reporters: "We know there was a
catastrophic explosion; it was caused by some kind of a bomb,
obviously."
But Kallstrom added that they were still considering other possibilit
ies, such as "a mechanical problem that has nothing to do with
terrorism or criminality, or something in the cargo that would have
caused a mechanical problem."
Robert Francis, vice chairman of the National Transportation Safety
Board, refused to speculate about what the sound was, or what it
meant. He said both tapes would be subjected to detailed tests
designed to learn more.
The data recorder's tape was contaminated by water, but Francis said
its information probably could be recovered with time.
President Clinton - who consoled victims' families earlier in the day
- announced security measures that could make air travel more
expensive and less convenient.
The president ordered that more baggage be screened or hand-searched
and that aircraft making international flights be fully inspected -
"every plane, every cabin, every cargo hold, every time."
He also appointed Vice President Al Gore to head a commission on
airline safety that will report back in 45 days on how to deploy the
latest security technology.
"Whatever needs to be done, we will do it," said Clinton, who spoke
alongside Air Force One at Kennedy Airport.
But he warned that such measures "could increase the inconvenience and
expense of air travel. I want the American people to know that
up-front."
The Federal Aviation Administration immediately told passengers to be
ready for delays at airports because of "congestion at security
screening checkpoints" as more bags are opened and searched.
The agency suggested that air travelers clearly label luggage and be
ready to answer questions about their bags; have photo identification;
be ready to have baggage opened and inspected; and arrive early at the
airport.
Clinton, a white ribbon of remembrance for victims pinned to his
lapel, cautioned against jumping to conclusions about the crash's
cause.
Investigators still hoped to find the answer in the black boxes, which
were recovered scratched and dented, but with "healthy" tapes. NTSB
investigator Robert Benzon called their recovery "a great step."
All 230 people aboard the Paris-bound jetliner were killed when it
exploded over the Atlantic on July 17; 126 bodies, more than half the
total, had been recovered by Thursday, and 111 had been identified.
Meanwhile, the search for more bodies continued about 10 miles off
Long Island, where two Navy search vessels were anchored above two
areas covered with debris.
One of the wreckage fields contains a 45-foot-high object that could
be the remains of the plane's tail; the other, a 60-by-30 foot piece
of twisted fuselage that is thought to contain or cover bodies.

Load-Date: August 9, 1996


End of Document