Officials take practical path on spending; Wisconsin counties will spend federal terrorism funds on items key to Midwest rescues
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 16, 2003 Saturday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a3
Length: 400 words
Byline: mailto:creber@wcinet.comCRAIG REBER  
Body


Terrorism readiness might not be an overwhelming concern of the average citizen, but it is for southwest Wisconsin officials.
When the federal government made more than $$ @300 million available, Wisconsin wasn't left out. Gov. Jim Doyle recently announced that applications for federal terrorism grants had been approved. Four southwest Wisconsin counties - Crawford, Grant, Iowa and Lafayette - are receiving more than $$ @120,000. 
Some counties are focused on insulating emergency crews against exposure, others on improving their communications systems.
Grant County Emergency Management Services Director Steve Braun has $$ @56,000 to spend on safety equipment. He doubts rural southwest Wisconsin ranks high as a terrorist target. His Iowa County counterpart, Ken Palzkill, agrees with that assessment. 
Braun's purchases will address "for practical purposes, the type of events that might happen around here."
Bracing for hazardous chemical spills or the discovery of a clandestine methamphetamine lab are two reasons Braun bought a decontamination trailer, also known as a "human car wash," which is used to cleanse people exposed to harmful substances.
"You're far more likely to see an ammonia spill than weapons of mass destruction," Braun said.
Palzkill's purchases include protective boots and overalls for first responders.
"Hopefully Iowa County isn't a terrorist hotbed," he said. "We try to acquire things that have direct benefit countywide."
Crawford County's Emergency Management Services Director Roger Martin notes every county has a wish list. A mobile command communications vehicle, a back-up for the county's only communications center in Prairie du Chien, tops Martin's list.
"If Prairie du Chien got hit, by say a tornado, we'd be out of business," Martin said.
Lafayette County Emergency Management Services Director John Reichling is spending $$ @30,000 on communications equipment for the county's new base radio system in the county's 911 Center. 
From large to small, Grant County law enforcement personnel will have new portable radios - augmenting existing equipment.
Joining the county's decontamination trailer is a medical mass casualty trailer with immobilization equipment and oxygen tanks. The trailer, Braun explained, enhances response to injuries suffered in a tornado or a school bus crash.
"Ultimately, we have to be prepared to respond to any type of incident," he said.

Graphic

 
Mug - Steve Braun

Load-Date: August 17, 2003


End of Document