Officials say citizens vital in fight against terrorism
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
January 31, 2002, Thursday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 543 words
Byline: Jeff Hansel
Body


Everyone knows that times have changed and that Americans need to be on the lookout for suspicious activity.
 But it's more than that, says North Dakota National Guard Adjutant Gen. Mike Haugen. He says that his conversations with national leaders show that terrorists are among us.
'Our homeland is their battle space,' he said. 'They're going to try and get next to us in our homeland. They're going to try and disturb our psyche.'
 Haugen, along with representatives from the Federal Emergency Management Agency and North Dakota's Division of Emergency Management, spoke Wednesday to about 135 front-line state emergency workers at a workshop, which continues today.
 As part of their annual training, emergency workers are rethinking how they will respond to disasters, from a reactive mode to one of forethought, preplanning and anticipation, in addition to reaction. The workshop was attended by a variety of people who may be involved in a disaster, including county managers, county commission members, the National Weather Service, the North Dakota Aeronautics Commission, the North Dakota Department of Health, Excell Leadership of Bismarck and state and tribal leaders.
 Terrorists will avoid conventional warfare, because a conventional war is one they cannot win, Haugen said. Because of that, North Dakotans are just as important to the war effort as New Yorkers are, through volunteerism and keeping an eye on activities around the state.
 Terrorists need information about potential targets, such as pipelines, refineries, dams and power plants. They share information about those targets through computer technology, he said.
 David I. Maurstad, FEMA Region VIII Director and former lieutenant governor of Nebraska, said North Dakota emergency managers are uniquely qualified to respond to terrorism because there have been 11 federally declared disasters here in the last eight to 10 years.
 'If there was a time when you could make a significant difference in emergency management, I think this is it,' he told the audience. 'We must be prepared for the ongoing possibility -- probability -- of another event.'
 Maurstad said thousands of terrorists are in the United States and around the world, so Americans need to be aware that it is up to them to be on the watch.
 North Dakota Homeland Security Coordinator Doug Friez said citizens have a responsibility to help emergency workers. They can do simple things, such as packing properly before taking an airplane flight, he said.
 Friez said recently met with President Bush, and Bush told him citizens can fight terrorism by volunteering, by visiting a nursing home or someone who is home-bound or alone.
 'We need to do everything we can as citizens to convey to the rest of the world and to these bad guys that we've got a wonderful way of life and it's based on sort of the golden rule,' he said.
 Derek Hanson, president of the North Dakota Emergency Medical Services Association, volunteers are desperately needed for rural ambulance services.
 'If ever there were a time for people to volunteer and help out their fellow man, it's probably now,' he said. 'It's up to us. The people of North Dakota will set the trend.'
(Reach Jeff Hansel@ndonline.com or 250-8255.)  
 Cutline: Mike McCleary
 1 photo

Load-Date: January 31, 2002


End of Document