Officials want suspects behind bars; British investigators continue to search homes, businesses
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 16, 2006, Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3A
Length: 1561 words
Byline: MATT MOORE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


LONDON - British investigators plan to tell a judge in a closed-door hearing today why 22 people arrested in a foiled plot to blow up as many as 10 trans-Atlantic jetliners should be kept in custody without charge.
Police, meanwhile, examined several homes and businesses for clues into the alleged plot broken up last week.
British officials have said little about the plot since they announced Thursday that they had disrupted a major attack. Investigators will have to provide at least some details of their evidence to the judge at the hearing today.
London's Metropolitan Police said another person had been arrested in the Thames Valley area west of London, but gave no further details. They also disclosed raids on a pair of Internet cafes, and investigators meticulously went over a stretch of woods where a news report said they discovered a handgun and rifle.
There was new concern about security after a 12-year-old boy managed to board a plane at Gatwick Airport on Tuesday without a passport, ticket or boarding pass. He was detected by cabin crew and removed before the flight took off.
"The boy had passed through a full security screening process and we are confident there was no threat to passengers, staff or the aircraft at any time," said Stewart McDonald, spokesman the airport's owner, BAA PLC.
Tough new anti-terror laws give the government up to 28 days to hold suspects without charge, but they must periodically go before a judge to make a case for continued confinement. The accused person is represented by lawyers and does not appear in court.
Twenty-four people were originally arrested in connection with the terror plot. Twenty-two of them had their detentions extended Friday night through Wednesday. One person had his detention extended on Monday, and one person was released without charge last week.
Britain doubled the maximum time for police to interrogate suspects after the July 7, 2005, bombings, which killed 52 people and four suicide bombers on London's transit network.
Amjad Sarwar said his brother, Assad, was one of the people arrested but that he was not involved in terrorism.
"They've got it all wrong," Sarwar told Britain's Channel 4. "He is an innocent guy. He minds his own business - he's been helping the youth out considerably in the area, and he's got nothing to do with it.
"There is no way he could have anything to do with terrorism. He condemns terrorism."
Two Internet cafes were raided in central Slough, 25 miles west of London, not far from the High Wycombe neighborhood where several suspects were arrested.
A Metropolitan Police spokeswoman said that 46 locations, including businesses and homes, have been searched, with 22 of those still being investigated.
Officers have not disclosed details about any items recovered during the searches, despite reports that firearms had been found.
The British Broadcasting Corp. reported that a search of the woodland area in High Wycombe turned up several firearms and other items of interest. It was not clear if they were to be used in the alleged jetliner plot, which authorities say involved a plan to smuggle liquid explosives hidden in hand luggage aboard flights.
Halfway around the world, investigations continued in Pakistan, where authorities held 17 people, including British citizen Rashid Rauf, who they said has al-Qaida connections and was a key player in the plot. At least one of Rauf's brothers was arrested in England during the sweep here.
Pakistan's Foreign Ministry said the country may extradite Rauf to Britain but that request had not yet been made.
The investigation was colored by claims that Britain's government has talked tough regarding terrorism but has been slow to act.
Conservative Party leader David Cameron said Prime Minister Tony Blair failed to follow through on a plan unveiled after last year's London transit bombings to crack down on radical clerics and help Britain's moderate Muslims face down militants in their communities.
"We need follow-through when the headlines have moved on," Cameron said. "But precious little has actually been done."

Load-Date: August 17, 2006


End of Document