Officials study terrorism facts
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 29, 2002 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: DeKalb;
Length: 382 words
Byline: DON PLUMMER
Body


Armed with slide presentations and outlines, Fulton County fire Chief David Daniels and officials from a half-dozen other communities will fan out across Georgia to teach local officials how to identify, respond to and plan recovery from a terrorist attack.
The 33 officials attended a three-day seminar at the Georgia Public Safety Training Center in Forsyth that gave step-by-step instructions for dealing with terrorism.
Materials from the course, billed as a "training-the-trainer" session, will be integrated into Fulton County's existing training program, said Daniels.
AJC
He said he will provide information to the county's elected officials and use it to augment training on a soon-to-be-delivered computerized disaster simulator and a 1:64 scale model city.
"The biggest thing we have to overcome is that we still think it's not going to happen to us," Daniels said.
G.K. Jefferson, an instructor in the DeKalb County police training division, said the seminar helped him recognize the need to talk to recruits about spotting possible signs of terrorism. He said the department is developing a lesson plan that will include anti-terrorism awareness.
"These are the guys who will be our foot soldiers in the coming months, and they need to be made aware of what's out there," he said.
Since Sept. 11, the demand for information about terrorism has grown, said instructor Barry Murner.
"You only have to look at the layout of a bookstore or local library to see how terrorism has already affected America," Murner said. "Every one of them now has a terrorism section."
The course does not include classified information, Murner said. He said state officials hope the training program will be presented to local civic clubs and church groups.
"All of this information was already out there. We just pulled it together to help people connect the dots," Murner said. Still unknown, Murner said, is how much money will be available to Georgia cities and counties.
Early estimates had about $100 million, with 75 percent to local emergency agencies.
The requirement that three-quarters of the funds go to localities still holds, Murner said, but there is now a question, due to federal officials, regarding the amount to be received by first responders.
Staff writer Eric Stirgus contributed to this article.

Load-Date: August 29, 2002


End of Document