Officials say D.C. trial eyed for Guantanamo detainee
The Salt Lake Tribune
January 15, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World
Length: 487 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Washington » The Obama administration is conducting an intense security review as part of a plan to bring one of the world's most notorious terrorism suspects from Guantanamo Bay to Washington for a trial just steps from the Capitol, officials said.
Republican critics said the plan would make the city more dangerous, risk compromising U.S. intelligence methods and provide a powerful and expensive bullhorn for Osama bin Laden's alleged lieutenant, Riduan Isamuddin, and two associates. Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, is believed to be the main link between al-Qaida and Jemaah Islamiyah, the terror group blamed for the 2002 bombing at a Bali nightclub that killed 202.
"Such a plan is unacceptable and I will vehemently oppose it," Rep. Frank Wolf, R-Va., wrote Friday in a letter to Attorney General Eric Holder. Wolf cited what he said were classified briefings he received about terror threats to the U.S.: "If the American people knew these threats, they would never tolerate the transfer of these detainees to major urban population centers for trial."
The plan under review at the Justice Department was described by multiple U.S. officials, who said a decision could come in a matter of weeks.
Other trials may also occur in Washington and New York, meaning the most significant terrorism trials in generations would be conducted in the two cities targeted in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. In his criticisms Friday to the attorney general, Wolf said trials should be at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, or, alternatively, at what he described as remote, secure facilities far from any U.S. population centers.
Following his capture in 2003, Hambali was among the terrorism suspects held for years in secret CIA prisons. U.S. intelligence officials have publicly linked him to the attempted assassination of a Philippine ambassador and the coordinated Christmas Eve 2000 bombings of Indonesian churches. In 2007, Hambali, 43, appeared before a preliminary military tribunal and denied any connection with al-Qaida.
The Justice Department said a final decision has not been made on Hambali's case, but after news of the plan surfaced, Republicans picked up where they left off criticizing the plan to try suspected 9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in New York.
"There is still no national security interest that is served by closing Guantanamo Bay," Rep. Pete Hoekstra, R-Mich, said in a statement Friday. "And there is only the prospect of new targets created by holding terrorist detainees and show trials on American soil."
Conducting a trial in the nation's capital would be a symbolic repudiation of the policies of former President George W. Bush, who portrayed Hambali as a success story in the Bush administration's CIA interrogation program. Box headline here
President Barack Obama is one week away from his self-imposed deadline to close the detention center at Guantanamo, a deadline he acknowledges he will miss.

Graphic

 
FILE - In this undated file handout photo from Malaysia's Bukit Aman Police Department, Hambali, also known as Riduan Isamuddin, a senior al-Qaida operative in Southeast Asia is seen. The Obama administration is considering a trial in Washington for Hambali, suspected of planning a 2002 Bali nightclub bombing, a plan that would bring one of the world's most notorious terrorism suspects just steps from the U.S. Capitol. (AP Photo/Bukit Aman Police Department, HO, File)
FILE - In this undated file handout photo from Malaysia's Bukit Aman Police Department, Hambali, also known as Riduan Isamuddin, a senior al-Qaida operative in Southeast Asia is seen. The Obama administration is considering a trial in Washington for Hambali, suspected of planning a 2002 Bali nightclub bombing, a plan that would bring one of the world's most notorious terrorism suspects just steps from the U.S. Capitol. (AP Photo/Bukit Aman Police Department, File)
FILE - In this undated file handout photo from Malaysia's Bukit Aman Police Department, Hambali, also known as Riduan Isamuddin, a senior al-Qaida operative in Southeast Asia is seen. The Obama administration is considering a trial in Washington for Hambali, suspected of planning a 2002 Bali nightclub bombing, a plan that would bring one of the world's most notorious terrorism suspects just steps from the U.S. Capitol. (AP Photo/Bukit Aman Police Department, HO, File) ** NO SALES **

Load-Date: January 19, 2010


End of Document