Officials warn of possible terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 17, 2005 Thursday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A03
Length: 557 words
Byline: BY KATHERINE SHRADER The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON -- 
Body


President George W. Bush's top intelligence and military officials said Wednesday that terrorists are regrouping for possible new strikes against the United States.
They said the best defense was for Congress to approve the president's military and anti-terrorism budget. But some in Congress, including prominent Republicans, were questioning some of Bush's spending proposals.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told a House hearing that the government could reasonably predict attacks would come from terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and other means. He offered few details of terrorist threats.
Meanwhile, CIA Director Porter Goss told the Senate Intelligence Committee the Iraq war was giving terrorists experience and contacts for future attacks, and FBI Director Robert Mueller expressed worry that a sleeper operative in the United States may have been in place for years, awaiting orders for an attack.
"I remain very concerned about what we are not seeing," Mueller said in remarks he submitted to the senators.
Rumsfeld told the House Armed Services Committee that the proposed $419 billion defense package for next year would set an ambitious course to "continue prosecuting the war and to attack its ideological underpinnings."
Yet the Republican-controlled Congress might exercise its considerable authority over federal spending and reject White House requests to simply sign the checks.
House Majority Leader Tom DeLay and Rep. Jerry Lewis, R-Calif., the new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, said lawmakers were questioning billions in foreign aid and State Department spending that Bush requested in an emergency bill this week.
Senior administration officials appearing at a series of congressional hearings Wednesday described a Muslim extremist threat that's become more diffuse, encompassing al-Qaida and like-minded associates.
"It may be only a matter of time before al-Qaida or other groups attempt to use chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons," Goss said at the Senate Intelligence Committee's annual hearing on threats.
In his first testimony as CIA chief, Goss said the Iraq conflict has become a cause for extremists.
"Jihadists" who survive the war "represent a potential pool of contacts to build transnational terrorist cells, groups and networks," Goss said.
Senior diplomatic and intelligence officials also named a number of countries that pose conventional threats.
Goss said North Korea continues to "develop, produce, deploy and sell ballistic missiles of increasing range and sophistication." Iran, too, is further improving its Shahab-3 long-range ballistic missile, Goss said.
Speaking to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Syria had undermined stability in neighboring Lebanon. On Monday, a car bomb killed former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
"The Syrians (have) a special responsibility for the kind of destabilization that happened there, that this sort of thing could happen," said Rice, who also said Syria was contributing to the insurgency in Iraq and endangering U.S. forces.
Rice laid out a menu of spending initiatives, including $658 million for a new embassy compound in Baghdad, $1.2 billion for U.S. obligations to international organizations and $5.8 billion in assistance to U.S. partners in the war on terrorism.

Graphic

 
photo
 PHOTO HEADSHOTS - Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld (left) and CIA Director Porter Goss. 

Load-Date: February 17, 2005


End of Document