OFFICERS STORM LONDON MOSQUE, ARREST SEVEN IN TERRORISM CASE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 21, 2003 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A8
Length: 277 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Police using ladders and battering rams raided a London mosque - a known center of radical Islam led by a suspected terrorist - and arrested seven men early Monday in connection with the recent discovery of the deadly poison ricin.
Dozens of officers wearing bulletproof vests stormed the North London Central Mosque and two neighboring houses just after 2 a.m., as circling helicopters shined spotlights on the buildings below.
Police seized computers and documents and found a stun gun, an illegal canister of CS gas (similar to pepper spray) and a blank-firing imitation gun.
They found no evidence of ricin in the mosque, where previous worshippers include would-be shoe-bomber Richard Reid, Zacharias Moussaoui, who faces conspiracy charges in connection with the Sept. 11 attacks, and extremists believed to have plotted to blow up the U.S. Embassy in Paris, officials say.
Mosque leader Abu Hamza al-Masri was not arrested. His fiery anti-Western sermons have led Britain to order him removed from his pulpit. A native of Egypt, al-Masri is wanted in Yemen on terrorism charges.
Al-Masri has denied any link with al-Qaida or other terrorist activities. He denounced the raid as a propaganda exercise that would alienate Muslims.
Police said the raid was connected to the discovery Jan. 5 of traces of ricin in another part of north London. The poison derived from castor beans has been linked to the al-Qaida terrorist network.
Four North Africans are charged in the initial ricin find, and three more were arrested Jan. 14 in the northern city of Manchester.
Police identified those arrested Monday as six North Africans, ages 23-48, and an Eastern European, 22.

Notes

WORLD

Load-Date: January 21, 2003


End of Document