Officials right to urge parents to talk to kids about terror
USA TODAY
December 1, 2004, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 369 words
Body

Contrary to the suggestion of some child experts, the Department of Homeland Security is on target in urging parents to talk with their children about terrorism ("Ads urge parents to talk terrorism: Some worry spots may frighten kids," News, Nov. 23).
Schools nationwide conduct regular fire drills to protect students. Children do not stay home out of fear that their school will burn down because educators talk with them about fire safety and conduct evacuation drills.
The real issue is how we talk with children about the realities challenging our safety, not whether we talk with them.
Fear is best managed by education, communication and preparation -- not by sticking our heads in the sand. Age- and developmentally appropriate communications better prepare our children for the safety threats they may face in the future.
While all adults should work to protect our children better, providing a false sense of security by denial and ignoring terrorism is as dangerous as overreaction.
Kenneth S. Trump
President
National School Safety
and Security Services
Cleveland
More harm than good
I read with interest the article about the Homeland Security Department ads. I am the parent of four children, and I do see the need to have a plan in the event something happens.
But I agree with Ronald Stephens of the National School Safety Center that parents want children "to grow up with a feeling of security and safety without feeling that the big, bad boogeyman is going to get them at any moment."
Although TV stations are being encouraged to run the ads only during "adult programming," kids could eventually hear or see them. Are these kids being exposed to a type of terrorism? If a child can read, how can he or she be protected from discovering a print ad?
Parents should take responsibility for teaching their kids about life's dangers. But I don't think anyone should "use children to get to adults," as Marsha Evans, president of the American Red Cross, said of the ads.
With the understanding that terrorism is a method used to instill fear, confusion and pandemonium -- and considering the possibility of children hearing or seeing the ads -- I think they could cause more harm than benefit.
E. Spear
Jacksonville, N.C.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Alex Wong, Getty Images; Encouraging readiness: Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge and Kathy Crosby of the Ad Council watch an ad this month urging parents to talk to their children about what to do if disaster strikes.

Load-Date: December 1, 2004


End of Document