Officer is assigned to duty in Africa; Richmond policeman is serving with Marine reserve unit on mission in Djibouti
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
July 2, 2007 Monday
Final Edition


Copyright 2007 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. B-1
Length: 729 words
Byline: PETER BACQUÉ

Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


Richmond police officer Tim DeGrauwe has a tough new beat: the Horn of Africa.
 A Marine Corps reservist, he's on active duty in Djibouti, a tiny country in East Africa with a big role in the fight against terrorism.
 "It's just like in the city - community policing," DeGrauwe said. "If you're not engaging with the local population, talking with them, then you don't really know anything."
 And knowing what's going on outside his base at Camp Lemonier is a big part of his unit's job.
 DeGrauwe is a sergeant major with the Marines' 6th Provisional Security Company, charged with defending the camp and patrolling "outside the wire" with the Djiboutian army.
 The former French Foreign Legion post has not been attacked, he said during a telephone interview from Djibouti.
 "Although we're ever-vigilant, we chalk it up to a good working relationship with the local population and the police."
 DeGrauwe, a Prince George County resident, has had a personal hand in building relations with the Djiboutian police.
 He's been meeting two or three times a week with the national police chief, Col. Abdillahi-Farrah, to help the multilingual official polish his command of English.
 "We work . . . on his pronunciation, reading, writing, grammar," DeGrauwe said. "The conversations could go from just reading and pronunciation all the way up to world events or events in Djibouti. Wherever we end up, we end up."
 DeGrauwe, who also did a tour of duty in Iraq in 2005 as first sergeant of a combat engineer company, is one of more than 1,800 U.S. service members, civilians and coalition allies taking part in the American-led Combined Joint Task Force - Horn of Africa.
 He's doing a seven-month tour in Djibouti - searing hot, desert dry and 7,318 miles from Richmond.
 The former French colony is located at the Red Sea's southern end, a region known as the Horn of Africa. Somewhat smaller than Massachusetts, Djibouti - pronounced "Jih-BOO-tee" - has an impoverished, overwhelmingly Muslim population estimated at roughly half a million.
 The nation hosts the only U.S. military base in sub-Saharan Africa. Regional politics are frequently tense and transnational terrorism poses a threat to East Africa, the U.S. State Department says.
 America's growing presence in Djibouti reflects the country's strategic location near the world's busiest shipping lanes and close to Arabian oilfields, as well as its willingness to help the U.S. fight terrorism, wrote W. Stuart Symington, the American ambassador to Djibouti.
 DeGrauwe, 46, is married with three children. His wife, Suzanne, is no stranger to the stresses of military life: She's a retired Marine master sergeant.
 "She knows all about the deployments, she knows all about the combat," DeGrauwe said. And, "she's close to a saint."
 Suzanne DeGrauwe is comfortable with the potential dangers of her husband's work. "Once you've been in a job for so long, you just kind of do it," she said, pointing out that, "It's a volunteer force. It's not like they were drafted."
 DeGrauwe spent more than 10 years on active duty with the Marines before moving into law enforcement. He's been a Richmond police officer since 1995, and had a stint on the SWAT team.
 "His commitment is just tremendous, all the way round," said Richmond police Sgt. David Wallis, who serves with DeGrauwe on South Side and worked with him on the SWAT team. "He represents us well."
 The Combined Joint Task Force has its headquarters at the nearly 500-acre Camp Lemonier. The task force is in the business of helping ordinary people, not shooting at enemy forces, the Pentagon says.
 Since 2002, the task force's doctors, civil engineers, veterinarians and well-drillers have built schools, clinics and hospitals, made dozens of medical, dental and veterinary visits, dug more than 20 wells, and pitched in on a dozen humanitarian-assistance missions.
 "We need to affect the next generation, the kids of today," DeGrauwe said. "If they're growing up knowing the Americans are good people, that we're generous, maybe they'll come to our side rather than leaning toward terrorism.
 "There are a lot of good people outside the wire," he said, "and they like Americans."
On duty in Djibouti
The small East African country of Dijbouti is home to an important U.S. military hub in the volatile Horn of Africa.
Contact Peter Bacqué at (804) 649-6813 or pbacque@timesdispatch.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO, MAP

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document