OFFICIALS TO TESTIFY ON ANTI-TERROR CONTRACT; SENATOR GRANTED SUBPOENA POWER
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 23, 2010 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 456 words
Byline: TOM BARNES, POST-GAZETTE HARRISBURG BUREAU
Body


HARRISBURG -- The senator who will conduct a hearing into a controversial "anti-terrorism" contract doesn't expect to use subpoena power to compel administration officials to testify, but she's glad she has it, just in case.
The Senate Veterans Affairs & Emergency Preparedness Committee, headed by Sen. Lisa Baker, R-Luzerne, voted Wednesday to give her the authorization to subpoena members of Democratic Gov. Ed Rendell's administration if she has to in order to force them to testify Monday.
Ms. Baker wants to find out how and why the state Office of Homeland Security entered into a one-year, $103,000 contract last October with the Institute of Terrorism Research and Response, based in Philadelphia and Israel.
The contract, which was aimed at preventing terrorist attacks on "critical infrastructure" in the state, led the institute to disseminate information about meetings of Marcellus Shale gas drilling opponents, parades by gay/lesbian rights supporters and residents lobbying for education funds. It has caused a furor at the Capitol. Mr. Rendell terminated the contract, saying it violated citizens' rights for lawful, constitutional protests.
Ms. Baker said, "People were targeted for no reason other than they were exercising their fundamental rights of free speech and assembly."
Anti-shale drilling protests have occurred in various areas of the state, including Luzerne County, where Ms. Baker lives. She wants to hear from state Homeland Security Director James Powers Jr., who awarded the no-bid contract, along with state Emergency Management Agency Director Robert French and state police Commissioner Frank Pawlowski. They would all have major roles in the state's efforts to fight terrorism.
Ms. Baker said she expects all the officials to testify voluntarily, although Mr. Powers has been unreachable since a furor over the contract erupted last week. Ms. Baker said he apparently has been "on vacation" but expects him to appear Monday.
Senate President Pro Tem Joe Scarnati, R-Jefferson, said, "The importance and the gravity of this [contract] issue" justify giving her subpoena power, although three senators on her committee, all Democrats from Philadelphia, voted against the subpoena authorization.
Rendell administration spokesman Gary Tuma criticized the move for subpoena power, calling it "at least unnecessary and at worst, a stunt, because the administration is cooperating fully with the Senate request" to have people testify.
He said Rendell chief of staff Steve Crawford has met with Ms. Baker and briefed her on a task force he heads that is developing new ways of telling local safety officials about "credible threats" of attacks on "critical infrastructure," such as roads, bridges or power plants.

Notes

Bureau Chief Tom Barnes: tbarnes@post-gazette.com or 1-717-787-4254./

Load-Date: September 23, 2010


End of Document