OFFICIAL RAPS HUNT FOR KIDNAPPERS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 19, 1992, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 20A
Length: 364 words
Dateline: BEIRUT, LEBANON
Body


A Lebanese Cabinet minister denounced on Wednesday any possible hunt for the kidnappers of Western hostages, saying the hostage-takers had received a pledge guaranteeing their safety.  Mohsen Dalloul, a Cabinet minister who helped mediate the release of two German hostages this year, was reacting to U.S. television reports that several terrorist suspects were being hunted down.  "There were mediations among all sides to win the release of the hostages," Dalloul said. "There were promises and pledges presented, even pleas, and now after (the hostages) have been released, (the West) says we want to track them down?  "There was a pledge that (the kidnappers) would not be pursued. This file should not be opened." Sources say the hostage-takers were given guarantees about their safety before they freed their American, British and German hostages.  But on Tuesday, CNN, ABC and CBS reported that the United States secretly had indicted several suspects in the kidnapping and killing of Americans abroad in the 1980s. ABC said some of those indicted were believed to be in Iran, Lebanon and Libya.  CNN quoted intelligence sources as saying the U.S. Justice Department has kept the indictments under seal while U.S. law enforcement agencies tried to track down the suspects.  A U.S. government official closely involved in U.S. counterterrorism efforts cast doubt on the credibility of the CNN report.  "We have no idea what they are talking about," he said. "You'd be going down the wrong path if you pursue that story."
Nearly a year ago, the FBI said it was trying to identify the kidnappers of the American hostages in Lebanon for possible future criminal prosecution in the United States.  Now the State Department is running advertisements around the world seeking information on terrorism and offering rewards of up to $4 million for any clues to past acts of terrorism or any planned.  More than a dozen Americans were taken hostage in Lebanon in the 1980s.  Three were killed: William Buckley, the CIA's station chief in Beirut; Marine Lt. Col. William Higgins, who was serving with a U.N. observer force; and Peter Kilburn, a librarian at the American University of Beirut.

Load-Date: October 12, 1993


End of Document