Officials right to place new terror research on campus
University Wire
February 8, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 The Diamondback via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 389 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Diamondback; SOURCE: U. Maryland
Dateline: COLLEGE PARK, Md. 
Body


For once, it's good to have terror hit close to home. Actually, it's good to have a terrorism research center close to home. The university announced the new government-funded, $12 million Center for Excellence in Behavioral and Social Research on Terrorism and Counter-Terrorism will be housed on the campus, a decision that will do a great deal in allowing students to learn about one of the most pressing issues of our day and participate in noteworthy research.
University officials first believed that limited campus building space would force them to place the center off the campus. Luckily, space opened up in Symons Hall and the center will occupy much of the building's third floor. Symons' spot along McKeldin Mall and at the corner of Campus and Regents drives is a convenient spot for researchers from all the university departments who will be collaborating in the center's work and for students who will hopefully find good jobs or for-credit opportunities there.
Undergraduate student participation in the center is integral. The university has done a great job in recent years of attracting some of the most sought after federal research dollars. But the gain in these grabs cannot remain only financial. The university has been praised in recent years for its focus on undergraduate curriculum. An important part of that is providing good opportunities for undergraduates to do and assist in research. The center should be ripe with possibilities for undergraduates. Not only will it allow students to be active in important discussions on terrorism and enhance their knowledge of the world around them, but it will also help many students get into graduate school and provide a positive image of the university.
Many undergraduates already participate in research in the physical and biological sciences, but the center's focus on the social sciences and behavior will open up research possibilities to students who may have never encountered them before. Additionally, researchers, academics and officials from around the world will participate in the center's work; having it housed on the campus will allow them to see parts of the university they might not have otherwise. University officials made a good decision finding a good spot for an important new facility on the campus.
(C) 2005 The Diamondback via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 8, 2005


End of Document