Officials urge renewal of Patriot Act; They warn not to give up tools to fight terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 6, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. b5
Length: 409 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Bush administration has used the Patriot Act's powers to listen to cell phone conversations and examine business records 84 times in 31/2 years, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales said Tuesday as Congress began considering whether to renew those powers and other sections of the anti-terror law.
Gonzales and FBI Director Robert Mueller urged lawmakers to make permanent all 15 expiring provisions of the law, some of which have aroused civil liberties concerns. Mueller also asked lawmakers to expand the bureau's ability to obtain records in terrorism cases without first asking a judge or grand jury.
"Al-Qaida and other groups remain a grave threat to our country, and now is not the time for us to relinquish our tools in that fight," Gonzales told the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Several lawmakers are introducing legislation Wednesday to curb major parts of the Patriot Act. Their bill would limit so-called "roving wiretaps" that allow authorities to monitor a suspect's cell phones and would raise the standard of proof the government has to meet before getting secret warrants to examine business records.
An unusual coalition of groups, including the American Conservative Union and the liberal-leaning American Civil Liberties Union, is backing the new legislation.
Though the Patriot Act prompts strong reactions, the hearing was remarkably subdued, with senators praising Gonzales for his willingness to engage in debate. "That's a grand departure from your predecessor," said Sen. Richard Durbin, D-Ill., referring to former Attorney General John Ashcroft.
Gonzales told lawmakers the provisions have been invoked sparingly since the Patriot Act became law in October 2001, just 45 days after the Sept. 11 attacks, expanding the government's surveillance and prosecutorial powers against suspected terrorists, their associates and financiers.
Authorities have sought roving wiretaps 49 times and business records 35 times, Gonzales said. All the business-record warrants were issued since September 2003.
The government never has used the provision permitting secret warrants for "books, records, papers, documents and other items" to obtain library, bookstore, medical or gun sale records, he said.
But when asked by committee Chairman Arlen Specter, R-Pa., whether the administration would agree to exclude library and medical records from the law, Gonzales demurred. "It should not be held against us that we have exercised restraint," he said.

Graphic

 
Mug - Alberto Gonzales

Load-Date: April 6, 2005


End of Document