OFFICIAL EXPECTS MOST ANTI-TERRORISM TIPS TO WASH OUT;
 HE DEFENDS PROGRAM AS LEGITIMATE WAY TO PROTECT AMERICANS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 11, 2002 Sunday Early Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A15
Length: 376 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Most leads that neighbors would pass along in the government's proposed network of anti-terrorism tipsters will produce little, a top Justice Department official predicted Saturday.
Still, Assistant Attorney General Michael Chertoff, the administrati on's lead anti-terrorism prosecutor, defended the program as a legitimate way to protect Americans, despite criticism that it infringed upon their civil liberties.
"You should not think you're dealing with a bunch of barbarians. That's not true," he told a group of lawyers at a meeting of the American Bar Association as he and other Justice officials addressed administration efforts against terrorism.
"We need to be sober about what is a threat to civil liberties."
Operation TIPS (Terrorism Information and Prevention System), originally was to begin this month, but is on hold until Congress returns in the fall. That will give Justice Department officials a chance to consult with lawmakers.
Chertoff's defense did not sway James Brosnahan, a lawyer who represented John Walker Lindh, known as the American Taliban.
"You can make a telephone call about somebody you don't like and maybe they'll be declared an enemy combatant with no rights even though they're a U.S. citizen," Brosnahan told Chertoff and others at a discussion of civil liberties. The TIPS program "is as sinister as anything I've ever heard of," Brosnahan added.
Chertoff said the administration has looked at inventive ways to catch terrorists without violating the Constitution.
Under the program, the government would encourage tips from everyday citizens about suspicious activities. Chertoff denied it would encourage Americans to spy on one another.
The department plans to set up a toll-free number for people to call about unusual activity.
Laura W. Murphy, director of the American Civil Liberties Union in Washington, said the administration "is creating a civil liberties crisis for this nation."
The administration's response to the Sept. 11 attacks has dominated the annual meeting of the ABA, the nation's largest lawyers group.
An ABA panel on Friday issued a critical report of the administration, recommending legal rights for Americans whom the government deems enemy combatants and locks up in the United States indefinitely.

Load-Date: August 11, 2002


End of Document