Officials say U.S. still vulnerable to terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 5, 1999, Friday


Copyright 1999, Telegraph-Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. a 2
Length: 676 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Despite progress in combating terrorism, the United States remains vulnerable to bombing attacks, both at home and at its far-flung outposts, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Attorney General Janet Reno told Congress on Thursday.
Only about 10 percent of the planned work has been performed on upgrading U.S. embassies since last August's twin bombings in Africa, Albright told a Senate hearing on anti-terrorism.
Reno said there has been much progress in foiling would-be terrorist plots and in improving coordination among agencies. Still, she said, "we're not going to be able to prevent them all. There is no way we can do that. And we have got to be prepared."
The attorney general said that of particular concern was "the threat of a cyberattack."
"Just now in this past year, we have been able to see instances in which 17- and 18-year-old hackers can intrude into sensitive computers across this country. If they can do that, our cybersystem, our cyberinfrastructure, is at risk," she said.
Reno said that government agencies are working together "with personnel and technology that can match the wits of the smartest criminals and the smartest terrorist." But she said states and the private sector need to do more to fight this new brand of terrorism.
Albright said security at U.S. embassies around the world has been beefed up considerably since simultaneous bombings last Aug. 7 at the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania killed 224 people, including 12 Americans. She also said the administration's five-year plan for combating terrorism is progressing.
But, she said, there is much to be done. "Our strategy must be long-term. The five-year plan is only the beginning. Certainly no single arrest or shutdown of a terrorist operation will be sufficient."
"The advance of technology has given us new means to counter terrorists, but it has also enabled terrorists to develop more powerful weapons and to travel, communicate, recruit and raise funds on a global basis," Albright said.
Albright, Reno and FBI Director Louis Freeh testified before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee that oversees the budgets of their agencies.
Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., the subcommittee chairman, said President Clinton's budget request for $ 300 million to upgrade embassy security next year falls about $700 million short of what he said an interagency study panel said was needed.
Gregg said the president's entire anti-terrorism program, which also includes a request for $ 2.8 billion in new spending, appeared to be "put together on the back of an envelope."
But Albright defended the program. "I think we are at the beginning stages. … We're working very hard and I think we all need to work together on this," she said.
Freeh told the panel that during fiscal 1998, which ended last Sept. 30, the FBI had "prevented 10 planned terrorist acts" through its investigations, nine of which he said were planned by an Illinois-based white supremacist group that plotted to bomb buildings across the country.
On the related subject of nuclear terrorism, a bipartisan group of 58 House members announced on Thursday they were reintroducing legislation to make it "official policy" of the United States to deploy a national missile defense to protect against incoming missiles.
The administration has its own missile defense program and put money for it in the budget Clinton submitted last week. But that provides for a decision by mid-2000 on whether to go ahead with such a system.
"A commitment to deploy is essential," said Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., the principal sponsor. He said moving forward with such a system - and not delaying a decision - would send a message to "rogue nations" like North Korea, Iran and Iraq.
Weldon and others introduced a similar bill last year. It never was enacted, although a spending bill passed in mid-October and signed by Clinton earmarked roughly $ 1 billion in additional funds for development of a national missile defense system.
The Senate Armed Services Committee debated its version of measure on Thursday.

Load-Date: February 5, 1999


End of Document