Officials urging public readiness for terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
February 11, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 983 words
Byline: THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON - Top federal officials issued their most pointed advice since Sept. 11, 2001, on precautions the public should take against terrorist attacks, warning that every home should be stocked with three days worth of water and food in case of a strike with chemical, biological or radiological weapons.
They also recommended on Monday that families consider designating a room where they will gather in the event of such an attack and have on hand duct tape and heavy plastic sheeting to seal it, as well as scissors, a manual can opener, blankets, flashlights, radios and spare batteries. The officials said they believe the al-Qaida terrorist network is particularly targeting New York and Washington.
Ranking officials of the Department of Homeland Security told reporters at a briefing that Americans must take some personal responsibility for protecting themselves, but stressed that people should not feel panicked or abandoned by government.
"We see information on citizen preparedness as prudent planning," said Gordon Johndroe, the department's spokesman. But given al-Qaida's interest in obtaining weapons of mass destruction, he added, "it's appropriate for citizens to be informed about how to respond to a terrorist attack, much as people have prepared for years to be ready for tornadoes, hurricanes or floods."
"You have to talk to your family, and plan how you're going to communicate with each other" after a devastating terrorist attack, said David Paulison, the U.S. Fire Administrator, who's a top civil defense planner for the new department. For example, he said, families could designate a third party with whom telephone messages can be left.
While much of the information in Monday's briefing has been previously offered to the public on government websites, the news conference was an effort to emphasize it. The briefing came three days after they raised the national terrorist threat index to indicate a "high risk" of attack by the al-Qaida terrorist network on U.S. targets here and abroad, and officials suggested privately that they don't want the gravity of the current threat overlooked.
Department officials were offering what one acknowledged was "a complex message" with several elements. The first is that people must mentally rehearse for a future attack, even though it's an unsettling exercise. Yet officials want citizens to remain calm and not to view the situation as dire.
Law enforcement and homeland security officials have come under some criticism since the Sept. 11 attacks for offering the public frightening but vague warnings, and at the same time giving little guidance about what people can do. Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge and Attorney General John Ashcroft have often said Americans should "be vigilant," and on New Year's Eve, people were advised to "avoid crowds."
Terrorism experts said that given large amounts of new intelligence, especially from Europe, suggesting that Americans could be targeted by weapons of mass destruction, U.S. government officials faced the same public relations quandary they have faced in the past, but with higher stakes this time.
"While police departments and local governments have a menu of steps they take in reaction to the higher threat alerts, private citizens don't, and there's not a hell of a lot an ordinary citizen can do," said Brian Jenkins, a Rand Corp. specialist on counterterrorism. "That creates consternation, maybe even an atmosphere of terror that terrorists want to create. And so that leads the government now to try to offer advice to people."
"They're not trying to scare people, but to educate people," said Randall Larsen, director of the private Anser Institute for Homeland Security, who teaches security studies at the National War College. U.S. officials have studied the Israeli government's citizen preparedness campaign before the Persian Gulf War, when Israeli families were given gas masks and plastic sheeting to protect them from possible chemical attacks by Iraqi Scud missiles, he said.
"The Israelis learned one main task is psychologically preparing the population," Larsen said. "Americans need to be prepared the way the Israelis are. The most important message we could send to terrorists after the next attack is get up and go to work the next morning."
Paulison said one of his key messages for the public is that, after a terrorist attack, people should listen to the news to learn what authorities are advising, and stay home if that is the recommendation. "If you don't have to evacuate, don't," he said. "The roads will be clogged."
But he laid out a vision of post-attack paralysis that made some other department officials wince. "People are going to be on their own for the first 24 or 48 hours," he said, reflecting on his experience with hurricanes as the former fire chief for Miami-Dade County.
Officials also offered details about actions the department has taken since Friday, when the threat level was raised from yellow to orange, the second-highest. Ridge, for example, held a conference call on Friday with 66 top corporate executives in charge of energy pipelines, utilities and other infrastructure to urge them to tighten security.
Department officials also contacted real estate management firms to urge them to impose new rules requiring visitors to tall buildings, as well as delivery workers, to obtain approval before entering. Likewise, mall owners were urged to begin moving parking for motorists, especially truck drivers, away from buildings. Many malls have hired armed guards in recent days.
Owners of all large buildings are being urged to secure air-intake equipment to prevent attempts to kill people with chemical weapons, and hotels have been told to restrict underground parking.
"The announcement on Friday was a signal to private industry and to state and local officials that more actions need to be taken," Johndroe said.

Load-Date: February 12, 2003


End of Document