Official: Trump, Putin talk about 'common foe' of Islamic terrorism; White House says sanctions against Russia did not come up duirng call.
The Salt Lake Tribune
January 28, 2017 Saturday


Copyright 2017 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: W-WASHINGTON; -
Length: 566 words
Byline: By Julie Pace And Vivian Salama The Associated Press
Body


Washington President Donald Trump had an hourlong discussion Saturday with Russian President Vladimir Putin -- the first since Trump assumed office last week -- raising questions over the fate of U.S. sanctions against Moscow and whether the two will look to enhance military cooperation against the Islamic State.
The White House provided a thin readout on the call between the two leaders, saying it was "a significant start to improving the relationship between the United States and Russia that is in need of repair."
The two leaders discussed "a range in topics from mutual cooperation in defeating ISIS to efforts in working together to achieve more peace throughout the world including Syria," the White House statement said, using an acronym for the militant group.
A White House official later said sanctions did not come up in Saturday's call between Trump and Putin. The official said Putin brought up several times that Islamic terrorism was a "common foe" for the U.S. and Russia. The official insisted on anonymity.
Contrary to statements from the White House, the Kremlin said that the two leaders addressed the importance of "restoring mutually beneficial trade and economic ties between business circles of the two countries."
The Kremlin also said that Putin and Trump spoke in particular about international issues, including the fight against terrorism, the Arab-Israeli conflict, Iran's nuclear program, the situation on the Korean peninsula and the Ukraine crisis.
Moscow has applauded Trump's promises to rebuild U.S.-Russian relations, which have been pushed to their worst level since the Cold War by the Ukraine crisis, war in Syria and allegations of Russian meddling in U.S. elections. Trump signed a presidential memorandum on the plan to defeat the Islamic State on Saturday, including in it the possibility of teaming up with "new coalition partners."
Trump was noncommittal about whether he was considering lifting the economic sanctions ahead of the call, telling reporters Friday: "We'll see what happens. As far as the sanctions, very early to be talking about that."
In 2014, Russia annexed Ukraine's Crimea region and backed separatists fighting government forces in eastern Ukraine, drawing widespread condemnation in Europe and the United States.
In response, sanctions were implemented against sectors of Russia's economy, including financial services, energy, mining and defense. The Obama administration also sanctioned people in Putin's inner circle.
Shortly before leaving office, President Barack Obama also ordered sanctions on Russian spy agencies, closed two Russian compounds in the United States and expelled 35 diplomats that he said were really spies. These sanctions followed an assessment by U.S. intelligence that Moscow meddled in the 2016 election to help Trump become president.
Trump also spoke on Saturday with the leaders of Japan, Germany, France and Australia.
Two Republican senators -- Arizona's John McCain, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and Ohio's Rob Portman, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee --warned the White House about easing any punishments on Moscow and they pledged to turn the sanctions into law.
"I hope President Trump will put an end to this speculation and reject such a reckless course," McCain said in a statement. "If he does not, I will work with my colleagues to codify sanctions against Russia into law."

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document