Ohio man admits he helped al-Qaeda;
The trucker pleaded guilty to terrorism counts and told of plotting U.S. attacks.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 20, 2003 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 762 words
Byline: Shannon McCaffrey INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


An Ohio truck driver who met with Osama bin Laden and helped al-Qaeda plot a possible second wave of attacks on U.S. soil has pleaded guilty to felony terrorism charges, according to court papers unsealed yesterday.
Iyman Faris, 34, told authorities he was scouting ways to derail trains and sabotage the Brooklyn Bridge by severing its suspension cables, part of an attack to follow the ones of Sept. 11, 2001.
"This case highlights the very real threats that still exist here at home in the United States of America in the war against terrorism," Attorney General John Ashcroft said at a Justice Department news conference. "While we are disabling al-Qaeda, we don't believe it is disabled."
In addition to casing fresh targets in New York and Washington for attack, the trucker from Columbus told federal prosecutors that for years he provided al-Qaeda operatives with cash, plane tickets, cell phones, and thousands of sleeping bags.
At the request of senior al-Qaeda leader Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, Faris said, he scoured the Internet for information on ultralight aircraft. Faris said the group wanted to use the aircraft as an "escape airplane," according to the court papers.
While Faris is considered a low-level al-Qaeda operative, authorities believe he received orders from senior lieutenants such as Mohammed, who is in U.S. custody overseas. Intelligence that Mohammed has provided is proving valuable to federal law enforcement officials as they work to disrupt possible further attacks, according to Justice Department officials.
Mohammed was not named in court papers, but his identity was confirmed by a law enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Faris pleaded guilty May 1 to two charges: providing material support to a terrorist group and conspiracy to provide such support. The plea was kept sealed because of national security concerns, Ashcroft said.
The plea was unsealed yesterday in U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Va. As part of the deal, Faris must cooperate with federal authorities.
Faris, who is represented by a lawyer and said in the documents he was not coerced to plead, could face 20 years in prison and up to $500,000 in fines. Sentencing was set for Aug. 1.
Ashcroft and FBI officials would not detail the circumstances of Faris' arrest. They also would not say whether Faris was part of an active al-Qaeda cell in the United States, or whether he had previously been monitored.
"Al-Qaeda knew that Faris, wrapped in the cloak of American citizenship and protected by the liberties of our republic, could travel unfettered from country to country, state to state, city to city," the attorney general said.
Faris appeared to be just another truck driver crisscrossing the country.
The affidavit gave this account of his actions:
Born in Kashmir, a disputed region claimed by both India and Pakistan, Faris came to the United States in 1994 and became a citizen in December 1999. About a year later, he traveled to Afghanistan with a conspirator who was not identified in court papers. Faris said he had known his travel companion since the Soviet war with Afghanistan in the 1980s. He referred to him as bin Laden's "right foot," meaning he held a key leadership role in al-Qaeda.
Faris met bin Laden in late 2000 at an al-Qaeda training camp. Soon afterward, he began to help the terrorist group by procuring cash and supplies.
In early 2002, Faris met with Mohammed and described how he made deliveries to airport cargo planes as part of his job as a truck driver. Faris said Mohammed told him he was interested in the planes because they would "hold more weight and fuel."
At that same meeting, Faris said he was told of plans for new attacks on New York and Washington.
Faris was asked to help by finding equipment capable of burning through the suspension cables of the Brooklyn Bridge and tools able to derail trains. He was instructed to refer to the items in code as "gas stations" and "mechanics shops."
In late 2002, Faris cased the Brooklyn Bridge. He said his trip convinced him that an attack would fail because of the bridge's structure and heightened security.
He sent his al-Qaeda colleagues a coded message that the bridge plan should be aborted.
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the government has obtained guilty pleas from several members of alleged al-Qaeda sleeper cells in the United States. Six men in Lackawanna, N.Y., have pleaded guilty to terrorism-related charges.
Contact reporter Shannon McCaffrey at 202-383-6164 or smccaffrey@krwashington.com.  
This article contains information from the Associated Press.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Iyman Faris said his possible terrorist targets included the Brooklyn Bridge.

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document