Ohio State U. talent show funds anti-terror dogs
University Wire
November 30, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 The Lantern via U-Wire
Length: 332 words
Byline: By Chris Patrick, The Lantern; SOURCE: Ohio State U.
Dateline: COLUMBUS, Ohio 
Body


With Ohio State University stepping even further into the national spotlight, and with thousands of students, staff and visitors descending upon campus each year, security on campus has become an increasingly important issue.
One particular campus group believed the funding for the University Police was insufficient to provide adequate safety from terrorism.
Daniel "Diddi" Johnson, the current program director of Kappa Alpha Psi, a 95-year old fraternity, found out from a fellow member of the group who also works for the police that the force had only one sniffing dog to help fight terrorist and bomb threats. So in response, Johnson decided to host a talent show to raise money to help fund the purchase and training of more dogs.
"OSU is a big target for terrorism. More than 100,000 people come out to watch a football game. We identified a need and thought it would be a good idea to assist the department and help protect the campus using student funding," he said.
With the help of Larry Williamson Jr., the director of the Frank W. Hale Jr. Black Cultural Center; Ron Parker, the Hale Center's program manager; and the Divine Nine Historical Black greek organizations, the show became a reality.
"This was all student motivated," Johnson said. "A lot of people showed support for this event."
The program was held last night in the Independence Hall auditorium and featured a dozen acts ranging from local rap artists to vocalists to those who use the spoken word.
"I've never done a performance to give back to the community," said Zari Hall, an R&B performer. "I love performing and the fact that this is not a competition, but is benefiting charity makes this even better for me."
Johnson also said the fund-raising campaign will continue with his fraternity reaching out to educate other groups of the importance of supporting the cause.
"We are all trying to help protect friends in the O-H-ten," he said. "This benefits OSU, alumni and the whole city."
(C) 2006 The Lantern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 30, 2006


End of Document