Ohio police plan for terrorism
University Wire
July 29, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 The Lantern via U-Wire
Length: 484 words
Byline: By Jared Hayes, The Lantern; SOURCE: Ohio State U.
Dateline: COLUMBUS, Ohio 
Body


Ohio's homeland security agencies are using Columbus, Ohio, students to practice for real-life terrorist situations.
Thursday, agencies will respond to a mock terrorist attack in a mock student rally at Walnut Ridge High School on Livingston Avenue. The event is under the supervision of the Ohio Department of Public Safety. More than 80 students from Columbus City Schools will act as victims in the exercise while emergency responders practice gaining control of the situation, decontaminating the victims, treating victims in area hospitals, handling evidence and and deceased victims.
"We have fire departments; police; Franklin County and Columbus bomb squads; Franklin County and Columbus HazMat teams; the coroners office; the FBI; about 25 different state agencies; and seven hospitals involved in this event," said Chief Mike Fultz, Department of Public Safety Division of Fire.
The State of Ohio Emergency Management Agency held a similar event for leaders responsible for Ohio's response to terrorist incidents and natural disasters earlier this week. Leaders from Ohio Emergency Management Agency, Department of Public Safety's office of Homeland Security, the Ohio National Guard, Emergency Medical Services, the Ohio State Highway Patrol and representative of the governor and attorney general all participated.
"This training was geared toward the top level of management with hopes that it will trickle down throughout their organizations," said Robert Glenn, chief of public affairs for the State of Ohio Emergency Management Agency.
The main purpose of these mock attacks is to see how well the different emergency response teams work together and what needs to be fixed for a real situation.
"These events gave us an opportunity to see how each agency responds," Glenn said. "It provided a good working experience to see where we're at, where we're going and where we want to be."
Funding for these training sessions came from federal grants from the Department of Homeland Security and the National Emergency Management Association.
"Part of the federal homeland security money that has come down to us goes straight to firefighters and police," said Fred Stratman, spokesman for the Ohio Department of Public Safety. "They're continually undergoing training about terrorist situations."
Other funds have been used to establish volunteer programs to train and assist professional emergency responders.
"About $1 million was given to Ohio Community Service Council and the Citizen Core, which broke down to a number of different groups," Stratman said.
The groups include Volunteers in Police Service, the Community Emergency Response Team, the Medical Reserve Corps and the Neighborhood Watch Program, all of which are made up of citizen volunteers.
"Citizen Core has established a goal of 4,000 volunteers for homeland security by the end of this year," Stratman said.
(C) 2003 The Lantern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 29, 2004


End of Document