Ohio State U., Israel team up against bio-terrorism
University Wire
January 28, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 The Lantern via U-Wire
Length: 754 words
Byline: By Joktan Kwiatkowski, The Lantern; SOURCE: Ohio State U.
Dateline: COLUMBUS, Ohio 
Body


Methods will be developed to protect food and agriculture in Israel and the United States from potential bio-security threats in a joint research project between the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Ohio State and the Ohio Department of Agriculture, speakers announced at a press conference hosted by state Sen. Eric Fingerhut at the Ohio Statehouse on Wednesday.
Mordehai Cohen, the Israeli Embassy's agricultural and science attache for the United States, Canada and Mexico, and Yitzhak Hadar, dean of the faculty of agricultural, food and environmental quality sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, said that Israel will work with Ohio to research and develop methods to identify threats to food sources and put preventive measures in place to protect them.
"We have had collaborative research that has spanned 20 years between Ohio State and the Hebrew university, funded by the State Department," director and associate dean of international programs in agriculture at OSU David Hansen said in a telephone conversation Wednesday.
"Over the past three years a new program of cooperation has emerged between Israel and the state of Ohio in agriculture. This new program has involved primarily all of the Ohio Department of Agriculture and Israel," Hansen said. "The purpose of this visit is to explore seriously how we may involve the Hebrew University and the Ohio State University in this project."
The collaboration will still be focused on agriculture but the priority will be on bio-security, food and pest or animal control, Hansen said.
"We signed a memorandum of agreement between our college and their college and we fully expect to be following up on promoting new collaborative research between their college and our college in these areas," Hansen said.
At the conference Hadar warned of potential terrorism threats using the dissemination of microtoxins in the food supply as an example. He said it is possible to develop a method for rapid identification and detoxification of such threats.
"You have to secure your food resources to have enough to eat," Hadar said. "We have to be very careful about these threats."
Although there may not be an imminent threat at this time Cohen and Hadar stressed the importance of creating preventive measures.
"In order to be optimistic, you should be pessimistic," Cohen said.
Controlling food and product contamination scares was also discussed.
Karl R. Gebhardt, president of Teater-Gebhardt & Associates and a consultant for the non-profit Negev Foundation, referred to the Alar apple scare of 1989, the Tylenol crisis of 1982, and the problems of Mad Cow disease and soy bean rust contamination in recent times as examples of scares.
If such problems are caused intentionally, serious economic damage can result and the impact can be very devastating, Gebhardt said.
Cohen said dealing with problems with food is long and sensitive, and that it is important to always regard the potential panic factor, because countries may be driven to close their markets to other countries that are sources of contamination.
Gebhardt said the United States is developing a livestock identification program similar to one operating in Israel to control contamination outbreaks, explaining that it will enable officials to track a disease back to its specific source.
Hansen said the program was started because of mad cow disease.
"Animals are receiving chips so we can trace things back to specific animals," Hansen said. "That's where we're moving towards because of potential dangers."
In Israel it was started as a breeding program, and it is a very precise system, Hadar said. He added that it can be used to prevent terror, but also to address accidents.
Apart from bio-security, the collaboration between Ohio and Israel is also designed to stimulate trade.
The program of cooperation between Israel and Ohio in agriculture is focused more on trade issues, Hansen said, explaining that both parties have been active in the export of products and materials.
Hadar expressed his support for the continued funding of mutual exports between Ohio and Israel.
Cohen said that in the United States and Israel the collaboration has opened a "new window of opportunities for corporations in both countries."
"The initiative between the state of Israel and the state of Ohio is one that holds tremendous promise," Fingerhut said. "It has already produced rewards both for the state of Israel and the state of Ohio in increased exports and mutual scientific undertaking."
(C) 2005 The Lantern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 2, 2005


End of Document