OHIOANS TRAINING TO HANDLE TERRORISM;
Details due to federal officials by Oct. 31
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
September 12, 2001 Wednesday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2001 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A; MAJOR
Length: 508 words
Byline: Nancy Bowman Dayton Daily News
Body


Emergency workers across Ohio have been preparing for how they would handle a terrorist attack such as the ones Tuesday in New York City and Washington, D.C.
They have an Oct. 31 deadline to finish assessments for anti-terrorism and domestic threat plans required by Congress after the 1995 bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma City.
Virtually every county in the state is preparing them, said Dick Kimmins, spokesman for the Ohio Emergency Management Agency.
Troy Fire Chief John Denney, a member of the new Miami County terrorism team, had planned Tuesday to answer questions about the county's emergency force resources and the equipment and training they might need.
"I was going to finish that today. I don't know if I can or not," Denney said as he watched details about Tuesday's attacks unfold on television.
Dick Sword, director of the Miami County Emergency Management Agency, said the county has received money for training and materials. Its eight-member terrorism team includes representatives of health, medical, emergency service and other agencies.
The anti-terrorism plans will be submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice and a copy sent to the state emergency management office, Kimmins said.
The plans will be used in determining where federal money will be allocated for training and equipment, Kimmins said. He did not know how much money has been set aside for Ohio.
Denney said terrorism preparedness has been a hot topic among emergency services workers. Last month, a disaster drill was conducted at the University of Dayton Arena, with U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft observing. He announced that Ohio would receive a $1.8 million federal grant to help the state plan ways to counter terrorist attacks.
"The threat of domestic terrorism is real," Ashcroft said, following the four-hour drill involving state, local and federal agencies on Aug. 17.
Although some may have been skeptical about such programs, Tuesday's attacks likely will place more focus and money on preparedness programs, Denney said.
Warren and Montgomery counties also are part of the state terrorism program.
"The goal is to educate and prepare for terrorist attacks," Warren County Emergency Management Director Frank Young said. "We have received equipment for situations like this as well as training from the Department of Justice."
Warren County could become a terrorist target, Young said. When Paramount's Kings Island is open, the amusement park becomes the largest city in Warren County with 50,000 people, he said. There have also two major interstates carrying hazardous material through Warren County every day.
"We are receiving information and we are in constant contact with the state emergency management," Young said.
The Miami Valley Emergency Management Authority has already filed its assessments for Greene and Montgomery counties' anti-terrorism plan, deputy director Rosanne Anders said.
Contact Nancy Bowman at nancy_bowman@coxohio.com or 335-4357. Staff writers Lisa Perry, Joann Rouse and Andrew Chow contributed to this report.  

Notes

A DAY OF TERROR

Load-Date: September 13, 2001


End of Document