Oil Depot Blasts Near London Hurt 43; No Terrorism Is Seen
The New York Times
December 12, 2005 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 367 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: HEMEL HEMPSTEAD, England, Dec. 11 
Body


Explosions at one of Britain's largest oil depots jolted an area north of London early on Sunday, hurling multiple balls of fire into the sky, shattering windows and blanketing the area with smoke. The police said the blasts, which injured 43 people, appeared to be accidental.
  But the powerful explosions felt throughout a large swath of southeast Britain, including London, 25 miles away, rattled nerves in a country still jittery over terrorism after deadly transit bombings in July that killed 52 people.
 The oil depot is near Luton Airport, and some residents reported hearing an aircraft flying low overhead shortly before the first explosion, at around 6 a.m. But the police said there was nothing to suggest that a plane was involved. ''All indications at this stage are that this was an accident,'' said Frank Whiteley, chief of police in Hertfordshire, the county where the depot is. Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups have threatened to attack fuel depots.
  The police said only two of the injured were seriously hurt. Total SA, the French company that owns the Buncefield Oil Terminal in a joint venture with Texaco, said the cause of the blasts was not immediately known. The depot stores four million gallons of gasoline, diesel, kerosene and aviation fuel. Buncefield is the fifth-largest of about 50 major oil storage facilities in Britain. The Total and Texaco reserves there account for about 5 percent of the country's oil supply.
  Total said 400 tankers a day were loaded at the site. BP also has a storage facility at the site, which was not damaged in the blast.
  There were reports of panic buying at some gas stations, but companies said shortages were unlikely. 
  ''The fire is contained,'' Chief Whiteley said at a news conference in Hertfordshire. ''It's big and it's going to burn for some time. But it is under control.''
  A dense pall of black smoke rose as high as 10,000 feet over the town of Hemel Hempstead and could be seen in satellite images, said Eddy Carroll, a forecaster at Britain's national weather forecasting office. The smoke also drifted over London, he said.
  ''It's not clear to what extent it is going to be a serious pollution event,'' Mr. Carroll said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 12, 2005


End of Document