Oklahoma State U. to help develop national institute to deter terrorism
University Wire
February 10, 1999


Copyright 1999 Daily O'Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 506 words
Byline: By Tyler Scott, Daily O'Collegian
Dateline: Stillwater, Okla.
Body


Oklahoma State University will help develop the United States' first national institute dedicated solely to understanding and deterring terrorism.
The 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal building in Oklahoma City bombing prompted Congress to form the Oklahoma City National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism. Congress also established the Murrah Building memorial site and a living memorial museum.
Oklahoma State U.
Retired General Al Goodbary, OSU's director of military relations, will play a part in the development of the institute.
"It is an Oklahoma-based national institution that will reduce terrorism by education, outreach and research." Goodbary said. "OSU will donate manpower and resources that are available and necessary for the institute."
The objectives of the institute are to understand and document the factors that lead to acts of terrorism, to promote the effective use of anti-terrorism measures.
Lisa Moreno-Hicks, program coordinator for the institute, said naming the organization after the Oklahoma City tragedy will remind people of the serious need for terrorism prevention in this country.
"The institute is important because it will serve as a memorial to what happened in Oklahoma City as well as meeting the needs of the nation," she said.
The institute will have four components: research and analysis, educational and professional training, outreach and communication, and a library, archives and resource clearinghouse.
The research and analysis component will focus on studies of public policy and the health and mental health of the general public.
The educational and professional training component will work to improve emergency response planning. This will be accomplished through discussions of emergency medicine, crisis management and counseling.
The outreach and communication component will set up speaking events for the public and develop a regular publication. It will also sponsor community briefings in places that have suffered recent acts of terrorism.
Another outreach plan of the institute would bring together victims of terrorism from across the world with people in Oklahoma City to discuss the long-term consequences of their experiences.
Goodbary said this is important because people in Oklahoma City will be able to empathize with terrorism victims in other parts of the world.
The last of the four components--the library, archives and research clearinghouse--will provide easily accessible information for researchers in the terrorism field.
The comprehensive library, which already includes over 1,000,000 documents and artifacts, will provide books, publications and articles related to terrorism.
The Institute will be governed by The Oklahoma City Memorial Foundation Board of Directors and an institute steering committee.
Goodbary said Oklahoma was chosen as the location for the institute because it's home to the Oklahoma City National Memorial, as well as the U.S. Postal and FAA training.
(C) 1999 Daily O'Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 23, 1999


End of Document