Oklahoma City Fire Department to practice terrorism response
University Wire
August 26, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Length: 475 words
Byline: By Justin Noel Shimko, Oklahoma Daily
Dateline: Norman, Okla.
Body


Oklahoma City will run a test chemical terrorist attack on Tuesday. Firefighters and other public safety agencies will participate in a weapons of mass destruction exercise at the State Fair Grounds. Maj. Brian Stanaland, OKC Fire Department's public information officer, said the practice will simulate a dangerous chemical released into a major city.
"We will work with the police, EMSA and the National Guard," Stanaland said. "We will get a 911 call around 10 a.m. and respond as if the call were real."
U. Oklahoma
Firefighters will practice the initial entry, with Hazmat (a hazardous materials deployment organization) working to identify the chemical released. Other parts of the exercise include decontamination and treatment, where EMSA and local hospitals will participate.
"Hospitals will receive 'victims' of this attack who have been exposed to the chemical," Stanaland said. "This simulation will have everything like a real attack, except having the actual chemical."
The decontamination will vary depending on the amount of chemicals the "victim" was exposed to. Methods at the site will include special suits and a trailer with actual showers installed, to wash away any chemical residue.
The attack will begin when a device, similar to a dirty bomb except without the nuclear component, sets off in a warehouse. Someone will place a 911 call, and all departments will go into action.
The fire department will deploy 50 to 75 volunteers to the fairgrounds after the 911 call.
Even though the exercise is a simulation to a terrorist attack, this type of exercise has been going on prior to Sept. 11.
"We have been doing this for a long time now," Stanaland said. "In 1990, we simulated a plane crashing into a vehicle with chemicals. This exercise was heightened with the Oklahoma City Bombing, though."
What used to be a mass casualty drill turned into a weapons of mass destruction exercise in 1995 after the Ryder truck exploded in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Building.
"Departments around the country practice these types of exercises, but ours has been heightened when we encountered terrorism first hand with the Oklahoma City Bombing," Stanaland said. "It's good because everyone learns how to work well with other departments."
The simulation is not just to prepare for terrorist attacks.
"This will prepare us for other chemical leaks in places like abandoned warehouses," Stanaland said. "The difference here is with a terrorist attack, there is always the threat of a second device."
Stanaland said the fire department participates in weapons of mass destruction exercises at least annually, but sometimes more often. The last exercise was in the spring, when the fire department worked with the Will Rogers World Airport Fire Department in a plane crash simulation.
(C) 2002 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 26, 2002


End of Document