Ole Miss panel reflects on 9/11 news coverage
Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo)
September 9, 2011 Friday


Copyright 2011 Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 322 words
Byline: Errol Castens, Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal, Tupelo
Body


Sept. 09--OXFORD -- Before 9/11, terrorism seemed to most Americans to be an "over there" problem.
A panel at the University of Mississippi on Thursday discussed how events and the reporting that followed changed all that.
Carl Jensen, director of the Center for Intelligence and Security at Ole Miss, said media is a central factor in terrorism.
"For every terrorist event there are at least three audiences or targets," he said -- the people directly attacked, the larger group or nation the terrorists hope to control through fear and potential recruits.
Jensen quoted one of the 9/11 planners: "I say to you, that we are in a battle, and that more than half that battleground is the media."
Wilson Lowrey, associate professor of journalism at the University of Alabama, said the 9/11 attacks offered no easy ways to put them in context.
"After 9/11, (journalists) had no answers, and the officials were running around without many answers, either," he said.
"Those people who went straight to the TV were more likely to have suffered stress ... are more likely to distrust people outside their group, are more likely to support curtailing civil rights," Lowrey said.
Matthew Hall, associate law dean at Ole Miss, said after 9/11 the media is less willing to question authority. Many media have hammered the imprisonment of enemy combatants at Guantanamo Bay while ignoring a much larger prison in Iraq, or accepted the use of drone-launched bombs instead of ground attacks without questioning their increased civilian casualties.
Kristen Swain, associate professor of journalism at Ole Miss, said, "On 9/11, what changed decisively were American perceptions of the threat of world terrorism more than the actual reality."
errol.castens@journalinc.com
___ (c)2011 the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) Visit the Northeast Mississippi Daily Journal (Tupelo, Miss.) at www.nems360.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: September 9, 2011


End of Document