Olmert says war was a success
The Bismarck Tribune
July 13, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: WIRE; Pg. 2A
Length: 534 words
Body


BASTI ABDULLAH, Pakistan (AP) - Officials let a jailed cleric attend the burial of his slain brother Thursday, and he turned the funeral oration into a fiery denunciation of the government for the bloody siege at Islamabad's Red Mosque and called for an "Islamic revolution."
Hours later, Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf went on national television to vow that his government will crush extremists across the country and move strongly against religious schools like those at the Red Mosque that breed them.
Musharraf also said security forces along the border with Afghanistan will get tanks and other modern weapons soon to bolster the campaign against militants. The frontier region is a haven for al-Qaida and Taliban, and the U.S. has been pushing Pakistan to root them out.
"Terrorism and extremism has not ended in Pakistan," Musharraf said. "But it is our resolve that we will eliminate extremism and terrorism wherever it exists. Extremism and terrorism will be defeated in every corner of the country."
In apparent revenge for the eight-day battle at the Red Mosque that left 108 people dead, a suicide bomber attacked a government office near the Afghan border Thursday and killed two officials. Thousands of tribesmen, meanwhile, angrily mourned three militants killed at the mosque.
The army's assault on the Red Mosque militants has given hard-liners a new rallying cry and sparked calls from al-Qaida and Taliban leaders for revenge attacks. But the crackdown also has raised Musharraf's standing among moderate Pakistanis worried about extremism in their nation.
TRIPOLI, Lebanon (AP) - A thick blanket of smoke covered a Palestinian refugee camp Thursday as the army unleashed one of its heaviest bombardments against al-Qaida-inspired militants holed up inside.
But the army, which lost four soldiers in the renewed attack, according to a senior military official, denied it was conducting a final assault against the Fatah Islam fighters barricaded in Nahr el-Bared camp.
The four soldiers were killed by shrapnel or gunfire during the fierce fighting, said the official, speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media.
Thursday's fatalities brought to 90 the number of soldiers killed since fighting began on May 20 near the northern port city of Tripoli.
KIRYAT SHEMONA, Israel (AP) - Prime Minister Ehud Olmert declared Thursday during a tour of Israel's northern border that the war he launched against Hezbollah guerrillas a year ago was a success that made Israel safer.
Olmert also renewed an offer to start peace talks with Syria, saying "we don't have any interest" in going to war. There was no immediate response from Syria.
Flouting the widely accepted view that the 34-day conflict with Hezbollah was a failure, Olmert said Israel is better off today than it was at the outset of fighting on July 12, 2006. Olmert's political fortunes plummeted in the wake of the conflict, and he remains deeply unpopular.
"We had in this war great achievements," Olmert said near a road that was hit by one of the nearly 4,000 rockets that Hezbollah fired into Israel last summer.
4 Lebanese soldiers killed as army pounds Islamic militants with artillery fire

Load-Date: July 13, 2007


End of Document