OLYMPIC SECURITY QUESTIONED
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 27, 1996, Saturday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7A
Length: 368 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


ATLANTA - The biggest peacetime security operation in U.S. history
could not prevent terrorism from striking at the heart of the Atlanta
Olympics.
The federal government spent $ 227 million to guard the Centennial
Games. About 30,000 police, military and private guards, as well as an
array of high-tech surveillance equipment, were deployed.
"The safest place on this wonderful planet will be Atlanta, Ga.,
during the time of our games," Atlanta organizing chief Billy Payne
had said repeatedly.
But all the elaborate measures could not prevent the bomb blast early
today in Centennial Park, the main gathering spot of the games.
"We will consider it an act of terrorism until information should
arrive to the contrary," FBI Special Agent Woody Johnson said.
The park is located about a mile from the athletes' village and on the
doorstep of several arenas used for the games.
"It's horrible - the worst fears something we can't control," Bob
Brennan, spokesman for the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games,
said. "I'm stunned."
Payne said this morning that he was satisfied security measures at the
Games were adequate.
"We have implemented as everybody has experienced, very tight
security measures at the venues," Payne said in an interview on NBC's
"Today" show. "We, of course, constantly review them in the face of
changing circumstances but they are and will continue to be safe."
Security has been a major concern for the Olympics ever since the 1972
Munich massacre, when 11 Israeli athletes and coaches were killed
following an attack by Palestinian terrorists.
In the days before the Atlanta Games, International Olympic Committee
president Juan Antonio Samaranch said the threat of terrorism was his
biggest worry.
"The main concern is security," he said. "Today the risk of terrorism
is higher than before. Today you have some people ready to die for
religious or political ideas. It makes the fight against terrorism
much more difficult."
The size and scope of the Atlanta Games - the largest in history with
11,000 athletes from 197 countries - provided a huge security
challenge.
Security concerns were already heightened when TWA Flight 800 exploded
off the Long Island coast just two days before the July 19 opening
ceremony.

Load-Date: July 30, 1996


End of Document