Olympic spirit wounded, but its grit shines through
USA TODAY
July 28, 1996, Sunday,
ATLANTA FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; Debate
Length: 382 words
Body


Along with global expressions of anger and sorrow, Saturday's
deadly bombing at the Centennial Olympic Park -- the first act
of terrorism at an Olympic Games since 1972 -- drew universal
expressions of courage and commitment.
No surprise there. These Games, with their 197 participating nations,
are a miracle of shared interest and internationalism. It is unthinkable
that they would be derailed by something as crudely evil as a
terrorist's nail bomb.
Still, an indomitable spirit is not an invulnerable one.
On the central Saturday of the 1996 Games, when 80,000 joyful
fans were expected to attend track and field events at Olympic
Stadium, a soaking rain reflected a soaking sadness. Flags drooped
at half-staff, and heightened security slowed the pace and lengthened
the lines. The festival mood felt poisoned and inappropriate.
A certain joyful innocence seemed lost.
"Now, when people say 1996, they're not going to remember the
medals we won," said one American athlete. "They're going to
remember this [as] the place where they had the terrorist attack."
Necessarily? A wound has surely been opened; a scar will surely
be left.
But the world lives with terrorism, and so does the United States,
and so must the Olympics. The 1972 Games in Munich set a modern
standard for horror when 11 Israelis were killed by Palestinian
terrorists. And even before Saturday's blast, the threat of terrorism
colored every Olympic moment, forcing the Games to be filtered
through the largest peacetime security operation the world has
ever seen.
With our awareness of terrorism comes the knowledge that no matter
what, terrorists will sometimes succeed. And when they do, the
dismay they sow is their greatest victory. It robs us of our freedom
and our pleasure, staining even our memories with blood and sadness.
But maybe not now. Around this planet, hundreds of millions of
people are engaged in Atlanta's Games, making the event a shining
example of the global community some lunatic wants to destroy.
With all the world assembled, what better moment to send terrorism
a single, collective message? It can ring out with every effort,
with every medal, with every flutter of the 197 banners draped
from the stadium's rafters. And with one voice in a thousand languages,
it can say to terrorists: To hell with that. And to hell with
you.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Diether Endlicher, AP; Games go on: Crowd waits under heavy security to enter table-tennis event Saturday.

Load-Date: July 28, 1996


End of Document