Olympic execs on alert for risk of terrorism
Business Insurance
September 4, 2000, Monday


Copyright 2000 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 696 words
Byline: KATE TILLEY
Body


SYDNEY, Australia-The high-profile nature of the Olympic Games in Sydney makes them a potential target of terrorist activity, but the New South Wales police force says its safety and security arrangements are in place and it is ready.
The state police force has held three major exercises this year to test its level of preparedness. All police leave has been canceled, and some suburban police stations will be closed during the Games. Court sessions and police training courses have been canceled, freeing police for security efforts.
The final exercise, Exercise Ring True, tested counterterrorist operations. Held at Sydney's Olympic Park baseball stadium in May, the exercise involved a mock terrorist raid in which hostages were taken by terrorists armed with poisonous gas.
An earlier exercise, Sky Ring, involved a scenario at Sydney Airport in which an aircraft with International Olympic Committee delegates was hijacked. Another exercise, Blue Ring, had terrorists taking over a ship at Circular Quay, Sydney, on which IOC delegates were conducting a meeting.
A police media spokesman said each exercise took three days and involved all Australian security agencies, including the Standing Advisory Committee on Protection Against Violence, a body set up by the federal government after Sydney's 1978 Hilton Hotel bombing. Two people were killed in that incident, when a bomb exploded in a rubbish bin outside the Hilton while a meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government was being held inside.
The spokesman said New South Wales' 5,000-strong police force will be supplemented by volunteers and security guards, bringing the total during the Games to 12,000.
New South Wales Police Minister Paul Whelan said he is confident that the police force can cope with any eventuality. Mr. Whelan said the counterterrorist exercises ''tested police response, tactical response, computer agency liaison and the overall coordination for potential disasters.''
Police Commissioner Peter Ryan said the exercises included mock security breaches in order to test responses. In Exercise Ring True, 40 people were taken hostage during a baseball game by six armed terrorists. The exercise also featured a concurrent bombing in Canberra and a nerve-gas attack on a hospitality tent.
While details about how the exercises were resolved is confidential, Mr. Ryan did say that they proved successful. ''The cooperation between the NSW Police Service and other agencies was outstanding and reinforced the work that's been done to develop procedures.''
The federal government's Australian Security Intelligence Organisation has assured foreign governments that it is ready to handle any terrorism threats. Dennis Richardson, director general of the intelligence network, said ASIO had been preparing for the Games for four years and had increased its staff from 100 to 600.
Up to 12 special agents of the U.S. FBI have reportedly been sent to Sydney to investigate rumors that Afghanistan-based Saudi Arabian terrorist Osama bin Laden has formed a network of extremists throughout the Asia-Pacific region. The FBI alleges that Osama bin Laden masterminded the bombing of two American embassies in 1998.
Australian Attorney General Daryl Williams said it is government policy not to comment on security issues.
''But, let me stress, Australia has well-practiced cooperative arrangements in place to respond to any security-related incident,'' Mr. Williams said.
ASIO and the New South Wales Police and other agencies have established the Federal Olympic Security Intelligence Centre to coordinate security arrangements during the Games.
Mr. Williams has said that Australia's security laws will not be eased to allow countries to bring guns in to protect their athletes. Israel is understood to have sought permission to bring in weapons to protect its athletes. At the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, 11 members of Israel's Olympic team were killed by Palestinian terrorists.
The only exemption to the laws that has been allowed was four years ago, when President Clinton visited Australia. His security guards were permitted to bring into Australia their own weapons with which to protect the president.

Graphic

 
A police officer makes a security sweep of the Sydney Olympic Park

Load-Date: September 8, 2000


End of Document