OLYMPICS, TWA, SAUDI ARABIA: LOSS OF LIFE CHANGES WAY OF LIFE;
BUT OFFICIAL AND UNOFFICIAL AMERICA IS SHOWING THAT IT CAN ADAPT TO THE;
CHALLENGES OF VIOLENCE AND TERRORISM.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
July 28, 1996, Sunday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: INSIGHT,
Length: 842 words
Byline: Robin Wright Los Angeles Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


It was a day, a week and a month that probably changed America forever, a stunning and almost unbelievable string of blatant or suspected violence against the Atlanta Olympics, a TWA aircraft and American troops in Saudi Arabia.
Henceforth, the open and easy flow that characterizes the ''American way of life'' almost certainly will be cramped by the kind of heightened concern and tighter security that until recently typified other societies, but never the United States.
America is changed, certainly. But not cowed.
The Olympic Games are proceeding as scheduled. Even more people turned out Saturday than on Friday; in fact, the greatest damper to attendance was the rainy weather.
TWA continues to fly. During the past 10 days, all but a small percentage of passengers booked to go overseas have carried on with their travel plans.
U.S. troops remain at their posts.
So in the end, do terrorists win?
President Clinton was correct when he said the Atlanta pipe-bombing was ''clearly directed at the spirit of our own democracy.'' In that respect, terrorists temporarily make tangible gains; their deeds can be punishing on many fronts.
The cost of providing high-tech airline security and repositioning American troops in Saudi Arabia, for example, will each run into tens of millions of dollars.
Politically, the FBI, CIA, Pentagon and a host of other U.S. agencies - not to mention the inevitable series of congressional hearings - are almost certain to be preoccupied for months, if not years, with terrorism assessments and prevention.
Psychologically, the impact is substantial. ''Historically the public will probably look back at this collection of individual events as a watershed after which there will be a growing preoccupation with terrorism,'' says Jerrold Post, a psychiatrist and head of George Washington University's political psychological program.
Indeed, while terrorism is the weapon of the weak, it has proven to be the weapon with the most impact in challenging the world's most dominant power at the end of the 20th century. The yellow ribbon - a mark of American vulnerability during the hostage ordeals of the 1970s and 1980s - almost has become as much a symbol of American nationalism as motherhood, apple pie and baseball.
Yet at several levels, both official and unofficial America is showing that it can adapt. And in the end, terrorists usually lose - as the record of the past quarter-century shows.
For every electrifying picture and breathless TV commentary accompanying an act of terrorism, there is a less noticed, but more comforting counterpoint: U.S. warplanes take off hourly from Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, to enforce Iraq's southern no-fly zone and come back safely. Ordinary people stroll without incident through thousands of open American parks, fairgrounds and streets. Passenger planes take off from international airport terminals across the United States and reach their destinations unscathed.
Among the latter is bustling JFK Airport outside New York City, where just three years ago American naivete about the potential for domestic terrorism was shattered by a thousand-plus pounds of fertilizer and fuel oil packed in a Ryder rental truck and parked in the World Trade Center's underground garage by Islamic extremists.
''What happened to tourism after the World Trade Center bombing? It didn't drop. People came anyway,'' observes Terry Anderson, who as a seven-year hostage in Beirut, Lebanon, can claim to have paid the greatest personal price of any surviving terrorist victim.
Bill Baker, a former FBI and CIA official who oversaw U.S. counterterrorism efforts at both agencies, compares public reaction to terrorist incidents to the impact of California earthquakes. ''A few can't take it, and leave. But most stay,'' says Baker.
The United States is not the first nation to face the challenge of terrorism - foreign and domestic, from the left or the right - and to endure.
Italy's flamboyant but more fragile democracy survived some of the earliest and nastiest terrorism. The deadliest act in post-World War II Europe was the 1980 bombing of the Bologna Train Station, killing 85 and injuring hundreds, by the right-wing Armed Revolutionary Nuclei. Among the dozens of victims of left-wing terrorism in Italy was American Gen. James L. Dozier, who was kidnapped in 1981 and held by the Red Brigades for six weeks.
Today the Red Brigade has no more than 50 members, according to the State Department's 1996 Patterns of Global Terrorism. And the Nuclei hasn't been heard from for years; it is no longer even cited in the State Department list of dangerous groups.
''Terrorism scares and kills and causes a lot of individual pain, but long term, it can't change a society. In the end, the only change it can effect is the change we do to ourselves to protect ourselves,'' says Anderson.
Clinton put it another way. ''We cannot let terror win,'' he said before departing for a scheduled weekend at Camp David. ''That is not the American way.''
But Americans have already shown they know that.
with sidebar airport

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC: Securing the skies, AP/Wm. J. Castello, Amy Kranz Source: InVision Technologies; Inc., AP research Securing the skies In the aftermath of the TWA; Flight 800 explosion, President Clinton called for stricter airport; security. Introducing a high-tech explosive-detection system is part; of the plan. Overall, travelers many face longer delays and higher; costs.; 1 Curbside baggage check-in won't be permitted for international; flights.; 2 Checked baggage heads straight for a machine like the CTX 5000,; currently being tested in Atlanta and San Francisco. Like a CAT scan,; it photographs contents of a bag and slices the image into several; pieces, pinpointing plastic and exposing any explosives.; 3 Officials will ask more questions of passengers and conduct more; thorough searches of carry-on luggage.; 4 Passengers may be asked at several junctures for photo; identification. All baggage must be matched to a passenger.

Load-Date: July 29, 1996


End of Document