OLYMPICS;
Keeping Terrorism at Bay in Barcelona
The New York Times
July 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Sports Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 29; Column 4; Sports Desk; Column 4;
Length: 897 words
Byline: By ALAN RIDING,

By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BARCELONA, Spain, July 9
Body


If the Spanish authorities in charge of security for the Summer Olympics were tempted to become complacent by the easing of international terrorism, they have their own home-grown Basque separatist movement to remind them that the unthinkable can happen.
The movement, known as E.T.A. -- the initials for "Basque Homeland and Freedom" in the region's language -- has been active since the late 1960's and, as recently as a few months ago, was still carrying out car bombings and assassinations in Spanish cities, including Barcelona.
Yet, since March, Spanish officials have taken aggressive measures against the group and no longer feel resigned to a disruption by the E.T.A. during the Games, which open on July 25. E.T.A.'s top leadership has been arrested in France, a so-called itinerant command operating around Barcelona has been dismantled, and there are reports of deep divisions within its ranks.
"E.T.A. is now a much weaker organization than six months ago," said Ferran Cardenal, the Civil Governor of Barcelona, who is in charge of security forces here. "We also have intelligence information that its interest in disrupting the Olympics has fallen. But we can't lower our guard."
 
Security Force of Thousands
 About 15,000 national police and civil guardsmen have been brought in to bolster the force of 12,000 regularly assigned to Barcelona and its environs. The city's 5,000-member municipal police force has also been mobilized, while an extra 5,000 soldiers will be guarding frontiers, airports and highways.
Complex logistics will also be involved. Three Olympic competition sites as well as the main Olympic Village are in Barcelona itself, but to maintain security at the 17 other sites, some of them 100 miles away, officials will use advanced communications backed by police helicopters.
Spain's plans entail more than simply discouraging E.T.A. Ever since Black September terrorists attacked Israeli athletes during the 1972 Games in Munich, Germany, tight security has been a requisite at all Summer Olympics.
At meetings here in 1990, in 1991 and again last month, Spanish officials exchanged information and experiences with security experts from a score of countries. Spain has also held separate meetings with France to coordinate actions against E.T.A. terrorists who use French territory as their safe haven, and with the United States to receive Federal Bureau of Investigation briefings on terrorist threats worldwide.
At the request of their governments, athletes from both the United States and Israel are to be given special protection at the Olympic Village and during transportation to and from Olympic sites. Israel has also been authorized to station its own security guards inside the Israeli compound at the village.
"Until Munich, there was no terrorist problem as such," Cardenal said.  "The Montreal Games in 1976 were militarized because they followed Munich. The United States boycotted Moscow in 1980. the Soviets boycotted Los Angeles in 1984. Then in Seoul in 1988 there was the special problem of North Korea."
Now, he believes, the international situation augurs well.
"We have the end of the cold war, the end of the Iraq war and peace prospects in the Middle East and we have no boycott," he said.
Yet the challenge of providing security for 10,000 athletes, 20,000 journalists, officials and technicians and 300,000 spectators in a city of four million is no less intimidating. Further, for the inaugural ceremony, King Juan Carlos of Spain is expected to be accompanied by another 30 or so heads of state.
One spinoff of the gradual tightening of security here has been a 20 percent reduction in ordinary crimes over the past six months.
"Security involves more than just terrorism," Cardenal said. "It goes from controlling pickpockets to combating business crimes, such as falsification of Olympic symbols and mascots."
Yet, from a security point of view, the success of the Games will be measured by the absence of terrorism. Local officials have been encouraged by the fact that E.T.A. has been unable -- or has chosen not -- to carry out any actions to disrupt the world's fair, Expo '92, since it opened in Seville, Spain, in April.
Catalonia's own tiny separatist movement, Terra Lliure, was officially disbanded two years ago, but last month its activists placed six small bombs outside bank buildings here and in Gerona. On this occasion, the security apparatus worked perfectly. Police followed the terrorists, disabled each bomb after they had moved on and then made arrests.
 
Yugoslavs Will Go to Games
 BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, July 10 (AP) -- The Yugoslav Olympic Committee agreed unanimously today to send athletes to the Barcelona Olympics to compete as individuals and not under the Yugoslav flag.
The United Nations Security Council included a sports boycott in sanctions it imposed May 30 on Yugoslavia. But Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committe, said Thursday that Yugoslavs could compete under the neutral Olympic flag and anthem and would be called the Independent Team.
William Hybl, president of the United States Olympic Committee, said the arrangement that allows the Yugoslav athletes to compete represents "the Olympic ideal at its best."
The I.O.C. will consider a bid for membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina next week, but the decision today guarantees Bosnian participation in any case.

Load-Date: July 11, 1992


End of Document