OLYMPIC COURAGE;
IN THE SHADOW OF TERRORISM, SPECTATORS AS WELL AS ATHLETES BEHAVED LIKE;
CHAMPIONS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 3, 1996, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1996 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 782 words
Byline: MARY MCGRORY
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The thousands who poured into Centennial Park in Atlanta three days after a bomb blew it up had the right idea. Their answer to the terrorist who did the deed was ''Get lost.''
It was the perfect response - a speech by Andrew Young and a gospel choir.
But response isn't a remedy, as the floundering in Washington demonstrated. Sure, you can up the wiretapping and airport security procedures, but the airline that doesn't have midair explosions is El-Al of Israel, which requires its passengers to bring their luggage to the airport four hours in advance of a flight so that every item can be microscopically examined.
The Republicans are lost in a time warp on the issue of terrorism. They seem to believe it can be foiled by the old reliable Cold War remedy, a mega-billion-dollar ballistic missile defense system. The venture would please the military-industrial complex and swell the deficit. It overlooks the screechingly obvious: Terrorism comes in small packages that missiles cannot target - briefcases and backpacks. Centennial Park's was in a knapsack.
Terrorism can come from small minds. It isn't always the raging nationalists and machine-gun-toting maniacs. It can be the work of a someone like the pudgy security guard who had a brief burst of glory on NBC as a hero, but was soon, in the fairy-story spirit of the locale, transformed into a possible suspect.
The network was so embarrassed that it had Tom Brokaw on the air explaining why the FBI was encouraging the world to think it had got its man and simultaneously not arresting Richard Jewel. It's a practice called ''sweating,'' bringing maximum public and secret pressure on a suspect. Brokaw was illustrating the sacrifice of individual rights the war on terrorism imposes.
It has been a week of clashing images. There were divers and divers. There were those women who hurled themselves off the high board into intricate somersaults that ended in surgically precise knifing of the pool waters beneath. They were searching for gold. Then there were the grim men in rubber suits and helmets who plumbed the depths of the Atlantic in search of bodies and other reminders of TWA Flight 800, which blew up shortly after takeoff.
The divers brought up rows of seats, suitcases, and other odds and ends of the human condition. Their loved ones mourn on the beaches and curse the evil that blasted the plane and their lives.
No one has claimed credit for the deed. The satisfaction of wielding total power was enough.
The blasted plane will be reassembled, fragment by fragment on some warehouse floor. Every bit of metal that has been salvaged will be arranged as it was thought to be at the time of the explosion. The hope will be to find out how it happened. The why of it will be left to others. Terrorism humbles. It's about the limits of power.
In Atlanta, exactly the opposite message was being disseminated. From the diving platform and the water, from track and field and diamond, the word was that there was nothing a human being couldn't manage. If you are asthmatic, should you give up the idea of swimming in Olympic competition? Shouldn't you make allowances and honorably say you just couldn't do it when you couldn't breathe? The thunderous rejoinder came on the first day from the first American to win a gold medal, Tom Dolan. He practiced hurt; he competed hurt; he won. But the answer to the idea of not doing it was no.
Kerri Strug, the little tiny gymnast, had a lion's heart, too. She had every reason to decline when her coach asked her to do another vault for the team and the gold. But she didn't. She did her vault and landed, in agony on one foot.
A lot of parents in the audience were thinking they wouldn't want their daughters in a sport where grisly choices must be routinely made. The risk seemed out of proportion to the prize - the team had won anyway, and an activity that makes something of a religion out of masochism is not quite what they had in mind for little girls.
In Washington, there was a great deal of leaping and twirling, too, but no gold. It's not that kind of a town. Washington does not like arbitrary standards. Compromise is more like it. Washington wants prizes for good intentions.
Listen to President Clinton telling of his career-long interest in welfare problems as if it justified his abandonment of poor children in the new ''reform'' bill. Washington washed its hands of children with hapless parents. A Pontius Pilate award was all that was won here.
The citizens who went to Centennial Park were champions. They deserved gold as much as Tom Dolan and Kerri Strug. They gave their all. Isn't that the Olympic spirit?
Mary McGrory is a syndicated columnist for The Washington Post.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, PHOTO: Tom Dolan is No. 1.

Load-Date: August 7, 1996


End of Document