On 9/11, Reflections on Terrorism
The New York Times
September 11, 2008 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24; LETTERS
Length: 980 words
Body


To the Editor:
  Re ''On Nov. 4, Remember 9/11,'' by Jeffrey Goldberg (Op-Ed, Sept. 9):
  I agree that our highest national priority, and that of our two presidential candidates, should be to protect America from what some believe is a ''nearly inevitable'' nuclear terrorist attack. 
  But I disagree with Mr. Goldberg's formula to accomplish this, especially his statement that ''the paramount goal is not prosecution, but pre-emption.'' 
  Our current policy of pre-emption -- killing suspects by assassination or military might -- is the moral equivalent of the bully on the playground who bashes you for not liking him. It leads only to more hatred.
  Instead, we must strive patiently and systematically to capture and prosecute the plotters. For fanatics, only the humiliation of a fair, public trial, consistent with our long-held concepts of justice, that exposes them as deranged fools and subjects them to the contempt of the world can make them realize that there are consequences here on earth for their heinous acts. 
  No one is talking about being soft on terrorism. But there is a right way and a wrong way. We must choose the right one -- our survival depends on it. 
  John Perkins  Pacific Palisades, Calif., Sept. 9, 2008
  To the Editor:
  I am saddened by Jeffrey Goldberg's supposition that protecting America from a ''nearly inevitable attack'' should be the next president's sole priority. 
  Living in New York City, one faces personal risk walking near a crane at a construction site, riding in a taxi on the way to Kennedy Airport or simply crossing a busy traffic-filled intersection. And yet we have learned to face these risks and go out and live our lives each day. 
  I believe the top priority for our next president should be a return to positive, constructive investment in America and a dismantling of the culture of terror. 
  Let's overhaul health care, restore the economy, fix the housing market and address global warming, and resist the temptation to stay inside and cower because an orange alert has been issued.
  Susan Q. Schwartz  New York, Sept. 10, 2008
  To the Editor:
  Anyone who doesn't believe that jihadis are within reach of Pakistan's nuclear arsenal while the Iranians are hard at work perfecting a long-range delivery system is either naive or in denial. 
  Whether terrorists actually succeed in detonating such a weapon in the West or merely achieve that capability as a means for thermonuclear blackmail, the consequences will be devastating. 
  Jeffrey Goldberg's assertion that there is no other issue is correct. This is no time to be debating the success of the surge in Iraq or habeas corpus for Guantanamo detainees. 
  We could be in store for a long nuclear winter if we ignore Mr. Goldberg's forecast. How to prevent such a catastrophe is the single most important issue of the presidential campaign. 
  Peter J. Cotch  Andover, Mass., Sept. 9, 2008
  To the Editor:
  Jeffrey Goldberg is absolutely right when he says ''nothing else matters'' when it comes to America's safety. The presidential candidate who convinces the most voters he can prevent a future terrorist attack here at home will win the election in November. 
  Right now there is a lot of talk about Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska and her coming vice-presidential debate with Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. All that chatter will fade soon enough. 
  When push comes to shove, the outcome of the 2008 race for the White House will come down to this: Will it be Senator Barack Obama or Senator John McCain whom voters trust most to keep their country and their families safe? 
  Denny Freidenrich  Laguna Beach, Calif., Sept. 9, 2008
  To the Editor:
  In raising the question of which candidate would deter a nuclear attack, Jeffrey Goldberg misses a critical corollary: Which candidate or party would restore America's moral authority in the world? That authority has been drained by seven years of unilateralism, abnegation of treaties, extraordinary rendition and torture.
  Without moral authority, we stand little chance of obtaining the level of international cooperation, particularly among intelligence agencies, needed to corral the world's loose fissile material. 
  Nor are our prospects good for slowing Al Qaeda's recruitment of individuals willing to give their lives to destroy ours.
  Central to America's moral standing is the rule of law. For that reason, I question Mr. Goldberg's criticism of Barack Obama for praising the successful prosecution of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. 
  Honoring our tradition of lawful investigation and prosecution is one of many necessary weapons in the arsenal of combating terror. 
  Dennis Aftergut  San Francisco, Sept. 9, 2008
  To the Editor:
  I disagree with Jeffrey Goldberg's understanding of the challenges facing the next president. And I disagree that we must choose a president by setting aside all other matters and asking only how well a candidate will protect us against nuclear terrorism. 
  The challenge for the next president will be to deter nuclear terrorism at the same time that he addresses the challenges of the economy, health care, education, the environment and the like. 
  If he knows how to deter nuclear terrorism but how to do nothing else, he will certainly be a failure.
  David Schwartz  New York, Sept. 9, 2008
  The writer served from 1980 to 1986 in the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, focusing on nuclear weapons policy.
  To the Editor: 
  Re ''9/11 Rumors That Become Conventional Wisdom'' (Memo From Cairo, Sept. 9):
  You say that many in the Middle East believe that the United States government or Israel  was  behind the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. 
  Perhaps we should not be too smug about ignorance in Cairo. How many Americans still seem to think that Saddam Hussein or Iran  was  involved in the 9/11 attacks?
  Penn Pfautz Middletown, N.J., Sept. 9, 2008

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY DANIEL STOLLE)                                                             

Load-Date: September 11, 2008


End of Document