On fighting terrorists
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 29, 1985, Tuesday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Column; Pg.  12
Length: 641 words
Byline: JOSEPH C. HARSCH
Body


WHEN the American hostages came home from Iran at the beginning of the Reagan administration on Jan. 27 four years ago, the new President declared that if such things happened again to Americans ''our policy will be one of swift and effective retribution.''
This year, on Jan. 26, the press reminded the President of those words and asked why there had been no ''swift and effective retribution'' against the terrorists when such things occurred as the car bombing of the United States Marines barracks in Beirut, Lebanon (Oct. 23, 1983).
His answer is worth notice. Here is the quotation:
''They are criminals. They may think they've got a noble cause or something; they're criminals committing the worst and most despicable kind of crimes. Now you have the same problem that you have with crime. They act surreptitiously, they come out of hiding, they're anonymous, they disappear again, you have to track them down, you've got to find them. You try to prevent their crimes by crime-prevention measures the best you can. You try to track them down, then you hope you can punish.''
The contrast could go into a textbook on presidents and what and how they learn about the job. The first remark is characteristic of the new President who had been campaigning against the alleged incompetence and stupidity of his predecessor and arrives in Washington thinking he can manage things better.
The second quote is characteristic of a President who has been in office for four years and had to learn the hard way what terrorism is all about and what you can and can't do about it.
There are many kinds of terrorists. The man who shot and killed President James A. Garfield was a disappointed office seeker. The man who killed President William McKinley was an anarchist. So too was the man who killed an innocent and utterly harmless Austrian empress waiting for a little lake steamboat on the landing in Geneva. There was a lot of wild ter-rorism before World War I, culminating in the assassination of the Archduke Ferdinand at Sarajevo.
And now in our time we have some terrorism as pointless as was the killing of that unhappy empress, but mostly now it seems to be political. The IRA terrorists think they can drive the English out of Ulster by terrorism, which is silly because even if they did drive out the English, Ulster would still be largely owned and ruled by its native Protestant majority.  Then there are Kurds who use terror against their enemies and vice versa. And Armenians commit acts of terror against Turks. And Basques use terrorism in their ancient war against the Spaniards.
In the US we now add anti-abortionists to the list of those who are so fanatic in their belief in a cause that they will resort to illegal violence to further it. In this case they have been quickly apprehended and seem to have done their cause more harm than good in the process.
Most determined and fanatical of today's active terrorists seem to be extremist Arabs in their war against Israel. They sometimes use methods which the Israelis themselves used in their own earlier war against the British. To many an Arab the war against Israel is a holy war in which they willingly spend their lives.
President Reagan is correct about the remedy. You can get out of the way. Mr. Reagan pulled the Marines out of Beirut after the car bombing of the Marines and has cut down US representation in Lebanon. The embassy staff is down to a skeleton.
And you can use police work.
Here there has been more success than is widely appreciated. The July 16, 1984, issue of U.S. News &World Report considered the danger of rampant terrorism at the Olympic Games in Los Angeles, the Republican and Democratic conventions, and the New Orleans World's Fair. Precautions and good police work prevented trouble.
Mr. Reagan has had four years of on-the-job training and learned from it.


End of Document