ON GUARD;
EUROPE TRIES TO FIND ITS OWN WAY TO FIGHT BACK
The New York Times
April 27, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 1163 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM
Dateline: BONN
Body


IT is a long way from Tripoli to Tokyo, but the American bombardment of Libya has succeeded in catapulting terrorism to the top of the agenda for the leaders of the seven largest industrial democracies when they meet in Japan beginning next Sunday. The air attacks - and President Reagan's assertion that he might repeat them or even extend them to Syria or Iran if those countries, too, were found to be fomenting terrorism - provoked contradictory impulses of anxiety and belated solidarity among United States allies. They also opened a difficult debate about the role of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
For Europeans, the air strikes, like Samuel Johnson's proverbial prospect of a hanging, had the virtue of wonderfully concentrating the mind. Though broadly disapproving of America's resort to force, the European Community's foreign ministers were galvanized into adopting one sanction Washington had demanded before the April 15 raids: sharp personnel cutbacks in Libya's People's Bureaus, or embassies, which have been known to serve as ammunition dumps and safe houses for assassins. Nine of 12 community nations quickly ordered the expulsion of Libyans. Britain expelled more than 200 studying aviation skills plus a few pilot trainees.
Bitter Talk
In the Hague, the Community's interior ministers and Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d agreed to intensify antiterrorist cooperation, and examined the possibility of inspecting the luggage of suspect diplomats. To an extent, it was an awkward instance of the Europeans' tardily showing resolve to appease Washington and check the bitter talk about ''wimps'' and ''Eurocowards.'' ''What is so awful for the Europeans is that they asked for a predominantly political reaction, and were unable to produce it themselves - and then protested against a military reaction,'' said Karl Kaiser, the head of West Germany's leading foreign policy institute.
Yet there were other considerations as the West Europeans pondered a political landscape suddenly dominated by the terrorist dilemma. One was voiced by President Reagan last week: The terrorists' ''vicious, cowardly acts will, if we let them, erect a wall of fear around nations and neighborhoods'' and ''dampen the joy of travel, the flow of trade, the exchange of ideas.'' The spectacle of Americans canceling European trips en masse seemed to suggest that they were enthusiastic enough about a bold military strike, but uneager to risk the consequences - terrorism that would most likely play out on European soil and, if the past is any guide, take many more European than American lives.
Weightier concerns turned on the issue of unity in the Atlantic Alliance. The Libyan raid was a godsend in West Germany, Britain and the Netherlands for leftists and pacifists who have not had a unifying cause since they failed to stop the deployment of American medium-range missiles in 1983. And from East Berlin, where he was attending a Communist Party congress, Mikhail S. Gorbachev launched another ''peace initiative,'' a vague proposal for reducing conventional weapons that seemed designed to contrast his purportedly benign intentions with those of an American President who, the Soviet leader contended, had sunk to ''the law of the jungle.'' In West Germany, the slick weekly Stern, which beat an anti-American drum during the antimissile campaign, was back in that business, editorializing that ''Ronald Reagan, not Mikhail Gorbachev, is the man to fear.''
Before leaving for the Tokyo summit, where the agenda also included the stabilization of exchange rates and an adjustment to collapsing oil prices, Mr. Reagan made it clear that he would be pressing for collective antiterrorist measures. The last time the seven leaders agreed on such steps was in 1978, when they pledged at Bonn to cut off air traffic with countries that gave sanctuary to hijackers or hijacked planes; the sanction has not been invoked.
Except perhaps for his Japanese hosts, whose trade interests and reliance on Middle Eastern crude oil have made them very quiet during the last month, Mr. Reagan will find the allies ready to deal with the terrorist question. Troubled by the killing of French hostages in Lebanon and savage bombings in Paris, President Francois Mitterrand has dropped his previous objections to considering terrorism at the summit. And Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy has also been moving to a tougher stand, even threatening Libya with military retaliation if it repeats actions such as its ineffectual missile attack on the Mediterranean island of Lampedusa.
But if the American President evokes during the conference Washington's sanctions against Libya, he may well be asked when American oil companies are going to halt their lucrative business there. West European imports of Libyan oil, sometimes cited as a symptom of European dependency, are often delivered by American companies or their overseas subsidiaries. And when she meets Mr. Reagan, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher will probably want to test how far America's antiterrorist campaign extends to extraditing Irish Republican Army terrorists and cutting off Irish-American money for the I.R.A. The reported murder in Lebanon of a third British hostage last week suggested that terrorist groups would be intensifying efforts to sow further doubts in Britain about Mrs. Thatcher's backing for the Reagan policy. (Backlash in Britain, page 2.) NATO Boundaries Secretary of State George P. Shultz ultimately toned down Mr. Reagan's implicit threats to Syria and Iran. But the logic of the American President's affirmation that state-supported terrorism was ''a form of warfare'' seemed to call for a military response not just by the United States but by NATO as a whole. Yet there is little enthusiasm in NATO, founded in 1949 to deter aggression by the Soviet Union in Europe, for what are called ''out-of-area'' operations. And friction during past attempts by the United States to conduct joint operations with France in Lebanon and Chad have made the American military wary about trying again.
The community of democratic values NATO represents was strained, but far from shattered, by the attack on Libya. But if the Reagan Administration intended to go forward with military means in the battle against terrorism, it looked as though it would be carrying the burden alone. If Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi was chastened, or toppled and replaced by a more pliable successor, Europeans would applaud. But other voices cautioned last week that the gains of punishing the erratic colonel might be offset by promoting and exalting little bands of desperate men to the status of No. 1 enemies of the most powerful nation in the world, which offers thousands of potential targets for terrorists. Last week, in apparent retaliation for the American raids, gunmen killed the British manager of an American-owned company in Lyons, France, and wounded an American Embassy communications officer in Sana, North Yemen.

Graphic

 
Photos of police and soldiers on guard in London, Germany and Rome (J.B. Pictures/Network/John Sturrock; Photoreporters/DPA; AP)


End of Document