ON MY MIND;
Terrorism in America
The New York Times
February 21, 1989, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 729 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Body


Jesse Jackson called to talk about what was most on his mind. This is the gist of what he had to say:
A terrorist movement is raging through the country. Its killers are shooting people down in the streets and in their homes. Our country is not mobilized to fight or even fully acknowledge the reality of the terrorist threat. The country makes no effort to disarm the terrorists. Guns and drugs: together they are destroying the domestic tranquillity of the nation.
He said more but that was the essence, and it can be summed up in one paragraph because it is the inescapable truth.
People tell the story of drug terrorism different ways. Gov. Mario Cuomo, at a lunch table, says New York has three major problems and then lists them: drugs first, drugs second, drugs third.
At the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, Dr. Gabriel Nahas, a specialist in narcotics, says the real price of terrorism will be the permanent brain damage to the hundreds of thousands of children now using crack. There are now 600,000 cocaine addicts in New York alone, triple the figure of three years ago, mostly because of crack. How many brains lost?
In Washington, William J. Bennett speaks with sophistication and hope about the powers and limitations of his job, a new one in the Federal service and one of the more important. He is the man President Bush named as this country's first coordinator of the anti-drug activities spread out among more than a dozen Federal agencies.
About the same time, a police officer in California spreads Chinese-made automatic weapons across a tabletop. None of them were captured from drug terrorists, for whom they are the weapon of choice. They were all bought, legally and openly, in California stores.
There is, of course, a direct connection between what the Governor was saying, what the research scientist was worrying about, the guns on the table in California and whether Mr. Bennett has any realistic chance of being able to do his job. Think of this: If terrorists murdered even a few Americans on foreign streets, our Government and our country would be furious. We probably would not actually do anything, but at least we would shout quite a bit. If Americans were killed every single day on foreign streets, or blown up in their homes, or firebombed, if Americans killed by street terrorism amounted to thousands every year, we might expect the people of the United States to demand some kind of action and the President of the United States to be moved to demand that the terrorists be disarmed or at least not be sold hand-held machine guns, complete with bullets, over the counter. And now consider this: Every day several people die in this country in drug-related murders, thousands a year. Sometimes drug terrorists kill each other, which is no great loss, true. Unfortunately, they kill others more often - to frighten a neighborhood or simply because if you spray enough bullets around every day a lot of bystanders are going to die. The terrorists have a cute word for people cut down that way - mushrooms.
Sometimes they kill mushrooms only a few blocks from the White House, which they must find particularly amusing. Sometimes the terrorists are Americans. Sometimes they come from Latin America and settle down with good homes and good full-time jobs, as killers. All kill for one reason only: money.
But the country never seems to get terribly excited about the daily terrorism in its streets. And most elected lawmakers in Washington do not even think it their duty to try to make hand-held machine guns used by the terrorists illegal to buy or own.
The President, who appointed Mr. Bennett and said he would remove the drug scourge from the land, absolutely refuses to support Federal legislation against street-spraying automatic weapons for fear some hunting rifles might be affected. That is a pretty clear statement about relative values.
No, banning automatic weapons will not stop the drug trade or drug killers. But it might save a lot of American lives, including police lives, which seems a worthwhile goal for a President.
And it would make the slogans about ending the scourge more believable if Mr. Bush would just say no to the gun lobby, powerful though it is. He could then demand from Americans and foreigners the sacrifices and commitment needed to fight the drug war - and keep a straight face.

Graphic

 
photos of Dir Geoffrey Howe (Reuters) (pg. A1); Foreign Ministers Hans-Dietrich Genscher, and Roland Dumas (Agence France-Presse) (pg. A8)


End of Document