ON MY MIND;
The Conquest of Terrorism
The New York Times
January 10, 1989, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 763 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Body


One day perhaps the West will summon the moral and political courage to face the truth about terrorism. On that day, the conquest of terrorism will begin - but not until that day.
It is not that the West is ignorant of the truth. It has been known for years - to every intelligence branch, every diplomat, every national leader.
But whenever a plane is hijacked or blown up by a bomb or a hostage is snatched off the streets, the Western nations mill around as if it had never happened before, swearing to hunt the criminals down and make them pay.
It never happens. The reason is not the brilliance or bravery of the terrorists. It is the hypocrisy and cowardice of the West in refusing to acknowledge the truth - that we have known all along who the major criminals are and exactly where they live.
So, for once, let us look at reality squarely: The important criminals are not the men and women who sneak the bombs on board the plane, or chain a hostage to the wall, but the top officials of the states that provide the money, the training, the camps where the ter-rorists are mustered, the guarded safe houses where they live and the platforms and meeting halls where they are allowed to strut in triumph.
Terrorism makes anybody anywhere a potential victim every time he buys a plane or ship ticket or she enters her own embassy abroad. It would be totally impossible without the money, weapons and succor that these countries and their leaders provide.
At one time or another, at least 20 states have fostered or promoted terrorism: Middle Eastern countries that gave terrorists money, Soviet bloc states that provided training, and Western countries that allowed them to escape on legal technicalities.
But at the moment, Western officials know these men are at the heart of international terrorism:
* Hafez al-Assad, President of Syria, who has made his country a headquarters and jumping-off place for a variety of Palestinian terrorists. American and other hostages are kept in apartment-prisons in Lebanon on streets patrolled by Syrian soldiers. Every time Mr. Assad arranges for one hostage to be released the world swoons with gratitude.
* Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran and the men trying to squiggle to the top of the mound of hatred that is the Government of Iran. It is in his name that hostages are taken and in his name that they are held.
* Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya, paymaster of terrorism in all parts of the world from the Middle East to the Philippines and even sometimes in Belfast.
Most terrorist atrocities are carried out in the name of statehood for Palestine. But those Palestinians who yearn for a decent settlement with Israel are not blowing up planes.
And the men psychotic enough to blow them up - long before the unsolved Pan Am disaster - will not call off their horrors unless they achieve the goal to which they are sworn, the death of Israel.
Nor is Palestinian statehood the goal for the criminals who pay the criminals. Mr. Assad, for instance, still dreams of Greater Syria, which would swallow up not only Jordan, Lebanon and Israel, but the territory on which a separate Arab Palestine is supposed to be created.
The West knows all this. But in 1986 President Mitterrand forbade U.S. bombers to cross French territory en route to Libya. Prime Minister Thatcher, brave in the Falklands, exudes nervousness at the very idea of American action against terrorist nations. Bonn rushes into automatic denial when Washington says West German companies are involved in building a Libyan chemical weapons plant.
And the United States itself? So far, mostly whimpering about how we cannot go it alone without our allies, as if we were Luxembourg.
Why all this evasion of the plain truth about where terrorism has its roots? Why the refusal to take economic and political action that would hit the terrorist states and their leaders hard enough to show them that terrorism does not pay? Such as:
A total economic boycott of states financing or giving refuge to terrorists. A total ban on all weapons sales to these states. A total closing of Western airports to all traffic to and from any of their cities. A warning that military action would follow if economic steps were not persuasive enough.
The reason for Western refusal to act is money - money to be made from selling weapons, equipment and factories to the terrorist states.
Maybe one day we will change our values and decide that lives of the innocent are more important. If not, let us at least have enough self-respect not to run around whining that we do not know the names and addresses of the terrorists.


End of Document