On My Mind;
The Peace Prize Winners
The New York Times
October 18, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 699 words
Byline: By A. M. ROSENTHAL 

By A. M. ROSENTHAL 
Body


The winners of the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize have good reasons to allow themselves the pleasure and pride of accomplishment.
Wait -- the "buts" will come soon enough. Still: if Israeli, Palestinian and American critics of the winners refuse them due credit they will harm their own credibility and future role in any attempt to work out peace on reliable terms, if such come to exist.
Yasir Arafat is the first Palestinian in history to have the realistic right to say he will bring about an independent Palestinian state. He almost has it already.
It is true that without the present Israeli and United States Governments he could not have accomplished that. Together they gave him more marks of honor, more applause and embraces, than to any other present Muslim leader, including the King of Morocco, the Presidents of Turkey and Egypt, the Sultan of Oman and other longtime Muslim friends of the West, all put together.
This did not come from a sudden thrill of affection for Mr. Arafat. It was testimony to the Palestinian determination to fight on. Labor decided that giving up strategic territory was better for peace than holding onto it. At that point, Labor had to muster the talent to do today what it had denounced yesterday; it did.
Israeli Labor gave the Palestine Liberation Organization the status, control and partnership in government that Shimon Peres and Yitzhak Rabin had so recently opposed. The world will not accept the idea that Israel can give Palestinians this cup of independence to hold but order them never to drink from it. Labor knows that.
I think the Nobel people might have waited a year, say three, before deciding that Mr. Arafat and the P.L.O. in no conceivable way would ever commit terrorism or give comfort to its perpetrators. But without quibble he deserved a medal of achievement for the cause of Palestinian nationhood.
Shimon Peres and Yitzhak Rabin: Mr. Rabin and the King of Jordan sign an agreement for a peace treaty. Morocco prepares, warmly, for full recognition of Israel. Tunisia and other Muslim countries move toward it. Maybe one day so will Syria, if President Assad does not bore the world to death before then.
Israeli businessmen and diplomats now deal with Arabs and other Muslims in many places of the world. Saudi Arabia and the gulf states talk of beginning the end of the boycott.
None of this would have been thought within reach before Mr. Peres and his aides, including Uri Savir, former Consul General in New York, went to Oslo to deal with the P.L.O. Mr. Rabin then approved their agreement.
Those accomplishments are in hand. But -- the bill is not.
Israel's decision to pull out from most of the West bank, go down from Golan and open the road to an independent Palestine that could be taken over by a militant movement or neighbor does not necessarily doom Israel. But to say it does not put the country at risk is idiotic.
Mr. Rabin and Mr. Peres once said they opposed such steps. So did every serving Israeli chief of staff, including the incumbent.
The collapse of Communism and the defeat of Saddam Hussein did lessen the short-term danger. But.
Russia is sweatily eager to succeed the Soviet Union as arms merchant to Iraq. Moscow sells heavy weapons to Syria, where thousands of Russian specialists are based. China and Eastern Europe jostle for the Mideast arms trade.
Were they all lying, those Labor politicians and Israeli generals who said that the collapse of the Soviet Union did not change geography? Until Labor won the election in 1992, Likud and Labor leaders both said holding onto the Golan Heights and the brief rallying time provided by the West Bank was not a war game, but the breath of life.
Terrorism -- now they scream at Mr. Arafat to stop terrorism against Israelis. Arafat? He has enough trouble protecting his own skin from terrorists within the P.L.O. and from Hamas.
But Labor was elected by the Israeli public. Likud can throw it out, and polls show the possibility. Either way, a toast to Mr. Rabin, Mr. Peres and to Benjamin Netanyahu and Ariel Sharon, who better get together real soon if they expect Likud to succeed the Nobel laureates.
Make that one for the bunch of them. This is no time to get all woozy.

Load-Date: October 18, 1994


End of Document