On My Mind;
Rabin and Sharon
The New York Times
January 25, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 19; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Column 2;; Op-Ed
Length: 697 words
Byline: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

By A. M. ROSENTHAL
Body


Yitzhak Rabin, a renowned general in Israel's wars, looks at maps of Israel and its Arab neighbors, studies military and political realities, and decides current peace negotiations are the road to lasting peace and security for his nation.
Ariel Sharon, a renowned general in the same wars, looks at the same maps, studies the same realities and decides the negotiations are the road to years of Palestinian terrorism ending in war or the draining of Israel, or both.
Mr. Rabin is the leader of Labor, Mr. Sharon a leader of Likud. Also, Mr. Rabin has the job Mr. Sharon has sought much of his political life, and still does.
But both men are Israeli patriots, both tested as military commanders. And not long ago, Mr. Rabin harbored some of the worries about Israeli safety that still keep Mr. Sharon awake.
Israelis made the election choice for the Rabin leadership. To the victor belongs world press attention. But since almost half of Israel did back Likud, I thought it would not be an offense against democracy to give Mr. Sharon a little type while he visited New York. So I asked him the question that comes up constantly among American supporters of Israel.
How is it that two Israeli generals who respect each other and keep in touch are now so far apart in military thinking? Mr. Sharon's answers boiled down to this: deep differences about the meaning of terrorism, space and time.
Prime Minister Rabin has said terrorism is a threat to the lives of Israelis but not to the safety of the nation. For Mr. Sharon, the threat is to both.
Terrorism has been a major Arab weapon before and since Israel's War of Independence in the late 1940's. Mr. Sharon thinks it will be an infinitely greater threat if Israel cannot search it out in advance, or retaliate.
The Oslo arrangement between Israel and the Arafat Fatah wing of the Palestine Liberation Organization will turn over internal security to a 20,000-man Palestinian armed force. Discovering terrorist plans, tracking down and punishing terrorists are to be carried out by Palestinians who are their relatives or comrades.
Mr. Sharon says it will never happen. In Gaza and the West Bank, the Fatah Hawks say exactly that -- never.
So, Mr. Sharon believes, Israel will be open to continuous terrorism, no longer able to hit it where it lives. Mr. Sharon's scenario is that Israel will eventually have to go in and strike. Arab states would move their tanks closer. Without firing a shot, they could force Israel into the mobilizations that cripple its economy. And Israeli attacks would be against a new Palestine, autonomous or independent -- an invitation to anti-Israeli embargoes.
Space and time. For decades Israeli officers said that for their tiny country both were matters of life or death.
After the gulf war, Israeli generals told me they had noted that before the ground attack against Iraq, the U.S. stationed its troops 50 to 80 miles from the Kuwait and Iraq borders, at least five times the width of Israel's narrow waist. Now, Israeli officials say, the military thinking has "evolved"; missiles, not minutes and miles, count most.
All of Syria's 1,000 missiles, about 100 with chemical warheads, have Israel in range. So are Egypt's, Iraq's, Iran's, etc. Israelis also have missiles; as lunch Israel will not sit well.
But Mr. Sharon has noted something himself: Missiles do not occupy territory. Tanks and troops do that.
General Sharon has made suggestions to General Rabin: At least demand control of internal security in the West Bank and Gaza, and of strategic roads. Insist on the right of Israelis to keep their settlements, under Israeli protection. For any Golan Heights concession, get reduction and fallback of Syrian forces near Israel.
But he remains against the whole Oslo deal as a disaster that would sap Israel through terrorism and set it up either for war or chaos. He believes negotiation should be with Jordan -- already Palestinian in everything but its royal family.
"But to tell the truth," he says, "I think things were better after the War of Independence, in 1949. It's more tense with less hope."
Maybe that is because about terrorism, space and time, the man is just not a very good evolver.

Load-Date: January 25, 1994


End of Document