ON MY MIND;
The Rewards of Terrorism
The New York Times
July 21, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 723 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Body


Here are two pictures of the same man - Saleh Khalef.
This one was printed recently in newspapers and shown on TV because he was involved in important negotiations with the United States Ambassador to Tunisia.
Now here is an earlier picture, a side view, printed late last year in a State Department publication. It is called ''Profiles in Terrorism'' and the introduction was written by George Bush, then just elected President.
Mr. Khalef's photograph was selected by State Department experts because he is the number two man in one of the terrorist groups profiled -Fatah, Yasir Arafat's wing of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
More to the point, Mr. Khalef, known in the P.L.O. as Abu Iyad, has been for decades a key planner and organizer of its terrorist activities.
The State Department lists 33 terrorist attacks by Fatah as a sample. American and European intelligence agencies say Mr. Khalef planned some of the best known. They include the murder of 11 Israeli Olympic athletes in 1972 and, a year later, the killing in the Sudan of the Ambassador and counselor of the United States of America.
Now Mr. Khalef negotiates with the United States. His aim is the recognition of a Palestine run by the P.L.O. If that happens, Mr. Khalef, Abu Iyad, may be foreign minister or vice president.
Then he would have every right to expect to visit Washington and call at the State Department. As he entered, he would pass a large plaque in the lobby.
On it are the names of all State De-partment employees killed in the service of their country. If he looked up, Mr. Khalef would be able to read two names familiar to him - Ambassador Cleo A. Noel Jr. and Counselor George C. Moore. They served in the Sudan and they died there.
That is where American diplomacy has taken us.
Far more is involved even than the lesson for American civil servants that given a little time, a little advantage to be gained, the United States will negotiate with their killers.
The issue goes beyond the conflict between Israeli and Palestinian. It mocks the credibility of the United States as a fighter against terrorism anywhere. It strengthens the confidence and power of terrorist forces around the world.
Seven months now since 259 people were blown apart in Pan Am 103. Ahmed Jabril, believed by Western intelligence to have carried out the operation, still lives in Damascus, supplied by the Syrians and under their orders.
But the United States tries to edge closer to Syria, despite its sponsorship of Mr. Jabril, despite the largest terror operation in the world - the continuing massive Syrian bombing of Lebanon. That's called diplomatic self-interest. Terrorism works.
In Libya, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi likes to pay an occasional visit to his particular treasure - the huge chemical warfare plant built with the help of West German, Japanese and other foreign businessmen.
He walks, no doubt, in dream of Israel. But while he dreams he does not waste time. Around the year he funds terrorists in Europe, Asia, Latin America.
The Soviet Union: for decades it has been a chief supplier of arms and money to terrorist groups and nations. Mikhail Gorbachev has not yet taken the essential step toward a real policy change: acknowledgment of the past.
No immunity in this country. Two terrorists crossed from Canada, loaded with explosives; they were captured in Vermont. In California, the wife of the captain of the U.S.S. Vincennes, which shot down an Iranian airplane, escaped with her life from a terrorist attack. Nobody captured.
In Washington, Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, forced open the issue of negotiation with killers or kidnappers of Americans. He drew up Senate legislation to prevent the Administration from doing that.
The conservative Mr. Helms and other backers of the measure, including liberals like Senator John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat, came under a hard, intensive pressure campaign straight from the White House. On the Senate floor, the Administration finally won a less binding version of the Helms legislation.
The premature recognition of the P.L.O. meant negotiation with terrorists and led swiftly and inevitably to negotiation with the killers of American civil servants. Mr. Helms and all who supported him deserve the credit due to those who make the country face an important truth, however nasty.


End of Document