ON MY MIND;
The League of Terror
The New York Times
May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Op-ed
Length: 742 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Body


The Presidential commission on terrorism in the air has turned in a report that is clear, thoughtful, brave and of commanding importance. Therefore the likelihood is that the Administration will try to shove it into oblivion as fast as possible.
That is not intended as cynicism. It is an interpretation of something very much in style these days in Washington - pragmatism.
The report centers on the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 and the 270 lives lost in that act of mass murder. But its conclusions go to the heart of terrorism and how to fight it - with a policy of retaliation against the ''League of Terror,'' the governments that sponsor the murder gangs.
In the last five years alone, terrorist attacks against planes of a half-dozen countries have killed 1,030 people. Not one nation has taken retaliatory action.
In Washington, Bush Administration ''pragmatism'' on terrorism has meant doing nothing to take action against the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, General Command, the gang that blew up Pan Am 103, or its masters, Syria and Iran.
Nothing - although the Government knew almost from the beginning that Iran paid and dispatched the killers, that Syria gives them safe haven and that Libya supplies the murder gangs of the world with the special plastic explosive that destroyed Pan Am 103.
It is hard to think of anything the Administration has done publicly to fight terrorism stronger than saying thank you, thank you Syria and Iran, for any small bones of mercy they might throw us from time to time.
The report is full of criticism of air security - the Government's and Pan Am's - and has a long list of specific security recommendations. But in its analysis of terrorism and its policy for action, it has special importance going even beyond the tragedy of Pan Am 103.
These are the essentials of the analysis:
The victim world has been lurching from terrorist attack to attack, always caught without response strategy. Terrorism remains a deadly weapon of the weak and cowardly, cheap and effective enough to change the policies of major nations. Once terrorism was the isolated acts of individuals, now it is state-sponsored acts of war and aggression.
These are the essentials of the policy proposals against terrorism:
Zero tolerance. The U.S must take leadership. The American public must show and exercise a national will to fight terrorism and support Government action. Retaliation must be threatened and carried out, retaliation graded upward from political and diplomatic to economic to military attack against terrorist targets in the League of Terror states.
''The commission finds unacceptable the idea of holding ourselves in all cases to a criminal standard of proof before we act . . . The U.S. must be ready to view some terrorist attacks as a matter of security or an act of aggression.''
The President appointed the commission because of the determination of people who would not surrender -the families of the victims of Pan Am 103.
It turned out to be a runaway commission, polite but independent. Its members told the President the truth, knowing it would not appeal to him.
It was headed by Ann McLaughlin, a former Secretary of Labor, a strong leader. Other members were Representatives John P. Hammerschmidt, Republican of Arkansas, and James L. Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota; former Secretary of the Navy Edward Hidalgo; Gen. Thomas C. Richards, Air Force, retired; and two Senators, Frank Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, and Alfonse D'Amato, the New York Republican who by his commission service earns dehexing for voting to uphold a Presidential veto of a bill protecting Chinese students.
Since the commission's most important recommendation is to make sure the terrorist states know they will pay a price, it carries a never-stated but implicit criticism of the existing do-nothing policy.
So what seems to await the report is a deep file drawer somewhere in the Executive Offices.
But if a policy of retaliation is not announced as a preventive warning and another American passenger plane is blown into scraps of metal and flesh, this report will creep out of that drawer to haunt the Administration.
So it is just possible that given enough public and Congressional courage now, the Administration will have to take account of the report and its plain words on terrorism.
We have that hope, thanks to the McLaughlin commission, which is better than what we have had so far - pragmatically, nothing.


End of Document