ON MY MIND;
Badges for Godfathers
The New York Times
November 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 751 words
Byline: By A.M. Rosenthal
Body


Over at the United Nations, the states that specialize in murder and kidnapping are working out a particularly bizarre and dangerous piece of political strategy. The idea is to legitimize international terrorism.
Syria, home base, organizer and sponsor of terrorism ranging from the Middle East to Europe and Asia, has solemnly introduced a resolution demanding a world conference that would decide that terrorism carried out by ''national liberation movements'' is not really terrorism after all, but legal action taken in just cause. Its chief supporter is Libya, bombed into a period of relative quietude by the United States but still simmering.
It is as if the godfathers of the Mafia asked to be given sheriff's badges. That is strange enough but what is even stranger is that at the U.N., some of the nations marked down for kneecapping - including other Arab states and countries bedeviled by their own terrorist movements - are going along with the Syrians and Libyans.
Everybody knows that Libya committed or commissioned acts of terrorism all over the world. Colonel Qaddafi kept boasting about it, until the United States bombing in 1986 taught him that there was a price to be paid. Since then not much has been heard from the colonel. But to assume he has changed his mind or goals would be simple-minded idiocy.
While Libya was being denounced and bombed, the world was not saying much about the real master craftsmen of terrorism, the Syrians. In part, this was strategy born out of fear for the hostages snatched and still imprisoned in Syrian-controlled territory in Lebanon.
And it was because the Syrians are considered important politically and militarily by the major powers. They are the chief client of the Soviet Union in the Middle East. The U.S. for years felt it could somehow outwit and manipulate the Syrians, which at least was good for a laugh in Damascus.
In 1986 the Syrians went public -by accident. The British caught their agent trying to put explosives aboard a civilian airliner leaving Heathrow and broke relations with them. Then the West Germans found Syrian operatives had bombed a German-Arab Friendship League in West Berlin. That was embarrassing enough. But the same year the Syrians developed problems with Moslem states.
The Pakistanis discovered a link between Syria and Palestinians captured after attempting to hijack a plane in Karachi. The Turks found that at least one of the killers involved in the bombing of the synagogue in Istanbul came from a terrorist camp under Syrian supervision in the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon.
Neither the Turks nor the Pakistanis talked openly. But they made sure that the Syrians knew that they knew.
Terrorism is not something Syria can lightly give up, despite the exposure. Terrorism is power.
For instance, antiterrorist specialists all over the world are convinced that Syria knows and protects the captors of the hostages in Lebanon, and knows exactly where the prisoners are. That makes countries that want the hostages back tread delicately with Damascus and effusive with thanks when the Syrians arrange to let one go.
So power is why Syria is trying to get the U.N. to decide that terrorism by liberation movements they back is justified action against oppression.
There are indeed oppressive governments that do not hesitate to kill their own civilians and are being opposed by armed movements.
But legitimate movements of rebellion, like the Afghans', do not make it a policy to kill their own civilian countrymen. They direct their attacks against the hated government and its forces. And they do not carry out terrorist operations abroad. It is interesting that international terrorists usually do not attack in totalitarian countries but in democracies - in West Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, India, Britain.
About a score of countries confront armed opposition devoted to terrorism as a weapon - which would be legal, even heroic, if the Syrians can talk the U.N. into it. The New People's Army in the Philippines. Shining Path in Peru. The Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka. The P.L.O. in Israel. The I.R.A. in Northern Ireland. Sikh terrorists in India. Terrorist movements in Spain, Japan, Uruguay, Yugoslavia, Colombia, Venezuela, Turkey.
There will be a vote in the Legal Committee of the U.N. General Assembly, possibly this week. The Soviet Union backs Syria's move, the United States opposes it. It will be fascinating to see which countries are so befuddled by ''liberation'' rhetoric as to vote for their own destruction.


End of Document