On My Mind;
A Choice For Americans
The New York Times
August 6, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 707 words
Byline: By A. M. ROSENTHAL 

By A. M. ROSENTHAL 
Body


On Aug. 2, the Republican leadership of the House and Senate joined to deliver a message of importance to terrorists, the families of their victims and all Americans whose travels, work, or political, philosophic or personal background may make them terrorism's targets, specifically or through the misfortune of being within a bomb's kill-radius in the air, on land or maybe on a cruise ship .
The message:
In the pursuit of anti-terrorist policy, we leaders will not agree to any component that might run counter to our party or individual political interests as we see them, or that is opposed by officials of groups we consider important to those interests.
So: It is now the responsibility of the members of those groups to renounce their officials' opposition to anti-terrorism and urge members of Congress not to surrender to them. If the members do that, they can force a reversal of that surrender. If they do not, they become a party to it.
On the afternoon of Aug. 2, the House Republican leadership -- which means Speaker Newt Gingrich -- took two steps that are certain to be read as politics over anti-terrorism by terrorists, American or foreign, and by men and women, American and foreign, who devote their lives to fighting terrorism.
First, the leadership stripped from an anti-terrorist bill a provision supported by President Clinton and the Congressional anti-terrorist point man, Representative Charles Schumer of New York, that microscopic markers called taggants be placed in two kinds of gunpowder used in making terrorist bombs. That would help investigators track down some bomb-planters.
This was opposed by the National Rifle Association on grounds that it might make the gunpowder more dangerous to use. Government and private specialists say that is false. The issue for the N.R.A. is not markers, but guns as a religion.
Tanya Metaksa, chief N.R.A. lobbyist, claims to speak for the 3.1 million N.R.A. members -- in fact all 60 million American gun owners. Does she? On anti-terrorism, they must answer for themselves.
Also killed was a provision to give the F.B.I. power to keep up with terrorist phone communications. With court approval, the F.B.I. would need one warrant, not many separate ones, to tap cellular phones of terrorists as they move from one to another.
The F.B.I. has this authority against ordinary organized crime. Do the 275,000 members of the American Civil Liberties Union, which fought these "multipoint" warrants, believe there is some mystic reason why criminals of organized terrorism should be exempt?
Don't they understand that their only importance to the Republican leadership is as exotic background support for the people the leadership really listens to -- the far right types who whip up fear of the American Government -- particularly the law enforcement branches? I believe that listening to this evil tripe demeans Mr. Gingrich's substantial intellect.
After the House castrated the bill, the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, refused to allow Senate consideration until everybody had a monthlong vacation. Obviously he has a guarantee that no terrorist bombs will go off this month that might have been stopped before they tore people to shreds or, afterward, been traced by a marker.
Taggants and taps have value in themselves as ingredients in an anti-crime system. Cutting them from the bill is even more important -- a symptom of the appeasement of terrorism that paralyzed the West so long.
It may interest the Republican leaders that they have the moral support of The Economist, a British publication specializing on instructing Americans on how to run their affairs so as not to upset dictatorships too much.
About terrorism, the magazine now informs us, the greater the alarm and outcry, the happier terrorists will be. So the solution is to "carry on as planned" and treat the bombing as a "marginal criminal occurrence to be dealt with in the manner of other crimes."
Carry on, do nothing special. No clearer definition of appeasement, or appeal for it, has been made from Neville Chamberlain's day to this. I hope Mr. Gingrich, Mr. Lott, their constituents, and members of the N.R.A. and the A.C.L.U. consider those instructions. It is their decision whether or not to obey.

Load-Date: August 6, 1996


End of Document