On My Mind;
Now the Hard Part
The New York Times
June 29, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 15; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Column 6;; Op-Ed
Length: 711 words
Byline: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

By A. M. ROSENTHAL
Body


President Clinton acted quickly, properly and in the interests of the United States by ordering the attack on Saddam Hussein's intelligence headquarters.
Now comes the hard part. The President has to respect the intellect of Americans enough to explain to them, with all the clarity at his command, exactly what it is, this threat of terrorism at home and abroad, how it grew, what will be needed to deal with it.
So far, none of the American Presidents in the age of war by terrorism have done that -- neither Presidents Carter, Reagan nor Bush. They have reacted to a terrorist attack, like hostage-taking, or failed to react to one, like the bombing of Pan Am 103.
But after each action, or evasion, the Presidents somehow stopped short of explaining how it all had come about. If there were a film of American policy on terrorism it would be like an old, grainy movie -- a flurry, a blur, a break, a flurry.
So now an American skyscraper can be shattered, an American plane can be destroyed, New York can come within days of slaughter, one American President can punish a death plot against another -- and Americans do not know what the connections are.
Perhaps too much was involved for the Presidents to be candid -- relations with Mideastern and other Muslim states and with American allies, commerce, the arms trade. Maybe it was too hard to state plainly how religious teachings can create death and hatred. Maybe that is why terrorism lives and grows.
The story begins decades ago. To spread or preserve their power, Mideastern countries provided arms, money and bases for various Muslim terrorist groups. Some killed mostly out of political hatreds -- of their own governments, the West and Israel.
For other terrorists, the fundamentalists, there is no real distinction between religious and political motivation. That is part of the meaning of Islamic fundamentalism. "All of Islam is politics," said the Ayatollah Khomeini.
Some Muslim states that sponsored their favorite terrorists found themselves the target of fundamentalist terrorists and tried to pay them off. Some, like Iran and Sudan, were taken over by fundamentalism. Still others -- like Saddam's Iraq, once denounced by fundamentalists -- became their allies, bound by hate of the West.
Most Muslims are not involved in fundamentalism or terrorism. That makes religious hatred essential to discuss without counter-hatred.
But in the interest of Muslim and non-Muslim, it has to be said without evasiveness: around the world millions of Muslims, fearful of the contagiousness of Western political, religious and sexual freedoms, support fundamentalist extremism.
In the Mideast, the cause relies openly on terror to suppress all who oppose it -- Muslim and non-Muslim.  Abroad, fundamentalists are reminded by religious teachers of their separateness, and the danger to Islam of the Satans among whom they live.
The basic reality is that over the years the money, weapons and safe haven that made terrorism possible came from Mideastern Muslim governments -- and still do.
So, there are connections between the fundamentalist terrorism and the terrorism of Saddam Hussein, a man only lately come to Islamic piety.  Both were created by the preaching of profound hatred -- religious or political, or in union. Both are dependent on aid from other countries -- directly from Mideastern tyrannies or indirectly from the West and the former Soviet Union, which empowered those tyrannies with arms and technology.
By themselves, both terrorisms might have withered. But with outside money and arms were created the Saddam Husseins, and men who mixed bombs in foreign cities.
One day Mr. Clinton will have to act again and more widely against Iraq; Saddam is rebuilding arms factories and returns tanks and planes to service. Or, the U.S. may no longer be able to avoid the evidence of terrorist support from Iran, Syria, the Sudan or Libya.
The President will need more than missiles. He will need the end of American and foreign arms sales to the Mideast dictatorships. He will need a strong, expensive, anti-terrorist operation in the U.S. Government.
To get all that, he needs public understanding of exactly what has been going on -- the full story of how the age of terrorism was created and how to end it.

Load-Date: June 29, 1993


End of Document