On My Min;
Our Friend Qaddafi
The New York Times
June 4, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 31; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Column 6;; Op-Ed
Length: 697 words
Byline: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

By A. M. ROSENTHAL
Body


For a while, many Americans asked themselves a sensible and healthy question every time they walked aboard a passenger plane -- is this another Pan Am 103?
The question was sensible because terrorists can do again what they did on Dec. 21, 1988 -- bring down a planeload of 259 people. And it was healthy, because as long as Americans asked it, there was a chance that terrorism could be stopped permanently.
Only one way exists to do that -- to make terrorist nations pay a price. These countries are terrorists' sponsors and paymasters before the crime and their safe havens after it.
The terrorist gangs are no more the sole criminals than was the ladder into the window of the Lindbergh baby -- somebody had to put them in place.
The West finally said that two Libyans did it. That is another Middle East fairy tale, a gem.
Intelligence agents who follow the case believe Iran supplied the money, Syria contributed its live-in Palestinian terrorists and the job was handed off to Libyans when the heat was on.
But let's go along with the fairy tale for a moment: a couple of Libyans managed to get their bomb on board first while, as the evidence shows, the Syrians were planning to do exactly the same thing.
So? So the West and the U.N. said that by Jiminy they would force Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi to turn the two over. Some trade sanctions were imposed, fierce talk talked.
So? So the two great Libyan masterminds are safe at home. Americans' fear of flying diminishes -- with our memory we don't even worry about bombs in skyscraper garages anymore.
The powers that be, or were, refuse to order the total oil embargo that might wipe the smirk off the colonel's face. Nothing surprising about that; the West usually finds a political or economic reason to stop pursuing terrorists. But three things happened in the past few days that made it a little harder to forget Pan Am 103.
One was the Memorial Day weekend. I thought a lot about a new kind of war casualty: civilians killed by state terrorism. That was sad to think of but sadder still was that since I travel a lot, I can see myself among the victims whenever I get on a plane.
Then I spoke to the mother of a young woman aboard that plane. Her voice was as sad as I remembered it was soon after the plane blew up, her pursuit of the guilty as exhausting.
Then the happy colonel happened. This time he managed to keep a straight face as he slavered us with unctuous contempt. The man now gives interviews saying how much he wants to be our friend. The man shipped pilgrims to Israel, where they remembered to say oh, yes, Zionism must be destroyed.
Then Moshe Shahal took place. This specimen is a Labor politician now Israel's Police Minister. He said Libya was "an Arab state we have nothing against."
Hear? Nothing -- not the Libyan terrorist raids on the shores of Israel, not Pan Am, not the killers the colonel dispatches all over the world, not a thing.
Apparently that is not the position of the Israeli Government under which Moshe Shahal and his mouth serve. I prefer Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin's summation of Libya: a "leper state." But the Government could make all victims of terrorism rest easier if it removed Mr. Shahal's political head.
Even if the two Libyan patsies are turned over, they will not blow the whole plot, not with their families hostage in Libya. And the colonel will not ever surrender the use of terrorism -- he was born joined to it at the brain.
But President Clinton -- he could do what candidate Clinton promised the families of the victims: to get to and tell the truth of the bombing of Pan Am 103. Then he could carry out the rest of his promise -- to expose and punish those responsible, the agents and the nations that gave them the ladders.
In 1986 President Reagan stopped Qaddafi's terrorist adventures for a couple of years when he bombed Libya as payment for the terrorist bombing of a Berlin bar used by U.S. servicemen.
The oil embargo might have deeper impact, threatening the whole Libyan economy. At least the colonel would not be smirking so much.
That would not mean anything to the dead. But it might be of some solace to the families of terrorism's victims, past and future.
 

Load-Date: June 4, 1993


End of Document