ON MY MIND;
Death On a Holiday
The New York Times
July 15, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 734 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Body


Terrorists attack cruise ship -there is a special kind of fear that kind of news brings on, an intimate and personal fear, felt by millions as the story whips around the world.
Partly it is the sudden mixture of the pleasant and familiar with the grotesque, like a dream in which you see a friend and he turns to you with a demon's face.
It comes from that, and from the feeling that there is no hiding place from the killers if they can murder you on an excursion ship heading back after a day's outing.
Of course, that is exactly what the terrorists want to get across - you cannot escape us. That is why they pick civilian targets, why a band of killers attacked the Greek vessel City of Poros the other day, leaving 9 people dead, 98 injured.
Usually, the shock is vivid briefly, a couple of weeks. Then it begins to recede. The people on the ship never forget, nor do the relatives of those who encountered death on a holiday. But the tendency of the rest of us to forget is the protection normality tries to throw up against a perversion like the planned murder of innocents.
But the impact of the attack on the City of Poros is not likely to disappear quickly within the Government of Greece - nor among those security specialists around the world who watch how governments react politically to terrorism. They do not give the Greek Government high marks.
Athens insists it does not condone terrorism. But other European capitals and Washington feel Greece is now paying for an attitude that has been politically and morally too relaxed. Security experts everywhere know that if a government's political attitude toward terrorism is slack-jawed, terrorists quickly decide that country is just right for their operations. Political alertness and determined antiterrorist leadership are more important than metal detectors.
In Greece, part of the atmosphere is the Government's warm and kindly attitude toward organizations like the P.L.O. and other Middle Eastern movements that use terrorism abroad as a weapon.
Greek history counts importantly. The civil war brought about by Soviet-backed Communists during and after World War II left still-lasting blood feuds. Right-wing juntaism was supported by the United States, making for anti-Americanism.
Then for years the current Government of Andreas Papandreou en-thusiastically spread more hostility to the U.S. All told, a fine operating ground for terrorists burning with hatred of America.
At least two men high in the Greek security system have had wide contact with terrorist movements for years, and one of them received P.L.O. training. That does not build confidence abroad.
Neither American nor Western European specialists think the Greeks have created an effective antiterrorist force. They say there are too many covert contacts between Greek officials and terrorist groups. And the police are weakened by political promotions and transfers.
So far, Greek Governments have not been able to arrest a single member of the November l7 movement, which commits terrorist murders on its own or on foreign assignment. Italy, France and West Germany have succeeded in breaking or blocking internal terrorist movements. The Greek failure raises security eyebrows all over the Continent and in Washington.
Americans serving their Government in Greece have been frequent targets. A C.I.A. station chief in Athens was murdered and so were two United States Navy captains, the second blown up near his home on June 28. At least 29 Americans have been wounded by direct attack; scores more would have been killed or injured but for dud bombs.
Summed up, there are knowledgeable Americans and Europeans who say the Greek Government has given comfort to terrorists by a kind of political drowsiness toward terrorism and the years of official anti-American harangues. This is not a matter that can be proved in court, but makes for real unease among Greece's allies.
There is hope among friends of Greece that the fact that the ship was Greek might make Athens see terrorism more clearly.
I got that far in this column when I read a fresh report from Greece. The Government spokesman was on full attack - against the United States. The U.S., he said, was orchestrating the American press in a despicable campaign against Greece, using the terrorism issue as blackmail to keep American bases in Greece. Foolish propaganda and hatred; a sad way to end the column and the hope.


End of Document