ON MY MIND;
Once And For All
The New York Times
August 8, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 731 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Body


Every great while, something unexpected happens that presents to a nation and its leader a sudden opportunity to settle a bedeviling problem, once and for all.
Chance, luck, accident - fate is as good a word as any.
Fate, this time in the form of a squad of Israeli commandos, presents President Bush with the opportunity to rescue those American hostages who are still alive and begin the end of the era of terrorism that has killed hundreds of innocent bystanders and helped prevent a Middle East peace.
To do that, he has to select one of three ethically distinct choices; no escaping that.
In all of them, politics, power and principle are intertwined inseparably, as they so often are in times of international high moment.
One is to listen to those Americans who assure him there really is no difference between the kidnapping by terrorists and the capture of the kidnapper.
They tell him, and the country, that his first statements implying he equated Israelis with terrorists was appropriately evenhanded - and that in this nation only Jews are upset by it.
Yes, there are people who speak and write in those terms. They know exactly what they are doing when they draw the line between antiterrorism and terrorism in terms of American Jew and non-Jew. They know.
Then they go on to urge Mr. Bush not only to deal with terrorists in freeing the hostages, which conceivably may be necessary one day, but to pay them off by taking a hard line in Washington against Israel.
Mr. Bush fed those hopes by fumbling on the difference between kidnapping a hostage and capturing the kidnapper. Secretary of State Baker was not among those who thought equating all ''kidnapping'' was a good idea.
In any case, the option to pay off the terrorists at Israel's expense would require the little matter of Israeli agreement. The Israeli Government sometimes acts stupid - but stupid, not suicidal. Trying to buy the terrorists by beating up Israel would delay peace, perhaps eliminate it for decades.
Now, those who say only American Jews are concerned about equating Israel with terrorism sometimes go further. They say the hostages will not be freed until Washington is tougher toward Israel.
Thus, they switch responsibility for freeing the hostages from Teheran and Damascus to Jerusalem and Washington; neat. They are a minority in this country. But careful attention should be paid to them. If we have not learned the dangers of trying to divide an important emotional and political issue along the lines of Jew and non-Jew, then we have learned nothing.
And: If suggesting that getting tough with Israel would free hostages and that only American Jews care about Israel being equated with terrorists is not intended as anti-Semitism, it sure is a lit match tossed with strange carelessness.
The second choice is to settle for a partial solution. Release some of the foreign hostages and the Israeli prisoners and the sheik goes home. Better than nothing.
The issue is allowed to drag on, and once again Americans will be kidnapped or blown up.
But Mr. Bush has it in his hands to end state-supported terrorism. That is the third choice.
To do this, he has to tell the kidnappers' paymasters, Iran and Syria, to release all, all hostages or confront American power, economic and military.
Economic blockade first. But only two things persuade the terrorist nations and their death squads to show the ''moderation'' of not immediately killing more American hostages.
One was the display and threat of American power. The second was the realization that Israel might strike again - this time with American approval.
Nobody wants heavy civilian casualties in Iran and Syria. Those Governments kill enough civilians at home. But if the Israelis can find and destroy an Iraqi nuclear reactor, the United States can pinpoint Iranian oil installations.
To minimize civilian casualties, notice could be given that one target would be destroyed the next day. To prevent the strengthening of the defenses of a specific target, a dozen could be on every announced list.
A clear decision to use military power if economic and political action fail might be enough. But, obviously, once the President takes the first real step to end terrorism he must be prepared to follow through.
Terrorism will end only when the terrorist nations decide they do not want to pay a price for it themselves. So far, the price has been zero.


End of Document