ON MY MIND;
The Next Terrorist Crisis
The New York Times
August 4, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 737 words
Byline: By A. M. Rosenthal
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Israelis did not kidnap the sheik. They captured him.
The difference is not a matter of semantics but of the most profound political and moral importance. It is the difference between terrorism and antiterrorism.
For a long time to come, it will be remembered around the world that when the Bush Administration faced its first crisis, its immediate reaction was to act as if it could not recognize that difference.
For years, Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid directed the very band of killers that specialized in kidnapping, torturing and murdering innocent foreign bystanders, mostly American, to help it achieve its political goals.
That is the classical definition of terrorism.
Finally the Israelis were able to strike back at the sheik and his Hezbollah terrorists by sending in a commando force to capture him. They wanted to free his victims, Israeli and foreign, and to put a plain price on future kidnapping, the bill to be presented to the terrorist chiefs. That is antiterrorism. Do we really have to debate, define and discuss terrorism and antiterrorism? It is staggering that we even have to talk about it after all these years.
Now, the terrorists have postponed the murder of one more American. There are reports the United States sent a warning that the terrorist bases would be attacked.
But terrorism is too valuable a weapon for the death squads and their paymasters to give up until they know the U.S. has a consistent policy of fighting it wherever and whenever it appears - even without the catalyst of an Israeli commando raid. This country has no such policy now.
So one day the terrorists will strike again, another kidnapping, another plane blown up in flight.
President Bush himself raised the question of the basic American attitude toward terrorism. He implied at the beginning of the crisis that all ''kidnappings'' were the same. He went on to call for the immediate release of ''all, all'' of the ''hostages.''
Then Senator Robert Dole contemptuously denounced Israel for ''freelancing.'' It was an exhibition of tight-lipped fury that disgusted many of his friends around the country who happen to hope well for Israel. It put a knowing smirk on the faces of his detractors, a loud ''I told you so.''
Suddenly Israel becomes target and villain. Israel - not the sheik, not his Iranian paymasters or the Syrians. The arms he gets go through Syria. His bands live and train in Syrian-controlled parts of Lebanon.
Israel did what the United States did when it could - reached out to grab a terrorist careless enough to get within grabbing reach.
This is a statement by an American official in 1985:
''We need to extend the reach of U.S. laws to those who would kidnap or murder U.S. citizens overseas. . . .
''This last year we have acted as never before - in seeking extradition of the Achille Lauro hijackers from Italy and of the T.W.A. hijackers from Lebanon and putting a price on the head of the P.L.O. leader of the Achille Lauro hijacking. And, of course, in October U.S. Navy planes forced out of the air a [Egyptian] jet carrying the murderers of Leon Klinghoffer.''
That statement was made by George Bush, then Vice President of the United States and in charge of its antiterrorist activities. What happened to George Bush? The Presidency happened - the Presidency and all its responsibilities, stresses and hard choices. We can sympathize with a President. But we can still expect him to remember today what he said yesterday.
Next month, next year - another crisis until the President adopts a consistent antiterrorist policy and strategy, lets the world know what it is and stands by it.
Now there is no one in Washington or anywhere else who can predict what Mr. Bush will do the next time.
Will he act swiftly or wait while the hostages continue to waste away, as did his predecessors? If Israel sees a chance to take action against terrorism again, will it hesitate too long itself, out of insecurity in the steadfastness of an American President?
Will President Bush be willing to stand up now and say what Vice President Bush had to say about going after terrorists?
President Bush need not announce tactical moves in advance. But terrorism will not end until his enemies know he can be counted on to fight against them - and his allies know he can be counted on to fight alongside them.
It is the not knowing that brings about the taking of hostages, their murder, and one crisis following another.


End of Document