On My Mind;
Stopping The Music
The New York Times
August 27, 1996, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 710 words
Byline: By A. M. ROSENTHAL 

By A. M. ROSENTHAL 
Body


The Democratic and Republican Presidential candidates, and their party platform-writers, all have touched on international terrorism. They come right out and say they are against it.
But, not to be picky, that's not good enough. During the political season, just to denounce terrorism and say how tough we will be someday becomes embarrassing as a display of Presidential quality. And tomorrow, and every day after, it will be an even more meaningless response, more ineffective and vapid.
President Clinton and Bob Dole know why: Terrorists have learned to diversify. They diversify their sources of money and arms, and their techniques of operation and organization. They become harder to track down, more efficient in their labors. So far, the candidates and their platforms have not divulged this to the public.
In their platform the Democrats throw too much into one blender -- drugs, crime and domestic terrorism mixed in with international terrorism. What comes out is impossible to deal with in one lump -- and untrue to reality.
The Republicans are less bland. But they throw in a warning about not allowing anything to interfere with their right to bear arms!
Drug abuse, crime and domestic terrorism are committed by Americans and are American responsibilities to deal with at home. So, we assume, is the interpretation of the Second Amendment.
International terrorism is something else entirely -- a foreign act of war against the U.S. that has to be handled as an act of war.
Neither party has the courage to identify consistently the specific international terrorism directed at the U.S. It is not terrorism of the Irish Republican Army or the Peruvian Shining Path. It is terrorism by militant Islamists who consider the West, Judaism until it is destroyed and then all other religions as enemies standing in the way of Islamic religious rule and so marked by God for death. To say this is not to attack Islam but its perverters. This truth, however, will mean little unless more Muslims speak it.
Instead of contracting, this terrorism is diversifying. Now it taps not only into government sponsors but Mideast fortunes and sophisticated fund-raising abroad. These terrorists have learned how to choose among the different forms of support and shape the operation at hand to suit them. The terrorists did what the West failed to do -- plan for tomorrow, stay flexible.
About this, the leaders of the West have remained silent or mumble-mouthed. But some intelligence specialists and a small number of American investigative journalists have not.
Steven Emerson, a brave independent journalist based in Washington, has exposed the money-raising of Hamas and other terrorist groups in the U.S. and Washington's failure to take effective action under existing law. Jeff Gerth and Judith Miller of The New York Times have added luster to their reputations and the newspaper's with a detailed report on Aug. 14 about the emergence of a sophisticated network of terrorists financed by wealthy businessmen in Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and other countries.
We are dancing to a suicidal rhythm. Terrorists attack, the West investigates; they attack, we investigate; attack, investigate. Waltz us around again as the years go by, dance us in the skies over Lockerbie, to the World Trade Center, to the American barracks in Saudi Arabia, to the Jewish center in Buenos Aires, perhaps to Long Island, maybe someplace else, dance with tears in our eyes. Or is that just spit from friendly countries we have asked not to invest in Iran?
What to do? Why, stop the music and then:
Enforce laws about freezing terrorists' treasuries and fund-raising in America. Give Libya four days to turn over the men who are supposed to have downed Pan Am 103. Maybe they will tell us who else was involved. Publicly inform Syria and the Sudan that terrorist camps not closed at once will become our targets. Publicly inform countries sheltering the terrorists' big money men that their safe houses are now very unsafe. Privately tell our allies how we can retaliate economically and diplomatically if they insist on building up Iran.
Americans have been murdered; more will be. The dancing is obscene. It is the job of a President to say so, and of a man who wants to be.

Load-Date: August 27, 1996


End of Document