on Nuclear Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
December 14, 1993, Tuesday


Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION/ESSAYS; Pg. 23
Length: 900 words
Byline: Jon Brook Wolfsthal; Jon Brook Wolfsthal is a senior analyst at the Arms Control Association, a private nonprofit group in Washington.
Highlight: Cut the hype surrounding North Korea and nuclear weapons
Body


NO one disputes that North Korea's pursuit of a nuclear-weapons
capability is a significant security threat to the region and to
the United States. South Korea and Japan are major US allies and
trading partners; President Clinton has rightly linked continued US
security to the region's stability.
But many in Washington have been hyping the current crisis over
North Korea and offering unfounded speculation about Pyongyang's
nuclear capabilities, with potentially disastrous circumstances.
Few experts doubt that North Korea is working on a bomb, but no one
knows exactly when they will acquire one.
We do know that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has conducted eight inspections in North Korea since Pyongyang
signed an inspection agreement with the agency in April 1992. The
IAEA has since confirmed that North Korea had developed the
capability to produce and reprocess plutonium.
North Korea reported to the IAEA that it had produced several
grams of plutonium - thousands of times less than is needed for
even one nuclear bomb. But the IAEA suspects that North Korea has
produced even more plutonium than it admits to. Secretary of
Defense Les Aspin recently disclosed that North Korea shut down its
nuclear reactor for 100 days in 1989, giving it enough time to
remove fuel elements for reprocessing. But the IAEA has not been
granted access to facilities that might enable it to determine how
much plutonium has been produced or if a significant amount of fuel
has been removed from the reactor.
CIA director James Woolsey testified before Congress this year
that the ''possibility'' exists that North Korea has already
produced enough plutonium for one or two nuclear weapons. But at no
time has the CIA or the IAEA confirmed that North Korea has
produced and extracted enough material for use in a weapon. And
while there is some evidence that North Korea has been developing
the technical capability to produce nuclear weapons, there is no
reliable information that they have reached the technological point
where they could actually build a nuclear bomb.
DURING World War II, the US developed two types of nuclear
weapons, one fueled with uranium - Little Boy - and a second
powered by plutonium - Fat Man. The physics of Little Boy, which
was dropped on Hiroshima, was so well understood by 1945 that no
explosive tests of the device were necessary to be confident it
would work. Fat Man's design, however, which used plutonium, was
much more complex than Little Boy's and had to be tested to ensure
it would work.
Even if one assumes that North Korea has enough plutonium for
one or two weapons and that it has progressed far enough to
construct such a weapon, it would be very difficult for North
Korea's leadership to have confidence that such a device would work
without testing it first. North Korean leaders would surely want to
know that a nuclear weapon would work before trying to use it to
exact concessions from other countries.
Some analysts will argue that Israel, which is believed to have
developed a nuclear arsenal based on plutonium, never needed to
test its weapons to have a high degree of confidence. But few could
reasonably maintain that North Korea is as advanced now as Israel
was in 1967, when it is thought to have acquired its first nuclear
capability.
Hype is nothing new in the field of nonproliferation. Before the
Gulf war began, President Bush claimed that Iraq might be within
six months of producing a nuclear bomb. It was later discovered
that it was at least 18 to 36 months from acquiring a bomb when the
war began. Former CIA director Robert Gates stated in February 1992
that North Korea was between ''a couple of months and a couple of
years'' from acquiring a nuclear bomb. Some took his statement to
mean that a North Korean bomb was imminent, which also proved to be
false. Experts and analysts sometimes overstate the facts to force
an administration to take notice, or to attract media attention.
These suppositions have a tendency to be repeated until they take
on the weight of fact.
Challenging this hype should in no way be interpreted as an
effort to downplay the threat posed to the international community
by North Korea's flouting of its obligations under the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty. The consequences of North Korea acquiring
a bomb would be enormous and could precipitate the creation of a
nuclear-armed South Korea and Japan.
The sensitive nature of the US-North Korean dialogue, however,
argues for a clear analysis based on facts. Nonproliferation
experts, reporters, and government officials have a responsibility
not to exaggerate what is known about North Korea's nuclear
capabilities just to make a point or headlines. The dangers are
real enough without the hype.
The Clinton administration is rightfully pursuing all diplomatic
possibilities to end the standoff and convince North Korea to
accept IAEA inspections. The time has come, if all diplomatic
options fail and the threat of a North Korean bomb becomes
immediate, when more punitive actions might be necessary. That
determination, however, should be based on hard evidence, not on
the hype witnessed in recent weeks.
 
The Opinion/Essay Page welcomes manuscripts. Authors of articles
will be notified by telephone. Authors of articles not accepted
will be notified by postcard. Send manuscripts by mail to
Opinions/Essays, One Norway Street, Boston, MA 02115, by fax to 617
-450-2317, or by Internet E-mail to OPED@RACHEL.CSPS.COM.  

Graphic

 
DRAWING. NO CREDIT

Load-Date: December 15, 1993


End of Document