On Politics
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 20, 2010 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Times Publishing Company
Section: METRO; Pg. 8
Length: 456 words
Body


Rubio, Putnam going to Palin rally
Senate front-runner Marco Rubio and agriculture commissioner candidate Adam Putnam will make it to a rally Saturday in Orlando featuring Sarah Palin and Republican National Committee Chairman Michael Steele.
Attorney general candidate Pam Bondi won't be there, even though she has been endorsed by Palin. Rick Scott, who received Palin's endorsement, also won't be there. He has a previously scheduled campaign event.
William March
Jeb's take on Scott has changed
A pair of quotes illustrate former Gov. Jeb Bush's changed view of GOP candidate for governor Rick Scott.
After the Scott vs. Alex Sink debate Oct. 9, Scott declined to appear before reporters, as he has done frequently, and Bush spoke in his place.
Asked why Scott won the primary, Bush said, "The main reason Rick Scott won is that he was focusing on getting Florida back to work."
Bush had backed Bill McCollum against Scott in the primary. During a campaign appearance in Tampa on Aug. 9, Bush was asked why Scott was leading McCollum.
His answer then, emphasizing each word: "Twenty--five--million--dollars."
William March
Dem big on gun, quiet on party
When you're a Democrat running for Congress in a heavily Republican district, it helps to look like a Republican. Fifth District nominee Jim Piccillo's first TV commercial never mentions his party and shows the former solider in uniform and civilian garb wielding an M4 assault rifle and pledging to "kick some butt" to stop special interests from ruining the country.
It also doesn't hurt to have Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson help you secure a couple of medals for your military service. With Nelson's assistance, the U.S. Army this month awarded Piccillo the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and an Army Commendation Medal for his service to his country.
Piccillo, who never served in a combat zone, was awarded the war on terrorism medal for serving his country in anti-terrorism operations on and after the 9/11 attacks.
Laura Kinsler
Suffolk poll showsRubio up 8, Sink up 7
A poll by Suffolk University shows Rubio leading in the Senate race by 8 percentage points, which, if true, would indicate the race is tightening. Most other recent polls have shown Rubio with a double-digit lead.
The poll also shows Sink up 7 points over Scott in the governor race.
The Senate results: Rubio, 39 percent; Charlie Crist, 31 percent; and Kendrick Meek, 22 percent. The governor results: Sink, 45 percent; Scott, 37 percent.
In the attorney general race, the poll showed Bondi up 38 to 30 percent over Dan Gelber.
The poll has a sample of 500 and an error margin of 4.4 points.
William March
Copyright © 2010, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: November 4, 2010


End of Document