On radio, President defends Patriot Act;
Calling it a vital tool against terrorism, Bush said "some politicians" ignore lasting threats.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 18, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A07
Length: 374 words
Byline: Pete Yost ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Declaring the Patriot Act a vital tool in the war on terror, President Bush yesterday said Congress would place the nation at greater risk of attack if it failed to renew the act's wide-ranging law-enforcement powers.
Key elements of the post-Sept. 11 law are set to expire next year, and "some politicians in Washington act as if the threat to America will also expire on that schedule," Bush said in his weekly radio address.
"To abandon the Patriot Act would deprive law enforcement and intelligence officers of needed tools in the war on terror, and demonstrate willful blindness to a continuing threat."
Several conservative Republicans have joined liberal Democrats in saying that portions of the law are too intrusive on Americans' lives. They are threatening to allow the provisions to die at the end of next year.
Some want more judicial oversight over how police and prosecutors conduct investigations.
"Our government's first duty is to protect the American people," and the Patriot Act "fulfills that duty in a way that is fully consistent with constitutional protections," Bush said.
Asked Friday whether Bush was making a campaign issue of the Patriot Act, White House spokesman Scott McClellan said that the President was "going to continue to talk about it" and that there were "some clear choices on this issue . . . in this election."
Bush's remarks strike a theme that he will return to next week, beginning tomorrow in the western part of Pennsylvania, a state that is key to his reelection hopes.
In an appearance in Pittsburgh, he and law-enforcement officers will stress the Patriot Act's importance. On Tuesday, the President will speak about the Patriot Act again with law-enforcement officers in Buffalo, N.Y., where criminal charges were brought recently against the Lackawanna Six, a group of Yemeni Americans convicted of supporting terrorism by briefly attending al-Qaeda camps in Afghanistan.
Bush said the Patriot Act must not be weakened. The law "tore down the artificial wall between the FBI and CIA, and enhanced their ability to share the information needed to hunt terrorists," the President said.
Because of the law, FBI agents can better conduct electronic surveillance and wiretaps on suspected terrorists, he said.

Load-Date: August 24, 2005


End of Document