On Racial Terrorism; DRY HEAT
San Manuel Miner (Arizona)
July 1, 2015


Copyright 2015 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2015 San Manuel Miner


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 553 words
Byline: San Manuel Miner staff
Body


The horrible killing of nine innocent people in a church in Charleston, South Carolina has shown that racism still exists in America. Add hatred and ignorance and you get someone like Dylann Roof who believes he's on a mission to start a "race war." This was a terrorist act carried out by a white supremacist. Whether he acted alone or was part of a group remains to be seen. If he did it on his own, he was at the very least influenced by white supremacist websites and rhetoric. This influence was shown when he spouted out a white supremacist diatribe/'You rape our women; you're taking over our country," and repeated their mantra of the coming race war.
He hoped to start a war but only found forgiveness and prayers for his soul from survivors and his victims' families and church members. Along with Presidents Obama's moving eulogy for Pastor Clementa Pinckney, the consciousness of people all around the country has been raised. So much so that South Carolina looks like it will remove the Confederate battle flag from government buildings. This symbol of slavery, hatred, discrimination, KKK terror and white supremacy is about to go down. It is about time!
Unfortunately while most Americans were empathizing with the victims' families some were more worried about Obama coming for their guns. They sit hunkering in their bunkers with their German shepherds waiting for the start of the imaginary race war. Five churches have been burned in the South, churches where the majority of members are African-American. No evidence yet that it is arson but the timing is too coincidental. The Ku Klux Klan is also planning a protest against the removal of the Confederate battle flag. When will they ever learn? President Obama and civil liberties groups have been on a roll thanks to the Supreme Court. SCOTUS made gay marriage the law of the land, the Affordable Care Act is still standing strong, and they supported the will of the people in Arizona where gerrymandering may soon be over.
On the lighter side, Donald "Latinos Love Me" Trump, the billionaire celebrity, announced his candidacy for President and now ranks second in the polls of all the Republican candidates. Then he opened his mouth and made derogatory comments about Mexicans. "They're bringing drugs. They bring crime. They're rapists and some, I assume, are good people." Thank you, Donald, this means more Latinos will be voting Democrat. The Republicans will need almost 40 percent of the Hispanic vote to have a chance in the 2016 election. Not looking good. Trump, also when asked about his views on the gay marriage ruling by the Supreme Court, says he believes in traditional marriage. By that he means three marriages, two divorces and three pre-nuptial agreements. Author's Note:
I have been given the opportunity to express my opinion and viewpoints on politics, national, state, and local issues as well as life in general. I hope to inform you as well as entertain you, make you smile or make you mad. I will use humor, sarcasm and occasionally anger to express my views. My intention is to hold politicians accountable sometimes bringing some heat on them and if my views make you angry or hot, remember that like my humor, it is a dry heat. These opinions are entirely my own and do not reflect the views of Copper Area News Publishers.

Load-Date: June 8, 2016


End of Document