ON THE EVE OF PEACE TALKS, 30 HURT IN ISRAEL BOMBING THE INJURIES WERE MINOR. NONETHELESS, THE BLASTS RIPPED OPEN THE DEBATE OVER TERRORISM.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 8, 1999 Monday SF EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 624 words
Byline: Barbara Demick, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Homemade pipe bombs hidden in garbage cans ripped through the seaside city of Netanya yesterday, causing mostly light injuries to about 30 people, but nonetheless again jarring open Israel's painful debate about terrorism and the peace process.
The explosions came the day before talks were to open on a "final status" peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians. Hardly had the victims been taken away by ambulance when hard-liners emerged in downtown Netanya urging Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak to suspend the peace process.
"No security. No peace," read the familiar banners waved by the protesters after the explosions.
Barak issued a statement yesterday saying he was "determined to smash terrorism." A member of his cabinet, Haim Ramon, said that the final-status talks would open this morning in Ramallah as scheduled.
The Palestinians' senior negotiator, Saeb Erekat, condemned the attack and applauded Israel's decision to go forward with the talks.
There was speculation that the bombings might be the work of Hamas, the dreaded Islamic resistance movement that has been blamed for the most lethal terrorism in Israel.
Only a day earlier, a leaflet purporting to be from Hamas' militant Izzadine el-Qassam brigade had warned that the "Zionist rulers must prepare themselves for a new wave of harsh strikes."
Ten Palestinians were detained briefly for questioning, then released, Armed Forces Radio reported.
Israeli Police Commissioner Yehuda Wilk said yesterday that the initial investigation did not point to Hamas and that he was inclined to attribute the attack to amateurs.
"It is easy to turn our lives into hell," said Wilk. "It is easy to block all cities with checkpoints and create huge traffic jams."
Witnesses described three bombs exploding almost simultaneously about 11 a.m. A fourth was deactivated by police in the nearby Mediterranean. The bombs were simple devices, made of nails and dynamite.
"As I was crossing the street, I heard a huge blast, really like a cannon going off," Avram Aviv, a middle-age man who was injured slightly in the back and head, told Israeli television from a hospital bed. Aviv, who also had been wounded in a 1994 bus bombing, vowed that Israelis would not be swayed by terrorism.
"We will continue to live here, me and my children. . . . These cowards won't stop us. If they're not cowards, let them meet us like men, face to face."
As of last night, all but 10 people had been released from hospitals, and only four were said to be moderately injured. The others suffered from minor burns, cuts and shock.
The Netanya bombings follow a string of terrorist attacks that have caused only minor injuries, or, in some cases, killed only the terrorists themselves.
In mid-August, two pipe bombs exploded harmlessly in an empty office building in Netanya. In early September, just one day after the signing of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreement to restart the peace process, three bombers were killed in thwarted attacks in Tiberius and Haifa.
It is a particularly sensitive time in the peace process, with Barak determined to forge ahead with the deal signed in Sharm el-Sheikh and to reach a framework agreement on a larger peace by February.
By next Monday, the Israelis are supposed to hand over an additional 5 percent of the West Bank, and the Israeli army reportedly is planning to evacuate six small military bases as early as this week.
Several Jewish settlements in the West Bank also are being dismantled in the next few days.
The Netanya bombings, however minor the injuries, give fresh ammunition to Barak's opponents on the right.
Yesterday in the Knesset, the opposition Likud Party - which embraced the peace process under the previous government - demanded that Barak put the process on hold.

Graphic

 
PHOTO AND MAP

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document