On Terror, Trump Sees Israel as His Model; Israeli experts object: 'More like a 14-year-old's perception of what Israel's terror policy really is,' says one.
The Forward
September 30, 2016


Copyright 2016 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 3
Length: 1250 words
Body


Back in 1994, Prime Minister Yitzhak  Rabin promised the Israeli people that the newly  signed Oslo Accord would not lead to a surge in  terrorism, even though the Palestinian Authority   would take control of parts of the West Bank  and Gaza. Rabin could make this promise, he said,  because the P.A.  unlike Israel  didn't have to  operate under legal and civil society constraints.
Without a Supreme Court and without human  rights watchdogs, he said, predicting how the P.A.  would be effective in policing its own people.
More than 20 years later, this idea might sound
familiar. Republican presidential candidate Donald  Trump says we should prevent terror attacks like  the one in New York City on September 15 by  using Israeli-style profiling and other anti-terror  tactics. But experts say the GOP nominee fails to  understand basic tenets of Israeli policy  and  misrepresents others. Democratic candidate Hillary   Clinton strikes a very different tone.
Trump says, as Rabin did, that political correctness   and governmental timidity can inhibit the  fight against terror.
We will not allow political correctness and soft-on-terror, soft-on-crime policies to threaten our  security and our lives, Trump said September 19,  hours after the capture of Ahmad Khan Rahami,  the suspect in the New York and New Jersey bombing   attempts.
But the resemblance between Trump's post-Chelsea   bombing approach to terrorism and Israel's  battle-tested doctrine is mainly superficial. Trump  oversimplifies Israel's approach, experts say.
Trump's statements in past days are more like a  14-year-old's perception of what Israel's terror policy   really is, said Neri Zilber, an adjunct fellow at  the Washington Institute for Near East Policy who  is based in Tel Aviv. It's a false conception of what  Israel does on the ground.
In response to the bombings and stabbing, Trump  directly invoked Israel when explaining his call for  use of racial profiling as a legitimate way to fight  terrorism.
Israel has done an unbelievable job, and they  will profile. They profile, Trump told Fox News.  They see somebody that's suspicious. They will  profile. They will take that person in and check  out. Do we have a choice? Look what's going on.  Do we really have a choice?
Israel does indeed profile, especially in its airport  security operation, but not nearly as broadly or  indiscriminately as Trump suggests; Israel does  not target all Muslims. Israeli authorities focus on  young, single Palestinians who they believe pose a  greater security risk than other population groups.  While Israel's profiling has been condemned internationally,   it is far less sweeping than that urged  by Trump.
Trump also says he believes torture is an effective  method of extracting information from terrorists.
Torture works. Okay, folks? You know, I have  these guys  'Torture doesn't work!'  believe me,  it works, he said in February during a campaign  event in South Carolina at which he backed water-boarding   and much worse.
And Israel uses torture as well, but only in cases  described as ticking bomb situations, in which a  terrorist has vital information that can be used to  save lives immediately. Israel had a public debate  about torture two decades ago, and it concluded   that the use of torture demands rigid limits,  set first by a public committee and later by the  Supreme Court. Trump has called for a blanket  authorization for using torture techniques, while  Israel regulates it.
Where Trump does hew closer to Israel's actu-
al counterterrorism practices is on  the distinction he wants to make  between criminal suspects and  enemy combatants. In Israel, Palestinian   terror suspects (but not  Jewish ones) are tried in the military   justice system, which allows  prolonged detention before charges  and conducts trials based heavily on  classified information that the defendant   cannot access.
Trump admires this system and has  called for terror suspects on United  States soil to be tried not in civilian  courts, but as foreign enemy combatants,   a definition used in the past to  justify the incarceration of detainees   in the prison on Guantanamo Bay  and their trial in military tribunals.
Congress should pass measures to  ensure that foreign enemy combatants   are treated as such, Trump said  September 19. These are enemies,  these are combatants, and we have to  be tough, we have to be strong.
Where Trump can't score points  with Israelis looking for international   validation of their own practices  and methods is on the issue of national   security experience. He doesn't have  it; Clinton does, and Israelis value that.
I'm the only candidate in this race  who's been part of the hard decisions  to take terrorists off the battlefield,  Clinton told reporters August 17.
It is an argument that Israel's liberal   opposition leaders have struggled  with for years, lamenting their inability   to take over the premiership due  to the perception that their lack  of sufficient military and national   security credentials disqualified  them from that highest office. History   proves this point valid in Israeli  politics  the only electoral success  the country's Labor Party has seen  was when led by Rabin and by Ehud  Barak, both former generals who had  entered politics with years of national   security experience.
Clinton doesn't invoke Israel when  she talks counterterrorism. She has  spoken out against profiling; after  the New York City bomb explosion,  she repeated her frequent claim that  profiling Muslims or targeting entire  communities would only inflame  terrorism and serve as a recruiting  tool for extremists.
We know that a lot of the rhetoric  we've heard from Donald Trump has  been seized on by terrorists, in particular   ISIS [the Islamic State group],  she told reporters at a press conference   outside her campaign plane in  White Plains, New York, on August 17.
Clinton has also praised President  Obama's decision to prohibit torture.
I am proud to have been a part  of the Obama administration that  banned illegal renditions and brutal  interrogations, Clinton said at a  gala in 2014 after the release of a CIA  report on torture. Yes, the threat  of terrorism is real and urgent, she  added, but the crowd should steel  our resolve and underscore that our  values are what set us apart from our  adversaries.
Whoever wins the election, Israelis  hope that terror attacks in the United  States will induce American leaders  to show more sympathy to the Israeli   struggle.
Today the entire international  community says that there is a need  to wage a determined and uncompromising   fight against terrorism,  Israel's prime minister, Benjamin  Netanyahu, told reporters before  leaving for New York, where attended  the United Nations General Assembly.   And indeed, they must also  support the determined and uncompromising   fight against terrorism,  and this moral clarity is necessary to  both fight against  and defeat   terrorism.
Netanyahu has long protested what  he and other Israelis see as a double  standard in which other countries  pressure Israel to use restraint in  dealing with terrorists but don't do  the same thing when terror hits their  own citizens.
Any time you have a terror attack  in Europe or in America, Israelis  hope the world will understand what  they've been dealing with for years,  Zilber said, that Israel is the canary  in the coal mine.
Contact Nathan Guttman at  guttman@forward.com
or on Twitter @nathanguttman

Graphic

 
IMAGE: 'They Profile':Israeli police frisk Palestinian men before Friday prayer at theDamascus Gate, a main entrance to Jerusalem's Old City.; GETTY IMAGES
IMAGE: Experience Preferred:Hillary Clinton stresses she's 'the only candidate who's been part ofthe hard decisions to take terrorist off the battlefield,' a claim that resonates with Israelis.; GETTY IMAGES
IMAGE: Huuuge Fan:'Israel has done an unbelievablejob,' says Trump.; GETTY IMAGES

Load-Date: October 6, 2016


End of Document