ON U.S.-CUBAN TIES;
by Jorge I.Dominguez
The New York Times
February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 843 words
Dateline: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.
Body


The United States and Cuba are almost certain to be involved in bitter political disputes in coming months. The Reagan Administration, accusing the Cuban Government of interfering in El Salvador's internal affairs, has placed the El Salvador issue at the top of its foreign policy priorities in relations with friends and adversaries. Nonetheless, United States policy must recognize that despite any conflicts with Cuba over El Salvador, or Angola, or Ethiopia, there is an important aspect of the bilateral relationship that should be preserved.
To put it differently: Do Ronald Reagan and Fidel Castro have common interests? They do, and it is essential that both countries enhance their joint gains from their existing relationship, even though they may remain in conflict over their relations with other countries.
Jorge Dominguez, Harvard government professor, Op-Ed discusses USCuban ties
Mr. Reagan and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. have made it clear that they believe that combating international terrorism is an essential foreign policy goal. The main reason for the decline of one form of terrorism - the hijacking of commercial airliners to Cuba - has been the agreements between the two capitals that have deterred and punished hijackers. Our Government must retain the Cuban Government's trust and collaboration if a hijacking epidemic is not to resume.
Havana very much wants Washington to prevent the launching of terrorist attacks against Cuba from United States soil. If Washington wants to be credible and consistent in its antiterrorism campaign, the Administration should take all possible steps to do so.
The Administration has a major stake in regulating and controlling the flow of people into the United States. The Castro Government opened a harbor last year to allow the emigration of Cuban-Americans' relatives and friends to the States. Havana has signaled that it is ready to open the gates again, even in the absence of formal agreements with Washington. Such agreements must be negotiated, especially since the boats carried people, including criminals, who would not ordinarily be admitted under immigration law. Unrelieved hostility toward Cuba might put the Administration in the uncomfortable position of ordering the Navy and Coast Guard to ''blockade'' the States against a new, illegal wave of Cubans seeking entry. Would United States personnel shoot at refugees? Should the Miami area be asked to absorb another 250,000 Cubans?
The Administration has indicated that the guiding value of its policies toward Latin America is to make the Western Hemisphere a bastion of freedom. It would be contrary to that policy to cut off the possibility of receiving remaining Cuban political prisoners, to prevent Cuban-Americans from visiting their families in Cuba, to prevent United States citizens from traveling to Cuba for cultural, educational or artistic reasons, or for touring, using charter flights departing from United States airports. It would be contrary to such a profession of freedom if visits by Cuban scholars or artists to the United States were prohibited, or if our libraries or scholars could no longer obtain Cuban documents and other publications, or if Cuban films could not longer be exhibited in this country.
Both governments share an aversion to the international drug traffic. Collaboration between their coast guards and the continued exchange of information on the problem would also serve common interests.
The maintenance of professional collaboration between both countries' weather services has served the safety of the peoples of Cuba and of Florida for decades. Hurricane-tracking in the Caribbean must remain insulated from disputes about El Salvador.
The diplomatic and consular ''interest sections'' established in 1977, whereby United States diplomats are posted in the Swiss Embassy in Havana and a comparable number of Cubans posted in the Czechoslovak Embassy in Washington, have served to clarify disagreements and to cool down disputes in moments of crisis. Our section in Havana has proved invaluable in assisting our citizens in Cuban jails, individuals with both United States and Cuban citizenships, Cuban political prisoners going to the States, and United States tourists.
It might be argued that the two countries have compatible goals in areas of the world where suspicion and hostility prevail: They may share a common interest in a Namibian settlement, in the preservation of existing African borders, even in Gulf Oil's continued oil operations in Angola's Cabinda enclave. Admittedly, these are controversial propositions.
What should not be controversial is that Ronald Reagan and Fidel Castro do have common interests in ensuring that possibilities of cooperation remain, despite the foreseeable deterioration in relations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jorge I. Dominguez, professor of government and chairman of the committee on Latin American and Iberian studies at Harvard University, is author of ''Cuba: Order and Revolution.''


End of Document