ON WASHINGTON;
Iran told to pay for terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
March 12, 1998, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14A; Pg. 14A
Length: 763 words
Byline: --; Compiled by Ernie Freda from staff; news services and published reports
Series: Metro Final Today's News
Body


Federal Judge Royce Lamberth ordered Iran to pay $ 247.5 million in damages to the family of an American woman killed by a suicide bomber in 1995. "The court is seeking to deter further terrorist actions," Royce said. The ruling Wednesday, the first under a new law permitting Americans to sue nations believed to sponsor terrorism for damages caused by such attacks, could complicate tentative efforts to improve relations between the United States and Iran.
Alisa Flatow, 20, of West Orange, N.J., was a student at a seminary in Jerusalem when she was killed along with seven Israeli soldiers in an attack on a bus in the Gaza Strip in which Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.
"Terrorists and the countries which sponsor them should know that we will continue to increase the price to be paid for acts of terrorism," declared Rep. Jim Saxton (R-N.J.), who heads the House Task Force on Terrorism. "This decision clearly shows that we will . . . hit them hard in the wallet as well."
Flatow's family is unlikely to collect the damage award any time soon, but the United States froze Iranian assets valued at $ 12 billion in 1979, and the money possibly could come from there. Whistleblower victory The Justice Department agreed Wednesday to pay a record $ 300,000 Privacy Act settlement to FBI crime lab whistleblower Frederic Whitehurst, who alleged the government spread false and derogatory information to discredit him. The government also agreed to speed the release to Whitehurst of 180,000 pages of FBI lab reports by examiners whose work he had criticized. Whitehurst was reinstated last month from a yearlong paid suspension, then resigned. The Justice settlement is in addition to one Whitehurst received last month from the FBI. In the earlier settlement, the FBI agreed to purchase $ 1.166 million worth of annuities that will pay the 50-year-old chemist-agent annual amounts equal to the salary and pension he would have earned had he kept working until normal FBI retirement at age 57. The bureau also paid $ 258,580 in Whitehurst's legal fees. Whitehurst's lawsuit had claimed that, in retaliation for his whistleblowing, FBI and Justice officials attempted to discredit him by releasing damaging and incorrect information about him, his medical condition, his wife, his fitness for duty, and internal investigations of him. Comin' out smokin' Three lobbying firms with strong political ties to Congress were paid $ 12.7 million last year by five tobacco companies seeking limits from Congress on liability costs from smokers' lawsuits, new federally required lobbying reports show. The well-connected registered lobbyists at those three firms are: former Senate Democratic leader George Mitchell of Maine, former Senate Republican leader Howard Baker of Tennessee and former GOP National Committee Chairman Haley Barbour. "The public health community has nowhere near the kind of influence and access that the tobacco companies have," said Scott Ballin, a consultant working with the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. A couple of former House members, but no ex-congressional leaders, are lobbying for health groups, Ballin said. Watch those stairs Sen. Barbara Boxer's left knee buckled while the California Democrat was carrying her 3-year-old grandson Zachary down some stairs Monday at her California home, and she flew back to Washington in considerable pain with torn ligaments. And Rep. John Spratt Jr.  (D-S.C.), walking down the marbled steps near the Senate restaurant last week, slipped on some spilled bean soup and ended up with two small fractures in his right arm. ELSEWHERE
Former Sen. Bill Bradley (D-N.J.), who has been on again, off again about whether to make a presidential bid since he left the Senate in 1996, said during a talk at Eckerd College in St. Petersburg, Fla., that he might.
Broadway dancers Savion Glover and Bebe Neuwirth were among 17 entertainers at the White House this week as the seventh "In Performance at the White House" was taped for showing later this year on PBS.
Gennifer Flowers and Pete Rose are scheduled to appear at WrestleMania XIV in San Francisco on March 29. DULY NOTED "To a physicist, everything is relative; to a geneticist, everyone is a relative." --- Francis Collins, director of the Human Genome Research Institute, at a White House briefing on the administration's science budget, presided over by Hillary Rodham Clinton. TODAY'S AGENDA Happening: Thai Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai arrives in Washington to meet with President Clinton on bilateral security and the current financial instability in Asia.

Graphic

 
Photo :
 mug of Frederic Whitehurst

Load-Date: March 13, 1998


End of Document