Once again, lessons of terrorism intrude
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 28, 1996, Sunday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 293 words
Byline: WILBUR G. LANDREY
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Some reflections after Centennial Olympic Park at Atlanta:
What I originally wrote about for today was the resentment against an Ugly  American trying to tell others whom to trade with, dumping on U.N.  Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and hogging the limelight at the  Olympics.
But the bomb in Centennial Olympic Park swept some of that aside with the  outpouring of sympathy, solidarity and the realization that we are all  vulnerable.
Whoever set off the bomb could not have chosen a more shocking place than  the Olympics, except perhaps for one of the world's great places of worship.
LANDRY
As the most powerful nation on Earth, the United States has become, for  many, the most responsible for their grievances.
Even in the most powerful nation on Earth, there is no hiding place from  the terrorism by the angry, the oppressed and the criminal that has haunted  the world.
The World Trade Center in 1993, the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, the  apartment complex in Dhahran a month ago, TWA Flight 800 a week ago, are all  testimony to those who may have forgotten the destruction of the U.S. Embassy  and Marine barracks in Beirut and PanAm Flight 103 over Lockerbie.
Terrorism is the weapon of the weak.
When all else fails, terrorist attacks are the ultimate - if cowardly and  sick - attempt to get even and be heard.
In reacting, remember the past wisdom that the thing to fear is fear  itself.
One danger is that the hunt for terrorists, looking for the enemy under  every table, chair and bed, could lead to a witch hunt.
And just as important as hunting down the terrorists is addressing the  grievances they feed on.
At home, as in a Middle East that still hasn't really learned the lesson,  peace creates security more than the other way around.

Load-Date: July 30, 1996


End of Document