One size fits all?; The Pentagon plans to award one medal for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, an for any future campaigns related to the war on terrorism
Air Force Times
September 1, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSLINES; Pg. 8
Length: 1472 words
Byline: By Vince Crawley; Times staff writer, Defense Department, Master Sgt. Terry L. Blevins
Body


Despite the weight of well over a century of military tradition and precedence, the Pentagon has no plans for campaign-specific medals for the most recent wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the nation's most protracted conflicts since Korea and Vietnam - both of which were deemed medal-worthy.
Military duty in Antarctica, Kosovo and the 1991 PersianGulf War also rates medals, as does "humane action," "humanitarian service" and "outstanding volunteer service." Past generations of veterans have qualified for medals and their accompanying ribbons for a wide range of operations, from the Civil War and both World Wars to China's Boxer Rebellion, the Spanish-American War and military actions against Mexico.
But troops involved in the current battle against terrorism instead will get two recently approved awards, the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and a Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, which are intended to cover all the bases in an effort that President Bush says likely will last many years and be fought on many shores.
In addition, veterans of these 21st-century wars may receive each medal only once. In theory - and in current practice - troops could spend years fighting in Afghanistan, Iraq, the Philippines and elsewhere and end up with a single medal that doesn't reflect their specific duty history or even the fact that they deployed multiple times in the global war on terrorism.
The Pentagon isn't saying much about its rationale for the decision. Defense officials believe "these two medals will provide appropriate recognition for our service members participating in the global war on terrorism, whether that be in Afghanistan, Iraq or elsewhere," said Air Force Maj. Sandra Burr, a Pentagon spokeswoman.
Not all troops agree. Marine 1st Lt. Zeb Philpott, 26, weapons platoon commander for Alpha Company, 2nd Light Armored Reconnaissance Battalion at Camp Lejeune, N.C., said campaign medals help establish an immediate rapport with individuals checking into a unit.
"You can tell what he's done," Philpott said. "I can look at a gunny and tell that he was in the Gulf War."
And people look. When a Marine shows up at a new duty station, commanders look first at his decorations and his physical fitness score - the first to see where he's been, the second to see if he can hang.
"They show what you've done and how serious you are," said Gunnery Sgt. James Cuneo, Alpha Company gunny. "If you're a good Marine, people are going to award you when it comes time. My ribbons don't make me who I am, but they show my experience level."
After 15 years, he's got quite a bit to show for his efforts - four full rows and the start of a fifth. They include the Navy/Marine Corps Achievement Medal with three stars, a combat action ribbon for Desert Storm with a star pending for recent Iraq ops, the Southwest Asia Service Medal with three stars and the Kuwait Liberation Medal.
"I think they ought to have an Iraq ribbon," Cuneo said. "They ought to have a Djibouti ribbon. And they ought to have an Afghanistan ribbon. They all mean different things."
Lt. Col. Keith Schultz, a B-52 Stratofortress pilot with the Air Force Reserve's 917th Wing at Barksdale Air Force Base, La., spent 91/2 months deployed to Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom.
On his last deployment, Schultz flew Iraqi Freedom missions from England and then headed to the Indian Ocean and flew Enduring Freedom assignments.
"I saw them as separate conflicts," Schultz said.
If one medal is issued to represent both operations, Schultz hopes the citation will explain the operations in which the recipient fought.
Tech. Sgt. Michael Pierce, a B-52 weapons loader with the 917th Wing, deployed to Enduring Freedom.
He said there should be some way to show, such as with a device on the ribbon, how many times an airman deployed or in what conflicts he served.
Others are fine with the GWOT medals. "It's nice to receive awards and decorations, but I was just there doing my job," said a field artillery major who recently returned from Iraq with the Army's 3rd Infantry Division.
"This is my job, my profession," he said. "There are people doing things everywhere. All of us are a part of this big [global war on terrorism]."
Bush signed an executive order March 12 to create the Global War on Terrorism medals on the recommendation of Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. But none has yet been officially issued because Rumsfeld's staff is working out the fine print for eligibility.
The Army Institute of Heraldry said June 13 that Rumsfeld's staff is "finalizing" the criteria and implementation rules for the two medals.
Asked Aug. 18 when the medals would be issued, Burr said she could not predict when coordination on the eligibility policy would be complete.
A March 15 Pentagon news release referred to the medals as the GWOT Service Medal and GWOT Expeditionary Medal, using the Pentagon's acronym for the global war on terrorism.
The Expeditionary Medal will recognize service in operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom. The Service Medal will recognize duty in Operation Noble Eagle, the homeland defense mission against further terror attacks, as well as duty in support of operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom performed in geographic areas that don't qualify for the Expeditionary Medal.
In the past, some medals have been created years or decades after the conflict they represent. The medals can be established by the president or Congress.
They typically include official orders and become part of the service ribbons that appear on service members' dress uniforms.
Below are examples of other campaign and service medals. Most can be awarded more than once; commonly, a small bronze star device is attached to the ribbon for each additional award.
**The Southwest Asia Service Medal was awarded for the 1991 Gulf War, with an eligibility period from Aug. 2, 1990, to Nov. 30, 1995.
In October 1990, when U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia began preparing for a possible offensive against Iraq, Pentagon personnel officials asked the Institute of Heraldry to provide proposed designs for a Southwest Asia Service Medal. Proposals were forwarded Oct. 30 to then-Defense Secretary Dick Cheney. A proposed executive order to authorize the medal was drafted by Cheney's office Feb. 11, 1991, before the ground war began. The medal was established by executive order March 12, less than two weeks after the cease-fire.
Three separate campaigns are recognized: the defense of Saudi Arabia, the liberation of Kuwait and patrolling the cease-fire agreement through Nov. 30, 1995, and service members can be awarded the medal up to three times.
nn**The Kosovo Campaign Medal was established by President Clinton on May 3, 2000, to recognize service in the U.S.-led Kosovo war, from March 24 to June 10, 1999, or in ongoing Kosovo peacekeeping operations. It may be awarded more than once to troops who took part in multiple Kosovo missions.
**The Antarctica Service Medal was established by Congress in 1960 for military members and civilians, such as scientists, who have supported U.S. government programs in the Antarctic since Jan. 1, 1946. The medal most commonly goes to aircrews and Navy personnel.
**The Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal was established by President Kennedy on Dec. 4, 1961, for operations on or after July 1, 1958, to recognize service in peacekeeping and peace enforcement missions. The Joint Chiefs have authorized 22 missions for this medal, including operations in Somalia and Bosnia, as well as actions against Iraq in the late 1990s. Multiple awards are allowed.
**The Armed Forces Service Medal was established by Clinton Jan. 11, 1996, within weeks of U.S. troops entering Bosnia. It is for troops participating in large military operations who face no armed opposition or threat of imminent hostile action. The medal is intended to fill a void in the criteria between the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal and the Humanitarian Service Medal. It has been awarded for service in the Balkans since June 1, 1992, and for service in Haiti.
Previous wars and military actions have resulted in a host of campaign medals, though in some cases they were approved years or even decades after the fighting. They include:
**The Vietnam Service Medal, established by President Johnson in 1965. Multiple campaigns are recognized.
**The Korean Service Medal, established by President Truman in 1950. Multiple awards are allowed for up to 10 wartime campaigns.
**The Medal for Humane Action, established by Congress in 1949 for those who took part in the Berlin Airlift from June 1948 to September 1949.
**World War II saw three campaign medals - the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic Pacific Campaign Medal and the European-African-Middle Eastern Medal, approved by President Roosevelt in 1942. All allow for multiple awards.

Notes

2 COLOR ILLUSTRATIONS; 1 COLOR PHOTO; COVER HED: No campaign medals for Afghanistan, Iraq / Instead, you're getting 'GWOT'; Cover design by Lisa Zilka, Times staff; COVER ILLUSTRATION OF OUTLINE OF MEDALS WITH LABELS OF AFGHANISTAN & IRAQ. ALSO ON COVER ARE VIETNAM, SOUTHWEST ASIA & KOSOVO MEDALS

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document