One Day, a Candidate; the Next, a Terrorist's Friend
The New York Times
October 18, 2006 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; ABOUT NEW YORK
Length: 784 words
Byline: By DAN BARRY
E-mail: dabarry@nytimes.com
Body


Another campaign flier came fluttering down upon South Brooklyn and Staten Island the other day, as welcome as confetti without a parade. But those who bothered to glance at the piece of paper might have paused a moment before balling it up. That's because it included an arresting photograph of a famous man with a beard.
  No, not Jesus, or Abraham Lincoln, or anyone from ZZ Top. Give up? Here's a clue: First letter is O. O, O, O, O-sss-aaa-ma. Bi, bi -- bin, as in garbage bin. Osama bin la. La, la, la.
 Osama bin Laden?
  How did you guess?
  The flier, courtesy of Republican Representative Vito J. Fossella's re-election campaign, paints his Democratic opponent, Stephen A. Harrison, as soft on terrorism. To underscore the charge, it includes that photo of Mr. bin Laden alongside a goofy photo of Mr. Harrison -- who, given the concocted context, appears to be searching for the rest of his golf foursome, Hitler and Satan. 
  Now just imagine Mr. Harrison's surprise upon learning of his link to the fugitive responsible for the murder of thousands on Sept. 11, 2001. He had no idea.
  Mr. Harrison was walking into a Brooklyn church hall to debate Mr. Fossella last week when a volunteer handed him this piece of Fossella campaign literature. At first he laughed at the sight of his own squinty expression in the photo. He remembered the day it was taken; there had been a lot of sun glare while he was campaigning. And, truth be told, he wouldn't have hesitated to use the same photograph if he were Mr. Fossella.
  Mr. Harrison read the text about his supposed ''anti-Brooklyn agenda'': how he would raise taxes on middle-income families; how he would raise the retirement age for Social Security. All distortions of his positions, he thought, but hardly out of the ordinary. Such charges are made so routinely during campaigns that they carry almost no meaning.
  Even the last line of the literature -- ''Steve Harrison: Wacky Ideas  Wrong for Brooklyn'' -- mustered barely a shrug. ''While I consider them distortions,'' he said yesterday, ''they're distortions within the bounds of acceptability in politics -- if that makes any sense.''
  Then he looked at the middle of the page, a half-inch from that dopey photograph of him. ''And there's this nice picture of Osama bin Laden,'' he recalled, beside the brief assertion that ''Steve Harrison opposes key tools on the War on Terrorism.''
  Mr. Harrison said that he needed several seconds to fully understand the flier's implication. Simply put, the 330,000 voters of the 13th Congressional District, along with other residents, were being sent a message that he translated as: ''A vote for Harrison is a vote for Osama bin Laden.''
  Of course, politicians from both major parties routinely link opponents to the bogeyman of the moment, whether it is former Representative Mark Foley or Osama bin Laden. In 2004, for example, the Democratic National Committee produced a television commercial that flashed the terrorist's image while President Bush was heard saying, ''I don't know where he is. I truly am not that concerned about him.''
  Mr. Fossella has dipped into this murky well before, releasing a flier against his opponent in 2004 that seemed to reach a bit for a chance to use Mr. bin Laden's face. This year, he used Mr. Harrison's criticism of some of the Bush administration's controversial tactics against terrorism as license to dust off Mr. bin Laden's menacing image from his Halloween closet of tricks. 
  When asked to justify the use of that image, Matthew Mika, Mr. Fossella's campaign manager, issued a written response yesterday that said, ''The policies advanced by Vito's opponent would weaken America's ability to fight the War on Terrorism.''
  ''The face of bin Laden is disturbing,'' he wrote. ''But the threat he poses is real and America cannot allow the terrorists an advantage in this war.''
  Mr. Harrison, who opposes the war in Iraq, said the flier would be comically absurd were it not for the implication that anybody who dares to question the tactics of the country's war on terrorism is therefore an enabler of terrorism. ''It's a small leap between saying that Steve Harrison supports the enemy to making me an enemy combatant,'' he said.
  So, then, to the ranks of famous duos, Martin and Lewis, Huntley and Brinkley, the Captain and Tennille, add -- bin Laden and Harrison? One is an international terrorist and the other is, um, well, a married father of two, a lawyer and a lifelong New Yorker with a history of civic service in Bay Ridge.
  ''For 15 years I've been a pillar of this community,'' Mr. Harrison said, disbelief in his voice. ''And then one day one person connects me to Osama bin Laden.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 18, 2006


End of Document