One dead in London attack Officials cite radical Islam, call incident near military barracks terrorism.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 23, 2013 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2013 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 590 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


LONDON • In a brutal daylight attack that raised fears that terrorism had returned to London, two men with butcher knives hacked another man to death near a military barracks Wednesday before police wounded them in a shootout.
In a video broadcast on British TV, one man gestured with bloodied hands, waving a butcher knife in the air and shouting political statements against the British government as pedestrians milled about a body lying motionless in blood on the street.
British officials said the attack appeared to be an act of terrorism, perhaps motivated by radical Islam.
The two suspects remained hospitalized on Wednesday night, but their identities and that of their victim were not known. One of them was reported to be in serious condition.
The afternoon attack happened in the southeast London neighborhood of Woolwich, just a few blocks from the Royal Artillery Barracks.
In Paris, French President Francois Hollande, speaking at a news conference with British Prime Minister David Cameron, said the slain man was a British soldier. Cameron didn't immediately confirm that fact, but the Britain's Ministry of Defense said it was urgently investigating if a soldier was involved.
Cameron said there were "strong indications" it was a terrorist incident. "We have suffered these attacks before, we have always beaten them back," Cameron said. "We will not be cowed, we will never buckle."
One British broadcaster ran video footage of what appeared to be one of the attackers, his hands covered in blood, making political statements about "an eye for an eye" to an unknown camera operator as a body lay behind him on the ground.
There was no immediate way for The Associated Press to verify who the person with the camera was.
The footage - obtained by ITV news - shows a man in a dark jacket and knit cap walking toward a camera, clutching a meat cleaver and a knife in what appear to be bloodied hands. With a British accent, he apologizes in English for the women passers-by who "have had to witness this" attack, saying that "in our land our women have to see the same."
He gave no indication what that land was.
"We must fight them as they fight us," the man said in front of the camera as people milled around behind him. The camera's view then pans away to show a body behind the man.
The Associated Press examined the footage to verify its authenticity. The AP cross-referenced images from the scene, aerial shots, the location of a car behind the alleged attacker and appearance of a body and car in the background of the image.
The British Cabinet's emergency committee immediately called a meeting, and the prime minister's office said security was stepped up at barracks across London. Cameron cut short his Paris trip to return to London, and his office said he would lead another emergency committee meeting today.
The barracks - which house a number of the King's Troop Royal Horse Artillery and independent companies of the Grenadier and Coldstream Guards - were the site of shooting events during the 2012 London Olympics.
Fred Oyat, 44, who lives in a high-rise near where the attack took place, said he heard four gun shots and then went straight to the window.
"I saw one man lying there bleeding, another lying on the pavement being disarmed. A policeman was pointing a gun at him. A third man was lying further up the street ... he was bleeding profusely," Oyat said.
The Independent Police Complaints Commission, which is called in when officers are involved in shootings, confirmed that it was investigating the attack.

Graphic

 
 Artillery Place road is closed in Woolwich southeast London near the scene where British officials said one person has died and at least two people have been wounded in an attack on Wednesday May 22, 2013. (AP Photo/Nick Ansell/PA) UNITED KINGDOM OUT  A tent is erected near the scene of an attack in Woolwich southeast London Wednesday, May, 22, 2013. British officials said one person has died and at least two people have been wounded in an attack in southeast London. Scotland Yard said officers responded to reports of an assault Wednesday afternoon in the London neighbourhood of Woolwich. London Ambulance service said one man was found dead at the scene and two other men were taken to the hospital, with one in serious condition. (AP Photo/Alastair Grant)  Police close the road on Artillery Place, Woolwich southeast London near the scene where British officials said one person has died and at least two people have been wounded in an attack on Wednesday May 22, 2013. (AP Photo/Nick Ansell/PA) UNITED KINGDOM OUT 

Load-Date: May 23, 2013


End of Document