One Step too Far
Inside Vandy: Vanderbilt University
July 23, 2012 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2012 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 737 words
Body


On June 13, Michelle Bachmann and four other Republican congressmen sent a letter warning the Department of State of "influence operations conducted by individuals and organizations associated with the Muslim Brotherhood." The letter pointed to allegations from a conservative think tank of connections between several relatives of Deputy Chief of Staff Huma Abedin and the Muslim Brotherhood as "security concerns" warranting the Department's attention.
Bachmann's slanderous, unsupported attack against the longtime aide of Hillary Clinton drew sharp criticism from Democrats and a rare backlash from fellow Republicans. Bachmann's former campaign manager Ed Rollins decried her "outrageous and false charges" against Abedin, calling the letter "extreme and dishonest." John McCain admonished the "unwarranted and unfounded attack on an honorable woman, a dedicated American and a loyal public servant." John Boehner also stood by Abedin, remarking that he is under the impression that "she has a sterling character" and "accusations like this being thrown around are pretty dangerous."
The severity and ridiculousness of several resolutions recently passed by chapters of the Tennessee Republican Party deserve a similar moment of universal condemnation. In mid-July, the Williamson County, Stewart County, Carroll County and (according to Politico) at least six other Republican Party chapters adopted resolutions demanding that the State Executive Committee take "appropriate action against the administration of Governor Haslam."
The resolutions accused Haslam, who allowed last year's Teach the Controversy "science" bill to pass without a veto, of not being conservative enough. The reasons included Haslam allowing "openly homosexuals to make policy decisions in the Department of Children's Services" and appointing "a Shariah compliant finance expert to the Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development."
That last accusation references Samar Ali, a Tennessee native and a graduate of the Vanderbilt College of Arts & Science and Vanderbilt Law School. Ali, now 30, was Vanderbilt's first Arab-Muslim student body president. The Steward County Republic Party resolution associates Ali with terrorism, calling her "an expert in Shariah-Compliant Finance which is one of the many ways Islamic terrorism is funded."
It is tragic that any organization would have a problem with openly gay state employees. How could an employee's sexual orientation have any effect on their ability to perform their job?
But the charges against Ms. Ali, a high-achieving student with an impressive résumé and strong career prospects ahead of her, sink as low as that backwards prejudice. 'Shariah-compliant finance' is merely one of many areas where Ms. Ali is trained, and all that it means is that she knows how to conduct finance in parts of the world where banks must abide by Islamic law (for example, closing on the Muslim Sabbath or not profiting from alcohol or gambling).
On Sept. 13, 2001, the future student body president stood up in front of the university at a "Come Together" ceremony after the September 11 attacks. In a powerful address preserved in the 2002 Arts & Science magazine, she spoke about how she "felt angry as an American at whoever did this" and urged for Americans to stand together against terrorists distorting Islam for immoral ends.
"We cannot let these terrorists succeed and fill our hearts with hatred. We cannot allow them to split us apart as Americans. We must come together; we have come so far. We must not fight hate with hate," said Ali. "The people who did this are a disgrace to mankind. While they claim to be fundamentalist Muslims, they are of no religion at all. I know of no true religion that celebrates a loss of lives. Islam condemns these acts."
Now, in a sad moment, several Republican chapters in Tennessee are smearing Ali's name with baseless accusations that run directly contrary to the message of peace and tolerance that she spread on that day.
Now is a time for all of us to come together. I hope that every member of the Vanderbilt community - no matter their political affiliation - can join the Vanderbilt College Democrats in strongly opposing and speaking out against these recent resolutions. 
- Benjamin Ries is a senior in the College of Arts & Science and president of the Vanderbilt College Democrats. He can be reached at benjamin.a.ries@vanderbilt.edu

Load-Date: January 18, 2018


End of Document