One Palestinian View Of Middle-East Peace
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
September 2, 1994, Friday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: BOOKS; Pg. 13 
Length: 552 words
Byline: Keith Henderson; Keith Henderson is on the Monitor staff.
Body


AS the Middle East peace process lurches and halts along a
twisty path, it helps to have an experienced guide, someone who has
surveyed this ever-changing path for years. Edward Said is such a
guide.
But this is the Middle East, after all, and guides are likely to
have wildly varying interpretations of the scenery. Said, a
professor of literature at Columbia University, has long been an
articulate spokesman for the Palestinian cause. He is a member of
the Palestinian National Council (PNC), a representative body that
used to figure significantly in Palestinian politics and may or may
not have a role to play in the present task of shaping peace with
Israel. In one of many departures from the PLO line, Said strongly
feels the PNC should be involved, in order to bring a grain of
democratic legitimacy to what he views as a process gone awry.
There's no hedging of opinions in ''The Politics of
Dispossession: The Struggle for Palestinian Self-Determination,
1969- 1994.'' Said's criticisms of Israel as a ruthless occupying
power, of the US as an arms-toting peacemaker blinded by reflexive
allegiance to Israel and its own imperialist ego, and of flawed
Arab leadership - including the PLO's - are unsparing.
Above all, this compilation of Said's op-ed pieces, scholarly
writings on the Mideast, and interviews of the past quarter century
reveals an impressive intellect striving to put before readers a
point of view - a reasoned Palestinian one - that most Americans
have little access to.
Reasoned, yes, but not dispassionate. The anger bubbles beneath
Said's words - and nowhere more so than when the subject is the
blanket dismissal of Palestinians as terrorists. ''Although
Israel's army is responsible for the destruction of Palestinian
society, the expulsion of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians and
the deaths of many thousands more, all resistance to it is
considered terrorism - because Israel and the United States say
so,'' Said wrote in a 1985 New York Times op-ed. American
narrow-mindedness is another hot button. ''In the United States the
Arab world has no cultural status at all; the few images of the
Arabs that circulate are essentially negative and frightening,
images such as those of terrorism, fundamentalism, and so on,'' he
wrote in 1991.
But Said's anger, with roots back to the scattering of his
family after the Arab-Israeli conflict of 1948, is balanced by a
steady-eyed pragmatism. He recognizes that peaceful coexistence
with Israel is the only intelligent option - a position, he says,
the PNC and mainstream of the PLO have held for more than a decade.
Said's writing, often elegant, can also climb toward scholarly
complexity. There are polemics aplenty, and intricately argued
critiques of the works of other observers of the Middle East, such
as Noam Chomsky and Thomas Friedman. There's also material that is
touching and human such as Said's description of his return to
''Palestine-Israel'' in 1992 after an absence of 26 years.
Overall, this book provides pretty good guidance - from one
crucial point of view - on how the Middle East arrived at its
present juncture. Said is not at all pleased with that juncture. He
believes the PLO has given up far too much for the opportunity of
sitting down with its adversaries and talking peace. Quite a few
Israelis, of course, would say the same about their government.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: [Book cover] THE POLITICS OF DISPOSSESSION:
THE STRUGGLE FOR PALESTINIAN SELF-DETERMINATION; 1969-1994 By
Edward W. Said Pantheon; 450 pp.; $ 27.50

Load-Date: September 6, 1994


End of Document