One of FBI's 'most wanted' arrested
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 20, 1994, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE WORLD IN BRIEF; Pg. 11A; DIGEST
Length: 419 words
Dateline: MIAMI; WASHINGTON; TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras; HALLE, Germany
Body


A former Miami police officer, who is on the FBI's "Ten Most Wanted" list  for the 1985 drowning murder of three cocaine dealers, has been arrested in  Colombia, the FBI said Wednesday.
Armando Garcia, 31, has been on the FBI's most wanted list since January  1989, Federal Bureau of Investigation spokesman Paul Miller said.
Garcia is one of seven Miami police officers charged in the infamous River  Cops corruption case. The officers were accused of stealing 750 pounds of  cocaine from a lobster boat docked on the Miami River and forcing the three  men guarding the cache to jump into the water, where they drowned.
Compiled from Times WiresWORLD BRIEFS
Garcia was freed on bail after his 1987 trial ended in a mistrial. When  one of the other defendants agreed to plead guilty and testify for the  government during the retrial, Garcia fled. 
 
No changes on terrorism list 
 
   WASHINGTON - Administration officials said Wednesday that they had made no  change in the government's list of seven countries deemed to support  terrorism: Cuba, Iraq, Iran, Libya, North Korea, the Sudan and Syria.
The Commerce Department is scheduled to submit the annual update of the  list to Congress today. Countries on the list face restrictions in American  aid and exports. 
 
U.S. missionaries in accident 
 
   TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras - A flatbed truck carrying Southern Baptist  missionaries from the United States crashed on a rural road, killing a  Mississippi man and injuring 23 others, authorities said Wednesday.
The accident occurred Tuesday night on the unpaved road between Tela and La  Ceiba on Honduras' north coast, about 120 miles north of Tegucigalpa.
The truck swerved to avoid an oncoming car and fell off a washed-out  shoulder, rolling several times, said a statement released by the Southern  Baptist Foreign Mission Board in Richmond, Va.
It said 18-year-old Bradley Boatner of Brandon, Miss., died in the  accident. 
 
Investigation of girl dropped 
 
   HALLE, Germany - An investigation involving a girl who cut a swastika in  her cheek and claimed neo-Nazis attacked her has been dropped, the  Saxony-Anhalt state prosecutor said Tuesday.
The 17-year-old girl, who uses a wheelchair, claimed on Jan. 10 that she  had been attacked by skinheads. The report horrified Germans and led  politicians to demand quick action.
But on Friday, Prosecutor Juergen Hossfeld said the mutilation apparently  was self-inflicted.
No charges will be filed, Hossfeld said, but declined to give other details  "in the interest of the girl."

Load-Date: January 22, 1994


End of Document