ONE YEAR LATER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 19, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. C10; EDITORIAL
Length: 661 words
Body


WAR
WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT that one year after the first smart bomb hit Baghdad, President George W. Bush still would be struggling to justify the war?
Who would have thought that U.S. forces would not have found a single weapon of mass destruction?
Who would have thought that the head of the Central Intelligence Agency would have to tell Vice President Dick Cheney to stop overstating the case against Iraq?
Who would have thought that the U.S. military still would have more than 100,000 troops in Iraq and that most U.S. casualties would have occurred after major combat operations concluded?
Certainly the president never expected it. Nor did his severest critics.
Today, one year after the war began, the situation in Iraq is precarious. U.S. troops richly deserve the praise that Mr. Bush delivered to the 101st Airborne on Thursday. They captured Saddam Hussein and many of his henchmen while fending off dangerous guerrilla attacks. Meanwhile, the U.S. occupation helped cobble together a relatively progressive interim constitution and hastened at least a formal transfer of power on June 30. But continued bombings and attacks on U.S. and Iraqi civilians keep alive the prospect of civil war.
Of course, Iraq is better off without Saddam. But it is far from clear that the world is safer. Instead of building on the united front against terrorism that existed after the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, Mr. Bush's war on Iraq alienated much of the world and split Americans in a way they have not been divided since the Vietnam War.
The war also diverted resources from homeland security and the task of capturing Osama bin Laden. Only now is the military focused again on that mission, which might soon bear fruit. Pakistani troops reportedly are close to capturing bin Laden's No. 2 man, Ayman al-Zawahri.
Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney are seeking re-election on the strength and decisiveness of the war against terrorism, ridiculing Sen. John F. Kerry, D-Mass., for nuanced views that they say amount to weakness and indecision.
But one of Mr. Bush's great weaknesses is his failure to recognize subtleties and unintended consequences of military might.
Just as President Lyndon Johnson misjudged the ability of the U.S. military to win a civil war in Vietnam, Mr. Bush misjudged the ability of military might to create an oasis of democracy in the Iraqi desert.
A recent Pew survey of global attitudes found that a majority of people in France, Germany, Jordan, Pakistan, Turkey and Morocco do not think that the Iraq invasion was a sincere attempt to fight terrorism. Suspicions run high in the four Muslim countries that the war was part of a U.S. effort to dominate the world.
Many people in Europe -- and in the United States, for that matter -- never bought Mr. Bush's claim that the invasion of Iraq was a necessary part of the war on terrorism. The failure to find weapons of mass destruction or confirm pre-war operational links between al-Qaida and Saddam makes that claim even less credible.
This is why, to many Spaniards and Europeans, the intention of incoming Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero to withdraw Spanish troops from Iraq doesn't seem like appeasing terrorists -- the war against Iraq being unrelated to the war on terrorism. In fact, Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage acknowledged this week that it was the conservative government's mistaken decision to downplay the al-Qaida connection to the Madrid bombings that led to the government's defeat.
Ironically, one of the unintended consequences of Iraq is that a war justified on the basis of a nonexistent link to terrorism has created that very link. The United States is now an even bigger, more vulnerable target for al-Qaida and other terrorists than it was before.
A year after spurning the United Nations, the best thing that Mr. Bush can do is to take the suggestion of Mr. Zapatero and put the United Nations in charge of the attempt to build a democratic nation in Iraq.

Load-Date: March 20, 2004


End of Document