Ongoing federal role seen in coverage of terror risks; Experts analyze the insurability of terrorism
Business Insurance
November 1, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 515 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The federal government likely will continue to have some sort of role in insuring against terrorism for the foreseeable future, according to a panel of experts at a recent symposium on the insurability of terrorism.
Such a role is likely, even though the federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act may not have had as positive an impact on the U.S. economy as its supporters claimed, according to an academic specializing in risk management and insurance.
J. David Cummins, the Harry J. Loman professor of insurance and risk management at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, cited as an example the fact that private-sector construction employment did not pick up after the enactment of TRIA.
Enactment of TRIA, which created a federal backstop for insurers that would have to pay loses from a future catastrophic terrorism attack, had been promoted as necessary to protect construction jobs in areas likely to be terrorist targets, such as New York City, he noted during the Washington symposium, sponsored by GE Insurance Solutions.
Mr. Cummins said that the question of whether the government should play a role in terrorism insurance remains unanswered. Rather the focus on the economy as a whole, perhaps a government insurance program should be focused on protecting small, private companies that would suffer the greatest financial losses from a terrorist attack, he said.
''Terrorism is a means of conducting war for political ends,'' said Gordon Stewart, president of the New York-based Insurance Information Institute. Mr. Stewart noted that he was speaking for himself rather than III. Fundamentally, he said, terrorism is an act of war that people do not want to call war.
If the United States is at war, and the government cannot protect its citizens, is it reasonable to ask the private insurance industry to underwrite the risk? Mr. Stewart asked.
He noted that the private/public insurance plan that TRIA created remains ''far more private'' than any other government terrorism insurance program in the world.
But without the federal backstop, terrorism is a risk that insurers ''want absolutely nothing to do with,'' said Bruce F. Deal, managing principal of the Analysis Group in Menlo Park, Calif.
Mr. Deal is the co-author of an industry-commissioned study on TRIA's economic impact, ''The Economic Effects of Federal Participation in Terrorism Risk.'' That report, released in September, concluded that a failure to reauthorize TRIA would result in a loss of more than $50 billion in gross domestic product (BI, Sept. 20). TRIA is slated to expire at the end of 2005, though the House Financial Services Committee approved a bill shortly before adjournment that would extend the program through 2007.
A two-year extension is needed, said Mr. Deal. Terrorism is a risk still ''too unpredictable to be fully covered by the private sector alone,'' he said. Even alternative risk spreading mechanisms-including new capital, pooling and terrorism catastrophe bonds-simply aren't feasible as the sole responses to the financial threat, Mr. Deal said.

Graphic

 
'Terrorism is a means of conducting war for political ends.'--Gordon Stewart, Insurance Information Institute

Load-Date: November 3, 2004


End of Document