Only Washington Can Break Mideast Stalemate;
Agent for Iraq
The New York Times
June 15, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 28, Column 6; Editorial Desk
Length: 394 words
Body


To the Editor:
With the May 30 Palestinian attack on the Israeli beaches (front page, May 31), we see the State Department gulled again - along with most of the mediocre analysis about why the attack took place. It is no coincidence that Abul Abbas, of Achille Lauro fame, is behind this.
Abul Abbas is regularly identified as an ally and right-hand man of Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. In reality, Mr. Abbas is an agent for Iraq, just as he was an agent for Syria in hijacking the cruise ship Achille Lauro. The goal both times had nothing to do with Israel, the United States or retaliation (the Achille Lauro demands were for the release of Palestinians in a Kuwait jail).
The goal of the beach attack is to eliminate Mr. Arafat as a political power within the Palestine Liberation Organization, and in the minds of those in the West who back him.
Mr. Abbas ran the Achille Lauro operation as a favor for Syria, to embarrass Mr. Arafat; Syria was then fighting Arafat factions for control of refugee camps in Lebanon and needed public condemnation of Mr. Arafat. Syria thus won the war of the camps, and 6,000 Palestinian women and children paid the bill.
Now, however, Iraqi dominance in Lebanon is rising, and Iraq needs to eliminate Syria and Yasir Arafat as competitors in Lebanon, in the occupied territories and over the Palestinian uprising. A terrorist attack on Israel that appears known to and approved by Yasir Arafat reduces his influence in the P.L.O. (by demonstrating his isolation from events). It also embarrasses the State Department after John H. Kelly, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, testified to Congress that Mr. Arafat is not sponsoring terrorism (news article, May 25).
Mr. Arafat will have to boost his use of terrorism to counter Syrian and Iraqi moves to undermine him.
The State Department and the Reagan Administration bombed Tripoli, Libya, in 1986 in retaliation for the 1985 deaths of Americans in a West German nightclub. In January 1988, West Germany produced one of the culprits, who identified Syria as responsible. Did Washington then bomb Damascus? Nor will it do anything about Iraqi backing of the Abbas attack. Iraq will continue to use this to its advantage.
 
NORMAN HIGBY
Menlo Park, Calif., May 31, 1990
  The writer, an oil-industry consultant, publishes a newsletter.


End of Document