ONLY COMPROMISE CAN FORESTALL ANTI-ABORTION TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
August 14, 1994, Sunday


Copyright 1994 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Op-Ed;
Length: 761 words
Byline: By GREGORY A. NEWKIRK
Body


American traditions of democracy are founded upon the philosophies of Jefferson's majority rule and Madison's accommodation of the minority. American democracy was never intended as a zero-sum game in which the winner takes all.
Even in the beginning, as the United States was being founded with its doctrines of equality, the slavery states were allowed to maintain their existing economy. Despite the reprehensible nature of slavery, failing to found a free nation would have been the greater evil.
Later, once the nation was strong enough, slavery was finally challenged. However, when the doctrines of equality were pressed to end slavery, a civil war ensued that claimed more American lives than any foreign war, including the world wars.
Since 1865, Americans have avoided uncompromising majority rule that threatened domestic tranquility. That is, until the last 20 years, beginning with Roe vs. Wade the U.S. Supreme Court decision that gave women legal access to abortion over the objectives of majority opinion and existing law.
By itself, the decision could be considered a compromise between conflicting beliefs. While anti-abortion advocates are opposed to any allowance of abortion on demand, there remained numerous laws and policies that affected the annual number of abortions. However, nearly all of these laws and policies were later removed through subsequent court decisions.
Abortion advocates were not content with Roe vs. Wade. They sought to establish precedence regarding right-to-privacy doctrine in a series of court decisions. Such decisions include the removal of parental and spousal notification, the removal of required counseling and waiting periods, and a continued push for public funding for abortion. And when abortion protests increased, abortion advocates pressed for restrictions and punishments against demonstrators. In other words, they want nothing less than uncompromising majority rule.
This situation has left anti-abortion advocates few avenues of public influence with which to reduce the number of abortions. However, since abortion is a matter of deeply held beliefs for many Americans, they have been willing to exercise influence with whatever means remain, extraordinary as those may be. No one should be surprised that many individuals now practice civil disobedience even though pro-abortion advocates gained the power of the Racketeering Influence and Corrupt Organizations statutes, which can strip a protester of all financial assets. One might conclude that this is little more than revenge and simple meanness in remembrance of the back-alley abortions and other conditions that existed prior to Roe vs. Wade.
Recently, the conflict over abortion has taken a new and disturbing twist with the killing of two abortion doctors and the attempted killing of another. The civil disobedience of many has been jaded by the terrorism of a few. Unfortunately, this terrorism appears to be more than temporary or isolated and could develop into organized activity.
But unlike the widespread beliefs and passions present in 1860, the disagreement over abortion does not portend a civil war. Instead, it resembles the dilemma of Northern Ireland, where one group rules at the expense of the other and pays for its unyielding hold on power with terrorism.
Despite its frightening ugliness, little can be done to eliminate the effectiveness of terrorism's influence or to bring about its cessation other than to correct the imbalance of power that created it in the first place. Why then do Americans maintain an imbalance of power regarding abortion? Are some of us so self-righteous or mean-spirited in our beliefs that we must forgo Madison's wisdom of accommodating the minority?
The issue of abortion lacks the moral clarity of slavery, leaving room for compromise. While there is no justifiable circumstance for slavery, reasonable people can agree under what conditions abortion may or may not be appropriate. Unfortunately, more than a few of us intend to subvert American democracy into a selfish and mean-spirited zero-sum game.
There is an alternative. Americans can find substantive ground for compromise on the issue of abortion. Activities such as counseling about abortion alternatives, use of parental and spousal notification and a waiting period would reverse the terrorism. Following such a course, we might yet avoid the fate of other terrorist-plagued nations. Otherwise we can add one more item to America's growing list of terrors: serial killers, gang warfare, tourist murders and, now, doctor assassinations.

Load-Date: October 30, 1994


End of Document