ONLY INCREASED SPYING COULD PREVENT TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 22, 1995, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion,; GUEST COLUMN; Column
Length: 1137 words
Byline: By Susan Rosenfeld
Body


The Amtrak derailment earlier this month in Arizona prompted President Clinton to revive his call for Congress to pass an anti-terrorism bill. Languishing for months after the World Trade Center explosion, anti-terrorism bills received swift approval from the full Senate and the House Judiciary Committee after the Oklahoma City bombing.
More recently, however, both Republicans and Democrats have expressed reservations about the bills based on civil liberties considerations. Clinton is using this latest presumed act of terrorism to urge Congress to Congress to ''Give us the tools we need.''
With the 1970 bombing of Sterling Hall at UW-Madison as a test case, it is obvious that the proposed bills will not provide those tools unless they permit more, not less, government spying.
The Wisconsin explosion was one of 692 bombings in the United States between July 1970 and July 1971. They occurred despite few restraints inhibiting the government from compromising rights in the battle against terrorism. Today laws and guidelines shield American freedoms during security investigations.
According to critics, these protections also kept the federal government from spying on the militias that allegedly influenced the Oklahoma suspects. Consequently, the administration insists new legislation is needed.
The 1970 bombers wanted to destroy the Army Math Research Center at UW-Madison, then considered one of the most radical campuses in the United States. Supposedly, the research center's products caused death and devastation in Vietnam. Convinced that the government discounted peaceful protests, the bombers sought to catalyze a quick end to American involvement.
They planned to minimize the possibility of injury by timing the explosion early on a Monday between semesters and telephoning a warning to the police. Instead, the bomb exploded prematurely, killing researcher Robert Fassnacht and injuring three others.
Prior to the blast, none of bombers attracted special attention from law enforcement. Karlton Armstrong, an intermittent university student, and his brother Dwight, a high school student, were native Madisonians. Although Karl planned the explosion and had attempted previous bombings, no authorities had information about him.
Dwight had a minor police record and an FBI index card listing anti-war activities. Joining them were Easterners Leo Burt, a drinking buddy of Karl's, and Leo's fellow university newspaper reporter, David Fine. Only David belonged to SDS, a regular target of government surveillance, and his FBI file had been closed recently for lack of activity.
In 1970 the government amassed thousands of files on Americans who opposed the Vietnam war, the vast majority of whom protested peaceably. Today the administration proposes forming a Center to collect foreign and domestic terrorism intelligence.
1995 technology, however, would not have helped in the Wisconsin situation. The data failed to distinguish David and Dwight from non-violent radicals, and missed Leo and Karl completely.
To prevent terrorism in 1970, the FBI wiretapped telephones in security matters (which included the anti-war movement) without first requesting warrants. Today warrants are required for each tap. The 1995 bills would expand the categories for permissible wiretaps including those of persons ''providing material support to terrorists.'' In order to track highly mobile fugitives, the bills would allow taps on multiple telephones after an initial warrant.
The Wisconsin bombers made their plans in apartments and bars, not over the telephone. Moreover, after leaving Madison, they did not stop anywhere for long and rarely where there even was a telephone. Wiretapped phones would neither have prevented the crime nor advanced the investigation.
The current bills also allow the FBI greater access to financial data. In 1970, agents could circumvent privacy regulations by flashing their badges to gain cooperation.
Now court decisions declare that there is no expectation of privacy attached to many transactions, and banks and credit companies can always be subpoenaed. The bills would put an additional governmental imprimatur on scrutinizing the records of possible terrorists and their associates, and of suspect organizations.
However, oil and fertilizer explosives like the Wisconsin bombers used are cheap, and they stole what they could not afford. Financial records would not have revealed anything.
Another 1995 provision bans contributions to organizations labeled ''terrorist.'' With the broad definitions of terrorism found in the proposed bills, virtually any group that supports actions contrary to domestic or foreign policy could be listed.
The examples of the Cold War era Attorney General's list and the recent widespread CISPES investigation should make Congress wary of treading on such shaky constitutional ground. More importantly, cutting off fund-raising would have no effect on American terrorists if, like the Wisconsin bombers, they do not rely on organizations for funding.
Use of undercover agents and informants, a highly intrusive technique, has never been outlawed. In 1970, the many Madison informants failed to detect the bombers. Law enforcement concentrated on the counterculture.
Had the government infiltrated more conventional groups, it might have stopped Karl after his early bombing attempts. Some of his fraternity house mates and his girlfriend, a secretary, knew about his plans. But they did not fit the New Left profile and the authorities never seriously questioned them.
In the end, old-fashioned detective work solved the Wisconsin case. Through their getaway car, the suspects were identified within hours of the bombing.
The FBI and local police confirmed the identities by pinpointing the fertilizer and fuel oil purchases and the rented U-Haul in which the ingredients ware taken to the staging area. They also pieced together the stolen van in which the explosives were packed.
By searching David and Leo's apartments and interviewing the suspects' families and acquaintances, law enforcement learned enough to issue arrest warrants and track the bombers into Canada. Unfortunately, the bombers stayed ahead of the law and disappeared into the anti-war underground.
Over the next five years, informants turned in Karl and Dwight, and a tip from someone seeing a wanted poster led to David's arrest. (These three served their sentences; Leo remains a fugitive, and some suspect he might be the Unabomber!)
Twenty-five years ago, the federal government infringed traditional privacy rights whenever it felt it was necessary in its efforts to prevent or investigate terrorism. By applying the lessons of the 1970 bombing, it is apparent that today's government must compromise these rights to a far greater extent than they did in the violent, Vietnam years.

Graphic

 
Photo/no credit
Authorities and photographers survey the damage after the bombing at UW-Madison's Sterling Hall in 1970.

Load-Date: October 24, 1995


End of Document