Ontario Terrorism Suspects Face List of Charges in Plot
The New York Times
June 6, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 927 words
Byline: By ANTHONY DePALMA; David Staba contributed reporting from Mississauga for this article, Christopher Mason from Toronto and David Johnston from Washington.
Dateline: MISSISSAUGA, Ontario, June 5 
Body


The men who were arrested in a suspected terrorist plot to bomb several Canadian buildings faced a rash of terrorism charges, including belonging to a terrorist group, running training camps and smuggling guns and ammunition across the border, according to court documents released Monday. 
  Canadian police officials said that the sweeping investigation, which has also touched on suspects in the United States and other countries, was continuing, and that more arrests were expected.
''The investigation is not over by any stretch,'' Mike McDonell, assistant commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, said in a telephone interview. So far 12 Canadian men, along with five youths under 18 who are being treated as minors, have been arrested in connection with the investigation. 
  Mr. McDonell said the main thrust of the operation continues to be in Ontario, but it has turned up several international connections.
  Colin Kenny, chairman of the Canadian Senate's National Security Committee, said in an interview that he believed that the police had issued search warrants for suspects who were not yet arrested, but Mr. McDonell said that was not the case. 
  Mr. McDonell said he believed that the investigation would lead to other suspects, but he indicated that they would probably be people who were only tangentially connected to the suspected plot. The Canadian authorities have said they believed that the threat of a terrorist attack was removed with the arrests over the weekend. 
  Court records made available on Monday outlined for the first time the specific charges that the detained men will face when they appear at a bail hearing in an Ontario courtroom on Tuesday. 
  Prosecutors are expected to argue that the men should not be released while awaiting trial because of the seriousness of the charges against them. 
  Canadian experts on the country's new post-9/11 antiterrorism laws said there was a possibility that the hearing would be adjourned to give defense lawyers more time to prepare their arguments. In that case, the suspects will continue to be held. 
  Charges against the five youths were not disclosed.
  All 12 adults are charged with belonging to a terrorist group, one that so far has been only loosely defined by the police. The men lived in and around Toronto, and some were arrested at their homes on Friday night and Saturday morning. Others were arrested east of the city and two were already in jail in Kingston, about 150 miles east of Toronto. 
  The authorities said the members were inspired by Al Qaeda but had no formal affiliation with that group. 
  Six of the men, including the eldest, Qayyum Abdul Jamal, a 43-year-old part-time school bus driver from Mississauga, will also be charged with planning to set off a series of huge explosions using the type of homemade bomb that destroyed the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1995.
  The authorities have not identified any of the intended targets. Nor have they confirmed that the suspects actually took possession of the three tons of ammonium nitrate fertilizer that the police said they intended to use as explosives. Other charges include operating terrorist training camps in rural northern Ontario late last year, and receiving terrorist training at those camps and in Fort Erie, Ontario, close to the United States border near Buffalo. 
  Two of the men, Mohammed Dirie, 22, of Markham, Ontario, and Yasin Abdi Mohamed, 24, of Toronto, are already serving prison sentences in Kingston for trying to bring weapons across the border last August. They will be charged with importing three guns and 182 rounds of ammunition intended to be used in terrorist activities, the authorities said. 
  American officials said the Canadian authorities learned of the actions of the group in Ontario by tracking them through Internet chat rooms, e-mail messages and telephone communications. Internet usage was also how investigators found out about the identity of two American citizens, now in custody in the United States, whose anti-Western beliefs led them to cross paths with some of those in custody in Ontario.
  The authorities said the men under arrest in Canada also communicated with Islamic militants in Europe whose activities were under investigation in the case. But officials said they had not unearthed evidence that anyone beyond those currently under arrest in Canada actively took part in the aborted fertilizer bomb plot.
  The two men facing terrorism-related charges in the United States, Ehsanul Islam Sadequee, 19, and Syed Haris Ahmed, 21, had several face-to-face contacts with the Canadian plotters, the officials said, including meetings during a 2005 trip to Canada made by Mr. Sadequee and Mr. Ahmed.
  American prosecutors have said Mr. Sadequee made ''casing'' videos of American landmarks, including the Capitol, along with computer images of instructions for making car bombs and suicide bombing vests, which were sent to confederates overseas.
  Mr. Sadequee, who has been charged with lying to federal agents, is an American citizen of Bangladeshi descent. Mr. Ahmed, who has been charged with material support of a terrorist group, is an American citizen who was born in Pakistan.
  Authorities have said there is no indication that any American targets were involved in the Canadian plot, but the case of Mr. Sadequee and Mr. Ahmed has been linked to arrests in November of three men in Britain. During searches after the British arrests, the police seized images Mr. Sadequee had made on his trip to Washington.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 6, 2006


End of Document