Op-ed: Surveillance of churches can be justified to fight terror
The Salt Lake Tribune
April 10, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Columnists
Length: 883 words
Byline: By Amos N. Guiora
Body


As the Boston Marathon bombers dramatically illustrated, 21st Century terrorism is a powerful brew of international and domestic causes. Some nations talk about a global war on terror, others cite acts of terror as domestic crime.
The Boston attack presents a third form: a hybrid of global-local terrorism. These are violent acts committed by people living in the U.S. or Europe but motivated by external influences. The challenges are highlighted when, for example, second- or third-generation immigrants carry out local terror attacks.
The question is: Does local-global terrorism warrant imposing limits on free speech?
Local-global terrorism is where the rubber meets the road in the context of the First Amendment: If we know someone is being radicalized in a house of worship, then it is imperative that we limit what religious leaders can say.
Given that local-global terrorism can be set in motion by faith-based incitement, then limits on free speech are essential to protect society.
Enhanced cooperation between law enforcement and clergy would enable the former to warn the latter regarding suspected criminal conduct of individual congregants. Further, where particular clergy are engaging in speech deemed capable of inciting, open channels of communication would facilitate law enforcement's ability to minimize a potential chilling effect by warning faith leaders of the potential criminal nature of their particular speech.
This would significantly contribute to a more balanced and nuanced approach for it would facilitate law enforcement while protecting the freedom of religion. A heightened probable cause standard would facilitate respect for the Free Exercise Clause while ensuring government fulfills its primary obligation of protecting the public.
This test raises legitimate concerns amongst those who jealously protect First Amendment rights. However, additional audiences are at play no less deserving of state protection: otherwise unprotected individuals and groups who are, to a certain extent, the victims of free speech protections.
Conducting surveillance in houses of worship has the potential to chill participation in religion. Not only may potential members hesitate to join, but also preachers, rabbis, imams and other religious leaders may not feel free to fully express their messages. However, given the danger posed by religious extremist faith leaders monitoring and surveillance of houses of worship is both legitimate and essential, subject to a number of conditions.
The monitoring and surveillance must not be arbitrary or capricious; rather, they must be conducted only if compelling evidence, including intelligence information, suggests a particular faith leader is inciting in the house of worship. This cautiousness is essential to ensuring due process and equal protection standards and obligations are met. Law enforcement must apply these measures narrowly, specifically and cautiously; otherwise, the inevitable chilling effect will be unwarranted and therefore unconstitutional.
This kind of preventative solution, however, is not without consequences. After all, imposing limits on free speech makes Americans uncomfortable.
Nonetheless, the thought that there are others like the Boston bombers in the United States is more dangerous to the fabric of American life than the 9/11 bombers. There is danger in pointing to people who are "just not like you" because it entails law enforcement focusing on U.S. citizens.
Local-global terrorism is difficult to combat because of its multi-faceted structure. The law enforcement burden is significant, perhaps even daunting. It requires security officials understand complex ethnic tensions spanning the globe and then determine whether there are ties to particular groups in the United States. To do this, the intelligence community must significantly expand from specific local angles, bridging to potential foreign causes.
The question, now, is whether national security and public order justify minimizing free speech. U.S. history has demonstrated a willingness to say "yes." The costs have been significant with respect to the principles articulated in the First Amendment and on a human, individual basis. The dilemma is determining how serious the threat is to national security and public order and whether limiting free speech will mitigate that threat and at what cost to individual liberty.
The First Amendment has traveled an extraordinary journey; from clear limits imposed on free speech to an understanding that protecting free speech is important to a vibrant democracy. The road has been full of pitfalls and pratfalls, reflective of both the importance of this protection and the dangers free speech can pose.
The burden is now on national decision-makers to focus their efforts on addressing this threat caused by global-local terrorism and to implement strategies to counter its potency. A public debate about free speech is, unfortunately, an important first step.
That discussion must be conducted with extraordinary sensitivity. However, to deny the requirement, if not urgency, is to commit an egregious error the public should neither tolerate nor bear.
Amos N. Guiora is a professor at the University of Utah's S.J. Quinney College of Law and co-director of the Center for Global Justice.

Load-Date: April 13, 2015


End of Document