OPINION
Anchorage Daily News (Alaska)
April 26, 1995, Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 Anchorage Daily News
Section: METRO,
Length: 551 words
Body

 
 Fighting terror
 
Protect Americans but move carefully
Leaders of both parties have been quick to promise Americans tougher laws to protect them from terrorism. Clearly a tragedy of the magnitude of the Oklahoma City bombing calls for a complete review of anti-terrorism laws. But it's just as clear that Congress must not tamper with fundamental civil liberties in the name of fighting terrorism.
Many of the proposals would either make it easier or quicker for the government to obtain wiretaps, hotel records, credit card bills and telephone records. Easier, quicker sounds so appealing when lives are at risk -- but individual freedom is at risk too.
In the past, Congress has granted law enforcement agencies great power to investigate individuals and groups who threaten domestic tranquility -- and then discovered astonishing abuses of power.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation didn't go after just "bad guys" during the upheaval that accompanied the civil rights movement, the Vietnam War and Watergate. FBI agents went after dissenters and critics of every stripe. "People discovered they had extensive FBI files even though they had engaged in nothing worse than sit-ins," said John Banzhaf, a law professor at George Washington University in Washington, D.C.
Since the '70s, the FBI has been asked to operate under guidelines that require agents to have solid evidence and a court order before acting. Now, a number of congressmen complain this policy has tied the FBI's hands.
This is news, however, to former FBI Director William Webster who says "We always were able to get what we needed. . . . Terrorism is only successful if it gets people excited and causes people to distrust that their government can protect them. . . . I'm against legislation born out of panic." Justice Department spokesman Carl Stern also says the department did not think the restrictions have caused problems in the past.
Another group of proposals exciting Congress would make it easier for police to wiretap suspected international terrorists, harder for immigrants to obtain American citizenship, and more risky for Americans to contribute funds to controversial international groups. Most of these ideas have been around for a while, but they should not be passed in haste now that Congress has an opportunity. Every one of them would make life easier for the government -- and more difficult for law-abiding people. If we have to have such restriction to deal with a few bad actors, they should come only after extensive debate.
Americans want to be safe in their homes and their public buildings. But they also want to live in a free country. By all means, let us make war on terrorism -- but let us not use liberty as the ammunition.
Tuesday, the Daily News published an editorial criticizing Congressman Don Young for the language he used during an appearance before students at West Valley High School in Fairbanks Friday. Over the weekend, Congressman Young reconsidered his words. In a written apology issued Monday, the congressman said, "In attempting to explain my opposition to pornographic art which is graphic, profane and offensive, I resorted to language which was inappropriate and unacceptable. I sincerely apologize for my poor choice of words to all concerned. Such language is simply inappropriate."

Load-Date: August 29, 1995


End of Document