Opinion: A Selfish and Selfless Fear
The Griffen: Canisius College
November 16, 2018 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 1039 words
Body


Bailey McOwen
Griffin Contributor
When a country faces acts of foreign terrorism, there is a sense of fear that boils within its citizens and adds to the ever-growing list of biases they collect throughout a lifetime. Social, racial, ethnic and cultural differences make up how we view and hold onto these acts of terrorism, and thus affects how we believe we should deal with the aftermath.
I am a firm believer in considering both sides, and even though many people who speak out on this issue will disagree with me on this, I believe that even this sensitive topic falls under that golden phrase in my eyes.
It is easy to point a finger at someone who believes the United States shouldn't allow refugees in and say, "you're why people are dying." The refugee crisis is emotional and heart-wrenching, but I believe it is important to remember that our different outlooks on how best to handle the situation do not come from a place of hate in most cases, but from fear, anxiety, and worry on both ends.
When I look at the Syrian refugees I feel an overwhelming sense of sadness. To see the terrified women clutching their children in fear as they sit in a pile of what was once their home fills me with empathy, and I don't know many people who don't feel the same way, whether they lean left or right.
News Deeply's Syria platform hosts articles about the Middle Eastern country showing the various aspects to the struggles they are experiencing in their country, how many are trying to change the situation overall, and how those affected by it are trying to escape. The tragic lifestyle of a refugee is one many Syrians are being forced to live in order to survive.
The socially, religiously, and politically oppressing rule taking control over the country is forcing people out, and while these refugees scatter to European countries, the United States has much more land to share than the smaller countries that are taking in as many as they can. Many argue that this is a good reason for letting them move to America along with the fact that nobody wants to see innocent people put in harm's way.
Frequently in the news and online, when someone opposes this view, they are immediately tagged "islamophobic" or "racist" because the most prevalent argument against letting the Syrian refugees in is a fear of foreign terrorism. What many people don't take into consideration is the fact that these people, usually belonging to an older generation, were here to experience pre- and post-September 11th America.
As many of us can vouch for, our experiences shape our views of the world, and not everyone can move past trauma, especially an event as tragic as 9/11, easily and quickly. This does not mean all Muslims deserve to be profiled and accused to an extent that inflicts fear, but I think that a generation that witnessed something they never thought possible should be allowed to formulate an opinion based off of those experiences.
It's unfortunate that a group of people who use violence as a means to achieve their goals can seemingly decide the fate of an entire group, and I firmly believe that nobody should be denied entrance to the country based on religion. I can't help but see the opposite side, though, and the fact is that Syria has a high terrorism rate within their own country. I sense that this is not necessarily an issue with religious beliefs, but with cultural ones.
Many of the Americans who are doubtful of the decision to allow refugees in are not against it due to hatred or disgust. I think they are worried about a culture they are not familiar with instilling values they do not understand into American life.
On top of this, I believe this increase of immigration and refugee hosting places a seperate level of worry on those opposed to it. Our economy, culture, and government will have to adjust to the change, and many are unsure if we can adjust to the influx of refugees.
Personally, situations like this cause a battle between my instincts, heart, and brain. Instinctually, I want to save myself and "my people". My heart aches for the refugees, but then I see an article that references a foreign terrorist attack that took more people from their families and I think "how can I stop this from happening to another American?"
Growing up I was taught to be patriotic. Respect America, its citizens, and those who fought to protect it, and while I still believe in all of that, I can't help but want to protect anyone in need of protecting. My brain tries to take in the facts, but once again both sides make compelling arguments.
The Pew Research Center says that, out of 100 Syrian refugees, 39 of them are young men between the ages between of 18 and 34 traveling alone, and multiple studies show that this demographic is most likely to succumb to islamic extremism.
No two reliable studies determine whether a terrorist attack is as likely as 1 in 200,000 or as unlikely as 1 in 2 billion, and it's even more difficult to say whether the attacks that do occur stem from one person, or a community surrounding them that enables their violent behavior.
Despite this, we rarely see attacks by foreign terrorists. While any attack is too many attacks, we must acknowledge this and ask ourselves if this is reason enough to refuse so many desperate people sanctuary.
Research states that as of late 2016, "54% of registered voters said the U.S. does not have a responsibility to accept refugees from Syria" (at the time 87% of Trump supporters and 27% of Clinton supporters agreed with this). As expected, Americans are practically split in half on this issue.
I don't think our country will be unifying on this subject anytime soon, but I urge everyone to look at this issue and those with different opinions through a lens of understanding.
Too frequently are disagreements turned personal, and as someone who always finds themselves in the middle of these political debates, I think it's time we sit down and have a real conversation with each other and find a solution that can benefit and ensure safety to as many people as possible.
References
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/01/30/key-facts-about-refugees-to-the-u-s/
http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/08/02/4-asylum-seeker-demography-young-and-male/

Load-Date: November 16, 2018


End of Document