OPINION: Monday Morning: Shootings, terrorism lead many to ask: Could it happen here?
Herald-Times (Bloomington, Indiana)
December 7, 2015 Monday


Copyright 2015 Herald-Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 638 words
Byline: Bob Zaltsberg, Herald-Times, Bloomington, Ind.
Body


Dec. 07--There's an inside joke of sorts in newsrooms, like ours, that look for every opportunity to "localize" a story. Sometimes we stretch to make a local connection in an effort to claim a piece of a national story, in order to make it more relevant for our readers.
The worst example of this phenomenon I've been a part of came in 1994. After O.J. Simpson drove around Los Angeles in the infamous white Ford Bronco and was charged with killing Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman, I thought about how we could localize the story. One connection I hit on was to interview members of the Indiana University football team, which played against USC and Simpson in the Rose Bowl on Jan. 1, 1968.
I use that weak idea as an example of overreaching. What were guys like Eric Stolberg, Harold Mauro and Ken Kaczmarek going to say?
"When I shook his hand after the game he didn't look like he was capable of anything like this!"
"I knew by the way he faked me out on that play he couldn't be trusted!"
Of course not. They had no better insights than anyone else. So we learn from our mistakes and try not to stretch too far next time.
Another type of story that fits this template is the "Could it happen here?" story. These do have merit but also can be overused.
If someone dies or is injured in a campus residence hall fire, a logical story would be to check fire inspection reports and the overall safety strategy for residence halls on the Indiana University campus. But I remember seeing the H-T take that concept too far.
Readers in their 40s or older may remember the MGM Grand fire in Las Vegas in 1980 in which 87 people were killed. I was a young staff member at the H-T at the time and remember a reporter being assigned to check on fire safety in our hotels and motels. We 20-somethings in the newsroom thought that was an overreach. We thought of a headline: "Major casino fire: Could it happen here?" And laughed. Of course it couldn't.
Stories of gun violence and terrorism seem to be spreading throughout the nation and the world and we wonder, what's next?
Terrorists open fire in a music hall in Paris where an American band is playing. We have music halls in Bloomington, of course.
A terrorist blows himself up when he's discovered trying to get into a major soccer venue in the same city. Bloomington has major athletic venues that draw large crowds.
A gunman shoots up a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado Springs, Colorado, and three people are killed. Bloomington has a Planned Parenthood Clinic that's been the site of hundreds of peaceful protests and at least one incident of vandalism.
Two heavily armed people in San Bernardino, California, attack a Christmas party at a center that provides services for people with disabilities. Fourteen people are killed. Bloomington has a large and successful center that works with people who have developmental disabilities.
Muslims fear backlash because of events around the world, some of them listed above. Bloomington has a Muslim community and a mosque. And we know, all too well, that hate crimes can happen here. I wrote about that last summer after the shootings in a church in Charleston, South Carolina. I listed four specific times, including the murder of IU graduate student Won-Joon Yoon by a white supremacist as he walked into his Bloomington church -- the Korean Methodist Church -- on July 4, 1999.
These other events -- a shooting in a large music hall, a bombing at a large athletic event, a shooting at a Planned Parenthood clinic or a shooting at a center for people with developmental disabilities -- have a lot of people asking:
Could it happen here?
The answer is obvious. And frightening.
___ (c)2015 the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.) Visit the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.) at www.heraldtimesonline.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: December 11, 2015


End of Document