OPINION: Jerry Moore: Declaring that we have a MAGAbomber is premature
Watertown Daily Times (New York)
October 25, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Watertown Daily Times
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 989 words
Byline: Jerry Moore, Watertown Daily Times, N.Y.
Body


Oct. 25--Reports this week of explosive devices sent to prominent individuals appear to be an example of political divisions pushed to the extreme.
Packages containing bombs were sent to former President Bill and Hillary Clinton, former President Barack and Michelle Obama, philanthropist George Soros, former CIA Director John Brennan and U.S. Rep. Maxine Waters of California. The bomb addressed to Brennan was sent to CNN's office in New York City. In addition, suspicious packages were sent to former U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder, actor Robert De Niro and former Vice President Joe Biden.
Many of these people have been the subject of President Donald Trump's criticism. He's well known for his provocative rhetoric. During his rallies, he has condoned violence and praised people who have engaged in it.
Connecting the dots between Trump's volatile comments and planned acts of terrorism seems obvious. Many have criticized the president for fanning the flames of animosity, thus fostering a toxic environment.
On Wednesday, however, Trump adopted a more conciliatory tone. He condemned violence intended by sending the explosives: "I just want to tell you that in these times, we have to unify. We have to come together and send one very clear, strong, unmistakable message that acts or threats of political violence of any kind have no place in the United States of America."
But U.S. Sen. Charles E. Schumer, D-N.Y., and U.S. Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., jointly issued a statement declaring that Trump's words ring hollow given his controversial comments. CNN President Jeff Zucker said the president doesn't comprehend the consequences of his own words.
Mitt Romney said that "hate acts follow hate speech. It is past time for us to turn down and tune out the rabid rhetoric." Journalists and political pundits also pointed fingers at Trump for inviting such attacks with his vitriol.
Highlighting the perceived "cause and effect" in this situation is understandable. But there's one big problem: We have no idea if it's true.
At this stage, we don't know who sent the packages. So we cannot yet make any conclusions as to this person's motive for sending bombs through the mail.
It's easy to link angry rhetoric with acts of violence. Impassioned speeches that denounce perceived enemies tend to stoke people's emotions. When inflamed, these acrimonious sentiments can get out of hand.
Trump has used his rallies to decry members of the news media, often spreading lies about reporters covering him. During his presidential bid, he singled out NBC's Katy Tur. People in the audience became so riled up that Secret Service agents felt the need to escort her out of some events to ensure her safety.
And Tur hasn't been the only journalist to require Secret Service protection as a result of Trump's reckless behavior. It's incredibly sad that the president puts reporters in jeopardy for doing their jobs and that many of his supporters applaud him for it. One should expect our head of state to act more responsibly, but I'm not going to hold my breath waiting for this to happen.
This does not, however, justify blaming Trump or his divisive rhetoric for these intended acts of violence. We have no idea what inspired the perpetrator to send the packages, so making any such link is premature.
But the lack of any concrete evidence hasn't stopped some from identifying the cause. Here is a typical headline, this one from a story posted Wednesday by Salon.com: "Trump is inciting violence, and now we have a MAGAbomber." The subhead reads: "We are not at war with them, but they're at war with us and somebody is going to die."
In the article, Lucian K. Truscott IV stated that he has received numerous death threats as a result of the hundreds of columns he's written about Trump over the past two years. And now he believes the president is liable for the mail bombs.
"You could call the bombs sent today to the Obamas and the Clintons and the others a terrorist act, but it's also attempted murder. The only difference between those bombs and what we would call terrorism is the politics involved. All of those targeted by the bomber or bombers are prominent Democrats. All of them have been targeted recently by Donald Trump in his rhetoric at rallies and in his tweets," Truscott wrote. "Trump has radicalized his base. He is inciting terrorism. He is an accomplice to attempted murder. Someone is going to be killed before this is over."
The problem with Truscott's analysis, and similar sentiments made by Trump's many critics, is that isolating what drives someone to commit violence is difficult. Some people may become so caught up in an ideology that killing others to maintain it seems natural. Others may have such serious mental health problems that they can't control their impulses.
The implication by Truscott and like-minded individuals is that Trump should tone down his language to reduce the potential for further attacks. Yes, I believe the president should choose his words much more carefully.
But telling rivals to ease the rhetoric is a not-so-subtle way of trying to curtail criticism. Need proof? Those demanding more civility from the other side don't usually make the connection between their own contemptuous statements and acts of violence against their opponents.
Are demagogic Democrats responsible for the June 2017 shooting of U.S. Rep. Steve Scalise of Louisiana? How many progressives who are now pointing fingers at Trump were willing to take this stance last year?
There is much we don't know about these bombs or why they were sent. So we need to reserve judgment on who may be to blame.
Jerry Moore is the editorial page editor for the Watertown Daily Times. Readers may call him at 315-661-2369 or send emails to jmoore@wdt.net
___ (c)2018 Watertown Daily Times (Watertown, N.Y.) Visit Watertown Daily Times (Watertown, N.Y.) at www.watertowndailytimes.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: October 26, 2018


End of Document