OPINION: Terrorism blocks cricket diplomacy
Enid News & Eagle (Oklahoma)
December 19, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: SPORTS
Length: 488 words
Byline: Jeff Mullin, Enid News & Eagle, Okla.
Body


Dec. 19--Sport is, most of the time, a great escape from reality.
But, on occasion, reality intrudes on all the joy we get from our fun and games.
The grimmest reality gripped India last month when terrorists attacked Mumbai, killing 164 people and causing chaos in that nation's business center.
Thursday the Indian minister of sport announced the Indian cricket team's scheduled tour of Pakistan early next year has been canceled.
To Americans, cricket is an incomprehensible sport only vaguely resembling baseball that takes days to play and features breaks for tea. To much of the rest of the world, cricket is an obsession.
And to people in India and Pakistan, it is more important than that. Imagine the Super Bowl, the CAA basketball tournament, the World Series, the BCS national championship college football game, the NBA finals, all four of golf's major tournaments and the Kentucky Debby rolled into one, and you wouldn't find a 1/10th of the excitement surrounding a match between India and Pakistan.
Indian authorities have said the militants who committed the Mumbai attacks originated from Pakistan, further straining relations between two countries seemingly always on the brink of war.
The countries have fought three wars in the past 60 years, and have been close several other times. But cricket has helped ease tensions between the two feuding neighbors.
In 2004 India's cricket team toured Pakistan, the first full series of matches between the two teams in 14 years. Analysts hailed that trip as a sign of hope for peace. This time, that hope has been dashed, at least for now.
The matches are a source of fierce national pride in both countries. A win would make the victorious country's players national heroes, while losses have led to fans pelting players' houses with debris, or burning them in effigy.
But at least the two teams competed on the field of play, instead of on the battlefield.
When interviewed during a series of matches between the two countries in 2005 in India, then-Pakistan Cricket Board chairman Shaharyar Khan was asked if "cricket diplomacy," was working.
"Of course it has. Look at the amount of goodwill the two teams generated during the series in Pakistan. If the Indians won the hearts of the Pakistanis in Pakistan, we are here to achieve the same goal in India. Cricket diplomacy has worked. I have no doubts on that score."
It will not get a chance to work this time. Diplomacy and understanding have been sidelined by terror.
Mullin is senior writer of the News & Eagle.
To see more of the Enid News & Eagle or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.enidnews.com. Copyright (c) 2008, Enid News & Eagle, Okla. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: December 19, 2008


End of Document