OPINION: Babes in terrorland
The Anniston Star (Alabama)
September 25, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 The Anniston Star
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 666 words
Byline: H. Brandt Ayers, The Anniston Star, Ala.
Body


Sept. 25--During World War II, my dad, too old for active service, felt a need to be where the action was, so he determined to visit a friend, Col. Elliot Warburton, in London during the "buzz bomb" attacks.
Buzz bombs were German rockets designed not for any military purpose but to terrorize British citizens, which they adamantly refused to be. When the whine of the flying bombs stopped, they randomly plunged down and detonated on contact.
While Elliot was showing Dad around, they were momentarily separated when a buzz bomb stopped. Elliot made a dash for a bomb shelter worried about the older man. As he entered the shelter, he found Dad already there.
When Dad returned safely home, he never gave another thought to terror randomly coming from the sky. Like every other American, he knew that the Atlantic and Pacific oceans protected us from harm.
Not so for our elder British kin. Elliot measured our nations' relative ages when he asked what I was studying and I said, "American history." "Oh," he wryly replied, 'That must be a short course."
Post-war England had to contend with the Irish Republican Army, whose bomb campaign many years later came close to obliterating Prime Minister Thatcher. During that time on a visit to the UK, security officials seemed alarmed by my hand-held recorder.
"WHAT IS THAT!!!" they demanded. I explained that it was a recorder. "PLAY IT," they ordered. I did and the recorder said, "Hello, Margaret, this is your Daddy's pocket talking to you."
Security, which had been so suspiciously fierce, laughed and gave us a friendly bye.
When we returned home from that trip, terrorism might as well have been a million miles away. We accepted our familiar sense of security with the nonchalance of a relative babe in Terrorland -- until Sept. 11, 2001.
Having never been hurt before by terrorism, the shock to our innocence made us react like the sophomores we were. Among our overreactions was the creation of the monstrous, duplicative Homeland Security Agency, which can't get out of its own way.
An alarm went off in the nation's brain, and not having been tested over time by war and terrorism as our British and Jewish allies have, we scared ourselves more than it was prudent to do.
In the recorded history of terrorism in the United States, violence has come almost exclusively from within. A remarkable number of plots to do major acts of terrorism have been prevented by the authorities.
The most tragic act of domestic terrorism was not detected and stopped by the authorities because it was the act of a single man, Timothy McVeigh, an anti-government obsessive acting with a lone co-conspirator. The truck bomb outside the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City took 168 lives and injured hundreds.
Until the attack on the Twin Towers in 2001, Oklahoma City was the worst terrorist attack in American history, but domestic terrorism didn't end there.
This year alone there has been the terrifying scene in the Orlando nightclub of partygoers scurrying like frightened rats as a deranged gunman took one life after another. Then there was the recent explosion in Manhattan.
In between, an officer was shot in Philadelphia and shootings in Baton Rouge killed three officers and injured three others. Finally, there were the stabbings in a St. Cloud, Minn., mall, injuring eight, and the random shooting in Bristol, Tenn., that wounded an officer and killed a lady driving on a parkway.
Bristol!!!? St. Cloud!!!? Is there no place to hide? Domestic terrorism will find us even in small-town America. The best we can do is adopt the fatalistic British attitude:
We will live our lives just as we always have, fearlessly, and if our time has come, we will die as free men and women who refused to let the terrorists win.
H. Brandt Ayers is the publisher of The Star and chairman of Consolidated Publishing Co.
___ (c)2016 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) Visit The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: September 25, 2016


End of Document