OPINION: TERRORIST IN US CONGRESS
The Will (Nigeria)
July 22, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 The Will Newspaper All Rights Reserved
Length: 1146 words
Body


 For quite sometime, activities rocking American liberal democratic institutions have revealed that sunlight is the best disinfectant. It's climaxing in hubris and backlash that's driving abominable nail of in-house terrorism into the coffin of American's majesterial democracy.
 In all of this, President Donald Trump has been made the fall guy for standing up to the plague of terroristic agenda of IIhan Omar, an Islamic mullah and terrorism advocate. Painfully, nobody likes the man who brings bad news, in the words of Sophocles (Oedipus the King).
 In this instance, Trump is the bearer of bad news for those bent on truncating centuries of American's hard earned democracy and her civilisation. Pitiously for Omar's own pietistic religious ideology and in her ancestral home in Somalia  an African country enveloped in turmoil and bloodbath instigated by Islamic radicalism, Al Shabaab  views women elevation, stardom or feminism as Zionism which must never be allowed to stand! Americans and the Democrats have themselves to blame for the freedom unlimited which secures places for bloodlust deviants, moral perverts and blood-embracing scoundrels to thrive, even when their own original countries have literally castrated them.
 Since Omar was elected to the Minnesota House of Representatives in 2016 on the DemocraticFormerLabor Party line, she has repeatedly been less than charitable on explosive religious terrorism issues. Ironically, she is the first Somali-American, the first naturalized citizen from Africa, and the first non-white woman elected from Minnesota, and one of the first two Muslim women (along with Rashida Tlaib of Michigan) to serve in Congress.
 Omar is known to have strongly opposed the immigration policies of the Trump administration including the Trump travel ban. She has been the subject of several conspiracy theories, death threats, and other perceived harassment by political opponents.
 Besides, she's a frequent critic of Israel. Omar has relentlessly denounced American's settlement policy and military campaigns in the occupied Palestinian territories, and what she describes as the influence of pro-Israel lobbies such as the American Israel Public Affairs Committee(AIPAC).
 In early 2019, Omar was criticized by a number of Democrats, Republicans and Jewish civil rights groups for comments about American support for Israel which drew on anti-Semitic tropes. Omar apologized for some of the remarks.
 In a video that inundated the cyber space for three days running, she revisited the can of worms many Americans and the world view of her as despised broken moral bankruptcy a vessel wherein no one pleases to associate with. Omar in a press conference stated that she doesn't expect white people to denounce other white people when they commit acts of murder.
 In her reasoning therefore, it is unthinkable to expect Muslims to denounce terrorism! I found Omar's equivalency the white race with Islam quite disturbing. Islam is an ideology while white as a race is not.
 Any person with the idea of human sancrosanity should denounce indiscriminate taking of life in any guise, either by white supremacists or Islamic terrorists. President Trump has answered for himself some of the touching issues supposedly responsible for his refusal to romanticize with enemies of humanity.
 As expected, Trump encouraged Muslims who want to live under Islamic Sharia law this week Wednesday to get out of America. It's one of the policy measures of his government to head off radical Islam and potential terrorists attacks after the 9/11 bitter experience.
 Trump's righteous indignation wasn't misplaced when he said, "I am tired of this nation worrying about whether we are offending some individuals or their culture. Since the terrorist attacks, we have experienced a surge in patriotism by the majority of Americans.
 "This culture has been developed over two centuries of struggles, trials and victories by millions of men and women who have sought freedom. "We speak English, not Spanish, Lebanese, Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, Russian, or any other language.
 Therefore, if you wish to become part of our society, learn the language. "Most Americans believe in God.
 This is not some Christian, right wing, political push, but a fact, because Christian men and women, on Christian principles, founded this nation, and this is clearly documented. It is certainly appropriate to display it on the walls of our schools.
 "If God offends you, then I suggest you consider another part of the world as your new home, because God is part of our culture." 'We will accept your beliefs, and will not question why.
 All we ask is that you accept ours, and live in harmony and peaceful enjoyment with us. "This is our country, our land, and our lifestyle, and we will allow you every opportunity to enjoy all this.
 But once you are done complaining, whining, and griping about Our Flag, Our Pledge, Our Christian beliefs, or Our Way of Life, I highly encourage you take advantage of one other great American freedom, 'the right to leave. "If you aren't happy here then leave.
 "We didn't force you to come here. You asked to be here.
 So accept the country that accepted you". I'm of the view  like Trump  that America would go to the dogs if the immigrants who can't respect and support the 'American dream', just like their forebears who toiled night and day, blood and water to build the United States can excuse themselves from 'God's Own Country'.
 The conundrum is, what then is the essence of having countries without boarders, either physical or artificial? Can countries exist as mere geographical expression without defined and designed boarders? Why did Ilhan Omar not remain in her war-ravaged home country, Somalia if Islamic terrorism is the best thing that has happened to humanity? The world shouldn't be taken unaware because an American political scientist Samuel P. Huntington had already argued that future wars would be fought not between countries, but between cultures in his book originally published in 1999 titled The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order.
 The Clash of Civilizations is a hypothesis that people's cultural and religious identities will be the primary source of conflict in the post-Cold War world. That's where we are at the moment, unfortunately! Those slamming President Trump for insensitivity to racial amity in their arguments fail to convince the rest of us whether or not the founding fathers of the United States of America were given to destructive politics of religious terrorism, cultural manipulation and conflicts, as it is today.
 Until the world separates emotion from reality, we have painfully arrived at the tipping point of clash of civilisations  western education against Islamic fundamentalism.  Written by Erasmus Ikhide /Email:ikhideerasmus@gmail.
com/Twitter @ikhide_erasmus1 

Load-Date: July 22, 2019


End of Document