ORDER FOR MILITARY TRIBUNAL RAISES LEGAL QUESTIONS;
 CHENEY SAYS TERRORISM SUSPECTS DON'T DESERVE SAME SAFEGUARDS AS U.S. CITIZENS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 15, 2001 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 434 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A military trial of someone accused of terrorism would include lawyers, jurors and a judge, but similarities to a typical American courtroom would end there. Even supporters of the idea say it would mean fewer rights for the accused, a freer hand for the government and little or no oversight from other judges or the public.
Civil liberties defenders say the military terror tribunal sketched by the White House is just shy of a star chamber - ultrasecret and omnipotent.
"The government gets to decide first that you're guilty, then it puts you through the process to affirm that you're guilty," said Morton H. Halperin, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. "I don't think constitutionally you can do that."
President George W. Bush gave emergency approval for a military tribunal this week, if terrorism suspects were caught and charged in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks. The White House says no U.S. citizens would be brought before such a court. Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terror network i s the target.
"They don't deserve the same guarantees and safeguards that we use for an American citizen," Vice President Dick Cheney said Wednesday. "They will have a fair trial under the procedures of the military tribunal."
Attorney General John Ashcroft said that the assaults were acts of war and that a military commission was the appropriate place to try terrorists captured in Afghanistan or elsewhere. Foreigners living in America also could go before the court, which could sit in the United States or abroad.
"Foreign terrorists who commit war crimes against the United States in my judgment are not entitled to and do not deserve the protections of the American Constitution," Ashcroft said.
Congress has not declared war, although the military is bombing in Afghanistan in the hope of destroying bin Laden's network.
The White House framework for a military tribunal is based on tribunals used by the United States during more traditional wars. Many details, however, are unresolved.
"It leaves open more questions than it answers," said Philip Allen Lacovara, a former counsel to the Watergate special prosecutor who has written and lectured on military courts worldwide. "What it essentially does is stake out the president's willingness to use military tribunals."
The president himself would decide who came before a military court, and many of the particulars of a trial would be up to him and the defense secretary.
For example, it is unclear whether the government would have to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the burden prosecutors must meet in an ordinary criminal court.  .

Notes

AMERICA RESPONDS

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document