Order rescinded easing terrorism suspect's jailing
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 29, 2007 Saturday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 312 words
Byline: Dan Browning, Staff Writer
Body


A federal judge in Minneapolis on Friday stayed his earlier order requiring U.S. marshals to ease the strict confinement measures imposed on terrorism suspect Mohamed Warsame pending trial.
On Aug. 31, U.S. District Judge John Tunheim ordered Warsame transferred as soon as possible to "more typical pretrial detention." On Sept. 4, government prosecutors sought a stay of his order, arguing that Warsame had failed to exhaust administrative remedies to modify his confinement conditions.
Last week, before Tunheim ruled on their request for a stay, prosecutors filed a new motion to vacate his Aug. 31 order. Assistant U.S. Attorney Thomas Hollenhorst wrote that the U.S. attorney general has the discretion to use special confinement conditions.
"There is every reason to believe that if the defendant were moved to `a more normal pretrial detention facility,' the U.S. Marshal's Service would not be able to adequately limit the defendant's ability to communicate with and contact known and suspected terrorists," Hollenhorst wrote.
On Friday, Tunheim agreed to indefinitely stay his confinement order while lawyers prepare written arguments. He asked Warsame's attorneys to respond as soon as possible, but no later than Oct. 5.
Warsame, a Canadian citizen of Somali descent, was attending college in Minneapolis in 2003 when FBI agents questioned him about the time he allegedly spent in two terrorist training camps in Afghanistan three years earlier.
Warsame was interviewed in his home by federal agents on Dec. 8, 2003, then arrested as a material witness. He was indicted Jan. 20, 2004, in Minneapolis on charges of conspiring to provide material support to Al-Qaida and of lying to federal agents about traveling to Afghanistan and sending $2,000 to an associate there.
Warsame reportedly had been held in solitary confinement at the Oak Park Heights prison pending trial.

Load-Date: October 2, 2007


End of Document