Oregon State U. debate discusses actual roots of terrorism
University Wire
January 30, 2002


Copyright 2002 OSU Daily Barometer via U-Wire
Length: 445 words
Byline: By Adrienne Evans, OSU Daily Barometer
Dateline: Corvallis, Ore.
Body


Doug Bandow, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, visited LaSells Stewart Center Tuesday night to debate the roots of terrorism with Oregon State University political science professor Richard Clinton. The OSU College Republicans sponsored the debate.
Bandow regularly writes for publications such as Fortune magazine, has appeared nationally on radio and television shows like Crossfire and Oprah and holds a B.S. in economics from Florida State University and a J.D. from Stanford University.
Oregon State U.
Bandow spoke of the great economic fortune that Americans hold in comparison to those of other countries.
"The richest fifth receives 82.7 percent of the world income and we all fall into that category," he said while looking onto a screen graphic that re-illustrated his message. "The poorest fifth of the world receives 1.4 percent."
He emphasized that terrorism is rooted in poverty. The extreme need of the impoverished leads to desperate feelings which can cause acts of terrorism.
As for why other nations hate the U.S.?
Clinton responds, "For the shear bloody arrogance of having it both ways all of the time. For thinking that we alone are above the rules. That we can laugh at treaties. That we can do whatever we want. We don't have to keep our word or behave like other civilized nations and we can just tell people to bug off when they raise question."
When it was Bandow's turn to take the floor, a somewhat different view was heard.
Bandow found the root of terrorism deeply intertwined with politics.
"It's not as though terrorism started on September 11th," Bandow said in his opening lines of debate.
"It's very common around the world and if one looks at it in that context then they realize that it is a political phenomena, that terrorism is essentially a form of warfare to advance political ends."
While Clinton focused on poverty as the primary influence of terrorism, Bandow approached the problem with a political solution.
"Whether or not you like Disneyland or MTV," he said, "that doesn't cause people to kill. Poverty creates discontent, it doesn't create terrorism. Political inequality creates terrorism."
One solution that Bandow posed to the terrorism issue was that of a free market economy where the power would be distributed to the people.
Approximately 150 students made up the crowd at La Sells, one of which was Paul Daghlian, a senior in political science.
"I agree with a lot of Bandow's speilings" he said, "And I like Dr. Clinton so I was very anxious to hear his remarks on this topic."
Bandow will be speaking again Wednesday at Stag 111 at 7 p.m.
(C) 2002 OSU Daily Barometer via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 30, 2002


End of Document