Orlando gunman's widow portrayed as willing helper in attack plot
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 15, 2018 Thursday


Copyright 2018 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. Z3
Length: 291 words
Byline: Doug Stanglin and Christal Hayes
Body


The widow of the man accused of killing 49 people and injuring dozens at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando two years ago was portrayed by prosecutors Wednesday as her husband's knowing helpmate in the crime.
"None of the victims that night knew the horrific events that would unfold. No one knew except for two people: Omar Mateen and his wife," Assistant U.S. Attorney James Mandolfo said in opening statements at Noor Salman's trial in Orlando. "The defendant gave Omar Mateen the green light to commit terrorism on behalf of ISIS."
Mandolfo described Salman, 31, as a person fully aware of Mateen's plot, including his purchase of ammunition for his AR-15, and who had helped him scout possible locations to attack. She also knew his plans when he left the house on June 12, 2016, he said.
And Salman - charged with aiding and abetting the support of a foreign terrorist organization and obstruction of justice - lied to and tried to mislead FBI agents, Mandolfo argued, including withholding information on Ma-teen's fascination with violent jihadist videos and terrorism. If convicted, Sal-man faces up to life in prison.
Linda Moreno, the defense attorney, challenged the prosecutor's portrait of Salman as a willing helper, saying Mateen had a secret life that involved cheating with other women and exploring jihadist websites.
She portrayed Salman as a simple woman with a limited intellect who was duped by her husband and coerced into confessing by the FBI.
Salman was questioned by authorities, and her story changed multiple times, prosecutors said. In the end, she signed a statement that outlined her knowledge of Mateen's planning and said she knew he was going to attack the club when he left their home.
Contributing: The Associated Press

Load-Date: March 15, 2018


End of Document