Orlando shootings: Obama attacks Trump's Muslim ban call
The Lion's Pride: Saint Leo University
June 15, 2016 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: PEOPLE; Pg. 1
Length: 621 words
Byline: Lydia Wallace
Body


Dismayed Republicans scrambled for cover Tuesday from Donald Trump's inflammatory response to the Orlando massacre, while President Barack Obama and Democrat Hillary Clinton delivered fiery denunciations that underscored the potential peril for the GOP. They want us to validate them, by implying that they speak for those billion-plus people, that they speak for Islam.
Ryan had previously rejected Trump's call for a ban on Muslims.
Criticizing "this kind of rhetoric and loose talk and sloppiness", Obama noted that the gunman in Orlando, one of the San Bernardino killers, and the Fort Hood killer were all USA citizens. Obama protested, pointing out that recent domestic terror attacks have been carried about by USA citizens.
Earlier that day, he suggested that Mr Obama was sympathetic to Islamic extremists, saying: "People cannot, they cannot believe that President Obama is acting the way he acts and can't even mention the words 'radical Islamic terrorism.' There's something going on". Obama asked on Tuesday, according to NBC News.
She said: "We don't need conspiracy theories and pathological self-congratulations".
"It wouldn't make us more safe, it would make us less safe, fueling ISIL's notion that the West hates Muslims", Obama said, using an acronym for Islamic State. "It'll make us less safe".
Obama's intervention also seemed motivated by a desire to help Clinton. "It'snot a strategy", Obama said.
Regarding terms such as "radical Islam" and "radical Islamists", Obama said, "It's a political talking point. They're trying to take over our children and convince them how wonderful ISIS is and how wonderful Islam is, and we don't know what's happening".
Obama also used the occasion to call anew for stricter controls on guns, which the GOP has blocked for years.
"We are now seeing how unsafe this kind of mindset and this kind of thinking can be", Obama said on Tuesday after meeting with his national security advisers to discuss USA efforts to combat Islamic State extremists.
Donald Trump will celebrate his 70th birthday Tuesday with thousands of supporters - at his latest campaign rally.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell told reporters he would not be commenting Tuesday about Trump.
Clinton, who spoke from a union hall, hit Trump for being simplistic on fighting terrorism and, she said, having only two ideas to address the problem: Using the term "radical Islamic terrorism", and banning Muslims and people from countries with terrorism ties from entering the United States.
Both Democrats said Trump's call a day earlier for special surveillance of U.S. Muslims and a prohibition against Muslim immigration to the U.S.is un-American and unsafe.
As his longshot bid faded in the closing weeks of the race, Sanders argued that Clinton reached the threshold by relying on superdelegates - party members who pledge their support for a candidate.
A Republican official said others in the meeting included the governors of Mississippi, Arizona, Arkansas, Nebraska and Tennessee, as well as New Jersey's Chris Christie, a close Trump adviser and former presidential rival.
"And I have to ask, will responsible Republican leaders stand up to their presumptive nominee or will they stand by his accusation about our president?" Calling a threat by a different name does not make it go away. We've gone through moments in our history before when we acted out of fear, and we came to regret it. "When I'm elected, I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where there is a proven history of terrorism against the United States, Europe or our allies until we fully understand how to end these threats".
"I continue to be discouraged by the direction of the campaign and comments that are made", said Sen.

Load-Date: January 5, 2017


End of Document