OSAMA DRIVER CONVICTED OF TERRORIST WAR CRIMES
Daily News (New York)
August 7, 2008 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 8
Length: 379 words
Byline: BY RICHARD SISK DAILY NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU
Body


WASHINGTON - A military jury of six active-duty officers convicted Osama Bin Laden's driver of backing terrorism but cleared him of conspiracy charges in the first war crimes trial since 9/11.
Salim Hamdan, a Yemeni national whose challenge of his status as an "enemy combatant" has already gone to the Supreme Court and forced Congress to rewrite war crimes law, put his head in his hands and wept as a Navy captain on the five-man, one-woman jury read the verdict.
The Pentagon-selected jury deliberated over three days before returning its split decision.
Hamdan was found guilty on five of eight charges of supporting terrorism by driving for Bin Laden in Afghanistan and Pakistan - while knowing his boss was plotting attacks against the U.S. - and giving Al Qaeda access to weapons. The jury cleared him of two counts of conspiracy to carry out acts of terrorism.
His lawyers were ready to appeal through the military and then civil court systems. An eventual reappearance before the Supreme Court was a "virtual certainty," said Eugene Fidell, head of the National Institute of Military Justice.
The military jury that convicted Hamdan reconvened in the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base courtroom for a sentencing hearing. He could face up to life in prison.
Hamdan's Pentagon-appointed lawyer, Navy Lt. Cmdr. Brian Mizer, had complained that trial rules had stacked the deck against his client by permitting hearsay and secret testimony. Even if he had been found innocent, Hamdan could still have been held indefinitely at Guantanamo as an enemy combatant.
The Bush administration said Hamdan received a "fair trial." White House spokesman Tony Fratto said the conviction means prosecutors will proceed with 19 other cases.
The Hamdan case spilled over into presidential politics, as John McCain and Barack Obama quickly issued statements.
Obama blasted the lengthy process, and called for speedier trials in civilian courts.
"While it is important to convict anyone who provides material support for terrorism, it is long past time to capture or kill Osama Bin Laden," he added.
McCain scoffed at granting terror suspects civilian court access.
"I recognize that we cannot treat dangerous terrorists captured on the battlefield as we would common criminals," he said.
rsisk@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Salim Hamdan was convicted of supporting Osama Bin Laden's terrorism. Photo by AP

Load-Date: August 7, 2008


End of Document