Osama bin Laden failed to break U.S. spirit
USA TODAY
May 3, 2011 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 922 words
Body


On Sept. 11, 2001, through clouds of smoke in New York City, we saw complete destruction of buildings, people jumping to their deaths and other images from Ground Zero that we will never forget. Contrast that to Sunday night,  nearly 10 years later as Americans learned of Osama bin Laden's death ("Osama bin Laden is dead, Obama says," News, Monday).
On TV,  we saw views of the construction site in the footprints of the World Trade Center, all lit up at night.  We heard people chanting, "USA, USA!" at Ground Zero, Times Square and in front of the White House. Bin Laden hurt us, but he never broke our spirit!
Jerry T. Johnson
Bloomington, Minn.
Sept. 11 attack was evil
As a Muslim American belonging to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, I completely agree with President Obama that the now deceased Osama bin Laden was in no way a representative of Islam.
Bin Laden's plot to kill a maximum number of innocent civilians during 9/11 was evil. He hijacked more than just a few planes, but also the entire religion of a billion Muslims. His name will remain in ignominy because he used the guise of holiness to spread anarchy, whereas I believe Islam instructs us to be loyal citizens of our country.
The world will be a safer place, though not only when the world can apprehend mass murderers, but also when the peaceful voice of Islam can prevent radical ideologies from taking root in the first place. Thus our work continues even after bin Laden.
Sohail Husain
Meriden, Conn.
Time to pull out of Afghanistan
Now that Osama bin Laden has been  killed by  a U.S. special forces team, it's time to leave Afghanistan. Getting rid of bin Laden is the reason we went there in the first place.
Forget about trying to democratize a country full of warring tribes, corruption and drug suppliers. No more of our troops should be at risk in  that hellhole. Mission accomplished! Get out now.
Timothy D. O'Reilly
Chicago
War against terrorism will continue
On May 1, 1945, it was announced to the world that Adolf Hitler was dead. He had committed suicide a day earlier.  Within a week, the war in Europe was officially over.  Move ahead to Sunday, May 1, and the world hears news of Osama bin Laden's death. As wonderful and morale boosting as this announcement is to those of us who live in Western civilizations, the similarities of these two evil men end there.
While Hitler represented the head of the German state, bin Laden has become  simply a symbolic leader of a worldwide movement called al-Qaeda, which is hell bent on converting non-believers to  its religion and way of life,  and if that is not successful, killing them. In other words, the war with Islamic terrorists will not end simply because bin Laden is dead.
Make no mistake. To Islamic radicals,  the "best" Muslims are those  who fight and kill for their religion.  Bottom line: The war against al-Qaeda and terrorism is not over.  Many people  are willing to step up and carry forth this never-ending jihad against everything that is not their religion.
Yes, it is a day to celebrate. But let's not fool ourselves that because bin Laden is dead the war will soon be over, as was the case when Hitler died.  This war will continue for many generations to come.
Ed Zak
New Smyrna Beach, Fla.
U.S. followed through
Is it right for a violent death to feel so good? Waking up  Monday morning  to the news of the killing of Osama bin Laden was like learning your team had won the Super Bowl.  We had a sense of accomplishment, pride and renewed faith in our system.
Death is not to be rejoiced in, except perhaps when  the victim is the devil, going on a rendezvous to meet his ilk. Thanks to our CIA, our Navy SEALs and, yes, our government for making the right calls and going into Pakistan.
I am so proud of our men and women who made real George W. Bush's words, spoken 10 years ago:  "I don't know if it will be tomorrow, or next month, or next year, but we will get him." And get him we did. USA!
Bob Guerin
Marathon, Fla.
Praise for our president, military
Although we cannot be naive enough to believe that capturing and killing Osama bin Laden will be the end of terrorism, we must band together and give credit to our president for executing what seemed like an impossible task. Praises to President Obama and our military for a job well done.
Jean Henley
Rockville, Md.
God bless America
The healing can begin for all who suffered from the tragedy of Sept. 11, 2001. The death of Osama bin Laden is the first step that the United States and the rest of the world requires to hasten the remedy for the deep psychosis affecting those haunted by 9/11.
This event  justifies the only one true human reaction from the democratic and free-thinking people of this world who have suffered from bin Laden: vengeance. If ever there was a time to accept the fault of this human trait,  it is with this man's death.
In my mind, both justice and vengeance for the men and women who died  because of bin Laden  have been served. God bless the victims of 9/11 and the United States of America for its continued vigilance against terrorism on behalf of all of us.
Daniel Kowbell
Ontario, Canada
Nation must stay vigilant
Osama bin Laden may be dead, but don't get too excited, America. Many people  in the Middle East despise us and breed hatred. So for every leader like bin Laden who dies,  more are waiting in line to take his place.
Breathing too easy and letting one's guard down too much could be very dangerous. In this case, the "Mission Accomplished" will never be, totally.
Renee Kirchner
Farmington, Minn. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Chip Somodevilla, Getty Images

Load-Date: May 3, 2011


End of Document