OSAMA BIN GRANOLA;
PENNSYLVANIA DOESN'T NEED AN ECO-TERRORISM BILL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 29, 2005 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 340 words
Body


Pennsylvania received its royal charter in 1681 and for all these years the commonwealth has been able to manage without eco-terrorism recognized as a crime. If someone damages property or assaults someone, for whatever reason, the law has always been sufficient to prosecute and punish the culprit.
 But a trendy criminal concept begs for a superficial up-to-the-minute response, and politicians in Harrisburg are up to the task. Not for the first time, a bill targeting "eco-terrorism" is up for consideration. The current attempt is HB 213, which passed the House 168-16 earlier this month -- but not without some misgivings expressed by a thoughtful few.
It is not clear why criminal behavior for a cause -- say, in support of animal rights, or saving trees -- needs to be considered differently from regular mindless criminality. But it can't be because Pennsylvania has a huge problem with eco-terrorism.
 To be sure, environmental extremism has brought some wanton vandalism to other parts of the country, particularly out West. Here in Pennsylvania, though, extreme environmental activism has been more nuisance than outrage, and it's been scattered at that. This bill addresses a problem that really hasn't occurred much here.
 Lawmakers opposed to the bill expressed concern that the wording is too broad and could inhibit free speech -- and we share their anxiety. Although one section specifically upholds free speech in peaceable demonstrations on public property or with permission on private property, any act dubbed "terrorist" in this era invites official overreaction. Indeed, HB 213 says if an offense against property is a felony of the first degree, the penalty can be imprisonment of up to 40 years and a fine of not more than $100,000.
 In many quarters, environmentalists don't get much respect these days and the very word "eco-terrorism" is loaded, insidiously lumping the good with the bad, The fact remains that crimes are crimes and the means already exist to punish them accordingly. The Senate should reject HB 213.

Load-Date: March 30, 2005


End of Document