OTHER OPINION: Methodists, Presbyterians get it wrong on terrorism
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 28, 2001 Sunday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: Editorial;
Length: 841 words
Byline: LUKE BOGGS
Body


Since Sept. 11, Americans have been largely united against terrorism. Our churches are another matter.
In fact, two mainline Protestant denominations --- the United Methodist Church and the Presbyterian Church (USA) --- have gone inexplicably soft on terrorism, with some of their leaders unable or unwilling to distinguish the terrorists from those who would forcibly oppose them.
While leaders of many other churches have no trouble grasping the obvious moral difference between attacking innocents and attacking terrorists, Methodist and Presbyterian leaders are lost in a fog of moral relativism.
For the Journal-Constitution
Take the official Methodist position on terrorism, highlighted on the church Web site (http://umns.umc.org/01/sep/389.htm) after Sept. 11: "There is no significant difference between 'state terrorism,' [meaning] the 'overkill' response of a state, and group terrorism." As such, members are told to oppose "retaliation or capital punishment" --- responses the church considers "terrorist acts."
Instead, Methodists are called to examine the causes of terrorism, support the United Nations instead of "resorting to war and/or terrorism," "urge the president of the United States to repudiate violence" and "continue to support the U.S. ban on assault rifles, as these are [terrorism's ] weapon of choice."
Now that airliners have become terrorism's weapon of choice, perhaps Methodist leaders will soon propose a ban on them.
Methodism's moral muddle extends to the basics of good and evil. Promoting a TV special on its Web site, the church asks, "If Americans see this as a battle between 'good' and 'evil,' are we in danger of embarking on a so-called 'holy war' ourselves?" The rhetorical question goes unanswered, but the church's confusion is clear.
For their part, Presbyterian leaders took the opportunity of last month's attacks to urge that churches not display the American flag, arguing that such exhibitions "fail to express the universality of the Christian faith and contribute to an ambiguity about loyalties."
And that was just a start. The Presbyterian News Service distributed a column by the Rev. Vernon Broyles, the church's "associate director for social justice and associate for corporate witness in the National Ministries Division of the General Assembly Council." (Now that's a mouthful.)
Broyles applauds President Bush's informal declaration of "war" against terrorism, not because it will allow us to defend our values long-term, but because it will help us respect our enemies as "soldiers" instead of madmen. Some silver lining.
Broyles insists, preposterously, that al-Qaida's kamikazes were employing "methods typical of every guerrilla army in history that is fighting against a force far superior to their [sic] own." Here, he is wrong all around. Not only are Osama bin Laden's butchers not guerrillas, but plenty of insurgents have rejected wholesale civilian slaughter as counterproductive.
Further, Broyles suggests there is no fundamental difference between last month's attacks and America's atomic bombing of Japan. Sorry, but Hiroshima and Nagasaki were bombed in a declared war against an empire whose grisly handiwork included the Rape of Nanking and the Bataan Death March. Our cause was more than just.
Broyles presses on to blame the victim, whining about how America has "ignored many people suffering injustice at the hands of those we support."
Ticking off a predictable checklist, from Somoza to Pinochet to the Afghan resistance, he implies that bin Laden attacked us because of our more unsavory Cold War partners. Preposterous.
The Presbyterian Church Web site (www.pcusa.org) also spotlighted an article on terrorism by Robert F. Smylie, director of the denomination's United Nations Office.
Right out of the box, Smylie says we could "probably do without the word terrorism," arguing the term is "emotive" in a way that "murder, assassination, bombing, rape, kidnapping, hijacking, piracy" are not. Apparently, it's bad form to brand mass murderers with such a loaded label.
And terrorism, according to Smylie, is wholly subjective. "If the Nazis had won," he explains, "the history of the Holocaust would be written quite differently." Even so, no amount of revisionist history would have changed the horrible truth.
Smylie eventually blames America: "We are first responsible for the beam that is in our own eye before we can see clearly enough to go after the mote (speck) in the other's eye."
And yet, the nation's most prominent mainline Protestant, a certain Methodist named George W. Bush, has no trouble seeing clearly past the twisted beams of Sept. 11.
Last year, the United Methodist Church saw fit to outline all of its many policy disagreements with candidate Bush, from missile defense to welfare.
President Bush hasn't formally returned the favor, but with every decisive action taken against terrorism, he is repudiating, with deafening clarity, his denomination's indefensible moral confusion on the subject. Luke Boggs, of Alpharetta, is a corporate speech writer.

Load-Date: November 2, 2001


End of Document