OTHER VIEWS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 7, 2008, Sunday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P2C
Length: 452 words
Body


Obama's team strong
Some Obama supporters may say the average age of his choice of secretary of the Treasury, secretary of state, vice president and defense secretary is all high. But Obama has gathered a team that commands respect.
That sounds promising for Obama and to a world in need of a stable United States.
Timothy Geithner, the next Treasury secretary, drew cheers from the stock exchanges when he was appointed.
The trinity of the new secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, Defense Secretary Robert Gates and the future national security adviser, retired Gen. James L. Jones, is promising.
One could say that Obama's promise that his government will be moving forward at full speed from day one to create stability will be kept.
Everyone on the team will be able to deliver the goods better than many others. They have both the experience and the desire to do so.
The focus will not only be on Obama's foreign policy team. Even his economic team will be in the crossfire from day one.
There is no doubt that Obama also has succeeded in gathering a strong team, which enjoys the confidence of corporations, Wall Street and ordinary Americans.
- Berlingske Tidende, Copenhagen, Denmark
Terror in slow motion
India's trauma will be measured not just by the scale of the attacks on Mumbai, but by their duration. For nearly three days, security forces battled terrorists for control of sites in the heart of the financial capital of the world's largest democracy. Compared to the instant horror of a suicide bombing, a paramilitary death squad murders in slow motion. The time it took to defeat the gunmen brought a new dimension to the fight against terrorism. On this occasion, it truly looked like war.
To Indian authorities, it also looks like invasion. New Delhi was quick to blame "elements linked to Pakistan." ...
India's terrible misfortune is to have been singled out as a collaborator in the imagined Western conspiracy against Muslims. ...
The enormous challenge for India's government is to pursue justice for the victims of jihadi violence and simultaneously to embrace the cause of justice for those Muslims in whose name the jihadis claim to act. In other words, New Delhi must find a way to make the defeat of terrorism a common cause among its citizens regardless of faith. ...
India was targeted not just because it is a country with an unhappy Muslim minority, but because it is a democracy undergoing rapid and potentially destabilising economic change, and with a history of inter-faith violence. But India is also a regional beacon of cultural openness and political freedom. The terrorists clearly think the bastion is brittle and can be blown apart. They must be proved wrong.
- The Observer, London

Load-Date: December 9, 2008


End of Document