OTHER OPINION: Don't fight terror with a blank check
 
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
November 9, 2003 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Editorial;; EQUAL TIME; Column
Length: 515 words
Byline: B.J. RUDELL
Body


President Bush's greatest political liability is having declared war on terrorism --- a war that cannot be won because it lacks borders and has not been clearly defined.
When Bush launched the war on terrorism two years ago, most Americans rallied around the cause, hoping that the defeat of terrorism would avenge the 3,000 American deaths on our homeland and protect us from future attacks.
But terrorism is not a nation. Its soldiers do not share a common skin color or language. We cannot calculate the number of enemy casualties and determine we're any closer to victory. We cannot plant an American flag on any soil and declare it free from the enemy.
For the Journal-Constitution
Terrorism is an action whose face is indistinguishable and whose boundaries are undefined.
Bush should have learned the lessons revealed by his similarly well-meaning predecessors, presidents Lyndon Johnson (War on Poverty) and Ronald Reagan (War on Drugs).
Just as with the war on terrorism, Johnson's and Reagan's wars directed more funds toward defeating each adversary; focused more media attention on each issue; and cultivated a common purpose among the citizenry. Decades later, our nation is arguably no closer to winning either war.
Likewise, there is no endgame for the war on terrorism. The war will continue to target anyone who threatens the American way of life. For that is what Bush is seeking to protect --- a noble aim, to be sure. But more than two years after Sept. 11, after spending more money and sacrificing more lives than anticipated, the United States is more deeply entrenched than ever in the battle.
The war on terrorism is the guiding force behind our wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. And according to Bush's "axis of evil" statement in his 2002 State of the Union address, Iran and North Korea could be next. And then there's Syria . . .
As important as it is to fight terrorism, we cannot afford to fight it with a blank check --- especially when the parameters of this war have not even been set. Bush has just completed a successful lobbying campaign to divert another $87.5 billion toward the Iraq effort.
With all signs pointing, in the words of Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, to a "long, hard slog," don't be surprised if the war on terrorism soon becomes one of our government's largest entitlement programs.
The American people fear another terrorist attack. But in growing numbers, they're coming to grips with the impossible task at hand.
So when will the war end? That is one of the key questions for which voters will demand an answer in 2004. And unfortunately for Bush and his re-election aspirations, there is no answer.
B.J. Rudell is an editor at Congressional Quarterly in Washington.
This column is solicited to provide another viewpoint to an AJC editorial published today. To respond to an AJC editorial, contact David Beasley at dbeasley@ajc.com or call 404-526-7371. Responses should be no longer than 600 words. Not all responses can be published. Published responses may be republished and made available in the AJC or other databases and electronic formats.  

Graphic

 
Photo: B.J. Rudell

Load-Date: November 9, 2003


End of Document