OTHER VIEWS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 29, 2013, Sunday


Copyright 2013 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P2E
Length: 813 words
Body


International community cannot turn a blind eye
The slaughter of innocent men, women and children perpetrated by Islamic militants at the Westgate Shopping Mall in Kenya, a country that is a longstanding and important Western ally, should leave the international community in no doubt about the dire consequences when failed states are allowed to become breeding grounds for terrorism.
Somalia, the wreck of a country on the Horn of Africa from which the evil, al-Qaida-affiliated al-Shabab thugs responsible for the massacre emanate, has lacked stability since the regime of General Siad Barre, a Soviet toady, lost power in 1991.
In the ensuing anarchy - with the international community unable and unwilling to do much - the worst forms of malevolent Islamic extremism have spawned and thrived, leading to the attack by the al-Shabab terrorists that claimed the lives of scores of people, including Tasmanian-born architect Ross Langdon and his pregnant wife, Elif Yavuz. Another 200 people were wounded. ...
Kenya, which has 4,000 soldiers in Somalia as part of an African Union military force battling to restore security to Somalia, is the al-Shabab terrorists' immediate target, but Nairobi needs help and the international community should be unhesitating in coming to its aid because the threat posed by the Somali terrorists could spread beyond Africa. Al-Shabab is operating closely with al-Qaida and in conjunction with the equally vile Boko Haram terrorists in oil-rich Nigeria and al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.
Given the large Somali diaspora around the world, attacks could also be staged elsewhere....
Recently, perceptions had grown that al-Shabab was losing ground. Senior U.S. officials claimed the Islamist group was on the run after staging a tactical retreat from Mogadishu, the Somali capital, and losing control of the port of Kismayo from which they launched their piracy and kidnapping attacks on the east African coast. The horror perpetrated in Nairobi shows the optimism was misplaced.
Such atrocities cannot be tolerated and the international community cannot turn a blind eye. It is to the credit of the African Union that it is leading the way in seeking to deal with al-Shabab, but far more than Africa's interests are at stake in the battle. As the death toll in the Nairobi massacre again shows, Islamic terrorism threatens us all, and the international community must do all it can to confront it. Somalia's chaos and the terrorism it has spawned as a failed state was allowed to fester for far too long.
AP photo
Dawn breaks over the still-smoldering Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya, Thursday. FBI agents began fingerprint, DNA and ballistic analysis Wednesday to help determine the identities and nationalities of victims and al-Shabab gunmen who attacked the shopping center, killing more than 60 people.
- The Australian
The U.S. Federal Reserve has brought both good and bad news by deciding to delay scaling back its massive bond-purchasing program.
The Fed has been printing money to inject liquidity into the financial system and thereby stimulate the U.S. economy. Each month, it has purchased $85 billion worth of Treasury and mortgage bonds to encourage people to borrow, spend and invest.
Until early last week, the Fed was widely expected to take its first step toward rolling back the extraordinary stimulus measures this month. A majority of Wall Street analysts predicted that it would announce a reduction of $10 billion-$15 billion in its bond purchases at its Sept. 18 meeting.
But it decided to keep the current quantitative easing measures intact, citing the weak hiring and economic growth figures.
The Fed's unexpected move is good news for a group of emerging countries whose currencies have plummeted in value since May when Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke first suggested a possible pullback of the stimulus program within this year.
These countries, including Indonesia, India, Thailand and Turkey, suffered an outflow of foreign capital as the prospect of higher U.S. interest rates caused the flows of money to reverse.
The Fed's decision is welcome as it will give some relief to these vulnerable economies. It also gives them more time to prepare for Washington's eventual tapering of the monetary stimulus. The Korean government also welcomed the decision, although it experienced an inflow, rather than an outflow, of foreign capital in recent months.
Korea is no longer a crisis-prone country. Rather, its strong fundamentals have earned it safe haven status. ...
For Korea, the U.S. represents the second-largest single export market. A slow recovery of the U.S. market would hamper growth of Korea's exports.
Yet it seems to be only a matter of time before the Fed starts winding down the stimulus program. It is expected to take its first step within this year. Policymakers need to keep their guard up.
- The Korea Herald, Seoul

Load-Date: September 30, 2013


End of Document