Our views; Pork spending weakens security Air-conditioned garbage trucks do nothing to deter terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 12, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 283 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


OFFICIALS in Newark, N.J., took money intended to help them improve homeland security and bought air-conditioned garbage trucks instead.
Spending other people's money is that easy. The federal government measures the success of programs in dollars and cents, not effectiveness.
Officials in Columbus, Ohio, used homeland security money to buy body armor for police dogs. Just how that will stop terrorists is not clear.
And it is difficult to believe that leather jackets will stop terrorists, but that did not stop officials in the District of Columbia from using homeland security money to buy leather jackets.
The only way an air-conditioned garbage truck would stop terrorism would be to run over a terrorist.
In the wake of the Sept. 11th attacks, Congress and the president wanted to secure the nation. Money was directed to state and local governments to beef up first responder agencies.
That is how it should be. Local officials should know those needs best.
But with the extra money should come extra safeguards. Local officials consider any federal money to be found money, easily blown on candy bars and moustache wax.
The formula first used to disburse this money signaled congressional intent to spend the money willy-nilly. It allotted $10 for each resident of Wyoming, but only $1.33 per person in New York, a state that had actually suffered a terrorist strike.
Sens. Susan Collins, R-Maine, and Joe Lieberman, D-Conn., worked on a reform bill that will double threat-based funding as well as put in tighter controls.
The Senate approved it 71-26. Here is hoping the House of Representatives follows suit.
The current system needs to be carted off in one of those air-conditioned garbage trucks.

Load-Date: December 13, 2005


End of Document