OUR OPINIONS: An unshaken resolve;
Attacks in London only strengthen commitment to hunt down and eliminate scourge of terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 8, 2005 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Editorial;; (none)
Length: 465 words
Body


On Wednesday, the people of London happily celebrated the announcement that they would play host to the 2012 Summer Olympics, bringing the nations of the world together under a British roof in the name of peace and sport.
One day later, tragedy.
The attacks Thursday could be described in many ways, from cowardly to despicable. But they were not surprising. Not after what had happened in New York and Madrid and Bali, and what is happening on a daily basis now in Iraq, where al-Qaida announced Thursday that it had murdered a kidnapped Egyptian diplomat. These people are killers, and they will kill wherever they have the opportunity.
The British people already understood that. Just a few months ago, a Times of London poll reported that 72 percent of Britons believed an al-Qaida attack on their country was inevitable. The British learned that sense of fatalism the hard way, through decades of terror attacks by the Irish Republican Army.
That experience taught the British that there can be no true security against determined terrorism.  The modern world is too open and crowded, too complex and fast-moving to tolerate the tight controls needed to make terrorism impossible.
The only real security will come by hunting down and eliminating those committed to terrorism as a weapon, while trying to ensure that we do not create still more terrorists in doing so.
After a long fight, the British appear to have succeeded in that task against the IRA. The fight against Islamic terrorism, if that is what this latest attack proves to be, will take longer still.
This continues to be a frustrating type of war, with no simple or obvious plan of action. In fact, a harsh and at times divisive public debate has erupted both in London and here in the United States about how best to win this struggle against terrorism.
As that debate continues, it's important to remember that we're not debating whether that struggle must be won. That is not at issue. The sight of mangled buses and subway cars in a modern Western city has reconfirmed that this is a world in which anger and resentment too easily find violent expression. That has to be changed.
"On the one hand, you have people working to alleviate poverty and rid the world of the pandemic of AIDS and ways to have a clean environment, and on the other hand, you have people working to kill other people," President Bush said Thursday at the G-8 summit in Scotland. "The contrast couldn't be clearer between the intentions and the hearts of those of us who care deeply about human rights and human liberty, and those who kill, those who've got such evil in their hearts that they will take the lives of innocent folks."
In the end, that contrast between us and them will prove to be our most powerful weapon, if we are strong enough to keep it.

Load-Date: July 8, 2005


End of Document