OUR VIEW; TERRORISM ISN'T LIMITED TO ONE RELIGION ...
The Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
April 1, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 The Santa Fe New Mexican All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIALS; Pg. A-9
Length: 634 words
Body


Here and in much of the Western World, "Islamic terrorism" has been the hair-raising phrase of recent decades. Not that there's no such thing, as our nation re-learned to its sorrow in September of 2001, but terrorism is what we tend to pin modifiers on -- broadly xenophobic ones.
Small wonder, then, that in this nation founded largely on Christian principles you don't hear a lot about "Christian terrorism," even after evidence of religious-right aid to the Oklahoma City bombers of 1995 and their mass-murderous blasting of the federal building there.
Fifteen years after Oklahoma City, guesses are coming fast and furious about the timing of an allegedly planned attack by a bunch known as the Hutaree, a Christian militia in Michigan accused of plotting to kill a cop, then blow up fellow officers and families who'd show up for the funeral.
Not a very, uh, Christian thing to do -- but when you've got people talking of "end time battles" and other gštterdŠmmerung scenarios, nothing should be especially surprising. Suddenly the line between one kind of terrorist and the other blurs to nothing; the sword of Jesus and the sword of Mohammed smite with equal ferocity, equal stealth -- and equal injustice ...
Since the election of President Barack Obama, considered by an alarming and poll-documented number of whackos to be the "anti-Christ," there's been a sharp rise in Christian-militia membership and activity.
What kind of activity? That's what bedevils our law-enforcement people. In this free country, folks can talk, and even act, pretty belligerently before they're jailed as accused seditious conspirators -- as the Hutaree have been. For all we know, their lawyers might get 'em set loose, albeit under watch -- and the surveillance and infiltration they've undergone over the past couple of years sets them apart from the 9/11 conspirators, who made evil use of America's freedoms.
The Hutaree had been carrying on military-style training along the Michigan-Ohio borderlands. Obviously they'd caught some law-enforcement attention, whatever the legality of their acts or their arms.
What the feds have in custody, under our justice system, is a bunch of innocent people -- and convicting them of "seditious conspiracy" and plotting war against this country won't be easy.
Sedition is stirring up rebellion against the government. That's pretty hard to prove: At what point does the constitutional right of free expression end -- and fomenting revolution begin?
The Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, when our country was on the verge of war with France, served Thomas Jefferson as an example of repressive government. He campaigned against those laws. Two years later he was elected president, and two years after that they were off the books.
Since then, righteous cries of "sedition!" have tended to be laughed off the campaign podium -- and out of court. The federal government's only major victories on the sedition front came against a few Puerto Rican militants seeking independence. Efforts against bunches like the American Bund during the Nazi era, and an assortment of right-wing nuts in the late 1980s, failed.
Whatever the Hutaree had in mind, they were foiled -- for which Michigan police may be thankful; but can prosecutors convince a jury that they were so close to carrying out their plot that they can be sent away for sedition or levying war?
The religious spouting of the defendants, like that of Muslim militants, strikes most of us as dangerously crazy. Christian or Muslim, the words of a few extremists from time to time turn peace to violence -- at which time the ringleaders become religious terrorists, and have to be treated as such.
Yet as always, our free country is caught between individual rights and collective security. We wish our justice system well with this case.

Graphic

 
See pdf's for exact rendition, caption, graphics and photographer info.

Load-Date: April 1, 2010


End of Document