OUR TOWNS;
Statues in Silent Grief Bring Terrorism Home - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section B;; Section B; Page 5; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Column 1;
Length: 758 words
Byline: By Evelyn Nieves

By Evelyn Nieves
Dateline: MORRISTOWN, N.J.
Body


EACH day, hundreds of commuters who would ordinarily zip past the Morristown Muncipal Hall stop in their tracks, round the parking circle out front and warily approach the west lawn.
They walk over to a dense cluster of arresting, slightly larger-than-life figures just beyond a row of maples. Then they freeze. If the sculptures look provocative from the road, they are positively unnerving up close.
Some people collapse on a bench in front of the installation and stare at it in stunned silence. Others walk very quietly among the figures, as if tiptoeing through a cemetery.
The 26 female nudes express loss, rage, raw pain. Some cover their faces with their hands. Others clutch their stomachs. Some are folded in a heap. Some are screaming. Most chilling is the discovery that the sculptures reveal actual moments. What Suse Lowenstein, the artist, has sculptured are figures of herself and other grieving mothers whose children fell from the sky 31,000 feet over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Dedicated to all victims of terrorism, the work, "Dark Elegy," seems especially timely after the World Trade Center bombing and the terrorist plots that are believed to have been thwarted after it. It is both a memorial to the 270 people who died as a result of the terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 and an intensely personal statement of grief. It reminds the world of a bombing that remains an unresolved issue, with families of victims still waiting for answers.
The 49-year-old artist began to create mother figures in various stages of mourning shortly after losing her 21-year-old son, Alexander, in the fireball of Dec. 21, 1988. She related what she was doing to members of Victims of Pan Am 103 and many women asked if they could join in.
The result captures the moment when the participants discovered what happened to the flight. Each woman who came to Ms. Lowenstein's studio stood on a posing platform and recalled the instant they learned the airliner's fate.
"It's been basically heart-wrenching," Ms. Lowenstein said. "It's each time going through the process. Each woman feels the same emotions."
No men were included in the work because none volunteered, she said. "It reveals the different ways men and women grieve," she said. "Not that men feel any less pain."
Eventually, Ms. Lowenstein plans to include 125 women -- widows and mothers who posed for her -- in the project. The figures are made of synthetic stone and fiberglass covered with wire mesh, colored in tones of terra cotta and ash. There are two figures of herself among the ones currently on display. In one, she is kneeling, being comforted by another. In the other, she has her hands over her head.
She found out about the bombing from a phone call from one of her son's friends. Her son was a Syracuse University senior on a semester abroad. She last saw him three weeks before he died.
"I felt compelled to visit him," she said. "And we spent a wonderful week. For the first time, he was in charge, arranging the hotel, making dinner reservations and taking me to the art museums." After four days in London, they flew to Hamburg, Germany, where Ms. Lowenstein has family. She said Alexander met some of his aunts and uncles for the first time.
"Alexander was a very sunny young man," she said. "His love of life was obvious. He was a funny kid, a very handsome young man."
"The last thing he said to me was, 'I'll see you in 10 days,' " she said.
Now, all her work is informed by her son's death.
"I'm basically not what I call a grief junkie," she said. "But I cannot be quite as frivolous as I used to be. Which isn't to say they're always going to be a downer, but my works have to have some substance now."
No one is quite sure how many people have stopped to study the figures, which have been on display since mid-June and will remain on the lawn until at least October. Town officials have estimated that thousands of drivers, heading to and from western Morris County on Route 124, stopped at the lawn the first few weeks.
Ms. Lowenstein, who lives with her husband, Peter, and younger son, Lucas, in Mendham, west of Morristown, said "Dark Elegy" received a similar reaction when it was first displayed last August at the Elaine Benson Gallery in Bridgehampton.
"It just seems that the sight grips the viewer," she said.
People are also moved by the plaque describing the work. It reads in part: "I want it to remind ourselves that life is fragile and that we can lose that which is most precious to us in an instant and have to live with that for the remainder of our lives."
Correction

A drawing with the Our Towns column yesterday carried an incorrect credit line. The artist was Lynn Pauley.

Correction-Date: August 28, 1993, Saturday

Graphic

 
Drawing

Load-Date: August 27, 1993


End of Document