Our views; 20 years is too little for terrorism; The U. S. needs to try the killer of Robert Stethem for his murder
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 26, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 341 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


ROBERT Dean Stethem joined the Navy on May 4, 1981. Both of his parents had served, as had both his brothers. His father had retired from the Navy.
Young Stethem became a diver, following in the tradition of his brother who would retire as a Navy Seal.
On June 14, 1985, the latest Stethem to serve took a commercial airliner to fly home from an assignment in Nea Makri, Greece.
He never made it home. Mohammed Ali Hamadi led a group of hijackers who took over the jet and forced it to land in Beirut, Lebanon.
Discovering Petty Officer Stethem among the passengers, they tortured him and tried to get him to renounce his nation. They shot him and dumped his body on the tarmac for the whole world to see.
The hunt for the hijackers went nowhere until Hamadi was arrested at the Frankfurt airport after explosives were discovered in his luggage. Terrorism respects no international borders.
But Germany refused to extradite him to the United States, citing this nation's death penalty. Instead, he was given a "life sentence."
The Navy, meanwhile, posthumously awarded Stethem the Purple Heart and the Bronze Star. A naval warship was named in his honor.
This week, Germany paroled Stethem's killer - on the heels of the release by terrorists in Iraq of German archaeologist Susanne Osthoff.
"There's no connection between the two," said German Foreign Ministry spokesman Martin Jaeger.
Hamadi was flown to Lebanon. The State Department is seeking his extradition, even though the United States has no extradition treaty with Lebanon.
"Regardless of the timeline, we will make every effort to see that this individual stands trial in U.S. court for what he has done," said State Department spokesman Sean McCormack.
Naming a ship after an individual like Stethem sends a message to the officers and enlisted men and women of the American military that their service will never be forgotten. Refusing to give up on bringing a monster like Hamadi to justice sends a message to the terrorists that their acts will be remembered as well.
Both messages are necessary.

Load-Date: December 27, 2005


End of Document