Our views; A sound-bite war in a terrorist age; The leader of the free world must be up to the responsibility
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
February 20, 2008, Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 350 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


FROM American television or American newspapers, one would think the great conflict of the age is the battle between Democratic Sens. Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama over the Democratic nomination for president.
Who becomes the next leader of the free world - Clinton, Obama or Republican Sen. John McCain - is a critical decision that will affect the world.
But the political war of shallow sloganeering, although it fills the airwaves and gives pundits something to talk about, has relegated news of life- and-death struggles to the sidelines.
That shouldn't be.
Hundreds of thousands of American troops faithfully execute hot, dusty, dangerous watches in war zones, but see on television no reflection of the realities they face - the threats the nation faces. Out of sight, they must wonder if they are also out of the minds of their fellow Americans.
It's refreshing that some people are in touch with reality.
Gov. Joe Manchin and Adjutant Gen. Allen Tackett recently called upon West Virginians to renew their support of National Guard troops and their families.
Tackett put the case plainly: "Less than 1 percent of America defends the other 99 percent," he said. "What we're saying is the other 99 percent needs to make sure we take care of those families."
Tackett told reporters he sees no acceptable alternative to seeking victory over terrorism. "I don't think we have a choice," he said. "We have to win this war on terrorism."
Indeed we do. It is the challenge of the age, and candidates for high office should be subjected to tougher questioning on the subject.
People who want the presidency need to demonstrate that they understand threats to national security and are capable of shouldering the responsibilities of national defense. Puffball questions and vague answers don't tell the American people what they need to know about candidates.
American troops hold the lines while the world waits to see whether Americans can be counted on, or will capitulate to terrorism.
The candidate who understands the risks and doesn't kid anybody about them is the candidate who can be trusted with the job.

Load-Date: February 21, 2008


End of Document