Our views; The war in Iraq left the world better off; U.S. combat troops leave better opportunities for 31 million people
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 23, 2010, Monday


Copyright 2010 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 435 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


TO its credit, "NBC Nightly News" followed the armored vehicles of the 4th Stryker Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division, as the last 4,000 U.S. combat troops in Iraq headed out of the country and toward home at Fort Lewis, Wash.
The United States will maintain a presence of 50,000 troops as advisers. If fired upon, they will return fire. But their mission is to help the Iraq Army fend for itself.
After more than 4,400 U.S. deaths, thousands of casualties with horrendous injuries, and terrible sacrifices by the Iraqis, it is easy to forget why this war was fought and what has been achieved.
The war began in August 1990, when Saddam Hussein ordered his troops to invade and take over Kuwait, a tiny nation rich in oil. He needed that oil to finance the debt from his bloody war with Iran, which claimed the lives of 1.4 million people.
Allies led by the United States forced Saddam out of Kuwait. Hussein agreed to sanctions in exchange for a cease-fire, then ignored 16 separate edicts from the United Nations.
Saddam was a serial aggressor. He had used chemical weapons against the Kurds, had invaded Iran and Kuwait, and had sponsored terrorism against Israel by paying the families of suicide bombers $25,000.
He had pursued a nuclear weapon, and there were fears that he had stockpiled other weapons of mass destruction.
After 9/11, the world could no longer afford such belligerence or state-sponsored terrorism.
The decision to invade Iraq was based on many things, and was overwhelmingly approved by Congress.
It was the right thing to do.
Countering Saddam was not about oil or empire. The United States is not an imperial power.
Our mission was clear: to depose Saddam Hussein, a sponsor of terrorism; decimate al-Qaida; and give 31 million Iraqis an opportunity to establish self-government.
Our army may be the only one in the history of the world to go into a country, free it from tyranny, and have no designs on its territory except, as Gen. Colin Powell so aptly put it, a small spot to bury our dead.
The deaths of Saddam Hussein and his twisted sons, Oday and Qusay, put an end to a reign of terror that killed 300,000 Iraqis. There will be no 60 years of a ruthless dynasty, as is the case in North Korea.
The world is safer for that.
President Bush handed to President Obama better field position in the Middle East than he inherited. A true democracy in Iraq would change the dynamic in the region.
Not even the well intended goes perfectly. Freedom is expensive.
But American soldiers and the Iraqis who have worked with them have given 31 million people a chance at enduring freedom. That's an achievement.

Load-Date: August 24, 2010


End of Document