Our views; Support for intelligence gathering important; Changes in technology make fighting terrorism difficult
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 13, 2015, Monday


Copyright 2015 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 414 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


Despite threats from extremist group ISIS, the U.S. didn't see any terror attacks over the Independence Day weekend. That was no accident.
According to FBI director James Comey, more than 10 people associated with the Islamic State were arrested in suspected terror-related plots in the weeks leading up to the July 4 holiday. Comey said it is unclear if any plot would have unfolded during the holiday, but did indicate at least some terrorists were planning to strike on America's 239th birthday.
The plots, Comey said, underscore the group's use of social media and other ways to recruit Americans. "Dozens of people in the U.S. are communicating with ISIS terrorists overseas through encryption, he said, explaining the process as beginning with someone who follows an ISIS fighter on Twitter, and then the conversation moves to direct messaging where information is exchanged to move the conversation, to a more secure app where it then "disappears, according to CNN.
Comey told a Senate panel last week that ISIS has 21,000 English-language followers on Twitter now, making it a fertile recruiting ground.
Fighting ISIS, or any other terrorist group, is no easy task. Recruiting and training fighters is more technologically advanced nowadays - ISIS uses encrypted messages and apps to connect with their new recruits and pass information. Those communications are hard to crack.
That's why it is important to support smart and effective intelligence gathering measures. Despite reports to the contrary, the government isn't targeting all Americans and listening in on phone calls or combing through text messages and emails.
Officials look at the metadata - what can be gleaned from looking at phone logs or what's on the outside of an envelope. When reasonable suspicions are raised, they may look further and uncover valuable information.
Some Americans may be hesitant to support that technique. Such hesitancy is understandable, but most Americans don't know - and likely never will know - the number of terrorist attacks foiled because intelligence officers discovered valuable information in that data.
Our Constitution guarantees personal liberties, but it also establishes a government to "insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty.
Granting the government limited wiretapping and data gathering authority is a small price to pay to keep America safe and free from terrorist attacks year round.

Load-Date: July 14, 2015


End of Document