OUR GOVERNMENT REFUSES TO ADMIT THE REAL CAUSE OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 30, 2010 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. B-6
Length: 377 words
Byline: JOHN GAVALER, Penn Hills
Body


To understand the current Islamophobia in the United States, it is necessary to review some recent history. In the 1982 civil war in Lebanon, precipitated by an Israeli invasion, the United States became an active participant via its naval bombardment of anti-Israeli forces. In retaliation, more than 200 U.S. marines sent to Lebanon by President Reagan were killed by a Muslim suicide bomber in 1983.
Since then the United States has attacked and occupied two other Muslim countries and is currently conducting military operations in two more. At least a million civilians in these countries have been killed, wounded or displaced as a direct result. During this same period there have also been a great number of terrorist attacks against Israel and its allies including, most infamously, the 9/11 attack against the United States.
The University of Chicago Project on Security and Terrorism has done an analysis of more than 2,200 suicide attacks around the world between 1981 and 2008. Its database includes information on the demographic and general biographical characteristics of the attackers, most of whom were found to have been Muslims. The conclusion of the study was that the prime cause of suicide bombings was not extremist Islamic beliefs (which many attackers did not have), or the inherent violence of Islamic culture, or the desire of achieving worldwide Sharia rule. The prime cause was ... foreign military occupations. That most of the attackers were Muslims was simply due to the fact that the occupied countries had predominantly Muslim populations.
The U.S. government from its own studies is undoubtedly well aware that the chief cause of terrorism is, in fact, foreign military occupation. However, to acknowledge this publicly would certainly generate serious questions regarding the wisdom of American policies in the Middle East. Those in power much prefer any discussion of terrorism to be focused on whether all or only some extremist Muslim beliefs are the prime cause, while knowing full well the answer is neither. The perhaps unintended but inevitable consequence of the government's silence regarding the actual cause of terrorism is the growth of Islamophobia and the accompanying bigotry and hatred toward our Muslim population.

Load-Date: December 31, 2010


End of Document