Our views; George Bush will be a hard act to follow Despite the cost to his popularity, Bush kept the United States safe
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
January 14, 2009, Wednesday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 375 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


GEORGE Walker Bush will leave the presidency with one of the lowest popularity ratings in recent memory. His predecessor, Bill Clinton, enjoyed a very high rating when he left office.
There's no question about who was more effective.
Bush refused to ignore terrorism and hope that it went away. In confronting the problem head on, Bush spared many American lives. On 9/11, no one believed the United States would escape another attack.
Seven years later and counting, there has been none.
Bush did his job without suspending habeas corpus for U.S. citizens, as President Lincoln did, without throwing war protesters in prison, as President Wilson did, and without creating internment camps, as President Franklin Roosevelt did.
While Barack Obama campaigned against the housing of terrorists at Guantanamo Bay, he now admits it will take a year to close it. There is no place to put these dangerous men.
"It is more difficult than I think a lot of people realize," Obama told ABC News this weekend.
That could be said of most of what Bush has done.
Bush took action to protect the nation.
And it was a war against all terrorism, including Saddam Hussein's Iraq, which sponsored terrorism against Israel. Bush's decision to liberate Iraq from Saddam Hussein will in the long term prove to be worth the sacrifices made during his presidency.
And no, he didn't lie about weapons of mass destruction. He made a momentous decision on the basis of widely believed intelligence that turned out to be flawed.
Between Afghanistan and Iraq, Bush's leadership led - not without losses and risk - to increased freedom for 50 million people.
Bush's domestic accomplishments include holding schools accountable under the No Child Left Behind Act, expanding Medicare coverage to prescription medicines, eliminating the Carter-era tax penalty on marriage, and appointing judges who respect the constitutional limits placed on the judiciary.
Bush made human mistakes, most notably the unfurling of the "Mission Accomplished" sign.
But he leaves the White House with his head held high. His last act as president has been to promote the dignified and smooth transition of power to President-elect Obama on Tuesday.
History will be kinder to him than his political opponents have been.

Load-Date: January 14, 2009


End of Document