Our views Bush to the U.N.: Liberty is the key If terrorism teaches anything, it is that despots threaten peace
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 23, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 435 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


WITH an eloquence his critics at home would deny him capable of achieving, President Bush explained to the United Nations on Tuesday why the War on Terrorism must be fought.
Rooting out terrorism requires not just seizing the perpetrators and their allies, but by changing the conditions that fester such acts of desperation.
"Both the American Declaration of Independence and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaim the equal value and dignity of every human life. That dignity is honored by the rule of law, limits on the power of the state, respect for women, protection of private property, free speech, equal justice and religious tolerance. That dignity is dishonored by oppression, corruption, tyranny, bigotry, terrorism and all violence against the innocent . . . .
"Wise governments also stand for these principles for very practical and realistic reasons. We know that dictators are quick to choose aggression, while free nations strive to resolve differences in peace. We know that oppressive governments support terror, while free governments fight the terrorists in their midst. We know that free peoples embrace progress and life, instead of becoming the recruits for murderous ideologies," Bush said.
In plain English, he laid out a doctrine that some may mistakenly label the Bush doctrine, but is in fact the doctrine on which this nation was founded.
The president did the United States proud as he defended the liberation of Afghanistan and Iraq and celebrated the advance of democracy.
"Because we believe in human dignity, peaceful nations must stand for the advance of democracy. No other system of government has done more to protect minorities, to secure the rights of labor, to raise the status of women, or to channel human energy to the pursuits of peace. We've witnessed the rise of democratic governments in predominantly Hindu and Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish and Christian culture.
"Democratic institutions have taken root in modern societies, and in traditional societies. When it comes to the desire for liberty and justice, there is no clash of civilizations. People everywhere are capable of freedom, and worthy of freedom," Bush said.
It is ironic that an American president should have to defend the freeing of two nations to a body that is supposed to believe in freedom.
Bush's critics contend that he must somehow mend diplomatic fences that were crushed by France, Germany and other nations so defensive about slights to their own persons and yet so uninterested in the suffering of others.
The onus is on them.
Bush is the real leader here, and Americans must stand with him.

Load-Date: September 25, 2004


End of Document