Our views Terrorism What does Islam stand for - and what does it stand against?

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 01, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 412 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


IN a land holy to three of the world's great systems of beliefs about how people should conduct themselves, there is no peace.
As Pope John Paul II put it, the Holy Land is being bloodied. War has been declared on peace.
Since Wednesday, Palestinian suicide bombers have killed at least 44 Israeli civilians - 22 gathered in a hotel dining room for a Passover Seder in Netanya, 14 in a restaurant in Haifa, four in the settlement of Efrat in the West Bank south of Bethlehem . . . on and on it goes.
No nation can stand for this.
Islamic militants hope to touch off a world war, and are willing to kill their own young to provoke a conflagration that would kill tens of thousands more. It's a shameful tactic.
It raises questions about what kind of society such elements would produce. What is the future of Muslim youth if such leadership prevails?
The United Nations Security Council called Saturday for Israel to withdraw immediately from Palestinian towns, including Ramallah, where Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat was holed up, safe, surrounded by his supporters. Israel wants Arafat to assert himself to stop the terrorist bombings.
There seems little likelihood of that. Since the fighting began 18 months ago, 24 Palestinians suspected of collaborating with Israel have been murdered, 10 in March alone.
Manifestly, some would-be leaders do not want peace. They want war, with all the additional suffering that would bring.
What does the rest of the world want? It's up to every person of every faith to make himself or herself clear.
Palestinian Planning Minister Habil Shaath on Sunday called for Arab states to stand with Palestinians - implicitly to extend approval of these tactics.
In Malaysia, the 57-member Organization of Islamic Conference opened a conference on terrorism, with Malaysia's leader calling for agreement that attacks on civilians should be labeled acts of terror.
"Muslims everywhere must condemn terrorism, once it is clearly defined, said Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. "Bitter and angry though we may be, we must demonstrate to the world that Muslims are rational people when fighting for our rights and we do not resort to acts of terror."
The Muslim world, 1.2 billion strong, must make clear what behavior is acceptable, and what is not. Just as Christians and Jews must police their zealots, the Muslim world must clarify its values as well.
Many difficult issues could be settled, at low cost to young people, in a world in which that was done.

Load-Date: April 3, 2002


End of Document