OUR NEW NORMAL 
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 3, 2006 Sunday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B1
Length: 293 words
Body


Before the war on terror, passing through security at Lambert Field was a simple process. A trip to the Arch meant dodging traffic, not anti-terrorism barriers. Funerals at Jefferson Barracks were rare for active-duty soldiers. In the five years since 9/11, our lives -- from family to faith, from business to politics -- have changed in obvious and subtle ways.
Mourning those killed in war
Michelle Leonard of Bellefontaine Neighbors visits the grave of her brother, Marco Damian Ross, on Aug. 25 at Jefferson Barracks National Cemetery. Army Spc. Ross, 20, died Aug. 25, 2004, in a military camp in Baghdad, Iraq. "The world will just never be the same" since Sept. 11, 2001, she says, "because I lost my little brother fighting against the war on terrorism."
Middle East issues at the forefront
The image of a woman's eyes peering out of a hijab has stirred up phone calls to its billboard advertiser. Jeff Allen, program director for radio station 97.1 FM Talk, says the station wanted to show that on-air personalities talk about conflict in the Middle East and the war on terror.
Surging patriotism
Last month, Hatida Residi (left) and Sue Charlebille, Flag Loft seamstresses, fold a flag that has been repaired and cleaned. After 9/11, the demand was high for flags, says Maureen Kelly, Flag Loft co-owner. Five years later, Flag Loft's residential sales have decreased because, Kelly says, of the availability of flags at bigger retail stores.
Tighter security
The Transportation Security Administration collects more than 175 pounds a month of items that are surrendered by passengers at Lambert Field's security checkpoints, says Deborah Craig, screening manager. Immediately after Sept. 11, 2001, she says, screeners were collecting about 300 pounds a month.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 (1) PHOTO - Michelle Leonard of Bellefontaine Neighbors visits the grave of her brother, Marco Damian Ross, on Aug. 25 at Jefferson Barracks National Cemetery. Army Spc. Ross, 20, died Aug. 25, 2004, in a military camp in Baghdad, Iraq. "The world will just never be the same" since Sept. 11, 2001, she says, "because I lost my little brother fighting against the war on terrorism." (2) PHOTO - Photos by Huy Richard Mach | Post-Dispatch PHOTO - Surging patriotism PHOTO - Tighter security 

Load-Date: September 3, 2006


End of Document