Our best line of defense
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 6, 2015 Sunday


Copyright 2015 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: VIEWS; Pg. 36
Length: 1277 words
Byline: RICK UBINAS

Special to The Tampa Tribune
Highlight: homeland security
Body


The danger now posed by homegrown foreign-inspired terrorists is arguably the most important homeland security challenge we face today. Although many in homeland security recognize this growing threat, today, without the robust engagement of every local police officer working the streets, the United States still is a long way from being able to meet the challenges posed by homegrown terrorists, in preventing and in responding to acts of terrorism. 
In the 14 years since 9/11, our nation has developed little, if any, ability to prevent small-cell or lone-wolf domestic terror attacks. The focus of counter-terrorism policy since 9/11 has been weighted toward high-consequence, low-probability transnational attacks that have sent federal law enforcement on never-ending searches for the Holy Grail of terror plots, leaving our domestic flanks vulnerable to much smaller-scale but equally effective death by a thousand cuts of lone-wolf and small-cell terror attacks. 
Improving the capability of all first responders - especially local police - to detect, prevent and respond to all types of domestic terrorism should clearly be a matter of national urgency. A national strategy with a collaborative network of properly trained and engaged local police officers to combat this growing threat represents this nation's best chance to prepare for the inevitable coming wave of domestic terrorism, and yet still it does not exist. 
Since the attacks of 9/11, the United States has been preoccupied by the federal role in preventing domestic terror attacks. Meanwhile, the national discussion of the role of local law enforcement has been largely absent. Our national counter-terrorism strategy has failed to incorporate the hundreds of thousands of capable local law enforcement officers across the country, and as a result we remain much more vulnerable than need be. 
A flawed implementation of the otherwise sound model of Intelligence Led Policing by federal officials has marginalized the very assets that research indicates have been the most effective at interrupting terrorist plots: the local police and private citizens. A study by the Institute for Homeland Security Solutions in 2011, which examined all publicly reported terrorist plots against U.S. targets from 1999 to 2009, indicates that law enforcement, assisted by the public, is generally the first line of defense in detecting terrorist plots. In over 80 percent of the foiled plots in the study's data set, the initial clue came from law enforcement or from public reporting. By contrast, intelligence reporting was found to be the source of initial clues in just 13 cases, or 19 percent.
The study goes on to state that non-terrorism-related criminal investigations also led to a significant number of plots being foiled (12 cases, 18 percent). In half of those (six cases), investigations into precursor crimes (e.g., robbery, theft, counterfeiting) revealed the larger plot, and in the other half, law enforcement came upon the plots by surprise while investigating unrelated ordinary crimes (e.g., parole violations, traffic stops). 
The FBI has emerged as the only domestic law enforcement line of defense in the current U.S. counter-terrorism strategy, a Maginot Line at best, with plans to simply cover more mission space and service more priorities in a unilateral manner. A review of the overall performance of this strategy, as evidenced as recently as the Boston Marathon bombing, indicates that this strategy is not adequately safeguarding our cities from attack. 
In an open, democratic society like ours, the enemy can be difficult to find. A smart terrorist, especially non-networked, lone-wolf or small-cell, as we've seen repeatedly at work in Paris, remains a fleeting and low-contrast target with behavior and plans that are difficult to detect and predict. Without the benefit of prediction, the next best interdiction tactics are redundancy and saturation, both of which are the cornerstones of local law enforcement in the United States. Local law enforcement officers remain our nation's largest sensor for illicit activity, our most effective interdictor of criminal and terrorist activity, and our greatest hope for preventing a devastating domestic terrorist attack before it occurs.
 Federal agencies, like the FBI, are simply not in a position to be the eyes and ears of local communities, but local law enforcement - with the right training and support - can be. 
Alert local police officers are in the best position to detect and interdict domestic terrorist attacks. The cop on the beat, the deputy on patrol or the trooper covering his usual assignment are in the neighborhoods and outposts of society where terrorists hide, plan and strike, and are more naturally sensitized to detect anomalies and act in real time to prevent an attack.  
An article by Senior FBI Agent William McCormack published in the FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin in 2009 drives home the point of just how easy it may be for street cops performing routine patrol activities to interdict a terrorist attack plot before it occurs. 
McCormack stated, One of the most common ways a state or local officer can encounter a terrorism suspect is during a traffic stop. ... and although the 9/11 hijackers were in the United States for relatively short periods of time, local police officers had stopped all but one for various reasons.
Boston Marathon bomber Tamerlan Tsarnaev also had several run-ins with local law enforcement prior to his deadly attack, and it now begs this question: Could the tragic events of that day been avoided had federal authorities flagged his name, shared intelligence or involved the local police in the investigation in any way before the attack took place? As the old adage goes, If you want to catch snakes you have to turn over some rocks. Who better to turn over rocks on a day-to-day basis than local police? 
In much the same way that communities across the nation now manage the threat of natural disasters or crime in general, local governments must learn to actively manage the potential for terrorism in their communities and not sit back expecting federal agencies to do so. Beyond just training police and other first responders to respond to incidents after they have occurred - a vital and necessary pillar of preparation - local governments must now take a different angle of approach and develop their capabilities as first preventers as well as first responders.  
Enabling local law enforcement departments across the country to prevent domestic terrorism need not involve a tectonic organizational shift or a burdensome investment in new technologies and programs. Instead, all that's needed is a calibration of existing local law enforcement efforts. Effective policing also is effective counter-terrorism. Minor traffic violations, fraud, use of counterfeit identification documents, etc., are all part of the subtle signature left in the wake of domestic terrorist activities in preparation for an attack. 
The most effective sensor systems understand the world by finding ways to be a part of it, swapping a God's-eye view for a view from within or amongst. The architects of our domestic security strategy and federal law enforcement leaders would do best to swap the sensation of power they seek for the effect of connection and true power that can result from better supporting and integrating the efforts of local law enforcement into the daily domestic counter-terrorism efforts of our nation. 
Counter-terrorism must now be woven into the everyday workings of every local police department across our nation - this is how we win the war on terror.   

Load-Date: December 6, 2015


End of Document