Our views; Fingerprint center has proved useful; A Gulf War-era appropriation helps fight the war on terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 11, 2006, Monday


Copyright 2006 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 345 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


ON March 13, 1991, as American troops came to a successful conclusion of Operation Desert Storm, as the Gulf War was called then, Rep. Howard Coble, R-N.C., raised a ruckus of his own in the House Judiciary Committee.
Coble was alarmed that Sen. Robert Byrd was trying to move the FBI Fingerprint Center to Clarksburg. He suggested it was Operation Deficit Storm.
"At first blush, this seems ludicrous," Coble said. "I don't think this is the way to do business."
But 15 years later, the only blushes are on the faces of those critics who dismissed the FBI center as pork-barrel spending.
The relocation of the FBI Fingerprint Center has turned into one of the most successful enterprises in the recent history of the federal government. The FBI needed a new center and moving it from Washington was a wise move.
The old center suffered a high turnover of staff and a large backlog. A request could take up to 22 days to fill.
New technology and a new staff turned that around. A system that was designed to do 62,000 searches a day now does 107,000.
The importance of the center to the war on terrorism cannot be overemphasized. Thomas Bush, assistant director of the Criminal Justice Information Services Division, said he hopes to solicit bids for a whole new system within the next few months.
The center will do more without increasing its staff of 2,600 employees, Bush said.
The center has 50 million fingerprints on file, including 40,000 from known or suspected terrorists. The prints come not only from the United States but from such places as Morocco, Saudi Arabia and Yemen.
The FBI needs a new system that is capable of integrating other biometric recognition data as it becomes available.
That the fingerprint center has sparked a biometric corridor of sorts along Interstate 79 does boost the area's economy. But that is a small benefit compared to the fast, accurate information that this center can provide to police and others who walk the line in the war on terrorism.
That initial appropriation of $185 million looked huge 15 years ago. Now it simply looks prudent.

Load-Date: September 12, 2006


End of Document