Our views; The terrorist threat is still far from over; 9/11 is a reminder that freedom is under attack from the outside
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 11, 2009, Friday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 324 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


THE two airliners that brought down the World Trade Center in New York stunned the nation and the world. The one nation that was the shining light of liberty to the world was clearly vulnerable to attacks by those who would use force and intimidation to get the world to submit to their ways.
The 9/11 attack was part of an escalating war on the United States. In 1998, al-Qaida operatives bombed the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. In 2000, terrorists rammed the USS Cole, killing 17 American sailors.
But this attack on New York and Washington was, as the Daily Mail headline said, "Unspeakable horror." People leapt from the Twin Towers in desperate attempts to escape the fires and the eventual collapse of those structures.
Terrorists had declared war on Americans. The inevitability of more attacks was clear.
The nation resolved to do everything it could do to prevent that. Never again would such acts of terrorism be treated as merely crimes.
America met the challenge, ousting the Taliban from power in Afghanistan. Saddam Hussein, who had backed terrorist attacks against Israel, was ousted in Iraq.
Vigilance has so far prevented another attack on the scale of 9/11. But there have been attacks by al-Qaida groups and al-Qaida-inspired groups in Bali, Madrid, London, Mumbia and elsewhere. This is a global war against the West.
Yet over time, Americans have slipped back into their 9/10 mentality, where they felt safe and secure.
Eight years ago, we said we would never forget. Too many of us have.
The new Homeland Security secretary, Janet Napolitano, made the ridiculous claim that this is not terrorism but rather man-made disasters. This administration now wants to prosecute those man-made disasters as crimes, rather than acts of war.
The United States cannot undeclare a war that has been declared against its citizens. If can only decide not to resist until the list of failed states that harbor hostile regimes grows longer.

Load-Date: September 11, 2009


End of Document