OUR SAY   Schaefer's latest comments about   terrorism go too far
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
October 10, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Editorial; Pg. A12
Length: 447 words
Body


WILLIAM DONALD SCHAEFER has been known as a political rascal ever since he was mayor of Baltimore. When he became governor, his antics amused most residents _ and inspired them. No one "got it done" better than him.
But something is happening in his new position as state comptroller that is leading to embarrassment for himself _ and for the state.
At the last meeting of the state Board of Public Works _ made up of Mr. Schaefer, the state treasurer and the governor _ he continued his long-standing vendetta against Gov. Parris N. Glendening. At the previous meeting, Mr. Schaefer had hinted broadly about the governor's private life and accused him of turning off the fountain at the Governor's Mansion merely to spite the comptroller, as the fountain was a pet project of Mr. Schaefer's longtime friend.
We were amused by Mr. Schaefer's comments about the fountain and by the irony that this petty quarrel finally put on the record the governor's not-so-secret relationship with a top aide.
But Mr. Schaefer went too far at the last meeting by suggesting the governor wasn't doing enough to protect the state against terrorism. He wanted Mr. Glendening to brief the Board of Public Works on state security.
Mr. Schaefer also said his office has given the FBI the names of 212 people who were either arrested for smuggling cigarettes in Maryland or whose names came up during the state's investigations. He suggested they may be involved in terrorism. The comptroller admits he has no proof of this _ but notes that most of the people on the list have last names that sound Arabic or Middle Eastern.
Who knows, Mr. Schaefer may be right that some of these lawbreakers are involved in the funding of terrorism. But it is preposterous to imply that their names are a good reason for suspicion. This is precisely the sort of bigoted attitude President Bush is doing all he can to discourage.
Furthermore, Mr. Glendening is not about to jeopardize the safety of Marylanders by publicly briefing Mr. Schaefer on security measures that shouldn't be publicly known. Whatever Mr. Schaefer wishes it to be, the Board of Public Works is not the state's governing body. To use it for briefings on how Maryland is trying to guard against terrorist activities would undermine the state's effort to treat the problem seriously.
Mr. Schaefer, clearly frustrated that he is no longer governor of Maryland, has stepped beyond the bounds of his position on the Board of Public Works. It's his right _ indeed, his obligation, if he's convinced of his case _ to challenge the governor on fiscal issues. But unless he is governor again, he should limit his remarks to subjects involving the comptroller's office.

Load-Date: October 10, 2001


End of Document