Our views Better The answer to terrorism lies in active support of decency
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 2, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 452 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


ON Sept. 11, 2001, terrorists declared war on the United States with acts of spectacular savagery. And as President George W. Bush has noted, "war is what they got."
In less than two years, United States leadership has changed the world for the better.
In Afghanistan, the repressive Taliban regime - gone, and a more representative government has taken its place. Reconstruction is beginning. The girls are back at school.
The al-Qaida network - wounded, on the run.
In Iraq, the regime of Saddam Hussein, hideous oppressor of his own people, sponsor of terrorism in the region - gone. And in less than a month, with obvious care to do as little harm as possible to the Iraqi people, and with minimal casualties on all sides.
Reconstruction can begin. A better day for the Iraqi people can begin.
And as a result, we see a new spirit of cooperativeness from Syria, long a sponsor of terrorism in the Middle East.
The end of repression in Iraq greatly increases the pressures on the theocratic regime in neighboring Iran, which faces a huge and hugely unhappy young population that wants more freedom, more opportunity.
Iran now does not want "any friction" with the United States over Iraq. It would hardly be in the mullahs' interests to foster any. It's going to be difficult enough for Iran to keep up with the progress that is likely to take place in a free Iraq.
The same is true of Saudi Arabia.
In Palestine, Yasser Arafat's band of thugs, suddenly looking at a shortage of sponsors, is being backed down, and the possibility of a decent government is emerging.
France, Germany, Belgium and Russia, unmasked as partners with oppressors, have lost more in international standing than they hoped to gain. The United Kingdom, Australia and Poland enjoy new respect.
As for the United Nations, it is obvious that it functioned to protect a tyrannical regime at the expense of human rights.
On Sept. 11, 2001, terrorists hoped to force Americans to withdraw into their own borders and leave tyranny alone. And the sorry truth is that under a less resolute American administration, they might have succeeded.
What a different world it would be today.
President Bush puts it plainly: "Men and women in every culture need liberty like they need food and water and air." Americans "stand for human liberty."
Old Europe has rethinking to do. It is unforgivable hypocrisy to live in freedom in decent societies and refuse to lift a hand to help other people gain the same.
The Bush administration, the Blair administration, the Australians, the Pakistanis and the Poles fought for a safer world and made it so. This leadership deserves credit for solid advances in human rights and world security.
Next time, they deserve more company.

Load-Date: May 2, 2003


End of Document