OUR OPINIONS: Guard against deceit;
It's unpatriotic to have a Patriot Act that curtails citizens' rights under guise of fighting terrorism
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 8, 2005 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Editorial;
Length: 409 words
Body


Those who would give up essential liberty, to purchase a little temporary safety, deserve neither liberty nor safety."
--- Benjamin Franklin
The Patriot Act, the subject of a just-beginning congressional debate over its controversial sections, may well become a defining document for the United States. If left wholly intact, as the Bush administration desires, it will signal a willingness to accept one peril --- the erosion of civil liberties safeguards --- to protect against another --- terrorism. An America true to its roots will reject that as an unequal trade.
The Patriot Act broadened the power of the government to conduct surveillance and poke into the lives of its citizens. Most of its provisions are not worrisome. A few are. The most troublesome parts of the law are sections 213, 215 and 802. Respectively, they permit property searches without prompt notice to subjects of the government's attention; provide access to an array of personal information that could include reading habits; and broaden the definition of domestic terrorism to the point it might dampen protest rights.
It's not even clear how necessary some portions of the Patriot Act are to combating terrorism. Section 213, for example, has been used in criminal, not terrorism, investigations, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales acknowledged during a congressional hearing Tuesday. And the turf wars and lack of communication among federal agencies that have been faulted previously still get in the way of preventing a repeat of Sept. 11, according to testimony before the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee.
The threat of terrorism is real, and a defense against it is necessary. But the United States must also guard against using that danger to take extraordinary measures against the rights of its citizens.
During his testimony, Gonzales said he could accept some modification of the Patriot Act (as if it were up to him), but insisted that section 215, for example, be preserved.
"Let me, kind of, reassure the committee and the American people that the department has no interest in rummaging through the library records or the medical records of Americans [under section 215] . . . The fact that this authority has not been used for these kinds of records means that the department, in my judgment, has acted judiciously. It should not be held against us that we've exercised, in my judgment, restraint."
It's not restraint that frightens us; it's the possibility of excess.

Load-Date: April 8, 2005


End of Document