Our views; Iraq should not show ingratitude Oil-producing nations will hurt themselves if they cut production
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
December 3, 2008, Wednesday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 323 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


DESPITE the talking points from the left, America did not invade Iraq for its oil. The war on terrorism was served by the liberation of Iraq from a dictator who financed terrorism and indeed terrorized his own citizens.
Now, after five long years of American sacrifice and several decades in Saddam Hussein's brutal wilderness before that, Iraq is finally getting ready to rejoin the world.
As such, it will enjoy many economic benefits. The standard of living for its people will rise, just as it has in Japan, Germany, Italy, South Korea and other lands that the United States has liberated over the years.
But along with economic recovery comes certain responsibilities.
One of them is free trade. Iraq belongs to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the notorious cartel that stands in opposition to a free market.
In typical OPEC fashion, Iraqi Oil Minister Abdalla Salem El-Badri has urged that production be scaled back to keep prices artificially high.
"We can't say how much the output cut will be in December, but for sure there will be an action because we're seeing that stocks are high," he said. "I cannot tell you the size of the cut but it will be a good amount."
Iraq wants the price of a barrel of oil to be $70 to $90, he said. It is now under $50 a barrel for the first time since 2005.
"The price of $140 does not represent the market. There is a disconnect between the paper market and the physical market. . . But things will be solved as of the second quarter of 2009. I hope so," Badri said. "The price of $75 is reasonable but our outlook is for between $70 to $90 per barrel."
Artificially inflating prices will only serve to slow a world economy that already is struggling.
The Iraqi oil minister's recommendation is also an astonishing display of ingratitude toward America.
If anything, Iraq should be moving to produce as much oil as possible so that it can improve its economy and pay for its own defense.

Load-Date: December 4, 2008


End of Document