Our views; U.S., Iraqi troops must win in Iraq That nation will continue to be key to the fight against terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
March 20, 2008, Thursday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 389 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


FIVE years after the invasion of Iraq, two things have not changed: Naysayers keep saying nay, and there are no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
But much has changed for the better since President Bush, with congressional approval, launched the effort to remove Saddam Hussein from power.
"Five years into this battle, there is an understandable debate over whether the war was worth fighting, whether the fight is worth winning, and whether we can win it," the president said. "The answers are clear to me: Removing Saddam Hussein from power was the right decision - and this is a fight America can and must win."
The liberation of 24 million people is no small feat. The evil that ended was very real. Troops found children's prisons, torture chambers, rape rooms, mass graves and more.
Furthermore, it is beyond evident that Iraq is a key theater in the fight against Islamic terrorists.
"For the terrorists, Iraq was supposed to be the place where al-Qaida rallied Arab masses to drive America out," Bush said. "Instead, Iraq has become the place where Arabs joined with Americans to drive al-Qaida out.
"In Iraq, we are witnessing the first large-scale Arab uprising against Osama bin Laden, his grim ideology, and his murderous network. And the significance of this development cannot be overstated," Bush said.
Indeed it cannot. Such shifts change the history of the world.
The argument that the Iraq war has somehow hurt the war on terrorism is nonsense. While bin Laden remains at large, the mastermind behind the 9/11 attacks, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, was taken into custody.
At the urging of Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and others following the 2006 election, President Bush changed the course in Iraq. Gen. David Petraeus was tapped to execute a new strategy that has largely been successful.
Still, naysayers unmoved by the success of American and Iraqi troops call for a quick withdrawal.
That would be a huge mistake.
The war on terrorism is a long battle against an enemy that has been working for decades to weaken the United States. The destruction of the World Trade Center came eight years after the unsuccessful attack on the same buildings. KSM has admitted to involvement in both plots.
Deserting Iraq would help only terrorists.
President Bush's resolve is as farsighted as the rush to defeatism is shortsighted and foolish.

Load-Date: March 21, 2008


End of Document