Our View: OKC bombing victims deserve to be respected and remembered
Oklahoma Daily: University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
April 16, 2015 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 472 words
Body


Our view: April 19 will mark the 20th year since the Oklahoma City bombing, and we urge all Sooners, from Oklahoma or not, to learn more about the bombing and pay tribute to those affected.
April 19 marks the 20th year since a truck bomb planted by Timothy McVeigh outside the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building left 168 people dead in Oklahoma City. Of course, Oklahomans know about that fateful day, and the Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum stands as a constant reminder of a day that impacted state and national history.
However, we understand many out-of-state Sooners only vaguely know about April 19, 1995, and many aren't sure how to learn more about one of the most devastating instances of domestic terrorism. For those students, we've compiled a list of how you can learn more about the bombing and why it is important to recognize and pay tribute to the lives lost on Sunday and every day.
Why the Oklahoma City bombing is critical to U.S. history
Until September 11, 2011, the Oklahoma City bombing was the worst terrorist attack in the U.S. The Oklahoma City bombing changed the way the FBI approached terrorism and focused national security efforts on preventing terroristic attacks. The threat of terrorism became a reality across the U.S.: armed security forces now guard airports, and there are metal detectors at most major public venues.
On a more positive note, the actions of Oklahomans in the minutes and days after 9:02 a.m. on April 19, 1995, exposed the world to the "Oklahoma standard," referring to the way Oklahomans came together, stood resilient and cared for those affected by the bombing. The Oklahoma City bombing changed the way America thinks about terrorism and showed the power of state strength even in the darkest of times.
Ways to learn more about the Oklahoma City bombing
There are several opportunities this weekend for those wanting to make a trip to the city to commemorate the 20th year since the bombing:
· Visit the Oklahoma City Memorial and Museum:
620 N. Harvey
Oklahoma City, OK 73102
405-235-3313
www.oklahomacitynationalmemorial.org
Admission normally costs $12 for students with a valid ID, but admission will be free April 19 from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. The memorial and museum are a permanent reminder of the bombing and a tribute to those wounded and killed. Commemorate the 20th anniversary of the bombing by attending the museum Sunday and learning something new.
· Cheer on participants in the Oklahoma City Memorial Marathon April 26, 6:30 a.m. to 2 p.m.
Over 25,000 participants will run in the annual marathon to honor the lives lost. Proceeds from the marathon benefit the Oklahoma City Memorial and Museum. Ambitious students can sign up to run at okcmarathon.com.
· Check out the FBI's page on the bombing at fbi.gov or watch the PBS film about the Oklahoma City bombing at pbs.org.

Load-Date: April 16, 2015


End of Document