Our say -;
Much of leadership in war on terrorism trained at academy
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
September 12, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10
Length: 348 words
Body


BACK IN 1995, the Naval Academy's superintendent, Adm. Charles Larson, had to defend the institution against charges that it was less efficient than college ROTC programs when it comes to producing naval officers.
The superintendent didn't have too much difficulty demolishing the anti-academy argument. It's not fair from a dollars-and-cents perspective, as the real costs of the ROTC programs are hidden in various subsidies for universities, while those of the academy are out in plain sight. And it makes little sense in view of the high concentration of academy graduates among the Navy's top officers.
We doubt today's superintendent, Vice Adm. Richard Naughton, will have to waste much time fending off such attacks. Any war - including a war on terrorism - has a way of calling attention to the academy's value.
For instance: Much of the government's foreign policy reaction to 9-11 has passed through the hands of Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage (Class of '67). Gen. Peter Pace (Class of '67) has served as vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff - the first Marine to hold that position.
Adm. Tom Fargo (Class of '70) commanded the Pacific Fleet during operations in Afghanistan. Vice Adm. Bill Moore (Class of '68) commanded the Fifth Fleet during the action in Afghanistan; he has since been relieved by Vice Adm. Tim Keating (Class of '71). Vice Adm. Scott Fry (Class of '71) commands the Sixth Fleet, and Vice Adm. Jim Metzger (Class of '71) commands the Seventh Fleet.
In addition, according to academy officials, six of the eight carrier battle group commanders deployed in the past year in support of Operation Enduring Freedom were academy alumni. So were five of the eight commanding officers of carrier air groups, and four of the commanding officers of nuclear aircraft carriers.
Of course, there's nothing in any of this to surprise most area residents. They've long known that when this country has to defend itself, it relies on the training given at the Naval Academy - and when it wins a war, a large part of the reason can be found right here in Annapolis.

Load-Date: September 12, 2002


End of Document