OUR OPINION; Make the call: Terrorists or criminals?
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 1, 2006 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B
Length: 760 words
Byline: JIM WOOTEN

Staff
Body


For more than a decade --- but most evidently and dramatically over the past five years --- two distinct views have emerged as the defining difference in how we confront the evil that threatens.
It is, and has been since the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, a law enforcement problem, as then-President Bill Clinton defined it by words and deeds. Or it is, as President George W. Bush defines it with his words and deeds, a war on terrorism. Everything else, including last week's debate in the U.S. House and Senate over legislation to establish military commissions, the rights of unlawful enemy combatants and the role of U.S. courts in intervening, flows from that key difference.
The difference roughly splits left and right, but on the legal issues raised last week a number of libertarians, who fall in between and who fear the power of Big Government to abuse the rights of its citizens, raised concerns about a failure to grant habeas corpus rights to foreign terrorists facing military tribunals.
Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Arlen Specter (R-Pa.) argued unsuccessfully that all persons held in U.S. custody, including noncitizens, should be granted the same rights as common thieves in this country. Three Republicans joined him and one Democrat, Ben Nelson of Nebraska, crossed over to oppose. The amendment failed, 51-48.
It initially appeared that three Senate Republicans --- Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, John Warner of Virginia and John McCain of Arizona --- would muck it up. They seemed to provide cover to Democrats who on terrorism often sound like filmmaker Oliver Stone, who insisted at the San Sebastian International Film Festival on Thursday that the United States should fight terrorism "the same ways that the British fought the IRA or the Spanish government fought the Basques here" in Spain. In Stone's view, and many on the left, "terrorism is a manageable action. It can be lived with." He went off the deep end from there.
This hatred of Bush tempts most of the Democratic Party's angry anti-war wing to make absurd statements and bad policy. The fear here was that Graham, Warner and McCain's opposition on the tribunals, when combined with the understandable libertarian fear of Big Government and core Democratic opposition, would result in legislation that effectively destroyed their usefulness by subjecting everything from food to interrogation to endless litigation in federal courts. That would constitute mucking up the president's bill and hamstringing this country's efforts to prosecute terrorists.
In the end, however, Graham's training as a military reserve legal officer proved valuable in drawing a real distinction between the laws of military conflict and those of domestic civil and criminal activity. As U.S. Sen. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.) noted afterward, "While this bill provides important rules of law procedures for illegal enemy combatants, it does not give them the same protections which we afford lawful enemy combatants or our own military personnel, and that is a critical distinction. That's how it ought to be."
That is a critical distinction and it is how it ought to be.
Without reinterpreting or defining the Geneva Conventions, which apply to nations and to their structured, uniformed military combatants --- lawful combatants --- the legislation takes a separate tact. It prohibits war crimes for the United States and defines prohibited interrogation techniques, but leaves to the president authority to approve other interrogation techniques that may be productive.
The bill draws a distinction between the rights of lawful combatants, unlawful combatants and U.S. citizens facing trial. The role of federal courts is clarified and limited. The rights of unlawful combatants facing military tribunals are cleared up. Congress, required by the U.S. Supreme Court to sanction the tribunals, has done its job, making clear that these are extensions of the battlefield, not U.S. criminal courts.
It is unfortunate that the nation cannot have an honest debate leading to either consensus or, absent that, a clear winner and loser on this critical question: Is the United States fighting a war on terrorism or an international criminal enterprise that has as its goal the arrest and prosecution in federal court of Osama bin Laden and others who can be found by evidence admissible in federal courts to have been hands-on responsible for specific acts?
We simply see the threats differently. Either the law enforcement view or the terrorism view has ultimately to prevail.
jwooten@ajc.com

Load-Date: October 1, 2006


End of Document