Our views 9/11/2001 Four years later, a nation continues to fight terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 10, 2005, Saturday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 585 words
Byline: Dmedit
Body


SUNDAY marks the fourth anniversary of a beautiful Tuesday morning when an airliner
careened into one of the Twin Towers out of a clear blue sky. Little did viewers realize as they watched this collision that a war had begun.
When the second airliner crashed into the other Twin Tower, they knew. And Washington quickly was attacked as another plane hurtled into the Pentagon.
The first counterattack began in Pennsylvania, where passengers aboard a hijacked airliner
apparently regained control and crashed into a field before it could do more harm to the nation's capital.
On that day darkened by the clouds of smoke from the three buildings, the nation came to a halt.
It was a body blow aimed at attacking the heart of America's economy and the head of its military. This was the work of an evil genius far beyond the imagination of Ian Fleming.
When the shock wore off, President Bush took
action. He told New York's senators and others in a private meeting, "I'm not gonna fire a $ 2 million
missile at a $ 10 empty tent and hit a camel in the butt."
The message was clear. The United States would act, not react. And it would react to all terrorists, not just those involved with al-Qaida and not just those attacking the United States.
Previous terrorism attacks had either led to the United States backing down, as it did when 238 Marines were killed in Lebanon; or some half-hearted response, such as the one following the embassy bombings in 1998; or by simply pretending the
incident didn't happen, as was the case with the bombing of the USS Cole in 2000.
This time, the United States meant business.
The United States quickly overthrew the Taliban government in Afghanistan and liberated 28 million people. The next theater in this war was Iraq, where 24 million people were liberated.
The Iraq War drew criticism by many nations. But this week's revelations of the Oil for Food program, which was run by the United Nations, show that many diplomats had a vested pecuniary interest in keeping Saddam Hussein in charge: He used the money from the oil not to feed his people but to
buy off other nations.
The occupation of Iraq has spawned acts of
terrorism. But as the toll in American lives approaches 2,000 men and women, the fact remains that it is better to battle the terrorists over there than it is to fight them on American soil.
There are problems as well. No one would have thought as America swung into action that four years later, Osama bin Laden would remain at large. World opinion has slipped back to the pre-Sept. 11 mode of resentment and indifference toward the world's last superpower.
The partisan bickering continues. Even the
flooding of New Orleans was not enough to stop the carping about the president. Goodness, is there
nothing he has done in the last four years that is worth even a grudging compliment?
But most Americans are not paying attention to that.
The bravery and the heroism of ordinary
Americans still overshadow the pettiness of politics. Military re-enlistments continue to surpass expectations.
And when Hurricane Katrina hit, thousands of
people volunteered to help. The money poured into relief agencies in record numbers. This is on top of the $ 2.2 billion raised following Sept. 11 and the
$ 1.3 billion Americans donated following the Dec. 26th tsunami.
If those who attacked the nation on Sept. 11 thought they could destroy American resolve, they were mistaken. It will take time u decades as the
president said four years ago u but America will
prevail, just as it always has.

Load-Date: September 12, 2005


End of Document