Out of a Father's Grief, a Fight Against Terrorism - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 1405 words
Byline: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN 

By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN 
Dateline: WEST ORANGE, N.J., Dec. 31
Body


Amid the staggering shock and numbing grief after his daughter Alisa, 20, was killed in a terrorist bombing while studying in Israel in April 1995, Stephen M. Flatow fell back on his instincts as a lawyer.
He was determined to make the culprits pay, even if they were on the other side of the world. But how?
Khaled al-Khatib, 22, the Palestinian who crashed a van packed with explosives into a bus Alisa was riding through the Gaza Strip, died in the blast. Other suspects have since died or are in foreign prisons and are unlikely to be extradited. As for so many others whose relatives have been killed by terrorists, justice seemed elusive.
Undeterred, Mr. Flatow, whose legal expertise is in the relatively mundane area of title insurance, set off into the murky waters of international law and foreign relations. In March, in Federal District Court in Washington, he won a landmark $247.5 million judgment against the Government of Iran for supporting Islamic Holy War, the terrorist group that claimed responsibility for the blast, which killed Alisa and seven Israeli soldiers.
But he has found that trying to force Iran to pay up is an even more daunting task. In the process, Mr. Flatow, who is seeking to seize Iran's former diplomatic properties in the United States, has become a thorn in the side of State Department officials. His efforts threaten to complicate further the relations between the two countries.
Mr. Flatow presses on, his efforts as difficult emotionally as they are legally. "I am not sure I know what closure is anymore," he said at his home here. "It's a word that the psychiatrists and the psychologists talk about. When you have a kid snatched from you, I don't think it ever really closes."
Like efforts by a Spanish judge to have Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, extradited from Britain for trial in Spain, and like the treaty drawn up last June to establish an International Criminal Court, Mr. Flatow's civil lawsuit against Iran is part of what legal scholars say is a growing global interest in finding new ways to achieve international justice.
The lawsuit, brought under the 1996 Antiterrorism Act, has made Mr. Flatow a compelling example of a tough new law's being used to ease the disempowerment so many families feel when terrorists go unpunished. The ruling against Iran was the first time a foreign state had been held liable in an American court for a terrorist act committed outside the United States.
But even as Congress has sought to give victims of terrorism more leverage, first by passing the 1996 law allowing foreign sponsors of terrorism to be sued, and later by passing two amendments to the law to help strengthen the Flatow case, Mr. Flatow has yet to collect a cent, demonstrating how hard it will be for him and for other victims planning similar lawsuits to ever achieve requital.
Immediately after Judge Royce C. Lamberth of United States District Court in Washington ruled against Iran in the Flatow case, a battery of Federal lawyers stepped in to block Mr. Flatow's legal team from seizing Iran's former embassy and other diplomatic properties in the United States.
Experts in international law universally agree that diplomatic property is sacrosanct. But Mr. Flatow and his lawyers are back in court, determined once again to set precedent. They have lobbied President Clinton's national security advisers and accused Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and her department of siding with Iran over an American citizen.
Mr. Flatow said the seizure of the diplomatic properties would send the strongest warning to countries that finance terrorism. "All the experts tell us that sponsors of terrorism can't take a financial hit," he said. "It's too expensive for them, and they have to rethink what they are doing."
Until the death of his oldest daughter, Mr. Flatow (pronounced FLAY-toe) was never one to take up causes.  If he is an unlikely crusader, it is less surprising that Alisa was his inspiration. Mr. Flatow, a round-faced man who wears a yarmulke, was not an observant Jew until 4-year-old Alisa insisted on attending an Orthodox Jewish day school after graduating from nursery school.
The rabbi who was the principal of the day school assured Mr. Flatow that Alisa's attendance would not change the family's life style. "He lied," Mr. Flatow said, saying that he and his wife, Rosalyn, felt compelled to reinforce the lessons Alisa learned at school by becoming more observant. His ties to Israel were also strengthened by Alisa. "The Israeli experience was part of her," he said.
Mr. Flatow is not alone in his battle. New Jersey's senior Senator, Frank R. Lautenberg, happened to be visiting Israel when Alisa was killed and has taken a strong personal interest in Mr. Flatow's case. Mr. Lautenberg and Representative H. James Saxton of Mount Holly, N.J., sponsored the amendments to the antiterrorism act and continue to be supportive.
Other victims of terrorism, including the families of Matthew Eisenberg and Sarah Duker, American students killed in a Jerusalem bombing in 1997, are planning similar suits.
Mr. Flatow's lead lawyer, Steven R. Perles, an authority on international law who has sued and represented several foreign countries mostly in commercial litigation, contends that civil lawsuits can be an effective weapon against terrorism.
"Each one has a deterrent effect in its own way," Mr. Perles said. "If you are going to be hounded for the rest of your life, there will be no safe haven. That will have a deterrent effect. If you know you may be tried as a criminal before an international tribunal, that will have a deterrent effect. And if a nation knows it is going to be on the receiving end of enormous civil judgments, that will be a deterrent."
The Iranian Government ignored the Flatow action. After the ruling, the Iranian Mission to the United Nations issued a statement condemning it, saying Iran "has consistently condemned terrorism in all its forms."
The statement said the Flatow lawsuit was based on "legislation that flouts one of the most fundamental principles of international law."
Clinton Administration officials express sympathy and support for Mr. Flatow's claim, but he has clearly made life more difficult for State Department officials charged with the delicate task of conducting foreign policy toward Iran. The United States and Iran have not had diplomatic relations since the seizure of hostages from the American Embassy in Teheran in 1979, though there have been recent hints of a possible warming in ties.
Iran's former embassy and ambassador's residence in Washington, two properties Mr. Flatow's lawyers hope to seize, remain in the custody of the State Department, which has been renting them out and has kept the proceeds in a bank account. Officials have cited numerous reasons for keeping the diplomatic properties from becoming enmeshed in the Flatow case, including concerns about insuring the sanctity of American diplomatic properties abroad.
There are also legal complications surrounding the properties dating back to the 1979 hostage crisis, including efforts by Iran to reclaim them. "For our purposes, attaching this property wouldn't punish Iran, because Iran would have claims under international law against the U.S. Government," said a State Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "We are confident that we are protecting U.S. interests as a whole." The official said the Government had no objections to attempts by Mr. Flatow's lawyers to seize several nondiplomatic properties.
Between trips back and forth to Washington for court hearings, Mr. Flatow also travels the country giving speeches about Alisa to raise money for Israel and other Jewish causes, including a scholarship fund established in Alisa's memory that helps send American students to Israel. Mr. Flatow and his wife, who does not talk publicly about Alisa, have four surviving children, whom they continue to send to Israel. A daughter, Francine, 19, is studying there now.
"The terrorist, his idea, his goal, is not only to kill the people on the bus or in the marketplace," Mr. Flatow said. "It's also to accomplish a political motive by getting Flatow to stay home, getting someone to leave Israel.
"It's this randomness that on the one hand, makes it so scary, and on the other, it makes you say, you have to fight back. And you get the tool to fight back by living your life."

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction

An article yesterday about the efforts of a New Jersey man to win damages in the terrorist killing of his daughter misstated the names of two other victims of terror and misstated the year of their deaths. They were Sara Duker, not Sarah, and Matthew Eisenfeld, not Eisenberg. They died in 1996, not 1997.

Correction-Date: January 5, 1999, Tuesday

Graphic

 
Photos: Stephen M. Flatow is determined to make governments that sponsor terrorism pay. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times)(pg. B1); Alisa Flatow, 20, died when a Palestinian terrorist drove an explosives-packed van into her bus. (Associated Press)(pg. B6)

Load-Date: January 4, 1999


End of Document