Out of the Spotlight, Intelligence Services Weigh an Alliance Against Terror
The New York Times
March 13, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 940 words
Byline: By TIM WEINER 

By TIM WEINER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 12
Body


When the television lights go out after the summit meeting in Egypt on Wednesday, the real work will begin behind the scenes: an international effort to form a counter-terrorism alliance involving the espionage services of half a dozen nations.
President Clinton, in a move considered highly unusual, is taking his Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, to the meeting, which was organized in an effort to strengthen the fight against terrorism and help salvage the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord.
Openly presenting an intelligence chief at a meeting like this illustrates a growing belief that nuts-and-bolts intelligence work, rather than diplomacy, is the best weapon against a threat like suicide bombers.
Mr. Deutch will stay behind after the meeting to talk with defense and intelligence chiefs from the Middle East and Europe. The meetings will be held in the hope of beginning a new level of cooperation among allied intelligence services against the military wing of Hamas and its international sources of money and support, Administration officials said.
At a minimum, they hope for a counter-terrorism accord between Israel and the United States aimed at sharing intelligence, perhaps mounting joint operations, and ultimately stopping the bombings. A more limited alliance among the intelligence services of the United States, Israel, Jordan and the Palestinian Authority would be the next goal, they said.
Ultimately, a carefully controlled pooling of intelligence with other nations could create the basis for a kind of Terrorism Interpol, a global data base of secret information that fuses the bits and pieces of knowledge gleaned by the intelligence services of the United States and its allies.
Nothing like that exists today. Its closest equivalent is a counter-terrorist center that was set up at C.I.A. headquarters 10 years ago, bringing together experts from various United States intelligence agencies, the State Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Intelligence is like a jigsaw puzzle. When it comes to terrorism, no spy service holds all the pieces or really knows what the picture on the puzzle box looks like. With the suicide bombings threatening to undo the peace accords between Israel and the Palestinians, Mr. Deutch and other Administration officials clearly believe old barriers against sharing intelligence must be broken.
The C.I.A. has always been loath to share its secrets, its sources and its methods, believing that there are friendly nations but no friendly intelligence services. Other nations' spy agencies -- the French, the Israelis, the Russians -- share that belief.  There will always be secrets the United States and its allies will never divulge, particularly to a fledgling government like the Palestinian Authority, for fear the information might fall into the wrong hands. Now the hope is that they may agree to set aside some of their suspicions for this effort.
"Counter-terrorism is now a technique, a specialty," France's Defense Minister, Charles Millon, told a radio interviewer on Monday. "We need to increase cooperation between intelligence services" against terrorist groups and the nations that support them, he said.
Ideally, spies can carry out diplomatic goals by forging unlikely alliances on the precept that the enemy of one's enemy is one's friend. That was precisely what Mr. Deutch's deputy, George J. Tenet, and the C.I.A. counter-terrorist center's chief tried to do when they met with Yasir Arafat, the head of the Palestinian Authority, and with Israeli intelligence chiefs over the weekend. The State Department's counter-terrorism coordinator, Philip C. Wilcox Jr., who formerly headed the department's Israel desk, is also scheduled to leave for Israel shortly.
Because the C.I.A. and the Israeli intelligence services know little about the military and political wings of Hamas, information and action from Mr. Arafat's secret police is essential in operations against the group. In the past week, Mr. Arafat has ordered the arrests of about 600 people, including founders and leaders of Hamas. He is being pressed hard by Israel to do more, but it is not clear that he can without espionage methods and intelligence-gathering sources that he does not possess.
At his meeting on Saturday with C.I.A. officials, Mr. Arafat asked for money, expertise, and a list of equipment from bomb-sniffing dogs to espionage devices. The C.I.A. and other United States agencies can offer him some of those things, and even serve as a go-between for intelligence provided by the Israelis.
The F.B.I. also has a role to play in gathering intelligence against Hamas and its allies in the United States and abroad. In testimony before a Senate panel today, Louis J. Freeh, the F.B.I. Director, illustrated how difficult such operations can be.
President Clinton last year barred fund-raising by Hamas and several other Middle Eastern groups linked to terrorism, and Mr. Freeh said investigators had uncovered trails of money for Hamas from the United States to the Middle East. But he said the F.B.I. found it "very, very difficult from an evidentiary point of view to trace those funds to actual military or terrorist operations." The money trail disappeared.
Intelligence from the Palestinian Authority, Jordan or other Arab nations could complete the jigsaw. Colleagues of Mr. Deutch in the United States Government say his aim at the summit meeting, and afterward, will be to encourage an international alliance that will help solve the puzzle of the secret financial, political and organizational structure of the suicide bombers and their support systems.

Load-Date: March 13, 1996


End of Document