Outlook for 2005: Tests to foreign policy loom large
USA TODAY
January 3, 2005, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 1474 words
Body

Iraq
Iraq will be the most important subject on American minds for 2005.
It should have been since 2002, when the final plans to enter Iraq were probably being tweaked.
As retired military officers of the Vietnam era, my husband and I were dumbfounded by the apparent naivete of the American public and our leaders. There seemed to be an inexplicable ignorance about war and cultures, about how these things are never that simple and about the realistic limits of American capability. In short, as a country, we seemed to be dumb, arrogant and irresponsible in how we were about to use our power.
It appears that our Congress, news media and citizens bumbled right along with our president's "plan."
At the least, the United States owes the world, particularly the innocent civilians of Iraq, and our military an apology and restitution.
Mary Collier
Beavercreek, Ohio
'Determination and courage'
It is tragic that journalists are sometimes excessively cynical about President Bush's plans for Iraq.
The president's leadership style reflects boldness in military actions against international terrorist threats. The media struggle to offer a comprehensive picture of Bush's effectiveness because current events lead journalists to focus on a small slice of his work. The war in Iraq represents a major challenge to the president's legacy because U.S. soldiers continue to die and the region remains unstable.
Bush's idealism in foreign affairs is sometimes misunderstood as being a source of weakness. Instead, it reflects his determination and courage to rebuild Iraq in the midst of extremely difficult circumstances.
Americans appreciate having political leaders who are visionary and single-minded in their international policies. There are numerous people who do not like our war in Iraq, but the world is a safer place because of our military presence.
Brent Muirhead
Alpharetta, Ga.
'Hopes and wishes'
My outlook for 2005 is shaped by my hopes and wishes.
As we embark on a new year in our war in Iraq, I wish that the daily toll in lives, especially those of innocent women and children, declines. I hope the upcoming elections can be held under some semblance of security and legitimacy, and that they will mark the beginning of reconciliation, of law and order, and of peace -- not necessarily of democracy, as we seem to be mandating.
I hope the Iraqis themselves, assisted by a coalition of the truly willing, not the coerced, will be able to maintain their own security and make it possible for our brave but overstretched troops to begin the journey home.
Finally, I hope that our leaders will at long last start leveling with the American people on the true reasons, costs and consequences of this and any other contemplated conflict. I hope that they begin to learn from past mistakes, even if they do not admit to ever making any.
Dorian de Wind
Austin
Middle East
With the passing of Yasser Arafat and the subsequent void in the Palestinian Authority, the Middle East players have the best chance in recent memory to forge ahead with a renewed peace initiative.
I'm very optimistic that new Palestinian leadership will err on the side of wisdom by choosing peaceful negotiations rather than the tools of terrorism.
It will be a decisive year as new moderate leaders attempt to gain peaceful co-existence with the Israelis while dealing with extremist groups within their ranks, such as Hamas and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade.
The year 2005 will be a "make or break" year for the Middle East. If things go well between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, it could provide the impetus to deal with the bigger reality of worldwide terrorism.
If things do not change and the cycle of violence continues in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, then 2005 will be no different from previous years.
Tensions may initially get worse, but I am optimistic that significant strides to the "road map to peace" will begin in 2005.
Paul Golden
Clarks Summit, Pa.
'Pivotal' time in struggle
The year 2005 will prove to be pivotal in our struggle against terrorism and radicalism in the Middle East.
As numerous independent reports have indicated, U.S. policies toward Iraq and Israel have been extremely unpopular throughout the Middle East and have been a boon to radical groups that capitalize on widespread resentment of the United States to find willing recruits.
The surest way to curb our unpopularity, stabilize Iraq and prevail over terrorism is to broker a fair solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict -- one that satisfies basic Palestinian rights to freedom, statehood and restitution.
We must end the double standard we have demonstrated through nearly four decades of financing and condoning Israeli occupation and settlement of Palestinian land.
We must join with the international community and demand that Israel abandon its illegal settlements and wall in the West Bank and work with Palestinians and Arab states to achieve a comprehensive peace.
We cannot afford to continue to allow the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to undermine our efforts to stabilize the region.
The success of our troops in Iraq and the triumph over radical ideologies will depend on our ability to demonstrate to the Arab and Muslim world that freedom and human rights are universal principles that apply equally to Palestinians -- not simply convenient slogans used to advance political interests.
Ken Galal
San Francisco
Great need for peace
Considering the links among terrorism, the Middle East and Iraq, I see a great need for an Israeli-Palestinian resolution.
Should a fair peace, land rights and a reconstruction policy be enacted, much of the wind will come out of the radical Islamists' sails.
Aside from deflating the false charges made by these radicals against the United States, an honest rapprochement of the Israelis and Palestinians with a program for housing, jobs and utilities could spur the disparate ethnic and religious groups in Iraq to cooperate to create a better country.
This would stabilize the oil supply in Iraq and weaken Osama bin Laden's invective against production and supply from Saudi Arabia.
Why not expect Israel to become an honest broker for a more egalitarian society and a supplier of goods, technology and ideas for its neighbors?
Mitchell Bernard
Altavista, Va.
Terrorism
Terrorism will remain the No. 1 concern in the coming year. Everything else will be subject to it.
Just the threat of terrorism affects economies, industries, foreign relations and our personal security. And, sadly, the odds are good that many Americans will die from terrorism in 2005.
Terrorism will be defeated only when those who practice it, and those whom they care for, feel more terror than they convey. Far more international cooperation will be needed to accomplish this. There can be no national, local or family sanctuaries for terrorists.
Until terror's defeat, our way of life and each day we celebrate are opportunities for others to do us harm.
Mel Maurer
Westlake, Ohio
Economy
It's the economy that will be most on my mind in 2005. Rising oil prices, the falling dollar, inflation, rising interest rates, declining homes sales, high unemployment, layoffs, salary freezes, the flat or falling stock market, the ever-growing national debt and dwindling Social Security are some aspects of the economy that will keep me tossing at night.
Will I still have a job? Will I be able to afford a house? Will my 401(k) and Social Security be around when I am ready to retire? How high will oil prices and interest rates go? And will Medicare take care of me in my old age?
I have a lot of questions, and I would like action on these issues. They are intertwined in the economic equation that affects all of us. It's the economy -- it's definitely the economy.
Diane E. Alter
Long Branch, N.J.
U.S. Supreme Court
Without a doubt, appointments to the U.S. Supreme Court should be considered the main issue for 2005.
Embryonic stem cell research is going to change the future, leading to better medicines, better treatments and the possibility of generating new organs along with spinal-cord-injury repair.
Whether Roe vs. Wade is changed will undoubtedly be a crucial issue for the next appointee.
While not advocating abortion, I do believe in a woman's right to choose. President Bush should realize that abortions will continue, legally or not. Women facing perhaps the most traumatic decision they'll ever have to make should continue to receive proper medical attention.
And if we, as a society, can help cure such illnesses as Parkinson's disease, diabetes and Lou Gehrig's disease with the use of embryos that would have been discarded, or embryos that will forever be frozen in fertility clinics, then let's take that step into the future.
I only hope that the first person to benefit from stem cells will be the ailing relative of an ultra-conservative right-winger.
Jeff C. Sell
Louisville

Graphic

 
GRAPHICS, B/W (ILLUSTRATION) (5)

Load-Date: January 4, 2005


End of Document