OUTRAGE ALONE WON'T END ASSASSINATION AND TERROR
The New York Times
May 24, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 435 words
Body


To the Editor:
The shooting of Pope John Paul II is a tragic and sad brutalization of all men and women, regardless of creed, whether or not each of us consciously realizes it.
A killing among the least of us is just as tragic as the killing of a pope or a president, but when the great among us fall, it shocks our sensibilities, which have become hardened to the now-commonplace killings and acts of terror against innocent people in Beirut, Belfast, San Salvador - and Washington.
We are sad and outraged today, but we will go about our business tomorrow the same as we did yesterday, and acts of terrorism and savagery will become more commonplace than ever. Just as long as people anywhere, though shocked by atrocity at the moment, return to complacency tomorrow, terrorism will go on.
Harold Lockwood letter proposes US move to convene international conference aimed at developing antiterrorism code and treaty
Nations and governments cannot be expected to take effective steps to eliminate terrorists until their citizens clearly demonstrate their revulsion and demand immediate, unequivocal action. Terrorism flourishes most in those societies least willing to oppose it effectively. And effective government action is long overdue.
As a beginning, the United States Congress should be urged to enact legislation making the assassination or attempted assassination of any government official and any act of terrorism or attempted terrorism, which must be carefully defined, an offense punishable by a mandatory sentence of death.
Trial and sentencing should not be subject to unreasonable delay.  Experience has demonstrated that temporizing, equivocation and delay in dealing with terrorists only invite terrorism. At the same time, an effective Federal counterterrorist unit needs to be established and adequately funded to investigate and apprehend suspected or known terrorists as defined by appropriate legislation.
Coupled with this national effort, the United States should take the initiative to convene an international conference with a view toward developing an international antiterrorism code and treaty in the expectation that each participating government will enact such legislation. Provision should be included for the imposition of sanctions, political and economic, against any nation which fails to enact anti-terrorist laws or refuses to participate in an international effort to eliminate terrorism.
Only then can we expect to have any hope that either popes or peasants will be able to live free of the threat of assassination and terrorism.
HAROLD A. LOCKWOOD JR., Philadelphia, May 13, 1981

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing of bullets


End of Document