Overselling terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 7, 2004 Tuesday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12A; EDITORIAL
Length: 545 words
Series: EDITORIALS
Body


The president may boast about his anti-terrorism bona fides at his party's convention in New York, but his Justice Department has demonstrated a pattern of missteps bordering on incompetence. Time and again Attorney General John Ashcroft and his deputies have pointed fingers at individuals, making serious terrorism allegations public with great fanfare, only to have to pull back when the evidence doesn't support the hype. The latest example is in a case out of Detroit where the department has said it will drop all terrorism charges against a group of men that Ashcroft once asserted were a sleeper cell of al-Qaida members with plans to attack in the United States and abroad.
Two Moroccan men, Abdel-Ilah Elmardoudi and Karim Koubriti, were convicted last year on terrorism and document fraud charges, a third Moroccan man was convicted only on fraud charges and a fourth man was acquitted. At the time, Ashcroft heralded the convictions as major victory in fighting terrorism. But after a nine-month investigation into the prosecutors' tactics, the government now concedes that every aspect of their terrorism case against the men has been compromised.
The investigation, conducted by the department at the behest of the presiding federal judge, found that the department failed to turn over substantial evidence to the defense that pointed to the defendants' innocence. The 60-page filing said that prosecutors "created a record filled with misleading inferences."
For example, prosecutors claimed at trial that a sketch in a day planner was of an aircraft hangar at a base in Turkey, when their own investigators had concluded it was a doodle of a map of the Middle East. Also, a videotape presented in court as the casing of targets, had been judged by FBI agents as tourist footage - a fact not disclosed.
This is not the first time the department has oversold a terrorism case - implicating innocent people in the process. It recently detained Brandon Mayfield, a Muslim attorney in Oregon for his participation in the train bombing in Madrid, after misidentifying his fingerprints.
Earlier this year, the department also failed to win a conviction against a Saudi graduate student in Idaho who set up and ran Web sites that prosecutors alleged were used by various groups to sponsor and promote terrorism. The government had defined the crime of providing expert assistance to terrorists so broadly that it could have applied to any business that sold services to people who had terrorist ties.
As abysmal as Ashcroft's antiterrorism report card has been, the Detroit case is particularly shocking. It evinces a pattern of purposeful deception - a willingness to railroad defendants regardless of the truth. However, to the department's credit, it has honestly evaluated the misdeeds in this case and is further investigating the attorneys in charge.
One lesson that should be drawn here is to treat skeptically any exhortations from the department that the normal rules of due process should bend in light of the terrorist threat. The department has proven that it cannot be necessarily trusted to play fair or above board, particularly when it is looking to trumpet its "war on terrorism." The Detroit case is a telling example of just how wrong prosecutors can go.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Associated Press; Attorney General John Ashcroft

Load-Date: September 7, 2004


End of Document