Overzealous prosecutions undercut war on terrorism
USA TODAY
September 22, 2004, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 669 words
Body

Today's debate: Rights vs. safety
Our view: Federal government pursues cases that turn out to be flawed.
Amid the glare of a news conference last Thursday, Attorney General John Ashcroft trumpeted the opening of the government's latest terrorism prosecution, the indictment of two men for financially aiding Islamic groups that support terrorists.
A few days earlier, with no fanfare, another major terrorism case, this one brought by military authorities, came to an end. Army Capt. James Yee -- accused just a year ago as the "big fish" in a spy ring intent on helping al-Qaeda -- learned that he would get an honorable military discharge. The designation offered symbolic exoneration. Months earlier, the criminal charges were dropped.
The juxtaposition of the two cases illustrates a trend in the Bush administration's domestic war on terrorism: Too many major prosecutions open with a bang but end with a whimper.
In recent months, several high-profile Justice Department or military cases have collapsed -- but not before they damaged lives, trampled constitutional rights and squandered resources that could have been focused on real threats.
The common thread is that authorities, fixated on preventing terrorism at any cost, ignored or avoided evidence that might have disproved their theories. Such zealous pursuits undermine the very values that terrorists are seeking to destroy -- individual rights and the rule of law.
Among the key cases that have unraveled:
 * Detroit terrorism. In June 2003, three North African men arrested a week after 9/11 were convicted in what was heralded as the government's first major post-9/11 terrorism trial. This month, a federal judge threw out the convictions and dismissed the terrorism charges after the Justice Department found that the prosecutors had withheld evidence that undermined their case. The judge wrote that the prosecution's zeal to convict trumped "its broader obligation to the justice system and the rule of law."
 * Spanish bombing. Last May, U.S. authorities detained Portland, Ore., lawyer Brandon Mayfield, a Muslim convert, in connection with the March 11 train bombing in Madrid. They said his fingerprint was found at the scene, and Mayfield was jailed for 14 days. But they were wrong, and a judge threw out the case. Spanish authorities had raised doubts about the fingerprint match early on. Now, two Justice Department probes are focused on the FBI's blunder and the conduct of prosecutors.
 * Military spying. Last September, the Army accused Yee, a Muslim chaplain then assigned to the prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, of being a spy and held him in solitary confinement for 76 days. While the government suggested he could face the death penalty, it actually charged him with only minor infractions. They were dropped last spring. The military said it didn't want to release sensitive information, but former military judges and prosecutors say the case collapsed for lack of evidence.
Related criminal charges against an Army Reserve colonel were dropped last month, and a third case against an Air Force translator is foundering.
The Justice Department defends its record. It says its own probe revealed the Detroit errors and that 189 of 357 individuals arrested for terrorism have been convicted.
That's a dubious defense. The Detroit probe was indeed thorough, but it occurred only after a federal judge ordered prosecutors to reveal why they had withheld exonerating evidence. Where were high-level Washington officials when prosecutors were misleading a court for more than a year?
The conviction record, meanwhile, says little. The Justice Department is unable or unwilling to provide supporting details.
In any case, no amount of convictions excuses overreaching that punishes innocent people.
Thwarting terrorism requires aggressive prosecution, as long as authorities distinguish between those who pose real danger and those who don't. Prosecuting the innocent only undermines cherished American values without making the nation safer.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Erik Lesser, Getty Images; PHOTO, B/W, Don Ryan, AP; James Yee <>Brandon Mayfield

Load-Date: September 24, 2004


End of Document