P.L.O. COMMANDER CALLS ISRAELI STRATEGY A FAILURE
The New York Times
July 28, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 592 words
Byline: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 27
Body


The Palestinian guerrillas' top field commander today characterized Israeli military strategy over the last two weeks of fighting as ''a complete failure.''
Abu Walid, chief of the Palestine Liberation Organization's ''operations room,'' said he believed Israel would soon carry out a ''second phase'' of its strategy with a land attack in southern Lebanon.
''We are preparing ourselves for the worst,'' he said in an interview in his office in the Fakhani neighborhood of west Beirut, a few blocks from where Israeli bombs fell during the recent fighting.
Chief of Palestine Liberation Orangization Abu Walid calls Israeli military strategy "a complete failure"
The guerrilla commander said that the concentrated Israeli bombardments on roads and bridges in southern Lebanon had had little effect on his troops because, as a guerrilla force rather than a conventional army, they were not heavily dependent on fixed supply and communications lines.
At the same time, he said, the new self-propelled rocket-launchers and artillery his forces have received in the last few months have enabled them to adopt mobile tactics of firing on settlements in northern Israel from different positions in the rugged hills.
 
'Tactic of Moving All the Time'
''It is a tactic of moving all the time,'' he said. ''We have adopted a tactic which will serve our aims, within our limited capacities.
''We can concentrate our fire in time and place, and it is very difficult for them to hit back because we can move,'' he went on.  ''In these two weeks, for the first time in Arab-Israeli conflicts,'' the guerrilla leader said, ''there was the evacuation of Israeli civilians from one part of the occupied land to another - 15,000 by their own estimates.''
Abu Walid, a trim man with thinning gray hair, who had the sleeves of his tan safari suit rolled up, is a 1966 graduate of the United States Army's Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan. ''I didn't receive my training in the East,'' he noted with a smile. He is a former Jordanian Army officer.
The apparent Israeli attempt to isolate guerrilla strongholds, particularly in Nabatiye and the Beaufort Castle area, by pounding the roads had little effect, the guerrilla leader maintained.
''We are not a regular army, it means nothing to me,'' he said. ''I don't have any heavy equipment, so I don't need first-class roads. I can actually stop using any cars - I can use animals if I have to.''
Indeed, Abu Walid, like a number of other Palestinian leaders over the last few days, contended that the Israelis had deliberately attacked civilian rather than military targets in order to turn the Lebanese against the Palestinian guerrillas in their midst.
 
Israeli Raid Called Terrorism
''They wanted to make a separation between the Palestinian revolution and the Lebanese people,'' he said, ''and this is the key cause behind the Israeli decision to hit civilian targets. I believe it was some kind of terrorism.''
The shaky cease-fire that ended the fighting on Friday was still generally holding today, despite a fourth rocket barrage from Palestinian positions into the border enclave controlled by the Israeli-backed Christian militia force of Maj. Saad Haddad. Israeli planes again flew over Beirut, drawing antiaircraft fire.
Palestinian sources said today that the militants of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, a radical faction that had earlier declared it would not honor the ''suspect'' cease-fire, had been brought into line with the P.L.O. leadership of Yasir Arafat.


End of Document