Pa. charges suspect with terrorism; Man accused of killing trooper was subject of intense manhunt
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 14, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 5
Length: 258 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: BLOOMING GROVE, Pa. 
Highlight: Trooper ambush suspect charged with terrorism, accused of saying he wanted to 'wake people up'
Body


 - Authorities have added terrorism charges against a man accused of ambushing a Pennsylvania State Police barracks and killing a trooper, and they say he told them he wanted to wake people up.
State police say Eric Frein called the Sept. 12 slaying of Cpl. Bryon Dickson an assassination after his capture.
Police filed the additional counts on Thursday. He was already charged with first-degree murder. Prosecutors are seeking the death penalty.
In court papers, police say they found a letter addressed to Mom and Dad on a thumb drive belonging to Frein. They quote the letter as saying that only a revolution can get us back the liberties we once had.Frein is accused of opening fire outside the Blooming Grove barracks, killing Dickson and wounding another trooper.
The quiet takedown of Frein last month ended weeks of tension and turmoil in the area, as authorities at times closed schools, canceled outdoor events and blockaded roads to pursue him. Residents grew weary of hearing helicopters overhead, and small businesses suffered mounting losses.
Police said they linked Frein to the troopers' ambush after a man walking his dog discovered his partly submerged SUV three days later in a swamp a few miles from the shooting scene. Inside, investigators found shell casings matching those found at the barracks.Police refused to tell Frein that his family had hired an attorney for him the night he was captured, his lawyer has said. Veteran criminal defense attorney James Swetz said he was prevented from seeing Frein the night he was arrested.

Load-Date: November 14, 2014


End of Document