Pa. House passes measures designed to thwart terrorism
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
December 5, 2001 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. A21
Length: 853 words
Byline: Amy Worden INQUIRER HARRISBURG BUREAU
Dateline: HARRISBURG
Body


The House gave final approval yesterday to a sweeping package of bills that would expand the state's ability to prevent terrorism and give authorities more powerful tools to prosecute alleged terrorists.
Among the two dozen measures, which passed with overwhelming support, were bills that would ease wiretap laws, establish penalties for possessing or manufacturing weapons of mass destruction, and require that haulers of hazardous materials be fingerprinted.
Lawmakers said changes were needed after Sept. 11, when terrorism ceased to be solely a federal issue. The changes align Pennsylvania wiretap laws with recently amended federal statutes.
"We updated a lot of criminal statutes to focus on terrorism and bring the laws in line with modern technology," said Rep. Thomas Gannon (R., Delaware), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.
Civil-liberties activists said they were dismayed that so many bills with such far-reaching implications for privacy rights rushed through the House without public hearings.
"You don't want to mistake quantity for quality," said Larry Frankel, executive director of the Philadelphia office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "They're doing a lot, but there is no sense of deliberation about what is the best thing to do about terrorism."
The House bills now will be reviewed by the Senate, which is considering its own antiterrorism measures. The Senate is expected to reconcile any differences before returning the package to the House.
"They have their own tinkering to do," Gannon said. "But I am confident we will get back a package that we can agree on."
The bills attack terrorism on a number of fronts, including economic. One forbids investment of state assets, including Treasury and government employee pension funds, in companies doing business in countries identified by the United States as sponsors of terrorism.
One measure authorizes the hiring of up to 370 state troopers at a cost of $10 million, raising the cap from 3,940 to 4,310. Since Sept. 11, state troopers have been on a constant state of alert, dispatched to guard airports and five nuclear power plants around Pennsylvania.
Except for that bill, Gannon said, the measures would not require additional state spending.
Several transportation bills would boost security on the highways, better protect the state's infrastructure, and crack down on the distribution of fraudulent drivers' licenses.
Pennsylvania's Department of Transportation was rocked in October when 20 men of Middle Eastern descent were arrested by federal authorities around the country for possessing fraudulent commercial drivers' licenses that had been issued in Pennsylvania and carried certification to haul hazardous materials.
The arrests came amid federal warnings that terrorists could rig trucks with explosives or biological hazards and set off additional destruction.
An employee of the Pittsburgh PennDot office was later charged with selling the fake licenses for cash. None of the Middle Eastern men arrested was accused of having terrorist ties.
The wiretap bill would allow investigators to more easily monitor phone conversations at a time when authorities say criminals are able to constantly shift phones and use mobile phones to thwart the law. Current law requires authorities to obtain court orders each time they tap a new phone line; the House bill would let them tap cellular phones and record conversations of people outside their homes.
"Investigators have a tap on one line and these guys are talking on another," Gannon said.
Frankel said he was especially concerned about measures expanding electronic surveillance.
But Gannon said he attached a "sunset" provision that would stipulate the Assembly reexamine the wiretap bill in five years.
"I am very sensitive to this kind of surveillance, but I believe the safeguards are in place," he said. "If there are abuses, we will look at them."
Another bill increases the penalties for making a bomb threat and expands the definition of such threats to include weapons of mass destruction.
"Before you had a school bomb threat and it was just a kid who didn't want to take a test," said Sean Connolly, a spokesman for Attorney General Mike Fisher. "Now you're talking about shutting down businesses for days and scaring the public. The stakes are much higher."
Connolly said several bills would broaden the powers of the attorney general to investigate potential terrorist acts.
"In 1980, when the office of attorney general was created, no one could have predicted we would be on the lookout for nuclear or biological weapons," he said. "Today all levels of law enforcement have to be vigilant."
Also included in the package was the creation of the William Penn Liberty Medal of Honor to recognize civilians who have distinguished themselves through an act of heroism or a lifetime of accomplishments.
The first medals would go to the families of United Airlines passengers - Todd Beamer, Mark Bingham, Thomas Burnett and Jeremy Glick - for their courage aboard Flight 93, which crashed in Pennsylvania on Sept. 11.
Amy Worden's e-mail address is aworden@phillynews.com.  

Notes

At War With Terror

Load-Date: December 6, 2001


End of Document