Pa., N.J. to get less in security grants; Phila. also will see less vs. last year. The federal aid is for emergency and terrorism preparedness.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 1, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 798 words
Byline: Jennifer Lin, Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Pennsylvania will get far less federal funding than last year to prepare for terrorist threats and other emergencies, while New Jersey will see a slight decline in funding, according to grant awards announced yesterday by the Department of Homeland Security.
Philadelphia, which receives a special allocation of Homeland Security funding as a high-risk urban center, will also face a cut in grants.
Forty-six cities in all will share $710 million - down by more than $100 million from last year - as part of an overall $1.7 billion Homeland Security grant program.
This year, the department used a new approach for allocating grants to prepare for emergencies.
The new process is more complicated and involves a checklist of "national preparedness standards" that spells out what cities must do to respond to terrorism threats, natural disasters or other calamities. The new standards include such matters as making emergency radios compatible and having the capability to respond to the release of hazardous materials.
Pennsylvania will receive $49 million in grants, down from $81.9 million last year.
Maria A. Smith, spokeswoman for the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, said the agency was disappointed with the overall grant allocations. "At a time where threats and challenges continue to increase, a 30 percent reduction of homeland security funds to the states and a 40 percent funding reduction to Pennsylvania does not seem to be a prudent decision," she said in a statement.
Smith said Pennsylvania would "continue to use these monies to support first-responder all-hazard efforts" to protect its citizens.
Of the state's total, $19.5 million is earmarked for Philadelphia to share among emergency planners in the city and its suburban Pennsylvania counties. In 2005, the city and suburbs got $22.8 million.
Joe Grace, spokesman for Mayor Street, said city officials were not satisfied with the allotment and needed more funding "to do this work properly."
"We need more and we'll be seeking more," he said. "The burdens on local government... are increasing, not decreasing, and to really enhance and protect the region's security, we need more funding for the federal government."
New Jersey will get $52 million in Homeland Security grants, vs. $56.4 million last year.
Roger Shatzkin, a spokesman for New Jersey's Office of Homeland Security and Preparedness, said that although the state's overall allotment was down slightly, its six urban counties near New York City received a large boost in funding.
Of New Jersey's total, the Jersey City-Newark region is targeted for $34.3 million, almost double what it received last year. Shatzkin said, however, that South Jersey communities would have to share in the $17.7 million in general spending for the rest of the state.
Levels of federal funding are critical for states and cities, which have had to substantially ramp up their emergency preparedness after the Sept. 11 attacks and the response failures exposed during Hurricane Katrina.
9/11 Targets Also Face Cuts
New York City will receive $124.5 million in antiterrorism grants for cities at high risk of attacks, a 40 percent cut that Rep. Peter King (R., N.Y.) yesterday called "a knife in the back."
"As far as I'm concerned, the Department of Homeland Security and the administration have declared war on New York," said King, who represents Long Island and is chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. "... I'm going to do everything I can to make them very sorry they made this decision."
A worksheet madeby the federal government to explain
the decision, obtained by the Associated Press, said the city, which was attacked on 9/11, had just four major financial assets at risk, and no national monuments or icons - a description ridiculed by New York officials.
"Anyone who can't see New York monuments at risk is blind as a bat when it comes to homeland security," said Sen. Charles E. Schumer (D., N.Y).
The Washington metro area- also targeted on 9/11 - will receive $46 million, down from $77.5 million last year.
Federal officials defended the decisions.
"At the end of the day, our job is to make sure that we apply resources in an appropriate manner across the full breadth of this nation so that we get the maximum benefit out of those dollars," Homeland Security Undersecretary George Foresman said.
- Associated Press
ONLINE EXTRA
Read more about the Homeland Security grants at http://go.philly.com/grants
CorrectionIn an article in yesterday's Inquirer about federal cuts in homeland security grants, a quote from Mayor Street's spokesman, Joe Grace, was not accurate. Grace said, "... to really enhance and protect the region's security, we need more funding from the federal government."
Contact staff writer Jennifer Lin at 215-854-5659 or jlin@phillynews.com.

Load-Date: June 2, 2006


End of Document