Packers' Aaron Rodgers fills void that politicians leave behind
Badger Herald: University of Wisconsin - Madison
November 17, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 569 words
Byline: Luke Schaetzel
Body


Terrorism has no religion. But time and time again, all Muslims face the blame. Some people in America choose to relate terrorism that uses religion as an excuse to commit mass acts of violence with a religion that is affected more by the terrorism than any other religion.
After attacks like the terrible tragedy that occurred in Paris last week, America has two options. We can either play into the hands of terror, changing who we are, or we can be the "shining city on a hill" that people from around the world aspire to be a part of.
Update: All UW students abroad in Paris are safe, university officials say[Update 9:33 p.m.: UW spokesperson John Lucas confirmed all UW students studying abroad in Paris are safe and accounted for.] All ...
During a moment of silence Sunday in solidarity for what happened in Paris Friday, a fan attending the Packer game at Lambeau Field shouted what is reported to be, "Muslims suck." Thankfully a more astute fan attending the game shouted much louder, "Have some respect."
Aaron Rodgers, in a postgame press conference decided to also speak up. Rodgers expressed his disappointment in the fan who made the anti-Muslim remark and said, "It's that kind of prejudicial ideology that I think puts us in the position that we're in today as a world."
Rodgers couldn't have been any more right. It is because we like to group people who are seemingly the same together that we struggle to take steps forward. It is because we group black people together that there is still structural racism resonant in today's America. It is because Democrats and Republicans group the other party's politicians together that Congress can't work in tandem. And it is because we group all Muslims with the terrorism that uses Islamic faith as an excuse to kill.
Monday Gov. Scott Walker decided to play into the hands of terrorists. He, and many governors across America, chose to take a stand against the acceptance of refugees fleeing the terror of the Middle East. When we become the country that is not accepting of the less fortunate, the terrorists win. This country was made and created by refugees, so when we stop being the "shining city on a hill" that accepts people fleeing for freedom, we stop being America.
Walker: 'The state of Wisconsin will not accept new Syrian refugees'While the refugee resettlement process falls under federal governance, Gov. Scott Walker announced in a statement Monday that Wisconsin will not ...
Why is it that our athletes can get it right but our leaders cannot? The Clippers took a stand against their owner Donald Sterling back in 2014. Countless athletes like LeBron James and Derrick Rose wore "I Can't Breathe" shirts after the acquittal of the cops who killed Eric Garner. University of Missouri's whole football team and coaching staff went on strike until their president, who overlooked countless instances of racial discrimination, resigned.
Students, community members protest peacefully in Black Out MarchUniversity of Wisconsin students and Madison community members braved the bitter wind Thursday night for a Black Out March in support ...
Time and time again our athletes have filled the void. Too often our politicians have been the fan who shouted, "Muslims suck," and too often our athletes have been the ones shouting back, "Have some respect."
Luke Schaetzel ([email protected]) is a sophomore majoring in journalism and political science.

Load-Date: January 25, 2016


End of Document