PACT WITH BRITAIN ON EXTRADITIONS BACKED BY SENATE
The New York Times
July 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 896 words
Byline: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 17
Body


The Senate approved today a landmark treaty with Britain that may make it easier to extradite suspects accused of terrorist crimes from the United States.
The heart of the new treaty, which does not require House action, limits the right of suspects to avoid extradition by asserting their political motivations for the crimes of which they may be accused. The previous treaty, like most extradition pacts with other countries, gave judges considerable latitude.
Under the treaty approved today, Federal judges can block extradition of suspects only by determining that the accused would ''be prejudiced at his trial or punished, detained or restricted in his personal liberty by reason of his race, religion, nationality or political opinions.''
Thatcher Sought Pact
The pact was eagerly sought by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who seeks the return of Irish Republican Army members accused of crimes in Great Britain. Citing the ''political exemption'' clause in the previous treaty, Federal judges in several instances have refused to allow extradition of I.R.A. members accused of terrorist attacks. The I.R.A. is a guerrilla force that is fighting for an end to British rule in Northern Ireland.
President Reagan strongly endorsed the new treaty, partly as a gesture toward Mrs. Thatcher, one of his most loyal allies, and he is expected to ratify it with his signature.
The vote on the pact was 87 to 10, far more than the two-thirds vote needed to approve treaties. The law is retroactive, and will allow the extradition of suspects accused of crimes that occurred before the treaty was ratified.
New York's senior Senator, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, voted for ratification, as did Bill Bradley and Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey. Those voting against it included Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York and Christopher J. Dodd and Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut.
While it is impossible to know how many fugitives may be affected by the new treaty, attention has focused on four major cases in recent years involving accused members of the I.R.A. who fled to the United States: Joseph Doherty, William J. Quinn, Desmond Mackin and Peter McMullen. In all four cases, Federal judges originally barred their extradition on the ground that the crimes of which they were accused were political in character. Mr. Doherty is in a New York jail, facing deportation for violating immigration laws. The order blocking Mr. Quinn's extradition was later reversed by a higher court, and he has appealed to the Supreme Court. Mr. Mackin has been deported to Ireland for violating immigration laws. Mr. McMullen was granted political asylum in the United States after he provided information about I.R.A. activities.
By voice vote, the Senate quickly approved a package of $20 million in aid to Northern Ireland. The House adopted a $250 million package, and the two bills will have to be reconciled in a House-Senate conference.
The vote for the treaty appeared to reflect rising concern about the spread of terrorism and the desire of the Administration and its allies to cooperate more in thwarting terrorism.
In arguing for the tighter restrictions in the treaty, Senator Richard G. Lugar, an Indiana Republican and chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said a number of suspected members of the Irish Republican Army had escaped extradition by claiming political immunity. These cases, he added, ''had the effect of encouraging political violence in Northern Ireland by signalling, however erroneously, that there was broad support in America for acts of political terrorism committed in Ireland.''
''Violence should never be deemed part of the political process,'' Senator Lugar declared.
But critics of the pact expressed concern that it would change longstanding American traditions regarding the rights of political renegades.
 
D'Amato Amendment Rejected
''As much as I want to stamp out terrorism,'' argued Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a Utah Republican, ''I also want to be sure that we don't stamp out some basic legal rights as well.''
Senator D'Amato said the treaty amounted to an ex post facto law because it was retroactive. Mr. D'Amato introduced an amendent that would have eliminated such retroactive proceedings, but it was rejected, 65 to 33.
The New York Republican also objected to the document on the ground that it ''singled out Irish people'' and made it harder for them to avoid extradition than suspects of other nationalities. The doctrine that protects political dissidents, which is called the ''political exception'' clause, is ''firmly entrenched'' in almost 100 other extradition treaties, Mr. D'Amato said. The treaty approved by the Senate would apply to all nationalities sought by Great Britain for extradition.
Senator Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat, said the Senate had failed to strike a proper balance and produced a treaty in which ''the scales of justice are tipped in favor of the state.''
In concluding the debate today, Mr. Lugar argued that ratification of the treaty provided ''a remarkable opportunity to affirm the strength of our relationships with Great Britain.''
But several Senators argued that there should not be a double standard in the fight against terrorism. Senator Thomas F. Eagleton, a Missouri Democrat, said: ''Terrorism is the same whether you have swarthy cheeks and talk in Arabic, or if you have pink cheeks and talk with a brogue.''

Graphic

 
photo of Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (UPI) (page A5)


End of Document