PACT WILL TEST PLO ABILITY TO CUT TERROR, RABIN SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 16, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 5B
Length: 353 words
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


PRIME MINISTER Yitzhak Rabin said Wednesday that the Israeli-PLO accord could lead to peace with Jordan and Lebanon soon, but its real test would be the PLO's ability to contain terrorism.  "From Israel's point of view, this test will determine the ability to continue with the process," Rabin told Israel Army radio after returning from Washington.  Another test, Rabin said, will be the willingness of European countries and Arab oil states to provide financial backing for Palestinian self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip and the West Bank city of Jericho.  Rabin and Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, watched Monday as their chief aides signed the self-rule agreement in a ceremony on the White House South Lawn. On Tuesday, Rabin stopped in Morocco on his first official visit.  Arafat returned to PLO headquarters in Tunisia on Wednesday. He said he was confident that the accord would help lead to a comprehensive peace between Arabs and Israel.  (Incidentally, as soon as Arafat's borrowed Moroccan jetliner left Washington, he donned his fatigues once more, and holstered his Colt revolver on his hip.) Although Arafat echoed Rabin in the hope for peace, Arafat said he would not stop at self-rule in Jericho and the Gaza Strip. Autonomy, he said, would be followed by "the establishment of our independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital." In Jerusalem, Rabin said Wednesday that the accord does not entail grave security risks or a complete Israeli withdrawal from the occupied lands, seized in the Six-Day War of 1967.
"Nothing is more wrong than saying that Palestinians might pose a threat to Israel's survival," he said.  Israel's 120-seat Parliament, the Knesset, will debate the accord next week. Polls published by two newspapers Wednesday indicated that about 60 percent of Israelis support the agreement, although 47 percent also believe it could bring an upsurge in terrorism.  Rabin has said that if he fails to win the support of a majority of the Knesset's Jewish members, he will consider seeking national approval of the accord in a voter referendum.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document