Padilla gets term of 17 years; Sentence is more lenient than expected for American accused in 'dirty bomb' case
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
January 23, 2008 Wednesday
Final Edition


Copyright 2008 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-4
Length: 284 words
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body


 Jose Padilla, the U.S. citizen once accused in an al-Qaida "dirty bomb" plot, was handed a relatively lenient sentence of more than 17 years yesterday by a federal judge. The judge said his convictions on other charges didn't prove he truly was a terrorist.
 Prosecutors wanted Padilla and two co-defendants sentenced to life on terrorism-support charges that didn't mention "dirty bombs,"
Padilla but U.S. District Judge Marcia Cooke disagreed.
 She took into account the harsh, isolated conditions Padilla faced during 3 1/2 years in a military brig as an enemy combatant after his 2002 arrest. Defense lawyers claim he was tortured by the military, but U.S. officials denied that, and Cooke never used the word torture.
 Ultimately, Cooke said at a sentencing hearing, there was not enough evidence linking Padilla, 37, and the other two men to specific acts of terrorism or victims.
 Padilla and co-defendants Adham Amin Hassoun, 45, and Kifah Wael Jayyousi, 46, were convicted in August after a three-month trial of being part of a support cell that sent recruits, money and supplies to Islamic extremists worldwide, including al-Qaida. Padilla was billed as a "star recruit," while Hassoun was the recruiter and Jayyousi served as a financier and propagandist, according to trial testimony.
 Sentencing guidelines had suggested a range of 30 years to life for all three, but Cooke used her discretion to go below even the minimum. Padilla got 17 years and four months; Hassoun, 15 years and eight months; and Jayyousi, 12 years and eight months. Their prison time probably will be even less counting months already served in pretrial detention and automatic reductions for good behavior, their lawyers said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: January 25, 2008


End of Document