PADILLA GUILTY IN TERROR TRIAL; 'ENEMY COMBATANT' FIRST ARRESTED IN '02 'DIRTY BOMB' CASE;; VERDICT IS SEEN AS A VICTORY FOR BUSH
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 17, 2007 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 652 words
Byline: ABBY GOODNOUGH AND SCOTT SHANE, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body


In a significant victory for the Bush administration, a federal jury yesterday found Jose Padilla guilty of terrorism conspiracy charges after little more than a day of deliberation.
Mr. Padilla, a New York City-born convert to Islam who became one of the first Americans designated an "enemy combatant" in the anxious months after Sept. 11, 2001, now faces life in prison. He was released last year from a long and highly unusual military confinement to face criminal charges in federal court in Miami.
The government's chief evidence was a faded application form that prosecutors said Mr. Padilla, 36, filled out to attend an al-Qaida training camp in Afghanistan in 2000.
The jurors, seven men and five women from Miami-Dade County, would not speak publicly at the courthouse and left through a side entrance.
But one juror, who asked that her name not be used, later said in a phone interview that she had all but made up her mind before deliberations began. "We had to be sure," the juror said in Spanish. "We wanted to make sure we went through all the evidence. But the evidence was strong, and we all agreed on that."
Mr. Padilla's extraordinary legal journey began in May 2002, when he was arrested at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago. Then-U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft announced Mr. Padilla's capture a month later in a news conference in Moscow, saying an "unfolding terrorist plot to attack the United States by exploding a radioactive dirty bomb" -- one that could have caused "mass death and injury" -- had been foiled.
After being held in isolation in a South Carolina military brig for more than three years, Mr. Padilla was transferred to civilian custody in Miami last year, after the Supreme Court considered taking up his case. His lawyers tried in vain to have him found incompetent to stand trial, saying he had been tortured in the brig. The government denied that he was ever mistreated.
For the Bush administration, the guilty verdict salvaged a case that had severely tested its approach to terrorism. Mr. Padilla's military detention -- and his sudden transfer to the criminal courts in 2006 on different charges than those initially announced -- made his case the centerpiece of a heated debate over that approach.
"We commend the jury for its work in this trial and thank it for upholding a core American principle of impartial justice for all," White House spokesman Gordon D. Johndroe said. "Jose Padilla received a fair trial and a just verdict."
But some experts said the very success of the prosecution raised doubts about the administration's insistence that the terrorist threat cannot be handled in the civilian justice system.
"This demonstrates, at least for now, that the United States is fully capable of prosecuting terrorism while affording defendants the full procedural protections of the Constitution," said Michael Greenberger, who served in the Clinton administration Justice Department and teaches terrorism law at the University of Maryland law school.
The dirty-bomb allegations were not mentioned during Mr. Padilla's three-month Miami trial, nor was his military confinement. That is because the government said it had gotten the information about the dirty-bomb plot by questioning other terrorism suspects abroad, and federal rules of evidence prohibit or limit use of information obtained during such interrogations.
Instead, Mr. Padilla was added to the case against two men of Middle Eastern descent, one of whom Mr. Padilla had met at a Broward County, Fla., mosque. The three were charged with belonging to a North American terrorism support cell that provided money, recruits and supplies to Islamic extremists
Like Mr. Padilla, the co-defendants -- Adham Hassoun and Kifah Jayyousi -- were convicted of conspiracy to murder, kidnap and maim people overseas, which could keep them in prison for life. Judge Marcia Cooke scheduled sentencing for Dec. 5.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Jose Padilla

Load-Date: August 17, 2007


End of Document