Padilla jury selection starts today; Will be 'uphill struggle' after years of publicity
USA TODAY
April 16, 2007 Monday
CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 647 words
Byline: Laura Parker
Body


It was June 2002, nine months after the Sept. 11 attacks that killed about 3,000 Americans, when Attorney General John Ashcroft made the dramatic announcement.
Jose Padilla, a U.S. citizen, had been arrested a month earlier at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and accused of plotting with al-Qaeda to detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb," possibly in Washington, D.C.
Today in a Miami courtroom, jury selection will begin in Padilla's trial.
The charges against Padilla, 36, however, say nothing about a dirty bomb. Instead, Padilla and two co-defendants, Adham Amin Hassoun, a Lebanese national, and Kifah Wael Jayyousi, a Jordanian and naturalized U.S. citizen, are charged with being part of a North American support cell that aided terrorist activities overseas. All three face possible life sentences if convicted. The trial is likely to last four to six months.
Padilla is one of the highest-profile symbols of the legal complications spawned by the U.S. war on terrorism. In 2002, President Bush designated him an "enemy combatant." Padilla was subsequently held in solitary confinement without being charged for more than 3 1/2 years in a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C. The federal government has not said publicly why Padilla has not been charged with conspiring to set off a dirty bomb.
The first hurdle that U.S. District Judge Marcia Cooke faces as the trial gets underway is the task of finding 12 jurors and six alternates who can lay aside the accusations against Padilla by top administration officials.
"It's an uphill struggle for the defense in a case that's had this much publicity," says Ian Weinstein, a law professor at Fordham University in New York. "Many people will start with a strong negative impression of Mr. Padilla."
Padilla, of Puerto Rican descent, was born in Brooklyn, N.Y., and grew up in Chicago. He converted to Islam in the 1980s.
At a March 29 hearing, nearly a third of 440 prospective jurors were excused from the juror pool because they had declared in a written questionnaire that their memories of the Sept. 11 attacks or their views of Islam and terrorism made it difficult for them to view Padilla without bias.
A sampling of responses to questions about terrorism and related issues were read in court. In one, the Associated Press reported, a 23-year-old woman declared: "After the 9/11 acts and other acts around the world, it would be difficult to listen and not think they are guilty."
Neal Sonnett, a Miami defense attorney, says that fear of terrorism complicates jury selection but won't thwart it. "Defense lawyers like to think they are selecting the best jurors they can," he says. "But in truth, it's really a process of trying to eliminate the worst jurors."
Padilla's detention in the brig was challenged in multiple courts. In 2005, as the U.S. Supreme Court was preparing to consider the case for a second time, the government abruptly shifted course and moved Padilla out of military custody and into federal court in Miami.
Padilla's attorneys allege that Padilla was tortured by the U.S. military at the brig, and they moved to have the charges dropped. Cooke rejected the motion last week. She emphasized, however, that she wasn't ruling on the torture allegations but had concluded the defense effort to have the case dropped because of "outrageous government conduct" failed on legal grounds.
Jury selection could last several weeks.
"I don't think you would want a juror who was completely unaware of the issues that have swirled around this case," says Michael Tigar, who defended Terry Nichols in the Oklahoma City bombing case. In that case, jury selection lasted five weeks.
"These cases to a much greater degree become an argument about the nature of constitutional government," Tigar says. "That sounds highfalutin, but boy, talk to jurors after these cases are over, and that's one of the things they care about." 

Load-Date: April 16, 2007


End of Document