Padilla gets his day in civilian court; The terrorism suspect was transferred from a Navy brig.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 6, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A02
Length: 283 words
Byline: Curt Anderson, Associated Press
Body


Jose Padilla, the alleged al-Qaeda operative held as a suspected enemy combatant for more than three years, made his first appearance in court yesterday after he was taken from a Navy brig and flown to Miami.
Padilla was transferred from military to civilian custody after a legal battle that went all the way to the Supreme Court.
Yesterday, he appeared before a judge on criminal charges after being taken from a brig in South Carolina and flown by military aircraft to Miami, U.S. Marshals Service spokesman Dave Turner said. He is to enter a plea today.
At the brief hearing, U.S. Magistrate Judge Barry Garber explained Padilla's rights as a criminal defendant and asked whether he understood them. "Yes, I do," Padilla replied.
Garber set a hearing this afternoon for Padilla to enter his plea and to determine whether he will remain in custody or be released on bail. Prosecutors said they would seek to have him held before trial.
Padilla, a former Chicago gang member, was arrested at Chicago's O'Hare Airport in May 2002 and held by the Bush administration without criminal charges on suspicion of plotting to detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb" inside the United States.
The U.S. Supreme Court has been asked to use Padilla's case to define the extent of presidential power over U.S. citizens who are detained on American soil on suspicion of terrorism. But before the high court could decide whether to take up the case, the Bush administration indicted Padilla in November in civilian court.
The charges do not involve the "dirty bomb" allegations, saying instead that he joined a North American terror support network that sent him overseas to "murder, maim and kidnap" people on foreign soil.

Load-Date: January 6, 2006


End of Document