Padilla charges don't measure up to accusations; A conviction in his trial wouldn't be for alleged plot to set off 'dirty bomb'
USA TODAY
July 19, 2007 Thursday
CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 1168 words
Byline: Laura Parker
Body


MIAMI -- Every morning, Jose Padilla trades shackles and a tan prison jumpsuit for a dark business suit and tie. He takes his seat at the end of the defense table in his terrorism trial here.
From that perch, he watches the government's witnesses come and go -- 22 in nine weeks -- as impassively as a cat. He is attentive and curious, but he reveals no hint of what he thinks of federal prosecutors' efforts to send him to prison for life.
Padilla, a onetime Chicago gang member, is best known as the U.S. citizen accused of plotting to detonate a radioactive dirty bomb in the USA. Yet the criminal charges against him have nothing to do with that dramatic allegation.
His trial, where the defense gets underway today, is the latest in a string of high-profile federal terrorism cases that started with sweeping accusations and ended in acquittals or convictions on lesser charges.
If the jury convicts Padilla, it will not be for a scheme to spew radioactive material over an American city but as a bit player in a murky plan to support unspecified terrorism activities overseas.
"What we see time and again is a big press conference and Justice Department statements about how we're prosecuting the war on terrorism, and then the cases either fizzle out or the charges are reduced to relatively minor guilty pleas," says David Cole, a law professor at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., who specializes in national security.
The Justice Department last year touted its "impressive success ... in the war on terrorism." Of more than 400 people charged with terrorism-related offenses since the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001, more than half have been convicted or pleaded guilty, the agency reported.
However, legal experts say that many of those convictions were for lesser crimes, including immigration violations or lying to investigators, and that the overall effort to find and convict terrorists in the USA has been less successful than the government suggests.
A "terrorist report card" prepared in September by the Center on Law and Security at the New York University Law School found that in 510 cases since 9/11 that the government said were terrorism-related, only 158 defendants have been prosecuted on charges of terrorism or giving material support to terrorism. The rest have been prosecuted on lesser charges, and no link to terrorism was proved in court. The figures are the most recent available from NYU.
Lower conviction rate
The report found a 29% conviction rate in terrorism prosecutions, compared with the Justice Department's 93% conviction rate in other criminal prosecutions.
Accounting for part of the difference, legal analysts say, is the government's strategy to intervene early in suspected terrorism cases to disrupt alleged plots before they can be carried out. That reduces the amount of evidence prosecutors can present in court.
"There is a fundamental difference between compelling intelligence and hard evidence that can be brought into a court of law," says Bruce Hoffman, a former terrorism expert for the RAND Corp., a think tank that specializes in national security research, who now teaches security at Georgetown.
Justice Department spokesman Dean Boyd declined to comment on the NYU report. "We have won high-profile convictions. It depends on the circumstances of each case," he says. He declined to comment on Padilla's case.
Success in terrorism cases also is a matter of interpretation. The Justice Department cites among its successes some of the same cases that critics offer as examples of government overreaching.
The Justice Department cited a Tampa case as one of the first involving extensive use of secret, court-approved wiretaps and classified information. Sami Al-Arian, a University of South Florida professor, was acquitted in 2005 of charges that he had raised money for a Palestinian group linked to terrorist attacks in Israel. The jury deadlocked on lesser charges. Al-Arian then pleaded guilty to one count of providing aid to the group and agreed to be deported after serving a 57-month sentence.
Seized at O'Hare
Padilla's emergence as the highest-profile terrorism suspect in the USA couldn't have been more dramatic. He was arrested at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport in May 2002. Then-attorney general John Ashcroft interrupted a trip to Moscow to announce Padilla's alleged scheme to detonate a dirty bomb.
President Bush declared Padilla an "enemy combatant," and Padilla spent three years and eight months in solitary confinement at the Navy brig in Charleston, S.C. In 2005, he was added to an existing indictment against two Arabs charged with conspiring to provide material support to overseas terrorists.
Prosecutors, who wrapped up their case last week, have painted the case in the darkest themes. Defense attorneys say prosecutors have shown no direct evidence of a crime. Prosecutors played a CNN interview of Osama bin Laden although the al-Qaeda leader has no direct link to the charges.
They cast Padilla, 36, a Muslim convert who traveled to Egypt in 1998, as an al-Qaeda recruit who trained at a bin Laden camp in Afghanistan before returning to the USA in 2002.
They have produced no witnesses who actually saw Padilla at the camp but have attempted to tie him to it through an application form for the camp they say he filled out. Prosecutors also produced wiretapped telephone conversations in which his two co-defendants discuss his activities in code.
The jury has heard 126 tapes of more than 300,000 wiretapped conversations. Padilla, who struggled to learn Arabic and spoke it poorly, is heard on seven of the tapes. Most of the telephone conversations involve Padilla's co-defendants, Adham Amin Hassoun, a South Florida computer programmer, and Kifah Wael Jayyousi, a Detroit school administrator.
Through the wiretapped calls, jurors have heard much about conflicts involving Muslims in Chechnya, Somalia and Bosnia, although prosecutors have not tied the defendants to any specific violent attack. The defense contends that Hassoun and Jayyousi were assisting efforts to provide legitimate humanitarian aid to persecuted Muslims in those regions. Padilla's attorneys say he was studying to become an imam.
On Tuesday, U.S. District Judge Marcia Cooke denied defense motions for acquittal, saying that prosecutors had presented a strong enough case that the jury should decide. The defense case is expected to last well into August.
The big splash that federal prosecutors often give terrorism cases at the outset serves another purpose, legal experts say: sending a broader message of U.S. vigilance.
"The government is securing pleas or guilty verdicts in a number of cases," says Stephen Vladeck, a law professor at American University in Washington. "But it's not nearly as big a deal as the government being able to say, 'We've caught this person, we've charged them.' The conviction is almost anticlimatic."
The following fields overflowed:
OBJECT = a_padilla19 A07_PADILLA_EARLY_19.jpg19 A07_PADILLA-PRISON_19.jpg19 

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document