Pakistan offers help mediating with Afganistan's Taliban rulers Afganistan may harbor terrorist suspected in rocket attacks attacks
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia)
November 13, 1999, Saturday saturday


Copyright 1999 Charleston Newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A P2A
Length: 388 words
Body


THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - Hours after U.S. and U.N. missions were targeted
by rocket attacks, Pakistan's military leader offered Friday to
mediate between the United States and Afghanistan's Taliban rulers
over suspected terrorist Osama bin Laden.
Six rockets were fired from cars near the U.S. Embassy, the U.N.
building, an American cultural center and downtown government
buildings in Pakistan's capital, injuring six people.
There was no evidence so far that bin Laden, who Washington says
masterminded the deadly bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa last
year, was behind Friday's attacks.  attacks.
But Pakistani Interior Ministry officials said immediate suspicions
focused on the Saudi dissident.
The blasts occurred two days before a U.N. deadline for the Taliban to
turn over bin Laden for trial or face sanctions.
Gen. Pervaiz Musharraf, who seized power in Pakistan a month ago in a
bloodless coup, refused to speculate on who carried out Friday's
attacks until an investigation is completed.
But he said he wants to help fight terrorism and offered to mediate
with the Taliban over bin Laden, who has been in hiding in Afghanistan
since 1996.
"If he is involved in terrorism, yes, surely, I would like to
negotiate with the Afghan government as how to resolve the issue,"
Musharraf told The Associated Press.
"It will be really sad that a country which needs help will have to
face sanctions," he said. "I would like to play my role with the
Taliban and see how a compromise can be reached."
"We are against all forms of terrorism, especially against the use of
religion for promoting terrorism," Musharraf said. "Surely I will
like to contribute toward curbing terrorism in whatever form."
The United States says bin Laden runs a network of Islamic militants
called al-Qaida, while living under protection of the Taliban, who
rule 90 percent of Afghanistan. It believes bin Laden planned the
August 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that
killed 224 people.
A guerrilla who said he conducts weapons training for al-Qaida warned
Friday that a special commando unit had been created to take revenge
if the U.N. sanctions are imposed.
"We have now collected our people," the guerrilla, who gave his name
only as Abu Daoud, told The Associated Press in his hideout in the
eastern Afghan city of
Jalalabad.  jalalabad.

Load-Date: November 16, 1999


End of Document