PAKISTAN PLANS ASSAULT ON AL-QAIDA 'EPICENTER'
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 17, 2010 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 442 words
Byline: Viola Gienger, Bloomberg News
Body


WASHINGTON -- Pakistan's army has pledged to go after militants the United States wants targeted in an area harboring al-Qaida that has become "the epicenter of terrorism," President Barack Obama's top military adviser says.
Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said his Pakistani counterpart, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, has given assurances that he will mount an offensive that the United States has long called for in North Waziristan along the Afghan border.
Adm. Mullen cited as evidence for his optimism Pakistan's offensives against the Taliban and related groups elsewhere in the country during the past 11/2 years.
"He's committed to me to go into North Waziristan and to root out these terrorists as well," Adm. Mullen, 64, said in an interview on Bloomberg Television's "Conversations with Judy Woodruff" that was to be broadcast this weekend. "He clearly knows what our priorities are."
In an interview that also touched on Iran, China and the burdens facing returning war veterans, Adm. Mullen said he hadn't read Washington journalist Bob Woodward's latest book on the administration's strategy debates, "Obama's Wars."
He countered suggestions in the book that the military limited Mr. Obama's options on Afghanistan during a strategy review last year. The military provided its best advice, Adm. Mullen said.
He said the goal was to defeat al-Qaida and ensure that Afghanistan wouldn't again become a haven for the group as it had been before the United States ousted the Taliban from power after the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.
"That's how I approached my best military advice to the president," Adm. Mullen said.
In addition to the military campaign in Afghanistan, Mr. Obama is relying on neighboring Pakistan to help rout al-Qaida and related groups that threaten troops across the border and may be preparing further attacks in Europe or the U.S.
Pakistan, a nuclear-armed nation struggling with an economic crisis and newly re-established democratic rule, says its army is stretched by the fight against militants in six tribal agencies and a flood that inundated a fifth of the country in July.
North Waziristan "is the epicenter of terrorism," Adm. Mullen said. "It's where al-Qaida lives."
Gen. Kayani, the Pakistan Army chief of staff, has shifted more than 70,000 troops from the country's border with India, its traditional rival, to the northwest, mobilizing a total of 140,000 forces, Adm. Mullen said.
"They've sacrificed, they've lost a lot of citizens and they are really concerned, urgently concerned, about the threat to their own country from terrorists," Mullen said. "Two years ago, that wasn't the case."

Load-Date: October 18, 2010


End of Document