Pakistan grabs al-Qaida suspect
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 18, 2011 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 352 words
Byline: By Saeed Shah • McClatchy Newspapers
Dateline: 0 
Body


ISLAMABAD, pakistan - Pakistan said Tuesday that it had arrested an al-Qaida operative in the southern city of Karachi, the first arrest of a terrorism suspect since an American special forces raid killed Osama bin Laden deep inside the country this month.
The Pakistani military described Muhammad Ali Qasim Yaqub, also known as Abu Sohaib al-Makki, as a "senior al-Qaida operative," though there was some debate about his importance.
"The indications are that he is a midlevel al-Qaida operative who may have been involved in operations," said a U.S. official in Washington who spoke only on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue.
The arrest appeared to be a Pakistani effort to show the United States that it would go after al-Qaida and Taliban extremists who have taken refuge in Pakistan. It came a day after Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., said here that the U.S. and Pakistan had agreed to try to reset their relations after the bin Laden raid, which angered and humiliated Pakistan's military and raised questions in the U.S. about Pakistan's commitment to combating terrorism.
But the difficulties the relationship faces were on display Tuesday.
It was unknown whether a trove of information that U.S. troops scooped up at bin Laden's hide-out in the resort town of Abbottabad had contributed to Yaqub's capture.
Word of the arrest came as other news reports indicated that al-Qaida had named an interim leader to replace bin Laden. Saif al-Adel, a senior al-Qaida military commander who was in Iranian custody until a year ago, will assume the group's top position until a permanent successor is named.
The Pakistani military said that Yaqub was a Yemeni national who "has been working directly under al-Qaida leaders along Pak-Afghan borders." He appears to be a virtual unknown, however, and doesn't appear on the FBI list of wanted terrorists or lists of top al-Qaida figures.
"He's certainly not a top-tier figure," said a U.S. official.
"The arrest of al-Makki is a major development in unraveling the al-Qaida network operating in the region," the Pakistani military said in a statement.

Load-Date: May 18, 2011


End of Document