Pakistani region doubts it's a haven for Taliban WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 8, 2010 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 447 words
Byline: By NAHAL TOOSI • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


QUETTA, Pakistan - If Afghan Taliban fighters and their top leaders are roaming around this remote part of Pakistan as the U.S. alleges, the police chief here says he hasn't seen them.
"Point them out to me," Abid Hussain Notkani says. "I will arrest them."
Interviews with residents and officials in and around Quetta, a dusty frontier city of 1.2 million, reveal widespread skepticism that Pakistan's vast southwestern Baluchistan province harbors Afghan Taliban commander Mullah Omar, his aides or their foot soldiers.
It's a disconnect that does not bode well for Washington-Islamabad relations - and America's already tattered reputation among Pakistanis - as Baluchistan grows in strategic importance for the United States.
The U.S. is pouring in thousands of additional troops across the border in southern Afghanistan, a surge that could make Baluchistan an alluring refuge and recruiting ground for the Taliban. Baluchistan also is home to one of the two main border crossings used to ferry supplies to U.S. and NATO forces - a route that has come under attack.
The region also could figure prominently in another plan gaining support in the U.S. - reaching out to Omar and his aides in the so-called "Quetta Shura" - or governing council - to negotiate peace.
Washington is so convinced that Afghan Taliban traverse this province that it has debated firing missiles in the area, a move that would certainly infuriate residents. The U.S. hasn't helped its case, offering virtually no public proof to back its allegations that Omar and his aides operate here.
Pakistan denies Baluchistan is a Taliban haven, perhaps because it wants to avoid further unrest in a province already gripped by separatist sentiments. It also may be trying to maintain cordial relations with the Taliban, in case the U.S. abandons Afghanistan and the militants return to power there.
If the Taliban are in Baluchistan, they keep a low profile.
Pakistani officials say there are no signs of convoys ferrying fighters across the border, no training camps, not even much Taliban propaganda. Unlike Pakistan's northwest, where the army is actively battling militants, any Taliban groups in Baluchistan avoid contacting the media.
"There might be Taliban coming and going back, but they have not created any problems for our local administration," said Mohammad Akbar, 39, a shopkeeper in the town of Pishin, some two hours drive from Quetta.
U.S. missiles routinely target militants in Pakistan's tribal regions in the northwest in attacks that are deplored by many Pakistanis. Nearly all those interviewed in Baluchistan said expanding U.S. missile strikes to their province would promote sympathy for the Taliban.

Graphic

 
 GRAPHIC - U.S. MILITARY WAR DEATHS | AP 

Load-Date: February 8, 2010


End of Document