PAKISTANI MEETS WITH SHULTZ; HOPES FOR 'CEMENTING' OF TIES
The New York Times
December 7, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 9, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 777 words
Byline: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6
Body


President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan arrived here today for talks with President Reagan that will focus on United States military aid, the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and United States concern over Pakistan's nuclear abilities.
General Zia met with Secretary of State George P. Shultz for more than two hours, and later signed a vaguely worded agreement to spur economic, cultural and technological ties with the United States. ''I hope and pray this will be a cementing force in improving relations between two old partners,'' General Zia said after meeting with Mr.  Shultz.
General Zia's talks with Mr. Shultz came before the Pakistani President's formal welcome by President Reagan, which is scheduled for Tuesday. The unusual procedure was made necessary by Mr.  Shultz's departure this afternoon for meetings in Europe with leaders of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
WASHINGTON, Dec. 6 - President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan arrived here today for talks with President Reagan that will focus on United States military aid, the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and United States concern over Pakistan's nuclear abilities.
Administration officials, at a White House briefing this morning, said that President Zia, an army general who led a military coup in July 1977, had ''no doubt how we feel about restoring democratic institutions in Pakistan and the Administration's clear-cut concern on the human rights issue.''
 
Protest Against 'Terrorism'
Small groups of demonstrators marched outside the State Department this morning, and later outside the Sheraton Park Hotel, where President Zia held a reception for Pakistanis living in the area, to protest what they called General Zia's ''terrorism'' against critics and his decision to execute his predecessor, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in April 1979.
''He murdered Bhutto, put political opponents behind bars, he completely destroyed the Constitution that was established in 1973, and during his five years of power he has promised elections six times and has always canceled them,'' said Tanvir Matin, a Pakistani engineer and a spokesman for supporters of the Pakistan People's Party who demonstrated against General Zia. Mr. Bhutto was a founder of the party.
President Zia, who will be honored with a White House state dinner, was expected to seek reaffirmation of the Administration's commitment to a $3.2 billion aid program, half of it in military assistance, and the sale to Pakistan of 40 F-16 fighter aircraft.
 
Pakistanis Called 'Courageous'
The aid package, to be delivered over six years, was shaped by the Administration in an effort to buoy the impoverished nation in the aftermath of the Soviet intervention in neighboring Afghanistan nearly three years ago. It is estimated that 100,000 Soviet troops are now in Afghanistan, and an Administration official told reporters that Pakistan had ''proved courageous in the light of frequent Soviet bullying.''
The official said there were no significant differences between the United States and Pakistan on policies toward Afghanistan. Both nations want a withdrawal of the Soviet troops, self-determination for the Afghans and the return of nearly 2.8 million refugees who fled to Pakistan, according to the official.
State Department officials have made it clear in recent days that the $2.3 billion aid package was intended, in part, to exert leverage in efforts by the United States to thwart development of a nuclear weapon by the Pakistanis. An official said it was hoped that the aid program would ''reduce the incentive'' for the development of a nuclear bomb. Despite Pakistani denials, United States officials have said over the last four years that Pakistan appeared to be moving toward a nuclear weapons ability.
 
Legal Limitation Stressed
State Department officials say that during President Zia's talks here Administration officials will cite United States law and the fact that nations that build nuclear weapons are generally barred from receiving American aid.
During his stay in Washington, President Zia will have lunch with Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, meet members of Congress and confer with Attorney General William French Smith. The meeting with Mr. Smith will center on United States concerns about what Pakistan is doing to slow the growth of opium for heroin and the growth of heroin production facilities.
State Department officials said heroin addiction had become a problem in Pakistan itself and had stirred General Zia's Government to take steps against heroin production. Nearly 55 percent of the heroin reaching the United States comes from southwest Asian nations such as Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of George Shultz and Mohammad Zia ul-Haq (page A1)


End of Document