PAKISTAN TO U.S.: END DRONE ATTACKS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
March 14, 2012 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 435 words
Byline: INDIRA A.R. LAKSHMANAN, BLOOMBERG NEWS
Body


WASHINGTON -- Pakistan has told the White House that it no longer will permit U.S. drones to use its airspace to attack militants and collect intelligence on al-Qaida and other groups, according to officials involved in the talks.
U.S. officials, speaking on condition of anonymity because the drone program is classified, called the use of unmanned aerial vehicles a critical element in the Obama administration's anti-terrorism strategy.
Pakistan's ambassador to Washington, Sherry Rehman, met Friday with Vice President Joe Biden's national security adviser, Antony Blinken, said officials involved.
Pakistan's sovereignty over its airspace and the civilian casualties that have resulted from drone strikes are emotional issues in Pakistan, where public opinion heavily favors terminating drone missions, Pakistani officials say.
The United States will try to reach an accommodation with Pakistani leaders, two U.S. officials said. The United States gave Pakistan $4.4 billion in economic assistance, counterinsurgency funding and military reimbursements in 2010, according to the Congressional Research Service.
The only chance for a compromise, Pakistani officials said, may be if the United States were to agree to share intelligence and coordinate strikes first, a strategy that Pakistan has long advocated. The United States has resisted giving information to Pakistan in advance because of fears that some in Pakistan's security forces might warn the targets of impending strikes.
The drone program, which President Barack Obama acknowledged publicly for the first time in January, has been part of U.S. counter-terrorism strategy in Pakistan since 2004, officials and counter-terrorism experts say. The administration authorized 53 drone attacks in 2009 and 117 in 2010, compared with 35 in 2008 under former President George W. Bush, said U.S. military analyst Bill Roggio, whose website, the Long War Journal, maintains a database of the campaign.
The drone program is "critical" because it provides better real-time surveillance and reconnaissance than satellite imagery does, Seth Jones, a senior political scientist in Washington for the Santa Monica, Calif.-based RAND Corp. research institute, said in an interview.
"If it is used selectively," it can help both the United States and Pakistan by taking out "key leadership" of al-Qaida and other groups such as Tehrik-i-Taliban of Pakistan, which poses a greater threat to Pakistan than it does to U.S. forces, said Mr. Jones, formerly with the Pentagon's U.S. Special Operations Command.
U.S. officials were dispatched to meet Tuesday with Mr. Rehman.

Load-Date: March 15, 2012


End of Document