Pakistan on trial? Chicago trial to test Pakistan's link to terrorists
Chicago Daily Herald
May 9, 2011 Monday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 13
Length: 667 words
Byline: By Sebastian Rotella ProPublica
Body


It could be years, if ever, before the world learns whether Pakistan's powerful Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISI) helped hide Osama bin Laden.
But detailed allegations of ISI involvement in terrorism will soon be made public in a federal courtroom in Chicago, where prosecutors late last month charged a suspected ISI major with helping to plot the deaths of six Americans in the 2008 Mumbai attacks.
The indictment has explosive implications because Washington and Islamabad are struggling to preserve their fragile relationship. The ISI is suspected of secretly aiding terrorist groups while serving as a U.S. ally in the terrorism fight.
The discovery bin Laden spent years in a fortresslike compound surrounded by military facilities in Abbottabad has heightened those suspicions and reinforced the accusations the ISI was involved in the attacks that killed 166 people in Mumbai.
"It's very, very troubling," said Rep. Frank Wolf, a Virginia Republican and chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee that oversees funding of the Justice Department. Wolf has closely followed the Mumbai case and wants an independent review South Asia policy top to bottom.
"Keep in mind that we've given billions of dollars to the Pakistani government," he said. "In light of what's taken place with bin Laden, the whole issue raises serious problems and questions."
Three chiefs of Lashkar-i-Taiba, the Pakistani terrorist group, were also indicted in Chicago. They include Sajid Mir, a suspected Mumbai mastermind whose voice was caught on tape directing the three-day slaughter by phone from Pakistan. Mir, too, has ISI links. He remains at large along with the suspected ISI major and half a dozen other top suspects.
Despite the unprecedented terrorism charges implicating a Pakistani officer, the Justice Department and other agencies did not issue news releases, hold a news conference or make any comments when the indictment was issued. The 33-page document names the suspect only as "Major Iqbal." It does not mention the ISI, although Iqbal's affiliation to the spy agency has been detailed in U.S. and Indian case files and by anti-terrorism officials in the past year.
"Obviously there has been a push to be low-key," said an Obama administration official.
The first public airing of the ISI's alleged involvement in the Mumbai attack will begin May 16 with the trial of Tahawwur Rana, owner of a Chicago immigration consulting firm. Rana was arrested in 2009 and charged with material support of terrorism in the same case in which the four suspects were indicted. The star witness will be David Coleman Headley, a Pakistani American businessman-turned-militant who has pleaded guilty to scouting targets in India and Denmark. Rana allegedly helped Headley use his firm as a cover for reconnaissance.
Rana's attorney, Charles Swift, contends Rana is not a terrorist because he thought he was assisting the ISI with an espionage operation. Swift said the U.S. indictment omits the ISI in hopes of mitigating tensions.
Even before bin Laden was killed, the Obama administration took a tougher tone about the ISI's alleged militant links. But a U.S. official said this month U.S. counterterrorism agencies still think any involvement in the Mumbai attacks was limited to rogue officers.
"No one is saying we can't work with the ISI — people are just pointing out the problems that exist," said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue. "I think the problems are largely with individual officers as opposed to the institution."
Pakistani officials deny security forces were involved in Mumbai. A Pakistani official questioned the credibility of Headley, an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration when he began training with Lashkar in 2002.
"When somebody is a double agent, whatever he says in a U.S. court is not credible from our perspective," said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the pending trial.

Load-Date: May 9, 2011


End of Document