Pakistani ambassador talks security at GW
University Wire
February 9, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 The GW Hatchet via U-Wire
Length: 436 words
Byline: By Heather Hodder, The GW Hatchet; SOURCE: George Washington U.
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Husain Haqqani, the Pakistani ambassador to the United States,
asserted his country's commitment to counterterrorism and touched on
Pakistan's tumultuous relations with India in the Marvin Center on
Friday as part of a roundtable discussion organized by the George Washington University Homeland
Security Policy Institute.
The roughly 150 guests ranged from government officials with the
Department of Homeland Security and Department of State to members of
international and national media like the New York Times and Voice of
America.
"I couldn't think of a more timely roundtable than today," said
Frank Cilluffo, director of HSPI. "And I couldn't think of a more
qualified ambassador."
Cilluffo served as moderator of the discussion with Yonah Alexander,
senior fellow at the Potomac Institute for Policy Studies and director
of its International Center for Terrorism Studies.
Haqqani said many in his country feel threatened and insecure. With
India as a "much larger eastern neighbor," Pakistan "needed to build up
security at expense to society."
Pakistan is working toward making the combat of terrorism its first priority, the ambassador said.
"Terrorism and extremism are threats to the stability of Pakistan.
Terrorism is a problem Pakistan must deal with," Haqqani said.
The government is hoping to change attitudes that Pakistanis hold toward the Taliban, Haqqani said.
"This is the first time [the Taliban] are being described as what
they are, as militants and terrorists," Haqqani said. "There is
absolute clarity that [terrorist groups] are not to be tolerated. What
happened in Mumbai was wrong and our heart goes to our Indian
neighbors."
Haqqani urged the Obama administration to change course from prior
U.S. diplomatic tactics and to enact "socioeconomic support that
doesn't end up within the Beltway."
Louise Shelly, a professor at George Mason University, asked the
ambassador where he saw the role of local police as opposed to the
military in fighting terrorists.
"Pakistan's law enforcement needs a revamp, and it is notoriously
understaffed and underfunded," Haqqani said, adding that law
enforcement requires funding, better training and equipment to be
effective.
Another guest asked Haqqani about the tension between India and Pakistan over Kashmir.
"I am paid to be a diplomat, and I need to use my skills to answer
this one," said Haqqani, drawing laughter from the crowd. "Pakistan and
India will find solutions to their problems because they need each
other."
Haqqani was open to answer questions on the Taliban and terrorism,
but he hesitated when discussing matters of its nuclear arsenal.
(C) 2008 The GW Hatchet via UWIRE

Load-Date: February 9, 2009


End of Document