Pakistan Arrests Key LeT Leader, 34 Afghan Followers
RTT News (United States)
February 25, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 324 words
Body


(RTTNews) - Pakistan authorities arrested a key militant of the banned Lashker-e-Taiba (LeT) and 34 of his Afghan followers from the Nowshera area in the country&apos;s northwest. From the same area, some wanted top Taliban commanders, including members of the so-called &apos;Quetta Shura&apos;, were captured earlier.
Matiullah, alias Abu Tallah, and his followers were arrested Wednesday in a pre-dawn raid on his &apos;madrassa&apos; (Islamic seminary) at New Dagai village in Nowshera district, police told the media. The raid followed after "credible information" about the illegal presence of foreign students in the seminary was received, said the police.
Police reportedly also closed Matiullah&apos;s illegal FM radio channel and registered a case under the Anti-Terrorism Act against him and his followers. The LeT leader is accused of using his illegal FM channel to incite people to wage jihad (&apos;holy war&apos;) and to mislead people about an ongoing anti-polio campaign. The police also accused him of using the seminary to impart "martial training" to his followers for waging jihad.
An anti-terrorism court later remanded the LeT leader to police custody for 30 days, while another court fined his followers and ordered their deportation. The Afghans were taken to the Central Jail in Peshawar, capital of the North West Frontier Province (NWFP), from where they will be deported to neighboring Afghanistan.
Matiullah claimed innocence and denied having links with any terrorist group. He said he would continue to oppose the anti-polio drive till an "authentic report by a reliable laboratory" certified that the vaccine was not harmful to the health of children.
LeT is blamed for the 2008 Mumbai November terror attacks--carried out by 10 Pakistani militants--that killed 166 persons, including many Americans and Jews.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document