Pakistanis Signal Shift In Relationship With U.S.
The New York Times
March 26, 2008 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 1097 words
Byline: By JANE PERLEZ
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan 
Body


-- The top State Department officials responsible for the alliance with Pakistan met leaders of the new government on Tuesday, and received what amounted to a public dressing-down from one of them, as well as the first direct indication that the United States relationship with Pakistan would have to change.
  On the day that the new prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gillani, was sworn in, Deputy Secretary of State John D. Negroponte and the assistant secretary of state for South Asian affairs, Richard A. Boucher, also met with the Pakistani president, Pervez Musharraf, whom they had embraced as their partner in the campaign against terrorism over the past seven years but whose power is quickly ebbing. 
  The leader of the second biggest party in the new Parliament, Nawaz Sharif, said after meeting the two American diplomats that it was unacceptable that Pakistan had become a ''killing field.'' 
  ''If America wants to see itself clean of terrorists, we also want that our villages and towns should not be bombed,'' he said at a news conference here. Mr. Sharif, a former prime minister, added he was unable to give Mr. Negroponte ''a commitment'' on fighting terrorism. 
  The statements by Mr. Sharif, and the cool body language in the televised portions of his encounter with Mr. Negroponte, were just part of the sea change in Pakistan's domestic politics that is likely to impose new limits on how Washington fights militants within Pakistan's borders.
  That fight, which has recently included American airstrikes in the lawless tribal areas where the Taliban and Al Qaeda have made sanctuaries, has become widely unpopular, particularly in the last few months as a surge in suicide bombings here has been viewed as retaliation for the American attacks. 
  Asif Ali Zardari, the leader of the Pakistan Peoples Party, also met with the Americans but did not speak to reporters afterward. Husain Haqqani, an adviser who attended the meeting with him, said, though, that the American officials had been given notice that the old ways were over.
  ''If I can use an American expression, there is a new sheriff in town,'' Mr. Haqqani said. ''Americans have realized that they have perhaps talked with one man for too long.'' 
  Neither Mr. Negroponte nor Mr. Boucher spoke publicly about the meetings, but the Pakistanis said the Americans expressed willingness to work with the new government. 
  Mr. Sharif and Mr. Zardari boycotted the swearing-in of Mr. Gillani as prime minister by Mr. Musharraf at the presidential palace, another sign of their determination to sideline Mr. Musharraf. 
  Distancing himself from Mr. Musharraf, Mr. Gillani, moments after taking the oath of office, said, ''We have to give supremacy to the Parliament so that we can jointly take the country out of these crises.''
  He later received a call from President Bush offering congratulations. According to Mr. Gillani's office, Mr. Gillani told Mr. Bush that ''Pakistan would continue to fight terrorism in all its forms'' but that a ''comprehensive approach'' was required, ''combining a political approach with development programs.''
  The new chief of staff of the Pakistan Army, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, also seemed to eager to show he was his own man, relieving two generals on Monday who had been close to Mr. Musharraf. 
  The timing of the American visit was harshly criticized in the Pakistan media for creating the appearance that the United States was trying to dictate policy to a government not even hours old. The two American diplomats met Mr. Sharif as Mr. Musharraf administered the oath of office to Mr. Gillani. 
  ''I don't think it is a good idea for them to be here on this particular day,'' said Zaffar Abbas, the editor of the English-language newspaper Dawn. ''Here are the Americans, right here in Islamabad, meeting with senior politicians in the new government, trying to dictate terms.''
  An editorial on Tuesday in The News, one of Pakistan's most-read English dailies, was headlined ''Hands Off Please, Uncle Sam.'' The Americans should understand, the editorial said, that the newly elected Parliament was now their proper partner, not Mr. Musharraf. 
  An aide to Mr. Sharif, Ahsan Iqbal, said Mr. Sharif told Mr. Negroponte that the strategy of the partnership against terrorism needed to be reassessed. ''Nobody supports terrorism, but there are different ways to counter it,'' Mr. Iqbal said. 
  ''Mr. Sharif asked Mr. Negroponte if he thought that using the military was the only solution,'' Mr. Iqbal said. ''Mr. Negroponte agreed that there are other dimensions that can be adopted.'' 
  Some of those questioning the American visit noted that Pakistan had been an ally of the United States since its independence 60 years ago. Still, they added, many Pakistanis now resented that the campaign against terrorism dominated the relationship. 
  Washington should learn from the outcomes of the election last month in which Mr. Musharraf's party was trounced and an alliance of religious parties in the North-West Frontier Province, adjacent to the tribal areas, was also defeated, said Javangir Tareen, the leader of a faction of the Pakistan Muslim League, who was a member of Mr. Musharraf's early cabinet. 
  ''The people have spoken and rejected the religious parties, and at the same time they have rejected the people who will automatically nod to the United States,'' Mr. Tareen said.
  An independent analyst on the Pakistani military, Shuja Nawaz, who lives in Washington, said  Pakistani officials had told him  they discouraged the American diplomats from coming this week.
  But the Pakistanis were told that Mr. Negroponte was on a trip that included other already arranged stops and that Tuesday was the only possible day for him. Mr. Nawaz called the visit ''ham-handed,'' and said it could be seen as Washington wanting to keep acting as the ''political godfather behind Musharraf.'' 
  The American Embassy in Islamabad said that the two diplomats would stay in Pakistan until Thursday, and that they would meet other officials on Wednesday, though the embassy declined to identify them.
  The changes in the military hierarchy by General Kayani seemed intended to display his independence from Mr. Musharraf, who appointed  him chief of the military in December. General Kayani reassigned two of the most important corps commanders, the 11 powerful generals in charge of regional posts: Lt. Gen. Shafaat Ullah Shah, the corps commander of Lahore, Pakistan's second biggest city; and Lt. Gen. Sajjad Akram, the corps commander at Mangla on the Indian border. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, left, and Yousaf Raza Gillani at Mr. Gillani's swearing-in as prime minister Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AAMIR QURESHI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (pg. A10)                                                                       

Load-Date: March 26, 2008


End of Document