Pakistanis too involved in terrorism enterprises
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
August 28, 1998, Friday


Copyright 1998 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A14
Length: 291 words
Body


In last week's U.S. missile strikes on the terrorist camps in Afghanistan, many Pakistanis were killed.
This was proof that Pakistan is actively involved in arming, training and sustaining terrorists.
Most of these were terrorists who operated in Indian Kashmir. This particular Pakistani terrorist group - Harkat ul Mujahideen - has now vowed revenge on America and the Jews.
Pakistan has consistently supported a reign of death and terror in Indian Kashmir for the past decades. The violent public reaction in Pakistan against the latest U.S. strikes aimed at Islamic terrorists is an indication of the reality. The extremist Taliban government of Afghanistan is solely dependent on Pakistan.
The fact is that Pakistan has been using U.S. and other aid to further its Islamic agenda. The nuclear status of Pakistan lends a dangerous dimension to the Islamic terrorist scenario.
Ramzi Yusuf - the World Trade Center bomber - was from Pakistan.
Mir Aimal Kansi - the killer of two CIA employees - was from Pakistan.
Not long ago four U.S. Embassy employees were gunned down in Pakistan.
The first Kenya Embassy bombing suspect was arrested in Pakistan.
The plot to murder the pope while he was visiting Philippines a few years back was hatched in Pakistan.
Pakistan has been secretly buying North Korean military technology, thus sustaining the outlaw regime of North Korea.
Pakistan supports, controls and directs the policies of the radical Islamic Afghan government, which is a breeding ground of terrorists.
What's more, Pakistan in collusion with China has completely undermined the nuclear nonproliferation regime by obtaining the banned technology from China.
If terrorism is to be eliminated, Pakistan needs to be effectively checked.
Mohana Kher
Bloomington

Load-Date: August 31, 1998


End of Document