Pakistani lauds war on terror alliance
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
March 1, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 974 words
Byline: Betsy Hiel
Body


WASHINGTON -- Assessments from Afghanistan seem bleaker by the day, yet Pakistan's foreign minister sees cause for "new hope." 
 Makhdoom Shah Mahood Qureshi, here for talks between U.S., Afghan and Pakistani officials, said he will return to Pakistan with "a lot of enthusiasm" for the direction of a shared battle.  
 "We have a common objective and we need a common strategy," he told the Tribune-Review in an exclusive interview after a diplomatic reception for the two foreign delegations at The Willard Hotel.  
 Qureshi said the United States "is evolving its strategy" and emphasized its importance "to the two principal players" -- his country and Afghanistan -- "who are suffering and are victims like you" of terrorism. 
 "If nations that have common values and principles could forge an alliance to defeat fascism and communism," the foreign minister declared, "then we can do it again and we can forge an alliance to defeat terrorism." 
 Last year's change of government in Islamabad has cooled relations with Washington, but Pakistan remains America's key ally in the war on terror.  
 The Muslim nation of 170 million has nuclear weapons, a vast border with Afghanistan that is controlled by independent tribes or Islamic militants, and a fragile civilian government after eight years of military rule. It has fought one minor and three major wars with neighboring India since both gained independence from Britain in 1947. 
 The United States has given Pakistan nearly $12 billion in aid, mostly military, since 2001, yet that support has provoked more anti-American sentiment in the country. 
 Tension between the two erstwhile allies has risen recently. U.S. officials are alarmed by al-Qaida and other Islamic militant safe havens in Pakistan; Pakistanis object to U.S. airstrikes against terrorists inside their border. 
 Qureshi told the Trib that the week's trilateral meeting here helped to reduce "the trust deficit" among all three countries.  
 "I think we have taken a big step, a leap forward, in bridging that gap," he said. "... What is so good about this interaction is that this (U.S.) administration is keen to listen. They do not claim to have all the answers." 
 U.S. special envoy Richard Holbrooke is to report on the region in April; another trilateral meeting is scheduled soon after. 
 Qureshi downplayed a recent agreement to permit one tribal area to follow Islamic law -- a decision that stunned Washington and sparked talk of appeasing terrorists. 
 Since late 2007, Islamic militants have attacked police stations and military convoys in the Swat Valley, a mountainous tourist area sometimes called "the Switzerland of the East." The militants tried to create Islamic governments in village after village, beheading local police and torching girls' schools. 
 To quash the insurgency just 100 miles from its capital, Pakistan agreed to allow local sheikhs to establish shariah, or Islamic, law. 
 Qureshi said the agreement is not with the Taliban or al-Qaida but with conservative local leaders. He said the demand for shariah's swifter justice was popular in Swat, a region that was amalgamated into Pakistan in 1969.  
 "The objective is to take the wind out of the sails of the militants. ... They were trying to latch onto this popular sentiment," he said. 
 "By doing this, we have removed the raison d'etre for the people to ally with the extremists ... now we can target them in a more focused manner.  
 "Schools have reopened, they have agreed to lay down their arms, agreed to accept the writ of government, and the army has not been pulled out of Swat. And if they fail to live up to their commitments, the (military) operation will start again." 
 He struck a balance on another contentious issue: U.S. aerial strikes against militants in the border region, begun by President Bush and so far continued by President Obama. 
 Those strikes reportedly have killed some 80 militants -- but also civilians, sparking public outrage in Pakistan. Pakistani officials deny involvement in the drone attacks, although some accounts suggest they have given private approval if not quiet support. 
 "The drone attacks gave certain tactical advantage, one recognizes that, and they have successfully taken out some high-value targets," the foreign minister said. "... Yet what has to be understood is the alienation being caused by the collateral damage that they cause. You cannot win the hearts and minds of people by alienating people." 
 Militants ranging from Pakistani and Afghan Taliban to Arab, Uzbek, Chechen and Uigher fighters are attacking Afghan, U.S. and NATO troops from Pakistan's border. Pakistani troops have launched several fronts against them, and claimed success in one sector, but at a high cost: as many as 3,000 soldiers killed since 2002. 
 Qureshi said that military option cannot bring a long-term solution in an area where only 3 percent of women and 17 percent of men can read. 
 "When force is required and when it is necessary, it will be used," he said. But "reconciliation, social-economic development, political engagement -- these are the prongs that need to be utilized to reach out to the people and win them over, and we aim to do that." 
 The United States has offered $750 million in economic aid for the tribal region, but its implementation has been hampered by the deadly unrest. 
 Strains aside, Qureshi said "we have been friends and allies for over five decades." 
 "Pakistan was instrumental in helping the United States of America in defeating the former Soviet Union in Afghanistan," he said, and "contributed significantly to the fight against extremism and terrorism in human and economic terms.  
 "We have lost more soldiers than the coalition forces put together in Afghanistan." 
 Still, he is optimistic: "I think collectively we can defeat the enemy, which is terrorism." 

Load-Date: March 1, 2009


End of Document