PAKISTAN IS FACING TERRORIST LISTING
The New York Times
April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 873 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS JEHL,

By DOUGLAS JEHL,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 24
Body


Aware that the step could shatter what was once a close relationship, the Clinton Administration is debating whether to add Pakistan to its official list of nations that support terrorism.
The proposed declaration has stirred deep misgivings within the State Department and in Congress because of the danger of a backlash of anti-American feeling in another Islamic country and because the alleged offenses mainly involve support for separatist guerrillas in the disputed Kashmir region.
But senior Clinton Administration officials say that Federal law will give them no other option unless Pakistan can present evidence that it has severed its ties to separatist groups that employ terrorism as a weapon.
"If circumstances don't change, it's going to happen," a senior State Department official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. The Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey, warned separately this week that Pakistan was "on the brink" of the designation, which would mean heavy costs for the country's economy.
 
A Spur to Fundamentalists
 But several other United States officials in both Washington and Islamabad say that such a decision would be counterproductive and perhaps unjust.  It would strengthen the hand of Islamic fundamentalists in the region and would punish Pakistan for backing guerrilla action in neighboring Kashmir that is sometimes more comparable to ethnic strife than a clear-cut example of terrorism.
Direct economic and military aid to Pakistan was suspended in 1990 in retaliation for its development of nuclear weapons. If it is judged to be supporting terrorism, Pakistan would face an automatic halt to the indirect American assistance it has continued to receive as well as new barriers to trade between the two countries. The United States assists Pakistan through the Peace Corps, the Export-Import Bank and development organizations.
Officials from both countries say the step would all but end the decades-long cooperation between the United States and Pakistan, which reached its height during a 14-year campaign by Muslim guerrillas to unseat a Communist regime in Afghanistan.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned a special Pakistani envoy this month that the United States expected Pakistan to take specific "action" to cut its ties to groups that engage in terrorism. Yet some American officials say the debate on Pakistan's status has raised questions about whether the criteria used in assessing terrorism remain appropriate as ethnic violence spreads to an increasing number of countries.
 
No Room to Differentiate
 The countries placed on the terrorist list have usually been regarded by Washington as outcasts, for example Iran, Libya and Iraq, whose main offense was said to be support for attacks on American targets or on American allies.
If Pakistan is added to the group, the United States would primarily be punishing the country for its backing of Kashmiri separatists who use terrorism as well as more conventional tactics of protest in their rebellion against India's central Government.
The law passed by Congress in 1979 to require punishment of nations supporting terrorism allows no room for differentiation among them. But the circumstances of Pakistan's actions and the potential consequences of its punishment have caused some American officials in both Washington and Islamabad to question whether it truly meets the terrorist test.
"They are not blowing up planes, or seizing half the Cabinet like North Korea did in Burma, or seizing American hostages, or giving refuge to Abu Nidal," the mastermind of a Palestinian terrorist group, said a senior American official in Islamabad who opposes Pakistan's designation as a terrorist state. "What they are involved in is what we did in Afghanistan," said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
But Mr. Woolsey, who backs a strict approach, told Congress this week that not only Kashmiris but Sikh secessionists had "found safe haven and other support" in Pakistan.
 
Arms Flow Called Stemmed
 In a recent interview, a very senior Pakistani intelligence official contended that Islamabad had stemmed the flow of arms and guerrillas into Kashmir directly in response to American threats.
With the Clinton Administration is skeptical about such claims, Pakistan has also sought to call Washington's attention to the Islamic radicals inside the country who are intent on making the schism with the United States permanent. Adding Islamabad to the terrorist list would "throw Pakistan into the hands of mullahs and clergy," Malik Zahoor Ahmad, a Pakistani diplomat in Washington, warned in an interview this week.
He also repeated Pakistan's contention that the United States is overlooking the support India has given to Tamil separatists, who have used terrorism in their violent campaign for independence in northeastern Sri Lanka.
The most recent State Department list of state supporters of terrorism, issued in January, includes Cuba, North Korea and Syria as well as Iran, Libya and Iraq. Although the law allows the department to amend that list at any time, Administration officials said they hoped to reach a decision by June about Pakistan and the Sudan, which is also facing a threat of American sanctions.

Load-Date: April 25, 1993


End of Document