Pakistanis released from Guantanamo allege abuse of Quran Pentagon says al-Qaida instructs followers to make up such claims
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 28, 2005 Tuesday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 464 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LAHORE, Pakistan 
Body


Pakistanis freed from Guantanamo Bay claimed Monday that they saw American interrogators throw, tear and stand on copies of Islam's holy book, and one former detainee said naked women sat on prisoners' chests during questioning.
The Pentagon denied the accusations and said al-Qaida training manuals instruct prisoners to make such false charges.
The men acknowledged that they were aware of the international furor caused by previous reports about Quran desecrations. Such reports triggered protests across the Islamic world and deadly riots in Afghanistan last month.
Seventeen Pakistanis were freed Monday from a jail in Lahore, where they had been held since their release nine months ago from the U.S. prison for terrorism suspects in Cuba. A Pakistani official said each had been "declared innocent by America" and cleared of involvement in terrorism by Pakistani intelligence.
The claims of the men, who spoke to reporters after joyful family reunions outside the jail in Lahore, could not be confirmed independently. The Associated Press briefly interviewed six of the men separately, sometimes interrupted by Pakistani officials who appeared anxious to keep the men from making the allegations.
All six said they were arrested in Afghanistan after going there to fight the U.S.-led coalition that ousted the hard-line Taliban regime in late 2001.
"During interrogation, whenever I would make a reference to the Quran, they would hit me in the face with a copy (of it). They would tear it into pieces. They would tell me that Quran teaches us terrorism," said Salahuddin Ayubi, 31, of Rajanpur in eastern Pakistan.
"They would throw the Quran against the roof, which would tear it into pieces, and they would say, 'This is the real source of terrorism,'" Ayubi said. "This happened several times in my interrogation."
Hafiz Ahsan, 26, a tailor in Lahore, said he was arrested three years ago in southern Afghanistan during the "jihad" against America. He claimed that he saw interrogators stand on the Quran and throw the book in urine.
"Our interrogators would stand on the Quran and they would ask, 'Call your God and ask him to rescue you,'" he said. "They would throw Quran in a bucket of urine. They would tear the Quran and throw it at our faces." 
He claimed inmates staged a hunger strike in protest and were then tortured with electric shocks.
Lt. Cmdr. Flex Plexico, a Pentagon spokesman, said inmates at Guantanamo are treated humanely and there are "adequate standard operating procedures in place to ensure detainee religious faith is respected."
He said al-Qaida taught detainees to make false abuse allegations.
"That these detainees are now making allegations of abuse at Guantanamo seems to fit the standard operating procedure in al-Qaida training manuals," Plexico said.

Load-Date: June 29, 2005


End of Document