Pakistan deserves U.S. trust, premier says
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
April 5, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 1022 words
Byline: Betsy Hiel
Body


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- This nuclear-armed nation of 170 million is "a frontline state fighting extremism and terrorism" despite U.S. doubts about its commitment, Pakistan's prime minister declares. 
In an exclusive interview with the Tribune-Review at his home here in the capital, Yousaf Raza Gillani clearly suggested that his country's critics do not understand that war's complexities or "the price we are paying." 
He said Pakistan deserves more trust as a crucial American ally. 
"The Afghanistan-Pakistan border is such a difficult situation that even the United States and NATO forces are fighting ... there for the last five and a half years, with what results?" Gillani, 56, asked. 
"It is not a 'Charlie Wilson's war' " -- a reference to the Afghan jihad against an invading Soviet army in the 1980s. Wilson, then a congressman from Texas, quietly arranged U.S.-Saudi funding and Pakistani support for Afghan fighters. 
Today's battle, according to Gillani, "is something like a guerrilla war, and we were not at all trained for such things." 
He said his country faces a dizzying array of jihadi groups launching near-daily terrorist attacks on its army, police and people. 
Pakistan is battling "with Chechens, with Uzbeks, with Arabs and with (fighters from) other countries" enlisted by al-Qaida, Pakistani and Afghan Taliban forces, and other affiliated or independent terror groups. 
Those militants "have the most sophisticated weapons. They are well-trained. Drug money is coming to Pakistan ... and the war lords, they are spending in dollars, and there is a lot of equipment coming from abroad." 
Much of the fighting is along the mountainous border with Afghanistan -- the seven Federally Administered Tribal Areas, or FATA, that bedeviled foreign armies in centuries past, and where today's Pakistani government admittedly has minimal control. 
In the past two years, however, bombings, assassinations and other terrorist attacks have spread to Pakistan's largest cities. 
Pakistan is under growing U.S. pressure to ratchet up its effort in the tribal areas. President Obama has said he will condition U.S. military aid on Pakistan's success in routing the jihadis. 
That provoked sharp objections from Gillani and other officials here, who say Pakistan has suffered more military casualties than all of NATO's armies in Afghanistan. 
Pakistani leaders insist their forces are winning some battles, too. 
Bajour, one of the seven tribal agencies, "had become the hub, the stronghold, the epicenter of militancy" in FATA, Maj. Gen. Athar Abbas, the Pakistani military's chief spokesman, told the Trib in the military-garrison city of Rawalpindi. "It was affecting Afghanistan, and it was affecting our settled areas." 
He said militants there "beheaded all those who resisted ... imposed taxes on the local people," blockaded roads and besieged Bajour's capital, Khar. 
Pakistani soldiers counter-attacked in September, according to the major general: "The militants were very well dug in. They entrenched themselves, they were using heavy weapons, and they had installed booby traps." 
Bajouris gradually backed the army, he said, and U.S.-led forces in Afghanistan "sealed the border (and) stopped the river-flow of militants from the Afghan side and the militants escaping from Bajour. ... I think it was a huge success." 
Yet the fighting also destroyed much of the civilian infrastructure, forcing 3.5 million refugees into camps, according to Gillani. And across the country, the threat of terrorism has caused a "flight of capital (and) no investment." 
He believes "the three Ds" -- dialogue, development and deterrence -- are needed to win: "Army action is not the only solution ... we should always be for deterrence and an exit strategy. 
"So when I send our army to Bajour or to Swat or some other area ... there should be some exit strategy. And that exit strategy can only be replaced by strengthening the law enforcement (forces), to build their capacity." 
In Afghanistan, he said, "there is no democracy, there is no law and order, and that is spreading to Pakistan because we can't seal the border, either." 
He said "80 percent" of Pakistan's unrest could be solved if the border was sealed. 
However, some U.S. officials say Pakistan is not up to its terror-fighting task. 
David Kilcullen, a top adviser to U.S. General David Petraeus, whose responsibilities include Afghanistan and Pakistan, made headlines here when he said Pakistan could collapse in six months and accused its military and intelligence service of acting as a rogue state-within-a-state. 
Gillani flatly dismissed Kilcullen's assessment. 
"How can you say it is a failed state, when all the institutions are working under ... the constitution?" he asked. "Even the armed forces and the ISI (the Inter Services Intelligence agency), they are working under the constitution, and they are answerable to the prime minister of Pakistan. 
"We have excellent relations vis-à-vis the army of Pakistan and the armed forces of the United States ... . Our intelligence, the ISI, has worked very cordially and very friendly for decades with America ... . How can you say they are working against somebody?" 
He called the military and the ISI "our national assets." 
Gillani's private study, where he sat for the Trib's interview, is filled with books on Pakistani and international affairs; framed silver or gold daggers and ceremonial swords hang on its walls. Yet one object underscored extremism's cost to Pakistan: a gold-framed photograph of Benazir Bhutto, the former prime minister and political icon who was killed by terrorists in December 2007. 
Gillani, Bhutto's first civilian successor following nine years of military rule, said he has made "the fight against extremism and terrorism" his primary duty: "My first dream is that when I leave this office, I want to see Pakistan stable ... free of terrorism. There should be democracy in Pakistan." 
And his "message for Americans (is) that we have a lot of understanding, we have multidimensional cooperation, we want to have a stable relationship with America. 
"We just want to tell them to trust us." 

Load-Date: April 5, 2009


End of Document