Pakistan's President Calls for End to Terrorism and Criticizes Intervention by U.S.
The New York Times
September 21, 2008 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 684 words
Byline: By CARLOTTA GALL
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan 
Body


President Asif Ali Zardari addressed a joint session of Parliament on Saturday, his first speech there since his election two weeks ago, and offered a program of peace and reform while vowing to root out terrorism and extremism. 
  Mr. Zardari, who is seen as pro-American but is confronted by public hostility to American policy toward militants in Pakistan's tribal areas, said his government was determined to meet the challenge posed by terrorist and extremist elements in those areas. 
  His government would offer peace to anyone willing to renounce violence, and would invest in development and political reform of the border areas, but would use force as a last resort to those who challenged the authority of the government. 
  He declared that his government should be firm in its resolve not to allow terrorists to use Pakistani soil to carry out terrorist activities against any foreign country, and said he wanted to improve relations with two of Pakistan's neighbors, Afghanistan and India. 
  But he also warned that Pakistan would not abide further American military incursions into the border areas. ''We will not tolerate the violation of our sovereignty and territorial integrity by any power in the name of combating terrorism,'' he said in a comment that was broadly greeted by legislators, who loudly thumped on their desks to show their support. 
  His warning followed a strong statement last week by Pakistan's military chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, warning that the country would defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity at all costs against any incursion. 
  Mr. Zardari placed a framed photo of his wife, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, who was assassinated by a suicide bomber in December and whose Pakistan Peoples Party he now leads, on the lectern before he began his speech. 
  ''We are here, this Parliament is here, because of the historic choices she made,'' he said. ''It is indeed her day. I wish she was addressing the Parliament today and not me.'' 
  Mr. Zardari pointed out that he was addressing Parliament within two weeks of his election, and would do so annually as required under the Constitution, unlike General Musharraf, who addressed Parliament only once in the eight years of his rule. 
  Mr. Zardari recommended a return to the 1973 Constitution, and offered to give up some of his presidential powers, calling on Parliament to form an all-parties committee to review amendments made under General Musharraf that gave the president powers to dismiss Parliament and to appoint the senior military chiefs, among others.
  ''Never before in the history of this country has a president stood here and given away his powers,'' Mr. Zardari said. 
  Yet his critics in Parliament said forming a committee was disingenuous and could delay any rapid reform. ''I have a feeling it should have been done straightaway,'' said Iqbal Zafar Jhagra, secretary general of the Pakistan Muslim League-N, led by former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. 
  Mr. Jhagra also expressed disappointment that Mr. Zardari did not mention restoration of the Supreme Court judges dismissed by General Musharraf during emergency rule last October. Mr. Zardari's refusal to reinstate the chief justice, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, led to the party's pulling out of the coalition government. 
  Legislators also complained that his speech lacked specifics considering that his party has already been in government for six months and the country is facing a critical period with growing militancy and a sliding economy. ''It was all generalities,'' said Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao, who served as interior minister under General Musharraf. ''He had to spell out the government's policies, he had to be very specific.''
  ''I have a dream for Pakistan,'' Mr. Zardari said. ''My dream is to free this great country from the shackles of poverty, hunger, terrorism and disunity.'' 
  He also said his government would move to bring the tribal areas, which are troubled by militancy, into the national political mainstream by removing their special federal status, which dates from colonial times. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Asif Ali Zardari outlined his goals to Parliament on Saturday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS OF PAKISTAN, VIA EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)                                                   

Load-Date: September 21, 2008


End of Document