Pakistani agents arrest 17 in terrorism conspiracy
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 12, 2006 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 353 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN 
Body


Pakistani intelligence agents have arrested as many as 17 people, some of them British citizens, in the plot to blow up jetliners flying from Britain to the U.S.
Britain hailed Pakistan's help in thwarting the attack. But the arrests on Pakistani soil show that despite its successes against al-Qaida, the country remains a fertile ground for Islamic militancy.
British authorities arrested 24 people Thursday in what they said was a scheme to bring down as many as 10 jetliners in a nearly simultaneous strike. Most of the suspects were believed to be British Muslims, with at least some of Pakistani ancestry.
The Foreign Ministry said that acting on information received from Britain, Pakistan had made arrests that triggered the arrests in Britain. It identified British citizen Rashid Rauf as a "key person" who had been nabbed in Pakistan.
Interior Minister Aftab Khan Sherpao alleged that Rauf had ties with al-Qaida. "We arrested him from the border area and on his disclosure we shared the information with British authorities, which led to further arrests in Britain," the interior minister said.
Foreign Minister Khursheed Kasuri confirmed in a television interview the arrests in Pakistan of seven suspects, including Britons. He said the suspects "had been monitored for quite some time" before the arrests.
Another senior government official said the suspects were two Britons of Pakistani origin who were arrested about a week ago, and five Pakistanis detained in the eastern city of Lahore and the southern city of Karachi.
A Pakistani intelligence official said 10 Pakistanis had been arrested Friday in Bhawalpur district, 300 miles southwest of Islamabad, in connection with the plot. A second intelligence official confirmed the arrests but did not know how many.
Although Pakistan is a key ally of Britain and the U.S. in the war on terrorism, the country has long been regarded as a center of Islamic militancy, much of it linked to events in Afghanistan.
Since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Pakistan has captured hundreds of al-Qaida fighters and arrested key figures in Osama bin Laden's terror network.

Notes

 Bomb plot foiled 

Load-Date: August 12, 2006


End of Document