Pakistan arrests US-wanted terror suspect in Mumbai attacks
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
July 17, 2019 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 432 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Hafiz Saeed, the chief of Jamaat-ud-Dawa, was arrested in the central Pakistan town of Gujranwala on Wednesday by the counter terrorism department.
Pakistan officials have arrested an Islamic cleric and American-wanted terror suspect implicated in the 2008 Mumbai attacks, days ahead of Prime Minister Imran Khan's trip toWashington.
The move follows pressure from the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which previous year placed Pakistan on its "grey list" of countries with inadequate controls over money laundering and terrorism financing.
The US Department of the Treasury has designated Hafiz Saeed as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist, and the United States, since 2012, has offered a Dollars 10 million reward for information that brings Hafiz Saeed to justice. Hafiz Saeed was taken into custody Wednesday while travelling to the eastern city of Gujranwala, where he appeared before a judge on terror finance charges, according to a Pakistani counterterrorism spokesman.
Saeed, a UN-designated terrorist on whom the U.S. has placed a $10 million bounty, was travelling to Gujranwala from Lahore to get pre-arrest bail in terror financing cases registered against him there when he was arrested, said a CTD official.
Amazon Workers Plan to Strike on Prime Day
In October of 2018, Amazon announced that it would pay all workers in the United States at least $15/hour within a month. Unfortunately, this bombastic new Prime Day deal only applies if you've never watched anything on Prime Video before.
On Tuesday, Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Mr. Trump's invitation to the Pakistani premier reflected the "importance of the relationship for both sides".
Saeed founded the Lashkar-e-Taiba group, which was blamed for theMumbai attacks that killed 166 people.
Hafiz Saeed was listed under UN Security Council Resolution 1267 in December 2008. "One court orders his arrest, another frees him", said the official, who has close knowledge of diplomatic issues with Pakistan.
In recent months, the government also took over schools, mosques, seminaries and all properties linked to Saeed's charities and froze their assets.
Born in 1948, Hafiz Saeed along with his family started migrating from East Punjab and reached Pakistan in around four months in the autumn of 1947. LeT is a terrorist group designated by the United Nations. Hence, they committed multiple offences of terrorism financing & money laundering under Anti Terrorism Act 1997. Earlier, Saeed was under house arrest. Pakistan said Saeed had been cleared by its courts and sought more eveidence from India.

Load-Date: July 18, 2019


End of Document