Pakistani court acquits 4 of helping NYC bomber Summary
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 3, 2012 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 275 words
Byline: By ZARAR KHAN • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


ISLAMABAD - A Pakistani anti-terrorism court on Saturday acquitted four men who had been charged with helping a Pakistani-American man carry out a failed attempt to detonate a truck bomb in New York's Times Square, their lawyer and family members said.
The four were arrested in the wake of Faisal Shahzad's May 2010 attack, which fizzled when the explosives in his vehicle produced smoke but no blast. Shahzad has pleaded guilty and admitted to getting training from the Pakistani Taliban in the country's tribal region along the Afghan border. He was sentenced to life in prison in the U.S.
The attempted attack increased tension between Pakistan and the United States, which has long accused Islamabad of not doing enough to crack down on militants on its soil who pose a threat to the West.
Even though the men acquitted Saturday had been in custody for two years, few details had emerged about their closed-door trial in an anti-terrorism court in Rawalpindi, next to the capital Islamabad.
Such trials rarely produce convictions in Pakistan because police often lack basic investigative skills, prosecutors lack training in terror cases and judges and witnesses are often subject to intimidation.
One of the men released Saturday, Muhammad Shoaib Mughal, had been charged with providing Shahzad with financial assistance, said his lawyer, Malik Imran Safdar.
The other three men, Humbal Akhtar, Muhammad Shahid Husain and Faisal Abbasi were charged as Mughal's accomplices, said Safdar.
Two other men arrested by Pakistan in the wake of the attempted Times Square attack were previously released. It's unclear if Pakistan has any other suspects in custody.

Load-Date: June 4, 2012


End of Document