Pakistan Court Admits Plea To Declare Kasab A Fugitive
RTT News (United States)
March 16, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 347 words
Body


(RTTNews) - An anti-terrorism court in Pakistan trying seven suspects for their involvement in the November 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, on Monday admitted the prosecution&apos;s plea to declare Ajmal Amir Kasab--the lone Pakistani Islamic terrorist caught alive during the attacks--a fugitive and adjourned the case for a week.
The court of Judge Malik Muhammad Akram Awan admitted an application from Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), which is probing Pakistani links to the Mumbai attacks, asking for Kasab to be declared a "proclaimed offender" or a fugitive.
The court scheduled the next hearing for March 20, when it will hear arguments on the plea by the prosecution and defense lawyers.
"The application was taken up first as it was a procedural matter," Shahbaz Rajput, a lawyer representing some of the accused, said. Several witnesses were scheduled to testify during Monday&apos;s hearing but could not do so as the court took up the FIA&apos;s application.
The FIA&apos;s plea had become necessary as a bench of the Lahore High Court last Tuesday ruled that Kasab&apos;s trial could not be separated from that of the seven accused, including Lashker-e-Taiba (LeT) operations commander Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi, booked under the Anti- Terrorism Act, Pakistan Penal Code and a cyber crimes law.
The Rawalpindi-based bench of the Lahore High Court had also ruled that Kasab&apos;s confessional statement to Indian authorities could not be used in Pakistani courts.
Defense lawyers for the accused were planning to challenge the FIA&apos;s move to get Kasab declared a fugitive as he was "not willingly avoiding an appearance in a Pakistani court," but0 was in the custody of Indian authorities and is thus not a fugitive from law.
The seven jihadists have been accused of training and providing financial support, accommodation, equipment and communications gear to the 10 terrorists who attacked Mumbai in November 2008 and killed nearly 180 people, including many Americans.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document