Pakistani Visitor Cleared in Terrorism Probe, Will Be Deported
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
January 9, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. B1
Length: 373 words
Byline: MICHAEL VIGH, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


A Pakistani man under investigation for possible ties to the Sept. 11 terror attacks and 2002 Olympic terrorism will not be charged with any crimes, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office in Salt Lake City.
Ghulam Rasool Chisthi, 58, will now be allowed to return to his native country, said Melodie Rydalch, spokeswoman for the U.S. Attorney's Office. No deportation date has been set by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, according to Chisthi's Denver attorney, Zeke Williams.
"I've been trying to make that happen for some time now," Williams said. "He's hoping to leave as soon as possible."
A purported Muslim cleric, Chisthi came to Utah in May to participate in a worldwide interfaith religious conference. At the conclusion of the five-day conference, Chisthi -- who stayed at the Olympic Village on the campus of the University of Utah -- was arrested for falsifying his visa application.
In August, he pleaded guilty to a federal charge that he failed to disclose several British rape convictions on the application. He has been in an INS holding facility in Denver ever since.
Chisthi's supporters have said he was investigated only because he is Muslim, but authorities say he asked suspicious questions about Olympic security at several venue sites. He was one of more than 1,000 people detained after the Sept. 11 attacks.
"There were certainly some red flags," Rydalch said. "But the FBI has conducted a thorough investigation and we don't anticipate filing any charges. You never say never, but we don't see anything happening."
Williams acknowledges Chisthi's checkered past prompted the investigation, but says, "I've never had any reason to believe he was a terrorist."
In 1991, a London jury found Chisthi guilty of raping eight female followers. He was sentenced to 11 years in prison for the rapes and three counts of indecent assault. He served 6 years.
Williams said he visited with his client Tuesday and he remains in good spirits. Despite being incarcerated for more than 7 months, he holds no ill feelings toward the United States.
"Following Sept. 11, he understands why this is happening to him," Williams said. "When he gets back to his country he says he will remain a supporter of the U.S."
mvigh@sltrib.com  

Load-Date: January 9, 2002


End of Document