Pakistan-Backed Force Leaves Indian Kashmir
The New York Times
July 15, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 370 words
Byline: By CELIA W. DUGGER 

By CELIA W. DUGGER 
Dateline: NEW DELHI, July 14
Body


Indian officials said today that the withdrawal of Pakistani-backed forces from an Indian-controlled area of Kashmir was on schedule to be finished by the deadline on Friday, but they expressed outrage at what they described as a Pakistani-sponsored act of terrorism that took place on Tuesday in the Kashmir valley.
The Indian Air Force has conducted sorties over the Kargil sector of Kashmir, the scene of fierce fighting over the last two months, and found no sign of the men who had infiltrated from Pakistani-held Kashmir and occupied peaks overlooking a key highway, officials said.
India says the men were Pakistani soldiers on a carefully plotted misadventure, while Pakistan maintains that they were Islamic guerrillas who are pulling out because Pakistan's Prime Minister, Nawaz Sharif, asked them to do so.
President Clinton, who helped broker Mr. Sharif's call for a withdrawal, has called on India and Pakistan to resume talks once the pullout is complete, and both sides have reaffirmed the sanctity of the so-called Line of Control, which divides Indian- and Pakistani-held areas.
But Indian officials said Pakistan would have to stop fomenting violence against India by Islamic militants in Kashmir before talks could proceed. "It's obvious that for any composite dialogue to succeed, this kind of cross-border terrorism has to stop," said Raminder Singh Jassal, a spokesman for India's External Affairs Ministry.
India described a guerrilla attack on Tuesday on a paramilitary camp north of Srinagar, which left four people dead, as an example of "Pakistan's brazen and continuing sponsorship of terrorism."
Pakistan says it gives the militants, whom it describes as Kashmiri freedom fighters battling Indian rule, only moral and diplomatic support, nothing more.
After killing four people, the two or three militants who burst into the Border Security Force camp took a dozen hostages, including five children. Indian commandos rescued all the hostages this morning, said Mohammed Zia Ullah, a spokesman for the Border Security Force.
The commandos later fired a rocket into the building where militants were believed to be hiding.Searchers found one body, an AK-47 and eight grenades there, Mr. Zia Ullah added.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Map showing the location of Kargil: Pakistani-backed troops have left the strategic heights near Kargil.      

Load-Date: July 15, 1999


End of Document