Pakistani Parliament Briefed by Military
The New York Times
October 9, 2008 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 877 words
Byline: By SALMAN MASOOD
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan 
Body


In an extraordinary step in Pakistan, the military gave a classified briefing to a special session of Parliament on Wednesday about its efforts in combating militancy and terrorism. 
  Afterward, many members of Parliament were disappointed, saying the briefing offered no new information and was focused too narrowly on military operations rather than the broad strategic issues facing the country.
  But the briefing was the first time that a top military general had formally offered any information to Parliament about the threats posed by the Taliban and Al Qaeda or the military's campaign against the militants in the restive tribal regions straddling the border with Afghanistan. 
  The special session was called by President Asif Ali Zardari, who like his predecessor, Pervez Musharraf, has defended Pakistan's alliance with the United States, which has grown increasingly unpopular here. 
  The briefing was the beginning of an effort by the president to win support from the public and elected officials, who were previously marginalized in the decision making, for an intensifying fight against the Taliban and Al Qaeda, which Mr. Zardari has called Pakistan's ''own war.'' 
  It was also part of a tentative rebalancing of powers between the new civilian government elected in February and the military, which ran the government for much of the last eight years and for more than half of Pakistan's 61 years of independence.
  The session was attended by the army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, as well as by governors and chief ministers of the country's four provinces. The leader of the opposition, Nawaz Sharif, who is not a member of Parliament, also attended the session on a special invitation.
  The governing party members hailed the briefing as ''historic,'' while some analysts saw it as a first step in evolving a national strategy against terrorism that includes the military as well as the political parties. 
  ''It has a substantive and symbolic value,'' Talat Masood, a retired general and political analyst, said, referring to the briefing. ''The military very much wants the support of the politicians. It is vital.'' 
  The two-hour briefing was conducted by the director general of military operations, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, who is the designated head of Inter-Services Intelligence, the country's powerful spy organization, according to members of Parliament who attended the session. 
  The lawmakers spoke on condition of anonymity because they were made to take an oath of secrecy not to divulge what was disclosed. The media were not invited to attend the session.
  As the director general of military operations, General Pasha has taken on responsibility for the conduct of the continuing military campaign in Bajaur, part of the tribal areas, and in Swat, in North-West Frontier Province, which borders the tribal areas. 
  General Pasha used slide shows and showed photographs of arrested militants. He said military operations had to be undertaken in the tribal areas to curb terrorism, according to a news release by Parliament. 
  He blamed ''foreign elements'' -- a euphemism for Afghanistan and Indian -- for aggravating the situation in the tribal areas and in other parts of the North-West Frontier Province.
  Opposition lawmakers and even some from the governing party said they found the briefing lacking. Ahsan Iqbal, a member of opposition political party Pakistan Muslim League-N, said his party was hugely disappointed with the briefing. 
  ''It was of operational nature, mainly about the military operations in the region,'' he said. ''But our demand is for a comprehensive briefing, which is about the scope, purpose and objectives of the government's policy. Also, what are the rules of engagement? What are our policy options?'' 
  Mr. Iqbal said the briefing just dealt with the tactical level. ''We are more concerned about strategy formulation,'' he said.
  ''I want the political government to give the briefing,'' as opposed to the military, he added. ''They should have come forward and given an overview of their strategy and policy. It seems the government has no policy.''
  Several other members of Parliament said they also felt that the briefing did not add to their  knowledge of the security situation. 
  ''There was nothing substantial or new,'' one member said. ''It was all just press reports put together in a decent manner.'' 
  There has been growing impatience in the country with the deteriorating law and order situation. Skepticism regarding Pakistan's alliance with the United States in the effort against terrorism has grown sharply. A spate of suicide attacks across the country has taken its toll on the national psyche. 
  In particular, the September bombing of the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad, the capital, has left people fatigued and wary, politicians say.
  ''Everybody, whether from the ruling clan or the opposition, all want this to end,'' Enver Baig, a senator from the Pakistan Peoples Party, said in an interview on Tuesday, referring to the wave of terrorism.
  ''We can't take it anymore,'' he added. ''People are very upset. It's coming to our homes. Every Pakistani is affected. So there is serious thinking within the Parliament that we have to bring this to an end.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 9, 2008


End of Document