PALESTINIAN FAILURES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 13, 2003 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Length: 300 words
Body


The Oct. 7 opinion piece by Post-Gazette Associate Editor Dan Simpson ("Palestine Comes Home to the Hill") tells a tale that needs answering and a basic infusion of facts and objectivity.
 The article refers to a Pittsburgh meeting where Palestinian labor leaders spoke about their economy and blamed the economic ruin, predictably, on Israel.
According to the speakers, the ruination of their economy is found in the security fence that Israel has been forced to construct. No mention is made in the article for the responsibility of the Palestinians and their leadership for the terrorism and targeting of innocent civilians that the Israelis are forced to endure.
 No mention is made of the culpability of the Palestinians for allowing the infrastructure of terrorism and death to be created and to flourish in their neighborhoods. Every hardship is laid at the feet of the Israelis and not the leadership of the Palestinian people. This leadership is more bent on destruction through terrorism than on peace and economic rebuilding.
 There is no responsibility taken by the Palestinian spokespeople for the disconnect between their supposed leaders and the desires of the Palestinian people for a state. Indeed, both the American government and the American people and the Israeli government and the Israeli people believe in a two-state solution.
 The only people who do not seem to have a genuine commitment to the two-state solution are those charged with overseeing and running the Palestinian Authority. Those people who have found themselves in leadership positions seem committed only to fostering death and mayhem through terrorism, not on building a peaceful co-existence.
 JOSEPH FRIEDMAN
 Pittsburgh Council Chair
 DAVID J. MILLSTONE
 Regional Board Chair
 Anti-Defamation League
 Cleveland, Ohio

Load-Date: October 16, 2003


End of Document