Palestinian leader appeals for EU help to end occupation
The Lion's Pride: Saint Leo University
June 24, 2016 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: PEOPLE; Pg. 1
Length: 404 words
Byline: Lydia Wallace
Body


President of the Palestinian Authority Mahmoud Abbas delivers a speech at the European Union Parliament in Brussels on June 23, 2016.
Israeli President Reuven Rivlin on Wednesday addressed the European Parliament in Brussels, emphasizing Israel's strong ties with Europe but also stressing that the continent's lack of respect the Jewish state's sovereignty-whether it be through "misunderstanding" or "impatience"-needs to be addressed".
"The Palestinian people are on your side in the fight against terrorism and extremism which we condemn: but in order to conquer terrorism there must be an end to the Israeli occupation and the creation of a Palestinian State".
"Remarkably, European legislators held up Abbas as an opponent of terrorism, even as he and his government regularly lionize Palestinian terrorists", said Harris.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas today met European Parliament President Martin Schulz and updated him on latest developments.
"Why is worldwide law not being applied in the case of Israel?" he asked to applause by MEP lawmakers. While the worldwide community has backed the Palestinian position, Netanyahu refuses to accept Israel's pre-1967 lines as the basis for a future border. Abbas also refused to meet Rivlin in a one-on-one meeting while in Brussels. In July 2000 at Camp David, former Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat rejected Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak's offer of all of the Gaza Strip and 92% of the West Bank, offset by land swaps, along with a capital in eastern Jerusalem.
Israeli and U.S. officials said on Thursday that the stalled peace efforts would be on the agenda when Mr Netanyahu meets the USA secretary of state John Kerry in Rome on Sunday.
"It is vital that the European Union puts the Middle East Peace Process at the top of its worldwide agenda, not only by declarations, but by specific and concrete actions".
Mr Kirby said the report would "largely" reflect the Quartet's previous statement in September a year ago.
The absence of a two-state solution, he said, would give "pretext to those who commit terrorism in the name of religion".
He expressed his expectation that the worldwide community would renew its efforts to restart the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, adding that he hoped that the Paris conference earlier this month "will ripen into an global conference". The UN chief will be in Israel and the Palestinian territories as part of a Middle East tour.

Load-Date: January 5, 2017


End of Document