PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION;
Lawmakers try to expel PLO from US as 'terrorist group'
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
March 17, 1987, Tuesday


Copyright 1987 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 4
Length: 504 words
Byline: George D. Moffett III, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Body


In the name of fighting terrorism, a number of lawmakers are looking for ways to close down two ''terrorist outposts'' in the United States manned by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
The group, led by Rep. Jack Kemp (R) of New York and Senate minority leader Robert Dole (R) of Kansas, says that by permitting the PLO to operate offices in New York and Washington the US is condoning the PLO's record of terrorist activity.
But critics say the move may have as much to do with domestic politics as with concern over terrorism.
''This comes up regularly, every time there's an election,'' a skeptical administration official says.
Responding to inquiries from Representative Kemp and Senator Dole, Secretary of State George Shultz in a letter last year conceded ''outrage'' over PLO attacks in the Middle East, but the secretary said that both US offices were operating within the law.
In response to a second query by Kemp, lawyers at the State and Justice Departments are giving the issue a closer look.
''It should be a matter of policy that we don't want terrorist groups operating on American soil,'' Kemp says.
''We are providing the American people with the opportunity to know the viewpoint of the PLO,'' responds Dr. Riyad Mansour, deputy permanent observer at the PLO mission in New York. ''Is it dangerous just to explain?''
At the invitation of the United Nations General Assembly, the PLO established an ''observer mission'' in New York in 1974, now operated by three diplomats. A seven-person Palestine Information Office was set up in Washington in 1978.
According to Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D) of New Jersey, PLO offices in Europe have been placed under surveillance because of concern that they may be used to help plan and execute terrorists attacks.
''I believe that we ought to investigate the (Palestine Information Office) to make sure it is not involved in terrorist activities on our shores,'' Senator Lautenberg says.
Kemp says he is looking into various legal means to close down the Washington facility. These range from looking for violations of reporting requirements imposed by federal law on agents of foreign governments, to extending the provisions of federal racketeering legislation to bar individuals from belonging to organizations advocating terrorism.
But legal scholars say that until there is evidence that PLO officials have broken US law, they are protected by the First Amendment's guarantees of free speech and assembly.
''It's a simple matter of civil liberties,'' a State Department source says. ''There's no way you can close down an information office just because you disagree with the viewpoint it represents.''
As a last resort, says a spokesmen for Kemp, new legislation may be introduced to shut the PLO facilities down.
''There's no allegation of any wrongdoing by either office,'' complains James Abourezk, now the chairman of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee. ''This is just a transparent attempt to keep the Palestinians from arguing their side of the story.''

Graphic

 
Picture 1, Kemp is a leader of drive to expel PLO, FILE/POLY-PRESS; Picture 2, Dole pushed Shultz to look into issue, FILE/JOHN SPRAGENS JR.


End of Document