PALESTINIAN TERRORISTS HAVE LESS TO CELEBRATE;
   EVEN AS PALESTINIANS CHEERED THE WEEKEND'S ATTACKS AGAINST ISRAEL, TERRORISM WAS SUFFERING IMPORTANT DEFEATS.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
August 6, 2002 Tuesday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A6; Editorial
Length: 424 words
Body


Thousands of Palestinians celebrated this weekend's terrorist attacks that killed 13 Israelis. But, thankfully, there was less for the supporters of terrorism to celebrate than was apparent at first glance.
* Leaders in the Mideast continued to aim toward peace. On Monday, Israeli Defense Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer met with Palestinian Interior Minister Abdel Razak Yehiyeh to discuss plans for a cease-fire. Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak invited Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to peace talks in Egypt.
Mubarak's invitation may have been no more than a gesture. Talks involving Arafat are problematic because Arafat is at best duplicitous and at worst irrelevant. And the meeting between Ben-Eliezer and Yehiyeh was overwhelmed in significance by Monday's Israeli missile attack on a Gaza City building suspected of being a weapons factory.
Nonetheless, the militant Palestinian terrorists count peace as their enemy. One of their goals is to bomb and kill enough to create despair among peace makers. In that, they are failing, as Monday's peace overtures demonstrated.
* German authorities on Monday shut down an Arab charity accused of collecting money for Hamas, a militant and murderous Palestinian organization. Investigators seized $296,000 from the Al-Aqsa organization, which claimed to help needy people.
The German move, combined with work done by the United States and other countries to shut off the money spigot for terrorist organizations, will deprive terrorists of the financing they require for murder and mayhem.
* Israeli troops arrested Mazen Foqha, a senior Hamas activist on the West Bank. He is suspected of supplying the explosives for one of the weekend's terrorist attacks.
Foqha's arrest showed that the leaders of terrorist organizations can be found and made to face justice. The arrest was a far superior method of enforcing justice than the July 22 Israeli air strike in Gaza, which killed Hamas militant Salah Shehadeh and sparked Palestinian vows of revenge.
For U.S. policy, the weekend's attack and subsequent developments are reason to step up efforts to keep Israel and moderate Palestinians focused on peace. Moderate Palestinians especially need encouragement to counter the popularity of the terrorists, which was on display in the weekend's celebrations.
Terrorism profits not only in death but also in the destruction of opportunities to establish peace. The United States, Israel and moderate Palestinians cannot afford to let terrorism prevail in the Middle East.

Load-Date: August 7, 2002


End of Document