Palestinian speedboat attack is thwarted
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 31, 1990, Thursday, North Suncoast Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 14A
Length: 532 words
Byline: LINDA GRADSTEIN
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Israeli forces intercepted 16 Palestinian guerrillas heading toward Tel Aviv beachfront hotels aboard speedboats Wednesday in one of the biggest attempted terror attacks in Israeli history.
 
    One of the speedboats with 11 guerrillas landed on a beach less than half a mile from 1,000 Israelis enjoying the Jewish holiday of Shavuot. The army evacuated a 30-mile stretch of beach. Four guerrillas were killed and 12 captured.
   Israeli army officials said that six speedboats were launched late Tuesday night from a larger ship that had sailed three days ago from Libya. One of the boats was for refueling and the others carried the guerrillas, weapons and maps of the Tel Aviv beachfront area. At least one of the boats sank, and only two of the six actually got near the shore.
 
    The Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) headed by Mohammed Abu Abbas claimed responsibility for the attempted attack in a statement issued in both Baghdad and Sidon, Lebanon. The statement said the attack was in retaliation for last week's killings of seven Palestinian laborers by an Israeli gunman in Rishon Letzion.
 
    Abbas is known as the mastermind of the 1985 attack on the Achille Lauro Italian cruise ship in which American Leon Klinghoffer was killed. An Italian court sentenced Abbas to life imprisonment in absentia.
 
    The Israeli chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Don Shomron, said that an attack on such a large scale requires months of planning and could not have been in retaliation for last week's attack. He said there were Katyusha rockets, grenades, pistols with silencers and even anti-aircraft missiles in the six speedboats.
 
    "The murderers tried to make our holiday into a day of mourning," said Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. "But they didn't succeed. The PLO has shown again that they have never stopped using terrorism."
 
    Israeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens charged that Abbas' PLF is officially one of the factions of the PLO. Analysts say Abbas is a member of the PLO executive committee, although he is not part of PLO leader Yasser Arafat's mainstream Fatah faction. Arens said that with Wednesday's attack, Arafat had broken his 1988 pledge not to use terrorism. That pledge led to the opening of direct talks between the PLO and the United States. Arens called on the Bush Administration to cut off those talks.
 
    In Washington, the State Department condemned the attack and said it will investigate if the PLO was involved. "The U.S. is horrified at this terrorist attack," said State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler. If it turns out that the PLO is behind it, "we would view this as a very serious matter."
 
    Analysts say the attempted attack will take much of the pressure off Israel to open direct talks with the Palestinians. In the past two months, U.S.-Israeli relations have been at the lowest point in years because of Shamir's unwillingness to begin talks with Palestinians.
 
    "It puts the United States in a very difficult position," said Dr.  Barry Rubin, an American terrorism expert and visiting fellow at the Truman Center of Hebrew University. "They will go to Arafat and say "You rejected terrorism. Will Abu Abbas be punished or not?' "

Load-Date: November 13, 1992


End of Document