PALESTINIAN STUDENTS RIOT IN BETHLEHEM
The New York Times
October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 511 words
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Oct. 29
Body


Palestinian students at Bethlehem University, angered by a rocket attack Sunday on an Arab bus in Jerusalem, stoned Israeli vehicles in the West Bank today. Israeli soldiers dispersed the students with tear gas and warning shots.
Arab sources said one protester was shot in the leg.
Palestinian students at Bethlehem University, angered by rocket attack on Arab bus in Jerusalem, stone Israeli vehicles on West Bank (M)
The Israelis kept the campus under siege until shortly before nightfall, when an agreement was worked out between the military and school authorities that enabled the troops to withdraw and the students to go home.
The clashes occurred in the streets near the campus, 15 miles from Jerusalem. Using slingshots and hiding their faces behind scarves, the demonstrators stoned vehicles bearing Israeli license plates as well as troops who reached the scene.
After the Israelis succeeded in driving the demonstrators back to the campus, the students raised a Palestinian flag and continued sporadic stoning.
 
Extremist Group Suspected
The bus attack Sunday, in which an Arab youth was killed and 10 other passengers were wounded, appeared to be the work of a Jewish extremist group, authorities said. The police and independent experts speculated that the attackers were members of a previously unknown extremist group not connected with the Jewish ''underground,'' whose members are now standing trial for killing Arab students in Hebron, crippling Arab mayors in bombing attacks and other terrorist acts.
Authorities said the new group appeared to be less sophisticated in its methods. Those who fired the rocket were said to have left several clues, including fingerprints on the rocket launcher and a handwritten note addressed to the police.
The note, in Hebrew, said the attack had been carried out by ''The Avengers'' and indicated that the attack was in retaliation for the deaths of two Jewish students in the West Bank last week. A 22-year-old Palestinian Arab has confessed to those slayings.
 
Followers of Kahane Questioned
Three followers of Rabbi Meir Kahane, whose Kach Party advocates the expulsion of Arabs from Israel, were among those questioned today by the police. There were no arrests.
Rabbi Kahane applauded the Sunday attack on the bus and praised the assailants.
A move to lift Rabbi Kahane's parliamentary immunity and put him on trial was initiated today by Yossi Sarid of the Citizens' Rights Movement. Mr. Sarid asserted that Rabbi Kahane had encouraged terrorist attacks, in violation of the law for the prevention of terrorism that was enacted four years ago, and that he was liable to up to three years' imprisonment.
Some critics, Jews as well as Arabs, said tolerance manifested by officials and the public toward the Jews standing trial on terrorism charges had encouraged the new group.
The Palestinian Arabic daily Al Fajr said today that the stepped-up aggression was a natural and inevitable result of what it called the lenient policy of the Israeli Government toward the suspects and the support they get from Israeli officials.

Graphic

 
photo of students


End of Document