Palestinians Must Speak Out Against Terrorism;
World Can Take Action
The New York Times
March 10, 1996, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section 4; ; Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk ; Column 5; ; Letter
Length: 287 words
Body


To the Editor:
Israel has declared war on the Hamas, and President Clinton has all but said he would not stand in its way. As Israel thinks of changing its strategy toward achieving stability in the Middle East, the world community must do the same:
* All international military and economic relations with countries that support terrorist activity -- Iran, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Libya -- should be frozen. There should be an immediate economic embargo of Iran and Libya, including the withdrawal of embassies and consulates, until they have removed themselves from terrorist organizations and activities. The United States should pressure its European and Asian allies who continue to associate with these pariah states.
* Negotiations with Syria should be suspended until it publicly commits to dissociate itself from the Hizbollah, or Party of God, as well as Hamas and their spin-off organizations and to dismantle their bases in Syria and Lebanon.
* International pressure should be applied on friendly Mideast states like Egypt, Jordan, Turkey and the Persian Gulf emirates who overlook Hamas and Hizbollah activities within their borders and who allow, passively or actively, the transfer of resources to these groups.
* The United States and other nations should outlaw all transfer of funds from Muslim organizations and private individuals to Palestinian organizations other than the Palestinian Authority.
* There should be international oversight of the use of funds arriving at territories under Palestinian control. Yasir Arafat might or might not be doing all he can to suppress militant activity. He needs help, and the international community should know what he is up to.
 
ADI KRAUSE
Washington, March 4, 1996

Load-Date: March 10, 1996


End of Document