Palestinians Kill 2 Israeli Civilians on Road From Gaza
The New York Times
July 25, 2005 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 758 words
Byline: By STEVEN ERLANGER
Dateline: JERUSALEM, July 24 
Body


Palestinian gunmen sprayed a civilian Israeli convoy with automatic gunfire early Sunday morning, killing a husband and wife and wounding four other Israelis, three of them seriously, the Israeli Army said. The attack took place on the main road connecting Israeli Gaza settlements with Israel.
 Israeli Army and security guards fired back, killing one gunman immediately and another after a pursuit. Two soldiers were also slightly wounded.
  The couple who were killed, Dov and Rachel Kol, 58 and 53, were residents of Jerusalem returning from visiting Ms. Kol's sister in the settlements, which Israel intends to dismantle next month. The Kols were buried later on Sunday.
 The Israeli Army also released details and videotape of an operation on Friday night in which soldiers captured a man whom they identified as a would-be suicide bomber, Jihad Shehade, 18, from the Jabaliya refugee camp in Gaza, and who, they said, had crossed into Israel with instructions to blow himself up in a crowded part of Tel Aviv.
 On Saturday, they arrested a man accused of being an accomplice, who had been married to an Israeli Arab and had an Israeli identity card, in Jaffa, the old port of Tel Aviv.
 The pursuit began when Israeli troops spotted a hole in the border fence between Gaza and Israel. They tracked Mr. Shehade and persuaded him to remove his suicide belt, which they said was packed with 11 pounds of explosives and thousands of ball bearings. The investigation indicated that the attack plan was initiated by Gazan members of the main Palestinian faction, Fatah, the army said. 
 The evidence of a continuing wave of efforts by Palestinian militants to kill Israelis, despite the visit of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and the promises to try to halt terrorism by Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, kept tensions high here, especially after the bombings in nearby Egypt.
 Prime Minister Ariel Sharon opened Israel's regular Sunday cabinet meeting by denouncing the Kol killings as another act of Palestinian terrorism against civilians. ''Last night, two Israeli civilians were murdered by Palestinian terrorists,'' he said. ''On behalf of the entire government, I send condolences to the Kol family and wishes for a quick recovery to the wounded. Israel will not countenance this terrorism.''
 Mr. Sharon said he had emphasized the issue of terrorism in his meeting on Friday with Ms. Rice and said he told her that under new orders, the army's ''response will be of a different kind, using very tough, new measures, whether terrorism is perpetrated during the disengagement or afterward.''
 Mr. Abbas condemned the killings as a violation of his truce with Israel, which the Palestinian factions said they would observe. ''I condemn this operation and consider it a violation of the truce, of the Sharm el Sheik understanding and the Cairo agreement between all the Palestinian parties,'' he said in a statement. ''The Palestinian Authority will make every effort to stop these useless operations. This violation of the truce gives the Israeli side reason to continue their attacks against our people and the assassinations of Palestinian leaders.'' 
 Palestinian militants insist that they are retaliating against Israeli violations of the truce. On Sunday, three militant groups jointly claimed responsibility for the attack, which they called ''a martyrdom operation.'' The groups are Islamic Jihad, the Popular Resistance Committee and Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, which is affiliated with Mr. Abbas's Fatah faction.
 Official Palestinian news organizations, including Voice of Palestine radio and Palestinian state television, described the killings as acts of resistance and martyrdom, while referring to the dead Israeli couple as settlers, which they were not. The Palestinian radio news, monitored by The New York Times, described ''two citizens martyred in an armed clash near Kissufim junction'' and described the Israelis killed or wounded as settlers.
 A member of Islamic Jihad blew himself up in Netanya on July 12, initiating this latest round of violence and killing 5 Israelis and wounding more than 90. Since then, 3 more Israelis have been killed by Palestinian terror attacks and 20 Palestinians have been killed by the Israeli Army. The army has reinstated its policy of targeted killings and, according to army figures, made 95 arrests of wanted Hamas or Islamic Jihad members, 94 of them in the West Bank. Mr. Sharon has complained that Mr. Abbas is doing too little to enforce the truce on Palestinian militant groups.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: The children of Dov and Rachel Kol and their grandfather mourning in Jerusalem yesterday during the funeral service for the Israeli couple. (Photo by Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)
 A girl in Gaza watched the burial yesterday of a militant killed by Israel. (Photo by Mohammed Abed/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)                          

Load-Date: July 25, 2005


End of Document