PALESTINIAN DENIES TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 4, 1998, Thursday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 335 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - U.S. law enforcement authorities have apprehended a Palestinian in connection with a fatal 1982 airline bombing.
Mohammed Rashid, 51, pleaded innocent in federal court to a nine-count indictment for murder, bombing, sabotage and other crimes. He faces a possible life term in prison if convicted, Justice Department spokesman John Russell said.
Rashid has been wanted by U.S. authorities since his 1987 indictment in Washington in connection with a midair bombing aboard a Pan Am flight from Tokyo to Honolulu in August 1982. A 15-year-old Japanese boy was killed in the blast and 15 people were injured.
Neither Russell nor a federal prosecutor, Ronald Walutes, would say where Rashid was captured or describe the circumstances of his apprehension.
U.S. District Judge Aubrey Robinson ordered Rashid held until a further hearing Friday. The judge also appointed a public defender to represent Rashid, who listened attentively as an interpreter translated the proceedings into Arabic.
Rashid was charged in a secret indictment in Washington in 1987. He was arrested on a false passport charge in Greece the following year, but authorities there refused a U.S. extradition request.
The indictment also named an accomplice, Christine Pinter, who also used the alias Fatima.
Rashid was convicted by a Greek court in 1992 and sentenced to 18 years for planting a bomb on a Pan Am jumbo jet flying from Tokyo. The bomb exploded as the plane was flying over Hawaii.
An appeals court reduced his sentence to 15 years a year later, and he was freed early in 1996 on grounds of good behavior and flew from Athens to Cairo.
U.S. officials criticized the release, arguing that he was the ringleader of a prison uprising in 1994.
''In all the countries of the world … no one is to be tried twice for the same crime,'' Rashid said, through an interpreter.
U.S. officials say Rashid worked for an Iraqi-based group known as May 15, which has been responsible for other attempts to blow up American and Israeli airliners.

Load-Date: June 5, 1998


End of Document