Palestinian factions reconcile
Chicago Daily Herald
May 5, 2011 Thursday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2
Length: 391 words
Byline: By Maggie Michael Associated Press
Body


CAIRO — Rival Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas signed a landmark reconciliation pact on Wednesday, ending a four-year rift that had divided the territory envisioned for a future Palestinian state. The deal plunged Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking deeper into uncertainty as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called it a "mortal blow to peace."
The agreement, which followed years of bitter acrimony between the two Palestinian movements, was made possible in large measure by the political changes sweeping the Arab world and the deadlock in U.S.-brokered peace talks with Israel.
A unity government foreseen by the accord would also allow the Palestinians to speak with a single voice if they go ahead with plans to ask the United Nations to recognize Palestine as a state during the annual General Assembly session in September.
With Wednesday's signing, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, whose Palestinian Authority governs the West Bank, joined forces with Khaled Mashaal, the Syrian-based head of Hamas, which rejects Israel's existence and is backed by Iran.
The alliance set off ecstatic celebrations in the Palestinian territories — and warnings from both the Obama administration and international mediator Tony Blair that the new Palestinian government must recognize Israel or risk international isolation.
Abbas brushed off the criticism and instead used the occasion to deliver a scathing attack on Israel, saying, "We reject blackmail and it is no longer possible for us to accept the (Israeli) occupation of Palestinian land."
Both Palestinian leaders emphasized a united Palestinian direction, with Mashaal declaring the pact means the Palestinians will have "one leadership, ... one decision."
"The common national goal is to establish a Palestinian state, independent with sovereignty on the West Bank and Gaza Strip with Jerusalem as the capital, without settlements, without giving up a single inch of it and with the right of return" of Palestinian refugees, the Hamas leader said.
Netanyahu denounced the new Palestinian alliance as "a mortal blow to peace and a big prize for terrorism."
"Israel continues to want peace and seek peace but we can only achieve that with our neighbors that want peace," the Israeli leader said. "Those of our neighbors that seek the destruction of Israel and use terrorism are not partners to peace."

Graphic

 
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, left, and Hamas leader Khaled Mashaal shake hands at a ceremony in Cairo, Egypt, Wednesday. ASSOCIATED PRESS Palestinians chant slogans while waving Fatah, Hamas and Egyptian flags at a celebration of the planned signing of a reconciliation agreement, in the West Bank city of Ramallah on Wednesday.

Load-Date: May 6, 2011


End of Document