Pan Am victims' relatives struggle with deal
USA TODAY
August 24, 1999, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 803 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- As countries get out of the terrorism business,
how should they be treated for their past terrorist acts?
Relatives of some of the 189 Americans killed on Pan Am 103 wrestled
with this question as they heard briefings Monday from U.S. and
Scottish officials on an unusual plan to try in the Netherlands
two Libyans accused of planting the bomb that caused the airliner
to explode over Scotland 11 years ago.
Senior Clinton administration officials have talked of removing
Libya from a list of seven terrorist-sponsoring nations if the
regime of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi cooperates with the upcoming
trial and pays compensation to victims' families. According to
the State Department, Libya has had no direct involvement in terrorism
for a decade but still harbors some members of Middle East terrorist
groups.
Some relatives of the Pan Am victims say the deal cut with Libya
will exonerate Gadhafi and effectively impose a statute of limitations
on the crime, which killed all 259 people on the Boeing 747 and
11 people on the ground in Lockerbie, Scotland.
In meetings Monday closed to the press, Attorney General Janet
Reno and the Right Honorable Lord Hardie, Reno's Scottish equivalent,
gave details of how the two Libyans will be tried by three Scottish
judges next year on a 90-acre former U.S. air base in the Netherlands.
The venue, to be considered legally part of Scotland, was chosen
because Libya refused to extradite the suspects to either the
United States or the United Kingdom.
Chester Phillips of Little Rock, whose son, Sandy, 27, was one
of 35 Syracuse University students on the ill-fated flight, said
he was impressed by the "professionalism" of the Scottish authorities
and believed they would present a convincing case.
Faced with "no trial or this trial, I believe this is the best
solution," Phillips said.
But Susan Cohen, whose only child, Theodora, 20, also died on
Pan Am 103, called Monday's meeting "primarily a public relations
exercise to sell the trial. I'm not going to buy it." Cohen,
of Cape May Court House, N.J., said the trial would be "a farce"
because the two intelligence agents, Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi
and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah, would never implicate Gadhafi, Libya's
ruler for three decades.
Cohen said the United States should not restore relations with
Libya so long as Gadhafi remains in control there. "There should
never be a statute of limitations for mass murder," she said.
Administration officials regard Gadhafi's decision to surrender
the two suspects as a diplomatic success, the result of mediation
backed by multilateral sanctions.
Support for those sanctions was eroding, U.S. officials say, and
as happened frequently in recent years, Washington is now alone
in barring all commercial ties with Libya.
The United Nations suspended air travel restrictions against Libyans
in April, after Gadhafi surrendered the two suspects.
Last month, Britain restored full diplomatic relations after Libya
accepted responsibility for the fatal shooting of a British policewoman
outside the Libyan Embassy in London in 1984.
Also last month, France accepted about $ 31 million from Libya
for the bombing of a French airliner in 1989 that killed 170 people.
Mike Stinson, vice president of Conoco, which is trying to regain
access to oil fields in Libya from which it has been barred by
U.S. sanctions for 13 years, says policymakers should take into
account U.S. economic interests and the value of U.S. interaction
in changing societies and regimes. "Oil industry people travel
more than anyone and live in more dangerous places," he says.
"We have a deep hatred for terrorism.
"But there is a time when we have to reach some sort of closure
and move on."
But Jeannine Boulanger, whose daughter, Nicole, 21, was another
Pan Am victim, said Monday that "the word closure should be eliminated
from the English language."
Any administration decision to lift sanctions on Libya "will
be met with an outcry from the families," said Boulanger of Shrewsbury,
Mass. She wore a brooch with her daughter's picture pinned to
her dress.
State Department officials deny any decision on lifting sanctions
against Libya is imminent. But other U.S. officials, noting a
sharp decline in terrorist acts by groups with government backing,
say sanctions have worked and should be eased as a reward for
better behavior.
"It's not realistic to impose sanctions forever because you give
no incentive to change," says Bruce Hoffman, a specialist on
terrorism at the Rand Corporation. "On the other hand, does anybody
in their right mind think the two Libyans were independent agents?"
Rep. Porter Goss, R-Fla., chairman of the House intelligence committee,
says countries should be judged on terrorism as they are for fighting
narcotics. "If you draw the line of once a terrorist, always
a terrorist, you can't deal with Yasser Arafat or some Israeli
leaders."

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, B/W, Reuters TV (2); Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi Lamen Khalifa Fhimah

Load-Date: August 24, 1999


End of Document