Panel OKs Bills To Assist Insurers With Disasters
American Banker
October 18, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 SourceMedia, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 4; Vol. 172; No. 201
Length: 596 words
Byline: Stacy Kaper and Joe Adler
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The Senate Banking Committee passed two bills Wednesday aimed at increasing
the capacity of insurers to deal with catastrophes.
In a 20 to 1 vote, the panel approved a stripped-down extension of the
federal terrorism risk insurance program that would preserve the backstop for
seven more years. The bill would buttress insurers strained by terrorist attacks
for a shorter time than a House version that would extend the program 15 years.
In addition, the panel unanimously approved legislation that would
reauthorize the National Flood Insurance Program for five years and add
provisions sparked by huge costs tied to the 2005 Gulf Coast hurricanes. Changes
to the program would include forgiving the roughly $20 billion of debt incurred
as a result of the storms, hiking premiums, and phasing out subsidies on
secondary homes.
Of the two bills, the one to extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act appears
to have the better chance of enactment this year. The White House has threatened
to veto a House version, but Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said Wednesday
that the Bush administration would not oppose the Senate legislation, despite a
preference for letting the program expire.
The program, which was established in 2002 and has been extended once
already, is due to expire at yearend.
The Senate bill to extend that program is much narrower than the version the
House approved last month by a 320 to 110 vote. For example, the House bill
would expand the backstop to cover group life insurance, but the Senate bill
would not. The House bill also would expand coverage to include nuclear,
biological, chemical, and radiological acts of terror, but the Senate bill would
require only a report examining the effects of such coverage.
The sole vote against the Senate bill came from Sen. Wayne Allard, R-Colo.,
who said he intended to "hold the insurance industry accountable for their
pledge" after the Sept. 11 attacks that they would need only a temporary
backstop.
"Until they come up with their own solution" to stabilize the terrorism
insurance market, "they will continue to rely on the federal government," Sen.
Allard said at Wednesday's vote.
But the bill's chances look good. "Within a week we may actually have a
window" to move the legislation to the Senate floor, said Senate Banking
Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn.
The outcome for the flood insurance bill is less clear. It is largely
similar to a measure that was sponsored last year by Sen. Richard Shelby of
Alabama, the panel's top Republican, but stalled in the Senate because of
objections by Louisiana's two senators: Mary Landrieu and David Vitter.
Since the program is not scheduled to run out until next year, the bill is
not considered as urgent as others. But Sen. Dodd said support for the bill - as
well as one the panel passed to bar public investment in firms with ties to
Sudan - is broad enough to justify quick Senate votes.
"These are provisions that enjoy such strong bipartisan support they may not
require ... [debate] on the floor," he told reporters after the votes.
In a 263 to 146 vote last month the House passed a flood insurance
reauthorization bill that would include optional wind insurance coverage. Sens.
Mel Martinez, R-Fla., and Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., advocated including a similar
provision in the Senate bill, but Sen. Dodd persuaded them to withdraw their
amendment and instead added a provision requiring a study of the cost
implications.
"There is merit" in adding wind coverage, he said, but he would be "uneasy"
about including it without first studying its cost.
http://www.americanbanker.com/            http://www.sourcemedia.com/

Graphic

 
photo, Dodd

Load-Date: October 17, 2007


End of Document