PANEL OF EXPERTS TO STUDY DANGERS OF TERRORISTS USING NUCLEAR ARMS
The New York Times
January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk
Length: 481 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28
Body


A panel of experts on nuclear weapons design, terrorism and intelligence matters will study the danger of terrorists' stealing a nuclear bomb or the material to make one.
At a news conference today, leaders of the group asserted that the risk of nuclear terrorism is increased by poor security at storage depots and weapons plants, and by the growing amount of weapons-grade plutonium that has been entering the commercial market after being separated from power plants' nuclear waste.
According to Paul Leventhal, a former Congressional staff member who is the group's executive vice chairman, if current processing rates continue, there will be 400 tons of separated plutonium in private hands by the year 2000, twice the amount now contained in Soviet and American nuclear weapons.
The panel, the International Task Force on Prevention of Nuclear Terrorism, is financed by the Carnegie Corporation. It is headed by Rear Adm. Thomas Davies, retired, and Bernard O'Keefe, chairman of EG & G Inc., a corporation that has done development and testing of nuclear weapons. Admiral Davies is a former Assistant Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and a former head of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Bureau.
 
Concern Over U.S. Focus
Mr. O'Keefe, one of those who developed the firing circuits for the first atomic bombs, expressed concern that while American military defense resources focused on a possible Soviet nuclear attack on the United States or a Soviet invasion of Western Europe, a third and more likely possibility - nuclear terrorism that could provoke one of the others - received little attention or financing.
Admiral Davies criticized plans to reduce financing of security improvement projects at nuclear installations in the United States while exempting from budget cuts the production of nuclear warheads.
Theodore Taylor, another member of the panel, who has designed nuclear research reactors, said that he would meet at the nuclear research center at Los Alamos, N.M., with three other specialists to examine the question of whether a terrorist group could manufacture a nuclear weapon.
Mr. Leventhal said that his group knew of no incidents in which attempts had been made to steal weapons or materials, although he added that there might be classified information on the subject.
The 26 panel members, who are from nine countries, also include Harold Agnew, former director of the Los Alamos National Laboratory; Brian Jenkins, an expert on terrorism for the Rand Corporation; Yonah Alexander, director of the Institute for Studies in International Terrorism of the State University of New York; Inga Thorsson, former Swedish Under Secretary of State for Disarmament; Stansfield Turner, former Director of the Central Intelligence, and Yuval Neeman, an Israeli physicist and politician who has been instrumental in developing Israel's nuclear weapons capability.


End of Document