Panel works for standards on sensitive, unclassified info
Federal Times
April 3, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: IN BRIEF; Pg. 4
Length: 465 words
Byline: By DEBORAH FUNK
Body


An interagency task force is reviewing the wide range of policies governing sensitive but unclassified information with the goal of creating common standards. The effort aims to promote better sharing of sensitive information among federal officials as well as with state and local government officials.
More than 99 percent of federal departments and agencies answered President Bush's Dec. 16 directive to take an inventory of their procedures for marking and handling sensitive unclassified information, according to a senior Justice Department official involved in the working group, who spoke on the condition his name not be used. The effort to harmonize rules for handling terrorism information, called the Information Sharing Environment, was ordered by Congress as part of the 2004 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act.
Sensitive unclassified information can carry a host of different labels, including Sensitive But Unclassified, For Official Use Only, Limited Official Use, and Sensitive Security Information.
"This is a huge, complicated task and a difficult one," the Justice official said. "But it's one that everyone appreciates has to be done."
The Congressional Research Service estimates about 50 such labels are in use across the government for sensitive unclassified information.
Most agencies have their own sets of rules on what label to use to indicate a document's sensitivity, who can label the information sensitive and who can remove the label, for example.
Some agency rules on how to treat this information are based on law, others on internal agency policies, according to CRS and the National Security Archives, a nongovernment, nonprofit group that promotes more government transparency.
The National Security Archives and some lawmakers have complained that agencies' practice to cloak unclassified information is unchecked. Federal managers don't track how many unclassified documents and files they deem as being too sensitive to release, and most do not have periodic reviews to see if information is properly marked.
"I think the idea that there needs to be more standardization goes in the right direction. But I would have liked the president to stress the importance of limiting the use of these to the purpose they are intended, and also monitoring the use of these," said Meredith Fuchs, general counsel for the National Security Archives.
Bush's Dec. 16 memo called on agencies to review their sensitive unclassified procedures and to assess how effective those procedures are. The attorney general and the Homeland Security Department secretary will work the Director of National Intelligence and the secretaries of State, Defense and Energy to draft recommendations for how to control terrorism, homeland security and law enforcement information.

Load-Date: April 12, 2006


End of Document