Panelists consider alternatives to TRIA
Business Insurance
September 19, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 511 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Congress should look beyond the issue of extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act and consider the creation of a multiperil pool as a long-term solution to insuring against truly catastrophic events, according to the District of Columbia's top insurance regulator.
Lawrence H. Mirel, the district's commissioner of insurance, admitted that he was ``blue-skying'' when he made that suggestion during a discussion of TRIA sponsored by the Washington Legal Foundation last week. TRIA, which provides a government financial backstop for insurers facing claims from future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire at the end of the year. The Bush administration, which backed the initial enactment of TRIA in 2002, has recommended against extending it in its current form.
Mr. Mirel, one of three presenters at the event, also advocated allowing the current program to expire. He said TRIA initially was designed in part to allow insurers to come up with their own long-term solution to insuring against terrorism, but ``the industry has done really nothing'' to achieve that, he said. In its current form, TRIA allows government financial involvement to begin much too soon in the case of a terrorist attack, discourages the development of private terrorism insurance capacity, and doesn't deal with the wide variations in pricing for terrorism coverage across the county, he said.
``It would be a mistake to extend TRIA,'' he said. ``It's not going to happen.''
Instead, said Mr. Mirel, Congress should consider allowing the creation of a privately funded pool to provide terrorism insurance capacity. As the pool grew, it would require an ever-shrinking federal backstop, he said.
And Congress should take the matter a step further and consider the creation of a multirisk catastrophe pool that would respond to a huge catastrophe regardless of whether a terrorist or tsunami caused it, he said. The key should be ``the size of the event, not the cause of it,'' he said. Mr. Mirel said the trigger to activate payments from such a pool should be very high.
Industry wants TRIA
Warren Heck, chairman and chief executive officer of New York-based Greater New York Mutual Insurance Co., said he believes that the insurance industry will eventually come up with its own long-term solution to the issue of terrorism insurance, but that an extension of TRIA in its current form should occur.
He said creating a revamped TRIA as suggested by the Treasury Department, with a much higher trigger and greater industry exposure, would not be acceptable. ``We'd be better off without it,'' he said. He predicted that Congress would address the TRIA issue, but possibly not until the current program has expired.
``It's too close to call,'' said Travis Plunkett, legislative director for the Consumer Federation of America, which opposes extending TRIA. Before Hurricane Katrina struck, the passage of some sort of TRIA bill seemed likely, he said. ``Katrina has thrown a wrench into that process,'' he said.
Glenn Lammi, the WLF's chief counsel, moderated the session.

Load-Date: September 21, 2005


End of Document