PANEL URGES U.S. TO REFOCUS ON FIGHTING TERRORISM BUT GUARD LIBERTIES/ INDEPENDENT BOARD SHOULD MONITOR ANTI-TERRORISM TACTICS, COMMISSION SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 16, 2003 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 493 words
Byline: Jonathan D. Salant/ The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The effort to protect Americans from terrorism "appears to have waned" as both the government and its people worry more about the latest disaster or outbreak of illness, a federal commission says.
The advisory panel urged the government to refocus on anti-terrorism measures, but it also called for an independent board to make sure that efforts to monitor terrorism suspects respect Americans' civil liberties.
The report was the last of five by the nonpartisan panel, set up by Congress and headed by James Gilmore, former governor of Virginia and former chairman of the Republican Party.
L. Paul Bremer was a member until he was named the U.S. administrator in Iraq. So was Donald Rumsfeld until he became defense secretary. The commission is scheduled to go out of business early next year.
Events such as Hurricane Isabel last September and the current flu epidemic have diverted attention from anti-terrorism efforts, said the commission, officially known as the Advisory Panel to Assess Domestic Response Capabilities for Terrorism Involving Weapons of Mass Destruction.
"Americans have very short-term memories," said the commission's vice chairman, George Foresman, deputy director of Virginia's office of preparedness. "People are dealing with the reality of their lives today. This country doesn't do a good job at looking to the future and remembering the past."
Commission members outlined several problems:
* The Homeland Security Department is trying to merge 22 agencies.
* Federal officials have yet to give clear directions to state and local governments on their role in the anti-terrorism effort.
* Business needs to be brought into the planning because it owns power plants, airliners and other crucial parts of the infrastructure.
The commission also said government should balance the threat of terrorism with protection of civil liberties. The panel called for an independent, bipartisan board to make sure that techniques used to fight terrorism are never used to spy on Americans. Among those techniques: using military satellites, letting authorities monitor lawful protests and following suspects through computer databases and traffic cameras.
"We are expressing concern and a simple warning that this must be constantly thought about," Gilmore said.
The commission said federal, state and local governments must work with the private sector to plan how best to guard against another terrorist attack. The commission said planning must look at what the country's enemies might do rather than simply revisit the tactics of Sept. 11.
New anti-terrorism approaches should be developed by a White House-level agency that "must have some clear authority over the homeland security budgets and programs throughout the federal government." The Homeland Security Council should be the White House agency to develop approaches that would be carried out by the new Homeland Security Department, other government agencies and private groups, the report said.

Notes

PAGE 2

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (James) Gilmore/ Headed congressional panel

Load-Date: December 16, 2003


End of Document