PANEL URGES ANTI-TERRORISM PUSH IN U.S.;
 PREPAREDNESS LAGGING SINCE SEPT. 11 ATTACKS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 16, 2003 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 571 words
Byline: SHANNON MCCAFFREY, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Efforts to protect America from a new terror strike have lost momentum in the more than two years that have elapsed since the Sept. 11 attacks, a federal advisory panel warned yesterday.
 The war in Iraq, the massive blackout in the Northeast, Hurricane Isabel and a deadly outbreak of the flu have all served to distract federal resources and attention from terrorism preparedness, according to the final report by the nonpartisan Gilmore Commission.
 "Americans have very short-term memories," said commission Vice Chairman George Foresman, deputy director of Virginia's office of preparedness. "People are dealing with the reality of their lives today. This country doesn't do a good job at looking to the future and remembering the past."
The Gilmore Commission also concluded that the Department of Homeland Security's color-coded terrorist threat warning system should be revamped to include a regional alert system that would warn local first-responders about threats to their areas.
 The report said the five-tier national system "has become largely marginalized."
 With the government tightening security, the panel recommended that the president appoint an independent oversight board to examine the impact on civil liberties. The commission said increased monitoring and surveillance done in the name of national security have "the vast potential to invade personal privacy."
 "We should not fall into the pattern of suggesting that the freedoms of the American people should be traded off for their security," said former Virginia Gov. James Gilmore, the committee's chairman.
 The report allowed that the Department of Homeland Security is still relatively new and said more time is needed before it is fully effective.
 But the commission noted the agency is lagging behind in crucial areas, such as its analysis and dissemination of intelligence to law enforcement and to first-responders.
 National homeland security strategy should be set by a White House-level entity that would have clear authority over budgets and programs scattered throughout the federal government, the commission recommended.
 It noted, for example, that at least six federal departments and several other organizations are involved in developing standards for emergency communications and equipment, creating confusion for state and local officials.
 The report said the administration must do a better job bringing state and local agencies into the loop, ensuring them timely grant monies and eliminating a backlog in security clearances for local officials who need access to threat data.
 Department of Homeland Security spokesman Brian Roerhkasse disputed that the administration had lost momentum. He said department employees "are more focused than ever on building in new layers of protection and enhancing our capabilities to respond to terrorism."
 The commission repeated a recommendation made in an earlier report to create a domestic intelligence-gathering agency, saying the FBI risks being perceived as a kind of "secret police" as it becomes more involved in surveillance. The Justice Department wants domestic police work left to the FBI.
 The Gilmore Commission was created in 1999 to assess how prepared America was to respond to a terrorist attack within its borders involving weapons of mass destruction.
 Its work took on a particular urgency after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. The report issued yesterday was the commission's fifth.

Load-Date: December 17, 2003


End of Document