Panel to discuss ways to handle bullying; The statewide panel discussion on bullying will be from 7 to 9 p.m. Thursday at the Laramie County School District 1 Auditorium, 2810 House Ave. A panel of about 20 school administrators, board members, former teachers, child advocates, counselors, law enforcement and others will discuss strategies to handle bullying.
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne)
May 12, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Main; Pg. A3
Length: 294 words
Byline: Baylie Evans
Body


By Baylie Evans
bevans@wyomingnews.com
CHEYENNE - Organizers of a panel discussion on bullying Thursday said their goal is to get everyone involved speaking the same language.
The event is being called a statewide town hall meeting, where administrators, parents, school board members, law enforcement, child advocates, counselors and others will get together to discuss solutions and strategies for handling bullying.
The panel will be broadcast by KGAB radio at 650 AM, as well as by video with the Wyoming Equality Video Network.
Bullying in this generation has changed over the last several years, said Marvin Nash of Cheyenne, a co-creator of the Bullying Hurts program and an organizer of the panel.
It's not a new problem, but today's adults may not understand the bullying that kids endure now, such as cyber-bullying.
"We need an interpreter," Darlene Nash, the other co-creator of Bullying Hurts, said.
About 18 people are scheduled to serve on the panel, including Cheyenne Mayor Rick Kaysen, Laramie County Sheriff Danny Glick and Laramie County School District 1 Superintendent Ted Adams.
Dave Chaffin, host of the Morning Zone and the program director for KGAB, also is an organizer of the panel.
"Bullying is terrorism in its truest form," he said.
The goal is to scare others, and "that's what terrorism is all about."
Bullying may seem like only a big town problem, Marvin Nash added, but it's a real problem right here in our schools. Sometimes it goes so far as to end in suicide.
"There are some things we just can't cowboy up," he said.
While they know that bullying will never end completely, the organizers hope to help the community come up with ways to help the children handle it.
"A school cannot teach what a community will not support," Marvin Nash said.

Load-Date: May 12, 2010


End of Document