Panel: U.S. rights stand rings false;
Conference urges fresh look at anti-terrorism measures
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 8, 2005 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Atlanta & the World;
Length: 664 words
Byline: MARK BIXLER
Body


The war on terrorism has hit close to home for Nozima Kamalova, a human-rights advocate in Uzbekistan.
She said authorities in her country have cited the war on terrorism to arrest and beat up opposition politicians, journalists and others they see as opponents. She said they jailed a human-rights activist after he gave a television interview and closed a press agency that didn't comply with new rules requiring some news outlets to receive a government permit.
"Many of these restrictive measures were justified by the war on terrorism," she said at a human-rights conference Monday at the Carter Center.
The conference drew about 30 people from 15 countries to Atlanta. Many are concerned that the United States is supporting governments that violate human rights but help fight terrorism just as the United States supported allies during the Cold War who violated human rights but opposed communism, said Karin Ryan, a human-rights expert at the center.
She worries that abuses in prisons run by the U.S. military will undermine its standing as a champion of human rights. The United States likes to portray itself as a beacon of freedom and liberty, and with some legitimacy, she said, but many see hypocrisy in the United States proclaiming its interest in democracy and equal treatment under the law while some of its soldiers humiliated Iraqi detainees in the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq.
"It makes it very difficult for the world to take a lecture from the U.S. on human rights," Ryan said.
Former President Jimmy Carter opened the conference Monday by saying that the threat of terrorism justified increased government security steps, such as closer monitoring of foreign visitors, but that governments around the world have too often used the war on terror as a pretext to crack down on human rights.
"We need to have a good balance between combating terrorism and protecting --- I would say enhancing --- human rights," he said.
The former president said the United States and its allies could reduce terrorism by promoting human rights because countries with poor human-rights records can be breeding grounds for terrorism.
Louise Arbour, U.N. high commissioner for human rights, cited several setbacks toward improved human rights since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
She said governments in general are more accepting of torture as a device to extract information and are less likely to see the Geneva Conventions, which govern the treatment of prisoners of war, as applicable to suspected terrorists.
She also said the United Nations' human-rights offices have suffered from "gross deficiencies."
A U.N. human-rights commission has been criticized for accepting members with poor human-rights records, such as China, Cuba, Eritrea, Saudi Arabia, Sudan and Zimbabwe. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has proposed replacing the commission with one whose members have better human-rights records.
Carter also said the United States has set a poor example by holding at least 520 foreign nationals as "enemy combatants" at a prison camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Most are suspected of ties to al-Qaida or the ousted Taliban regime in Afghanistan. Some have been held for three years without charge. The United States says the detentions are meant to prevent terrorist attacks, but critics say the detainees either should be prosecuted or freed.
Carter said detainees should be told the charges against them and have access to an attorney. He said the United States should close Guantanamo because "it's a great embarrassment" that encourages repressive regimes to violate human rights. He also criticized the United States for not doing enough to stop the abuse of people captured and held in Afghanistan and Iraq.
"I'm convinced that these abuses have been caused by public statements and secret statements now made public in which U.S. officials denied the applicability of the Geneva Conventions," Carter said. "Every guard should know that the Geneva Conventions will apply."

Graphic

 
BITA HONARVAR / Staff Former President Jimmy Carter listens as Louise Arbour, U.N. high commissioner for human rights, speaks Monday at the Carter Center. Both were participants in a conference on defending human rights while advancing security and the rule of law.

Load-Date: June 8, 2005


End of Document