Panel Limits New F.B.I. Rules
The New York Times
May 12, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 295 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 11
Body


A House committee, concerned about new Federal Bureau of Investigation guidelines that give agents broader authority to infiltrate domestic groups, agreed today to a compromise that allows the bureau to use the regulations temporarily.
The House Judiciary Committee approved the compromise by voice vote.
WASHINGTON, May 11 (AP) - A House committee, concerned about new Federal Bureau of Investigation guidelines that give agents broader authority to infiltrate domestic groups, agreed today to a compromise that allows the bureau to use the regulations temporarily.It was introduced by the committee chairman, Peter W. Rodino Jr., Democrat of New Jersey, who had been in favor of eliminating the guidelines the bureau says are designed to help it fight domestic terrorism.
The compromise language was sent to the House floor as part of the Justice Department's $3.4 billion authorization bill for the fiscal year 1984. The bill was approved by voice vote.
Attorney General William French Smith issued the guidelines on March 7. One of them would permit the bureau to infiltrate groups in which ''there is not yet a reasonable indication of criminal activities.''
The compromise would permit the bureau to use the guidelines through Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year. But from Oct. 1 through Jan. 1, the bureau must revert to previous guidelines that put greater restrictions on agents.
Before Jan. 1, Mr. Rodino said, Congress and the bureau would attempt to agree on a new set of rules governing the investigation of groups that come under the guidelines.
Had the compromise not been reached, Mr. Rodino faced a battle from committee conservatives, led by Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, who had wanted the bureau to retain the guidelines.


End of Document