Panetta sees security gains in Afghanistan; U.S. officials avoid claiming to be winning the conflict.; War on terrorism
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 15, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: MAIN; Pg. A4
Length: 358 words
Byline: By David S. Cloud and Laura King
Body


FORWARD OPERATION BASE SHARANA, Afghanistan - Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta said Wednesday that security gains seen in parts of Afghanistan over the past year represented a "turning point" in the decade-old conflict.
"We're moving in the right direction and we're winning this very tough conflict in Afghanistan," he told troops from the U.S. Army's 172nd Infantry Brigade at Forward Operating Base Sharana, about 30 miles from the Afghan-Pakistani border.
Guarded response
U.S. officials generally have avoided explicitly claiming to be winning the conflict, mindful of insurgent attacks that continue to exact a heavy civilian toll, the stubborn resilience of the Taliban and other militant groups, Washington's deteriorating relations with Pakistan, and the political woes of the administration of President Hamid Karzai.
Instead, over the last year, American commanders have cited significant progress against the insurgency, but with the caveat that the gains are fragile and potentially reversible.
Soldier's question
One soldier asked if the Afghan government would collapse once U.S. forces withdrew. Others asked skeptical questions about Karzai, and whether Pakistan would ever crack down on militant groups that use its territory as a springboard for attacks on Western troops inside Afghanistan.
Panetta sought to reassure the soldiers that troop withdrawals ordered by the White House did not mean the Obama administration was walking away from Afghanistan. "All of the blood we have shed here has not been shed in vain," he said.
Mission not over
Asked later about his assertion the U.S. was winning, Panetta acknowledged, "We have not won. We have not completed this mission, but I do believe we are making significant progress."
Col. Ed Bohnermann, commander of the 172nd, said Paktika had seen an even steeper drop in insurgent attacks than in previous years when winter weather set in.
Coinciding with Panetta's visit were fresh reminders of ongoing violence across the country. A district chief who crusaded against drug trafficking in Afghanistan's poppy heartland was killed Wednesday in a roadside bombing, along with two bodyguards.

Load-Date: January 29, 2012


End of Document