Panel Rules Jail Stabbing Constituted Terrorism
The New York Times
December 3, 2008 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 28
Length: 357 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


A  reputed former leader of Al Qaeda who is serving 32 years in prison for stabbing a jail guard in 2000 must be resentenced, a federal appeals panel in Manhattan ruled on Tuesday, because a judge wrongly concluded that the man's crime did not meet the legal standard for terrorism. 
  Federal prosecutors, who argued that the attack met the standard for terrorism, had sought a life sentence for the defendant, Mamdouh Mahmud Salim.  Officials have described him  as a founder of Al Qaeda and a former top aide to Osama bin Laden. 
  Mr. Salim pleaded guilty to stabbing the guard, Louis Pepe, in 2002.
  Prosecutors said that the stabbing was part of a fruitless plan to take hostages and escape from the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Lower Manhattan. Mr. Pepe, who was stabbed in the eye, was left with severe brain damage.
  At the time of the stabbing, Mr. Salim was awaiting trial in a terrorist conspiracy case  stemming from the 1998 bombings of two American embassies in East Africa, in which 224 people were killed. 
  He later testified that he had become frustrated with his lawyers, and stabbed Mr. Pepe so he could take his keys, unlock a visitors' room, and attack his lawyers so they would withdraw from his case. 
  In sending the case back for a new sentence, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held unanimously that the attack included the required elements to be considered a crime in the furtherance of terrorism under the sentencing guidelines at the time. 
  Judge John M. Walker Jr. wrote the decision, which was joined by Judges Jon O. Newman and Sonia Sotomayor.
  Eileen L. Trotta, Mr. Pepe's sister, said after being told of the ruling, ''That is definitely our early Christmas gift.'' 
  She said that her brother, Mr. Pepe, continued to improve, with the assistance of physical therapy and other treatments.
  Richard B. Lind, who represents Mr. Salim in the assault case, said he planned to ask the judge, Deborah A. Batts, to impose the same 32-year sentence on his client rather than a harsher one. 
  Mr. Lind declined to comment further. Prosecutors declined to comment.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 3, 2008


End of Document