Panicking won't prevent terrorism
University Wire
February 14, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 338 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Oklahoma Daily
Dateline: Norman, Okla.
Body


Americans must take terror alerts for what they are worth. They are not meant to cause panic, but to alert people to be cautious. There is nothing to gain from becoming worried. Furthermore, if the intention behind acts of terrorism is to instill terror, then becoming worried will allow al Qaeda to accomplish its goals.
U. Oklahoma
In the last week terror warnings have increased, and suggestions for preparation have abounded on local and national television stations. Some advice has provided practical information and simple procedures to follow in case of an attack. For example, individuals have been advised to have a plan for communicating with family and loved ones in case of a disaster. This clearly has practical application and could save lives.
Other recommendations, however, border on hysteria. The anxiety caused by a suggestion that people duct tape their windows in order to protect their homes in the event of a biological or chemical attack seems to outweigh any potential benefits.
Furthermore, it is impossible to predict acts of terrorism. Few people could have foreseen the tragedies that occurred on Sept. 11. Americans should heed practical advice that they can turn to in the event of a tragedy. However, no one can foresee the numerous things that could happen. Attempts by the public to predict acts of terrorism and assess methods of prevention contributes to hysteria. This is exactly what terrorists want.
In addition the media has a responsibility to relate new information regarding threats of terrorism in a way that is informative but not sensational. Watching too much of a 24-hour news channel may provide viewers with an over-exaggerated assessment of the threat posed by terrorists.
As terror warnings increase, and international conditions become more volatile, Americans must be guided by common sense. Panicking and rushing to extremes will not help anything. Americans can demonstrate their resolve best by going about their daily business.
(C) 2002 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 14, 2003


End of Document