Papandreou Faults U.S.
The New York Times
May 29, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 325 words
Byline: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, May 28
Body


Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou, toasting President Assad of Syria at a dinner here Tuesday night, indirectly criticized the United States position on international terrorism.
Addressing a leader whose country has often been charged with supporting terrorism, Mr. Papandreou said: ''We cannot accept the principle that terrorism is directly related to states characterized as terrorist, because if we had sufficient time, I could read a list of countries either in the West or the East, North or South that should be included in that category.''
At a news conference in Tokyo this month, President Reagan said he would strike at Syria if he obtained ''irrefutable evidence'' that it had supported a terrorist attack.
Mr. Papandreou, pointing his remarks more directly at the United States, said: ''We also do not accept the settlement of terrorist problems by the military intervention of one country against another, because this upsets the international legal order and nominates the strong powers as policemen of our planet.''
Mr. Papandreou, striking a note also sounded by the Syrian leader, drew a distinction between terrorism and ''national liberation struggles.'' He said Greece condemned terrorism as a way of solving problems. He did not specify whether he differed with other Western leaders in their definition of a series of recent attacks as terrorism.
In his response, Mr. Assad echoed his host's stand against terrorism. He said that only recently 144 Syrians had been killed and 149 wounded in a ''major terrorist action.'' He was presumably referring to a series of mysterious explosions on Syrian buses that caused many casualties.
He said Syria ''unhesitatingly'' supported movements fighting for Palestinian liberation and popular resistance movements throughout the world. He said Syria condemned terrorists whom it regarded as criminals and mercenaries.
Mr. Assad left today for Damascus, apparently changing his plan to visit Rumania.


End of Document