PAPERS SHOW COMMUNISTS BACKED PLO PURPOSE WAS TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 26, 1992, TUESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 918 words
Body


MOSCOW - The Russian government released on Monday secret documents on Communist Party involvement in terrorism, including reports that it armed Palestinian gunmen for attacks on American and Israeli targets.  The disclosure came on the eve of a court hearing on the banning of the party by Russia's president, Boris Yeltsin. Russia's Constitutional Court will review the legality of Yeltsin's 1991 decrees liquidating the Communist Party and nationalizing its property.  Yeltsin issued the decrees after hard-liners in the party, military and KGB tried to seize power in the coup last August against Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.  Western governments often accused the Soviet Union of backing international terrorism in the 1970s and '80s, but internal documents proving high-level involvement by the Communist Party had not previously been made public.  ''The Communist Party that seized power and dissolved the Parliament by force in 1918 is now trying to return to power using democratic institutions and procedures,'' Yeltsin's top legal adviser, Sergei Shakhrai, 37, said at a news conference Monday.  He read a document dated May 16, 1975, describing a decision by the party's Central Committee to supply arms to the Palestine Liberation Organization.  ''In accordance with the . . . decision, the KGB has handed over to the head of the foreign operations service of the PLO a shipment of foreign weapons and ammunition,'' it reads.  It says the weapons were intended ''to continue 'the oil war' by special means, accomplishing actions against U.S. and Israeli personnel in third countries and conducting terrorist activities.''
The oil war was apparently a reference to Arab attempts to use access to Arab oil as a lever to influence other nations in the Arab-Israeli conflict.  Shakhrai said the document came from the ''special dossier'' that Gorbachev passed to Yeltsin. It contained top-secret papers on the party's clandestine activities from the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution through the 1980s, and was transferred directly from one Communist Party general secretary to another, Shakhrai said.  The Russian business weekly Commersant reported Monday that Yeltsin's government began last week to declassify the estimated 1 million documents in the ''special dossier.'' Commersant said they include details on Soviet dictator Josef Stalin's wholesale deportation of various ethnic groups, party support for world terrorism, repression of dissidents and financing of foreign communist parties.  Shakhrai said, ''The Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Communist Party of Russia were not parties, either in a political nor in a legal sense.  ''They conducted genocide against their own people, inflaming inter-ethnic animosity and deporting populations, encouraging social conflicts, violating freedom of conscience. Each of these conclusions will be proved with documents at the session of the Constitutional Court.'' The Soviet Communist Party gave money to 109 like-minded organizations in more than 70 countries, and illegally sen t abroad more than $200 million during the past decade, Russian prosecutor Sergei Aristov said in an interview published Monday.  Former party bosses now admit no ''broad world Communist movement'' existed, and some foreign parties had fewer than 250 members, Aristov told the government-supported newspaper Rossiskaya Gazeta.  Shakhrai said he would represent Yeltsin at today's hearing, which stems from a petition by diehard Communists in the Russian Congress of People's Deputies.  The party, which once had 19 million members, was discredited by the coup and apparently has little popular support.  New Pact Russia and Kazakhstan signed an economic and military cooperation treaty Monday.  The treaty, the first of its kind between former Soviet republics, provides for open frontiers for goods and services and lays the basis for a common market among the states of the former Soviet Union.  Russia and Kazakhstan also formed a single security zone, which they pledged to defend together in a new alliance. The provision is similar to that allowed for in a pact signed earlier this month by the two countries and three other Commonwealth states.  War Rumors Moldova's President Mircea Snegur said Monday that war with Russia was possible unless his country's Parliament brought a halt to military activity in the breakaway Trans-Dniester region, the Itar-Tass news agency reported.  ''The Moldovan Parliament has to choose between two decisions - either to stop military activities in the Dniester region, which is not possible in my opinion, or to declare that Moldova is in a state of war with Russia,'' Snegur said.  He was speaking at an emergency session of the former Soviet republic's Parliament devoted to the conflict with Russian-speaking separatists in open rebellion inside the republic. The separatists wish to remain in the Commonwealth of Independent States; many in Moldova wish to join Romania.  Snegur said Yeltsin had not responded to Moldovan charges of ''aggression by the 14th Army on the left bank of the River Dniester.'' Moldova accuses Russia, which controls the former Soviet 14th Army, of deploying its men and equipment in support of the Dniester separatists.  Baker In Georgia U.S. Secretary of State James A. Baker III flew Monday for a reunion with former Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze in Georgia.  It is the last of the 15 former Soviet republics Baker has visited since the Soviet Union disintegrated.

Graphic

 
Photo; PHOTO by AP … Armenian fighters maintaining a watch Monday over the Azerbaijani town of Lachin. Armenians are burning abandoned homes of Azerbaijanis to make sure they do not return. (NOTE: Photo ran with different version of story in the 5* edition)

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document