Paradise officials eye terrorism prevention
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
June 29, 2005, Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: M,
Length: 326 words
Byline: JAMES BUESCHER, Correspondent
Body


James Buescher, Correspondent With Route 30 running east to Philadelphia and a new $4.1 million Amtrak station under construction near Belmont Road, Paradise Township officials have decided its time to start getting savvy about preventing terrorism. Though we know theres a chance however slim that our municipality could be a terrorist target, our real fear is … that something could pass through here on the way to Philadelphia or even to the state capitol, Paradise Township supervisor Dennis Groff said June 22. Our fear is that terrorists might use our transportation system against us, he said. On June 15, the Paradise Township road crew joined more than a dozen local government professionals to discuss terrorism prevention at a seminar called Highway Watch, a nationwide program sponsored by the U.S. Transportation Security Administration and the American Trucking Associations. Our trains are possible targets, as are our highways. This program just wants folks to be mindful, Groff said. It teaches you to pay attention to what your instincts are telling you about a particular situation. Some of those situations include seeing a tanker truck dumping chemical agents into a public water supply, Groff said. Anyplace could be a target, and we need to do our part on the smallest level, Groff said. Who knows? Something somebody sees in Paradise could stop a disaster from happening in Philadelphia. Another benefit of joining Highway Watch is that Paradise is now plugged into a nationwide program that warns local leaders if something suspicious is passing through their municipality.
#704711.wrk#Its neat to know these systems are in place to protect us. And it stretches from the federal level all the way down to the smallest townships, Groff said. Even the terrorists know we have these security systems in place, and it scares them. For more information on Highway Watch, contact the township office at 768-8222 or visit www.highwaywatch.com. 

Load-Date: July 12, 2005


End of Document