Paratrooper thought he had the jump on new job
 Philadelphia Daily News
JUNE 3, 2005 Friday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 12
Length: 276 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


As a man, David Schroer was an Army colonel and terrorism expert. As a woman, Diane Schroer was out of a job.
What happened in between is the subject of a civil- rights lawsuit against the librarian of Congress.
According to the case filed yesterday in federal court, David Schroer had accepted a position as a terrorism-research analyst at the Congressional Research Service when he told his future boss he was about to change his name to Diane and to begin dressing as a woman. It was part of a medical transition that Schroer had decided to make from being a man to being a woman.
The next day, the suit alleges, Schroer's future boss called to say he would not be a "good fit" at the Library of Congress, of which the CRS is a part.
David Schroer was an Army Ranger with more than 450 parachute jumps and two master's degrees, and he directed a 120-person classified organization in the war on terrorism. Schroer presented highly sensitive intelligence reports to Vice President Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Schroer decided to change from being a man to being a woman after leaving the military, applying to the Library of Congress as a man.
Sex reassignment often involves hormone therapy, living full-time in the gender corresponding with the person's gender identity and surgery.
"The government was perfectly happy to let Schroer risk life and limb to fight terrorism, yet now that she's female, Schroer has been told that she's unfit even to research terrorism," said Art Spitzer, legal director of the ACLU in the Washington area.
The Library of Congress declined to comment. *

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Schroer

Load-Date: September 14, 2005


End of Document