Paranoia about terrorism breeds bad decisions
University Wire
July 15, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Daily Lobo via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 386 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Daily Lobo; SOURCE: U. New Mexico
Dateline: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. 
Body


Say what you want about Michael Moore. Either way, his latest film has got people talking, thinking and writing letters to the editor. I watched the film. I didn't investigate it. I can't tell you if he took quotes out of context to make his argument.
Still after "Bowling for Columbine" and "Fahrenheit 9/11," I was left thinking about one thing -- the nature of panic. People do stupid things when they're afraid. They make rash decisions. They think reactively.
According to an article in this week's Newsweek, the Bush administration is trying to figure out how to postpone this year's election in the event of a terrorist attack.
Talk about overreacting.
Moore blames media and stereotyping for creating a culture of fear. In "Fahrenheit," he claims the Bush administration deceptively used fear tactics on the American people to promote the war in Iraq.
Deceptive manipulation or not, it sure seems like terrorism is on the United States' collective brain. And just when you thought you might forget about it, Homeland Security Chief Tom Ridge warns us that al Qaeda is planning an attack to disrupt the election. He also said he didn't have any exact information to report.
Chairman of the Election Assistance Commission DeForest Soaries is urging Ridge to see if he can get emergency legislation from Congress to allow the vote to be rescheduled if an attack occurs.
Are these guys serious? After all the hubbub surrounding President Bush's first election, you would think his administration would be doing everything it could to ensure that this one looks like it's on the up and up. Making moves to find out how the election might be postponed is probably not great for PR.
More than that, postponing the election is surely un-American.
In the history of the United States, a presidential election has never been postponed. We even had an election on schedule in 1864 during the Civil War. Abraham Lincoln thought he was going to lose that one, but he refused to postpone it, though he was advised to.
Lincoln, apparently, was not afraid of his own shadow.
"The election is a necessity," Lincoln said. "We cannot have a free government without elections; and if the rebellion could force us to forgo, or postpone, a national election, it might fairly claim to have already conquered us."
(C) 2003 Daily Lobo via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 15, 2004


End of Document