Pardon case latest test for White; Quiet: Prosecutor's legacy is fighting terrorism, some say
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 5, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001, Telegraph-Herald
Section: Pg. a7
Length: 421 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


NEW YORK (AP) - Mary Jo White likes riding motorcycles, runs five miles a day and, despite standing just 5-foot-1, is a force to be reckoned with on the office women's basketball team. She also likes a good fight.
Her latest test: a criminal investigation of former President Clinton's pardon of fugitive financier Marc Rich, the ex-husband of a Democratic fund-raiser, and his commutation of the sentences of four swindlers from a Hasidic community that overwhelmingly backed Hillary Clinton's Senate bid.
White, the Manhattan federal prosecutor, was said to be outraged when the pardons were announced Jan. 20. She notified the Justice Department she wanted to investigate whether Clinton traded presidential powers for money and votes. Within a couple of weeks, she was given the green light.
More often than not, White has gotten what she wants during an eight-year reign in the Manhattan prosecutor's post, the job that helped Mayor Rudolph Giuliani earn a national reputation.
Unlike Giuliani, who as prosecutor was quick to call a news conference, White has chosen a quieter route, rarely granting interviews and summoning reporters only for major announcements. As a result, the public knows little about one of the nation's most powerful prosecutors.
After graduating at the head of her class at Columbia University Law School, White was a federal prosecutor in the Manhattan U.S. Attorney's office. She entered private practice in the 1980s, and later became a federal prosecutor in Brooklyn.
In 1993, she was named U.S. attorney in Manhattan and took over what was then the biggest terrorism case ever brought to court: the trials of six men in the World Trade Center bombing.
"She walked into a swarming hornet's nest," said J. Gilmore Childers, lead prosecutor in the case, which resulted in the convictions of all the defendants. "Probably her single biggest legacy is the fight against terrorism."
From her Manhattan office, she has pursued a global battle against terrorism, dispatching some of her top prosecutors around the world.
When 12 Americans were among the 224 people who died in the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, the government turned to White again. She obtained the indictments of 21 men in Manhattan on conspiracy charges, four of whom are now on trial.
FBI Director Louis Freeh called White a "prosecutor's prosecutor."
"In all my years of working with Mary Jo, I have only seen extraordinary dedication, skill and integrity," said Freeh, who worked with White when both were young prosecutors.

Graphic

 
Mug - Mary Jo White

Load-Date: March 6, 2001


End of Document