PARENTS OF HANDICAPPED CHILDREN ARE WORN DOWN BY THE SYSTEM;
PALUMBO IS IMPROVING LIVES;
REVIEW MISSED THE MARK;
KENT STATE SHOOTINGS;
IT'S A SIN;
BUT THE QUESTION IS: SHOULD IT BE A CRIME?;
BIRDERS FLOCK TO ANNUAL CHRISTMAS COUNT;
SENSE AND SENSITIVITY;
POLITICS AND TERRORISM MIXED WITH RELIGION POSES QUANDARY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 9, 2000, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,; TO THE POINT
Length: 1288 words
Byline: FAY COREY, POINT BREEZE; RICHARD L. WHITE; CHAIRMAN; BOARD OF DIRECTORS; DUQUESNE UNIVERSITY; UPTOWN; LARRY GARA, WILMINGTON, OHIO; THOMAS P. BENIC; FOX CHAPEL; JACK KELLY; DAVE ZUCHOWSKI; JOHN G. CRAIG
Body


Let us begin with a paragraph from a letter written by Momin Hoque of Elizabeth Township:
"When U.S. Customs officials arrested near Seattle an Algerian national, named Ahmed Ressam, with a carload of bombmaking materials (' Islamic Terrorism Link,' Dec. 23), and when federal prosecutors charged a Canadian citizen, named Lucia Garofalo, crossing the border into Vermont in the company of an Algerian national Yasim Rachek suspected to have terrorist ties, you attributed their activities linked to ' Islamic' terrorism (' Border Arrest, Radical Linked,' Dec. 24).
"It has become quite common in the U.S. and Western media to label terrorism, violence and even acts of common crimes committed by a Muslim individual or a group of individuals as Islamic terrorism. An act of terrorism committed by a Muslim does not become an Islamic terrorism. Islam does not sanction terrorism. German civic-minded citizens who happened to be also Christians slaughtered 7 million Jews during the WW II; but that inhuman act did not become a Christian holocaust!"
What concerns Mr. Hoque and other Muslims in southwestern Pennsylvania are prejudice and generalizations. Early last month, representatives of the America Muslim Council's local chapter visited our office to argue for more sensitivity on the newspaper's part. As Mr. Hoque said in his recent letter:
"We should remember that there are more than 1 billion Muslims in the world, and we shall have to live with them as neighbors. Labeling an act of violence as Islamic has consequences more far-reaching than what meets the eye. We expect that the Post-Gazette will be careful in crafting its news stories so that it does not unwittingly hurt the sensibility of its numerous readers, including about 10,000 Muslims residing in the greater Pittsburgh area."
Several days before Hoque's letter arrived, I fielded calls and letters from other readers who were upset by the main story on the front page Christmas morning. It concerned the hijacking of the Indian airliner and included this headline: "Sikh Hijackers Killed at Least 2, Goal Unclear."
As these readers observed, the Associated Press story had been in error about the identity of the hijackers, as was the headline that was based on the AP story filed from Kabul, Afghanistan. They did not believe that later stories, which indicated that the initial reports were erroneous, were adequate. They wanted a prominent apology.
These two complaints were representative of a larger phenomenon religious, ethnic and nationalist sensitivities and the increased effectiveness of representatives of special-interest groups of all persuasions in making these sensitivities known. If you paid attention the last 10 years to the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia, you understand what I mean.
The problem for a newspaper like the Post-Gazette is living with the complaints, because the episodic, freewheeling tradition that is American journalism assures that many, many people will regularly be offended. This is not to defend errors, like the AP's Sikh report, but they are going to occur. In the early hours of a story, someone in authority will be asked for information. He will provide it and it will be reported.
There will also be distortion, misplaced emphasis or "spin" that would not have been there if it were history rather than news being presented each day in the PG.
The Indian hijacking story is a good case in point. Hindus and Muslims in northern India have been fighting for years over territory in Kashmir that Pakistan believes should be within its borders. The man whose release the hijackers sought was Maulana Masood Azhar, a Muslim cleric and leader of Harkat ul Ansar, a Kashmiri nationalist group, put on the U.S. list of terrorist organizations in 1997.
Indian government officials said the hijackers were members of Al-Faran, a militant Islamic group that kidnapped four Europeans and one American in 1995, beheading one, letting one escape and leaving three unaccounted for.
The Afghan foreign minister, in describing his government's role in resolving the hostage standoff, said he was more than happy that the authorities of the "Islamic emirate of Afghanistan" were able to be helpful. Shortly afterward, one of the three freed hostages told a news conference, the hijackers who helped gain his freedom had embraced him and said, "We have done this for the cause of Islam."
It is very difficult for me as an editor to defend each and every one of the facts that were reported in this complicated and involved story. I do concede, of course, that an organization is not terrorist merely because the U.S. government says so, and that today's terrorist can become tomorrow's friend and international statesman.
But it does seem reasonable to conclude on the basis of overwhelming evidence that religion was the primary marker the participants on all sides of this drama used to describe themselves. This in turn suggests what bothers Mr. Hoque and other spokesmen for special-interest groups is not so much the product of journalistic distortions as it is their disquiet with the actions of peoples and movements with whom and which they identify. I do not see any easy way around this quandary or the prospect of comfort anytime soon.
 pg00 0103 000109 R S 0001070077 00002717 IT R
West Brownsville and Centerville boroughs may learn in the next several months whether they can move forward on forming a joint sewage authority board that would oversee construction of a $ 5.9 million treatment plant in West Brownsville.
The municipalities earlier approved creating the board to allow it to seek federal funding for the sewage treatment plant, said Robert Bible, engineer for the Centerville Sanitary Authority.
He said the plan is being reviewed by the state Department of Environmental Protection. A decision could come as early as this spring, Bible said.
"Once the DEP approves our draft plan, we'll advertise for a 30-day public inspection period to be followed by a public hearing. We'll then submit all comments with our final plan, and then the DEP will conduct another review," Bible said.
He said the joint board would benefit both communities by sharing costs for the plant that will treat sewage from 568 households in West Brownsville and 667 homes in Centerville.
"The cost for the new plant will be divided among the two boroughs based on the number of customers that will be affected," he said.
"And since the state Department of Environmental Protection favors regionalization of this type of service, rather than each municipality having its own treatment plant, we believe we'll have a better chance of being approved for full funding."
The new plant would serve all of West Brownsville, which has no sewage treatment facility, and the remaining portion of Centerville not served by the sanitary authority. Areas in Centerville to be affected by the plant are Malden, Vesta 6 and 7, Denbo and Denbo Heights, according to Bible. Construction of the plant is expected to be completed within 12 months.
West Brownsville officials are concerned over the cost of the mandated sewage project on borough residents, many of whom are senior citizens. An estimated $ 350 tap-in fee would be charged to each household served by the new plant, with average monthly rates of $ 44.
Borough secretary Jack Sabo said the DEP may provide funding to help homeowners offset the cost of the tap-in fees.
The local sewage plan was necessary to bring West Brownsville and Centerville into regulation with Pennsylvania's Act 537 that mandates all municipalities develop sewage systems.
John G. Craig Jr. is editor of the PostGazette. OUR TOWNS: Community News at a Glance WEST BROWNSVILLE/CENTERVILLE Jim Smith is a free-lance writer

Load-Date: January 11, 2000


End of Document