PARIS WARNED ON ARMENIANS
The New York Times
January 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 372 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, Jan. 20
Body


Turkey has warned France that Armenian militants might stage violent protests to exert pressure on a French court where a French Armenian is to go on trial Friday on charges of trying to kill the Turkish ambassador to Switzerland in 1980.
''We feel confident that French justice will fulfill its duty according to the laws,'' the Turkish Minister of Justice, Cevdet Mentes, said in a message to his French counterpart made public today.
''However, re cently some circles have engaged in efforts to divert the trial fro m its purpose.'' Armenian gr oups reportedly plan to hold a march and an open-air meeting in Ma rseilles Friday to protest the trial, and Mr. Mentes expressed con cern that Armenian activists might stage attacks as the trial of the French Armenian, Max Kilimdjian, opens.
Turkey warns France of possible protests by Armenians regarding murder trial of French Armenian accused ot trying to kill Turkish diplomat in 1980Leniency Is Feared
Turkish officials said they feared that the French court in Marseilles might show leniency, in view of recent Arme nian threats and terrorist acts.
Turkey is increasingly troubled by an Armenian campaign against its diplomatic missions abroad, a drive that has taken the lives of 21 diplomats or members of their families since 1975.
It was then that the Armenian Secret Army turned from political efforts to a violent campaign against Turkey. Its stated aim is to obtain redress for the massacres of Armenians during World War I under the Ottoman Empire.
The Turkish authorities refuse to acknowledge the existence of ''an Armenian problem'' but describe the Armenian campaign as part of a broader plan to try to upset the stability of the region.
Turkish-French relations have deteriorated considerably since the Socialists came to power in France and members of the French Government have expressed open sympathy for the Armenian cause.  France's position, according to official quarters, is that it condemns any form of terrorism but also condemns ''the genocide of Armenians'' under the Ottomans.
In the last few days, there have been bomb explosions in Paris and Geneva, causing no casualties but considerable damage. Armenian activists have taken responsibility for the incidents.


End of Document