PARIS SAID TO SEEK DEAL WITH SYRIANS TO CURB TERRORISM
The New York Times
October 30, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 1249 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Oct. 29
Body


There were signs today that France was moving toward closer cooperation with Syria in an effort to curb terrorism in Paris, less than a week after Britain severed diplomatic ties with Damascus, also over terrorism.
The French moves, disclosed by officials and in news reports here, were said to be aimed at winning Syrian cooperation in halting terrorist bombings in Paris and in obtaining the release of French hostages in the Middle East.
At the same time, France reached a settlement today with Iran on a major cause of friction between the two nations, a dispute over a $1 billion loan made to France by Iran before the present Iranian Government came to power.
 
Hostages' Release Sought
Both Iran and Syria are seen here as keys to attaining the two most urgent objectives of the Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac: the release of the French hostages and the prevention of bombings like those that traumatized this country in September.
The French Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, said in an interview published today that French and Syrian secret services were involved in ''real cooperation'' to prevent a renewal of terrorist bombings.
Mr. Pasqua, speaking a week ago to a Saudi Arabian newspaper, said the Syrians had been ''very hurt and very shocked'' by allegations that they had supported terrorist actions in France. The Syrian Government, he said, is trying to demonstrate not only that ''it was not implicated in these incidents, but also that it is ready to do everything to help us.''
 
Rejected British Request
France was among several European nations that rejected a request by Britain at a meeting of foreign ministers on Monday for collective punitive measures against Syria. British officials cited was they said was Syria's role in an attempt in April to blow up a London-to-Tel Aviv Israeli jetliner carrying 375 people, about 200 of them Americans. A British jury in the case convicted a Jordanian who officials said took his instructions from Syrian officials.
In Bonn, meanwhile, the West German Government said today that it would delay replacing its Ambassador to Syria when he routinely leaves his post next month, pending the outcome of a trial in West Berlin of a Jordanian suspected of bombing an Arab-German friendship society there.
The Jordanian, Ahmed Hazi, is the brother of Nezar Hindawi, who was convicted by the British court on Friday and sentenced to 45 years in prison for the attempted bombing of the El Al aircraft. The Syrian Embassy in East Berlin has denied any involvement in the El Al plot.
Mr. Pasqua's remarks in the interview came as the newspaper Le Monde reported today that Syria had helped France impose what the newspaper called a ''truce'' on the group believed to have planted the bombs in September, the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Faction.
The Syrians, the newspaper said, have told the terrorist group, whose headquarters are in Syrian-controlled territory in Lebanon, to end terrorist attacks at least until February, when George Ibrahim Abdallah, who is reportedly the group's leader and whose release was demanded by the bombers, comes to trial in Paris.
The newspaper said the case against Mr. Abdallah, accused of complicity in the 1982 killings of two diplomats here, including an American military attache, was weak and likely to result in an acquittal.
 
Contacts Called 'Normal'
Foreign Minister Jean-Bernard Raimond, in a television interview tonight, contended that it was ''normal'' for French officials to maintain contacts with Syria, but he denied that any deal had been struck involving the terror bombers.
But other officials here confirmed that France has been engaged in an intensive effort to gain Syrian cooperation to curb the terrorists. This has included visits to Syria by Bernard Gerard, the head of the French internal security agency.
''What seems likely is not so much that there was an agreement with Syria as such, but that arrangements have been made with the Syrian secret service,'' one official said.
Asked specifically about the Le Monde report today, officials said that they could not confirm it in detail, but that they found it to be ''highly probable.''
 
Syria Asking Aid and Arms
French officials also said Syria had in recent months asked France both for increased economic aid and new sales of military equipment, presumably in exchange for its cooperation in curbing terrorism. An official here said today that some groups in the Government had argued in favor of some new arms sales. Since the British break in relations, however, the Government has publicly said there will be no such sales to Syria.
Foreign Minister Raimond said in Parliament today that the Government had refused all recent Syrian arms requests. He also said deliveries remaining on arms sales contracts signed by the Socialist Government in 1982 and 1984 had been suspended.
Some officials here said Syrian embarrassment over British charges of terrorist involvement - and Syrian concern that other European nations might eventually accept British demands for punitive measures - might have helped France gain Syrian help in curbing terrorist activities, even though the Syrian intelligence service might have provided help carry out terror attacks in the first place.
The Le Monde report that the Government was seeking close cooperation with Syria was bound to produce controversy in this country, where many have argued in recent weeks that France has mistakenly compromised with Middle East radicals.
 
Mitterrand Appears Critical
President Francois Mitterrand, a political rival of the conservative Government's leaders, said on a visit to West Germany on Tuesday that there should be ''no compromise with terrorism.'' The statement that was widely viewed here as an implicit criticism of the Government's conciliatory approach to Syria.
The report in Le Monde today suggested that France had succeeded in getting Syrian help in curbing the terrorists' activities at least for several months.
The newspaper also said an intermediary, Lakhal Ayad, director of Algeria's military security agency, had passed a French message to the terrorist group suggesting that Mr. Abdallah was likely to be acquitted by a French trial.
The newspaper also said the French had concluded a ''contract'' with Elie Hobeika, a pro-Syrian Christian militia leader in Lebanon, to carry out reprisals against the terrorists, whose base is in a Christian area of northern Lebanon, if the truce in the bombing campaign was not observed.
 
BONN TO DELAY ENVOY
 
 BONN, Oct. 29 (Special to The New York Times) - The West German Government said today that it would delay replacing its Ambassador to Syria when he routinely leaves his post next month, pending the outcome of a trial in West Berlin of Mr. Hazi, the Jordanian suspected of bombing an Arab-German friendship society there.
The authorities have said Mr. Hazi had told the police that he picked up the explosives used in the attack in March from the Syrian Embassy in East Berlin after his brother, Mr. Hindawi, now jailed in London, traveled to Damascus to clear the attack with Syrian intelligence officials.
The Syrian Embassy in East Berlin has denied any involvement in the plot.
The Government spokesman, Friedhelm Ost, said Bonn's Ambassador in Damascus would leave his post in November as part of a ''routine change of assignments.''
But he said Bonn ''reserves its decision to replace the Ambassador'' in view of Mr. Hazi's trial, which is scheduled to begin in a West Berlin court on Nov. 17.


End of Document