Paris gunman had long criminal record, praised ISIL
Charleston Gazette-Mail
April 22, 2017, Saturday


Copyright 2017 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P3A
Length: 601 words
Byline: Elaine Ganley and Lori Hinnant The Associated Press
Body


PARIS The gunman who shot and killed a police officer on the famed Champs-Elysees just days before the French presidential vote spent 14 years in prison, including for attacking other officers, Francess anti-terrorism prosecutor said Friday a lengthy criminal history that gave a jolt to an already nail-biting election and fueled growing security concerns.
Yet, despite an arrest as recently as February, the 39-year-old assailant, Karim Cheurfi, had shown no signs of radicalization, Paris Prosecutor Francois Molins said, and was released for lack of evidence of a threat.
That all changed Thursday when Cheurfi, a Frenchman born in the Paris suburbs, opened fire with a Kalashnikov assault rifle on the crowded boutique-lined boulevard synonymous with French glamour, striking a police officer with two bullets to the head and wounding two others before being shot and killed by police.
Security forces found a note praising the Islamic State group at the scene of the attack, which apparently fell from the gunmans pocket. That, along with an unusually quick claim of responsibility by the Islamic State group were the only signs that he had entered the world of Islamic extremists, Molins said. Scraps of paper scrawled with the addresses of police stations and a satchel of weapons, munitions and the Muslim holy book were discovered in his car.
Thursdays shootings followed the arrest this week of two men in Marseille on suspicion of plotting an attack around Sundays hotly contested first-round presidential vote, fueling Frances worst fear: a terrorist attack as crowds gather at polling stations across the nation.
Polls suggest a tight race among the four top contenders, with far-right nationalist Marine Le Pen who rails at Frances Socialist government for being lax on crime and Emmanuel Macron, an independent centrist and former economy minister, in the lead.
However, conservative former Prime Minister Francois Fillon, whose campaign was initially derailed by corruption allegations that his wife was paid as his parliamentary aide, appeared to be closing the gap, as was far-leftist, Jean-Luc Melenchon.
The attack in Paris appeared a perfect fit for Le Pen and her barbed criticism of authorities she accuses of being naive on terrorism. The outcome of the election was being closely watched for signs that Europe is moving toward nationalist candidates like Le Pen.
U.S. President Donald Trump waded into the fray Friday, asserting in an interview with The Associated Press that the attack will stoke Le Pens chances.
Shes the strongest on borders and shes the strongest on whats been going on in France, Trump said in the Oval Office interview, noting that he was not specifically endorsing the far-right candidate.
Whoever is the toughest on radical Islamic terrorism, and whoever is the toughest at the borders, will do well in the election, he said.
Le Pen, who wants France to exit the EU, says her first move if elected will be to regain control of the nations borders, something she says is a critical component of sovereignty and a way to end what she calls a sieve for terrorists.
France is part of a treaty for a borderless Europe, allowing travelers to freely come and go.
Le Pen has hammered at the security issue, and on Friday she demanded the government immediately re-establish border controls. Bernard Cazeneuve, the Socialist prime minister, accused Le Pen of electoral opportunism in the face of a tragedy. He noted that Le Pens National Front party voted against an anti-terrorism law in 2014 and, in 2015, against a law that beefed up resources for French intelligence services.

Load-Date: April 25, 2017


End of Document