PARIS TRIES CONCILIATION AND EXPULSION
The New York Times
November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk
Length: 802 words
Byline: By FRANK J. PRIAL
Dateline: PARIS
Body


TEN days ago, the French Government disclosed that since the passage of an emergency anti-terrorist law in September it had clandestinely deported some 1,700 illegal aliens.
The law, prompted by a succession of terrorist bombings in Paris, authorized the police to bypass traditional judicial restraints in expelling undesirables. Civil rights groups, suspicious of the new Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, a strong law-and-order advocate, interpreted the law as a convenient way to rid the country of undesirable immigrants regardless of their possible connection to terrorism. The expulsions were widely criticized in the press but defended by the Government as an important part of its anti-terrorist campaign.
In fact, as it turned out last week, the Government, despite official claims to the contrary, appears to have been moving toward conciliatory deals with Syria, which is widely believed to instigate or support terrorism. Mr. Pasqua, describing the relationship between the French and Syrian secret services as one of ''real cooperation,'' disclosed that the police in the two countries had been working together for almost a month to head off further bombings here.
France joined 10 other European Community nations Monday in refusing to approve a British-sponsored ''European initiative'' against Syria. Britain broke off diplomatic relations with Damascus after a British jury convicted a Jordanian, said to have been assisted by Syrian agents, of attempting to place a bomb aboard an Israeli airliner in London. The United States and Canada have recalled their ambassadors to Damascus, and West Germany said it would delay sending a new envoy there. Mr. Pasqua ignored Britain's assertion that it had ''conclusive evidence'' that Syria directed terrorism, except to describe Syria as ''hurt and shocked'' by the allegations.
According to a report in Le Monde, the Paris newspaper, Syria has ordered the terrorists responsible for the Paris attacks, who are based in Lebanon, to end the bombing until February. At that time, Georges Ibrahim Abdallah, a terrorist leader whose release the bombers have demanded, comes to trial here.
The Government scoffed at the Le Monde report in public, but several officials said confidentially that it probably was true. Le Monde said the French agreed, in exchange for a hiatus in the bombing campaign here, to supply Damascus with much-needed economic aid and, perhaps, arms. The possibility of a multimillion-dollar arms deal with Syria, first discussed by the previous Socialist Government, highlighted once again the feud between President Francois Mitterrand, a Socialist, and Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, whose conservatives took control of the Government last March.
Mr. Mitterrand and Mr. Chirac are potential rivals in the 1988 presidential election. Mr. Mitterrand said in Germany Monday that there ''should be no compromise with terrorism'' and that there was ''no question'' of arms sales to Syria.
There are those who believe that Mr. Mitterrand may have scored heavily in the turbulence over terrorism. Mr. Chirac is seen by political analysts as gambling on getting two concesssions from the Syrians: help in freeing the 10 French hostages still held in Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon and an end to the bombings in Paris.
 
If Chirac Fails
If he is successful at either or both, he can expect to be forgiven for dealing with the terrorists and their alleged Syrian bosses, the anlaysts say. If, as some analysts believe, he fails at either or both, his chances of becoming President two years from now, like President Jimmy Carter's in 1980, will have all but disappeared.
Le Monde also reported that Algeria had relayed a French message to the terrorists saying that Mr. Abdallah probably would be released after his February trial. The reported role of Algeria helps to explain the arrests in France last week of some 20 dissident Algerians who oppose the Government in their homeland.
Under the Sept. 9 law, 101 Malians, most of them accused as drug traffickers, were taken aboard a plane in chains at Orly Airport and flown to Bamako, the capital of Mali, where they were turned over to authorities. Yesterday, two bomb explosions caused serious damage at the Government immigration office and the air charter company that had flown the Malians home. A letter received by Agence France-Presse said the French leftist terrorist group, Direct Action, was responsible, protesting the ouster of the Malians and detention of the Algerians.
Mr. Pandraud said the number of illegal residents who had decided to go home on their own had jumped sharply, but he offered no figures. He said the expulsions would continue ''because in the arrests made so far, we have discovered a number of foreigners who were far more dangerous than we had ever imagined.''

Graphic

 
Photo of demonstrators in Paris protesting the deportation of 101 Mailans from France (Special Features/Sipa Press/Pascal Le Segretain)


End of Document