Paris bombings may strengthen France's resolve in fight against terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 7, 1986, Friday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 12
Length: 517 words
Byline: By William Echikson, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Paris
Body


A series of bomb blasts this week may strengthen France's resolve to combat terrorism.
Explosions on the Champs Elysees Monday and in a book shop on the Left Bank on Tuesday failed to arouse much public attention. So, too, did the news that police defused a bomb at the Eiffel Tower.
But an explosion Wednesday night in the underground shopping center in the old market area of Les Halles shattered indifference.
Police say they are working on the assumption that the attacks are related and are the work of professionals, most likely Mideast terrorists.
The attacks have not changed the government's foreign policies toward Arab countries. Although Interior Minister Pierre Joxe said police surveillance against terrorism would be ''increased,'' he added that ''French policy will not be changed whatever, towards whomever.''
Along with other European countries, the French refused to follow the United States in imposing sanctions on Libya following terrorist attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports in December. The government doesn't believe sanctions are effective and is concerned about giving other Arab countries cause to rally around Libya.
The French also are resisting US pressure to put terrorism on the agenda of the economic summit in May, which will bring together the leaders of the seven largest industrial nations in Tokyo. The French government says the summit should remain focused on economics and should avoid politics.
But political pressure from the conservative opposition is pushing for a tougher political response.
''The government, the police, and the courts must do something,'' declared Jacques Toubon, secretary-general of the neo-Gaulist Rally for the Republic party (RPR).
''This is proof of too much indulgence toward terrorists,'' added Charles Pasqua, the RPR president in the Senate.
These comments underline a slow and often overlooked hardening in French attitudes toward terrorism.
During the 1970s, France was accused of striking a cynical bargain with the Arab terrorists: They could operate on French soil as long as they did not harm the French.
At the end of the 1970s, however, terrorists they began striking at French targets. After an attack against a Jewish restaurant in Paris in 1981 which claimed six lives, President Francois Mitterrand responded by naming a special minister to fight terrorism, forming an antiterrorist strike force, and hiring more policemen to increase security at the borders.
Also currently, the French intelligence services are quietly increasing their cooperation on terrorist matters with US intelligence services.
This does not mean the French are about to become tougher in dealing with Libya and other nations, such as Iran and Syria, suspected of promoting terrorism. French foreign policy officials say they continue to believe public confrontation with these countries will be less effective than private diplomacy.
But this week's attacks in Paris might change this opinion. In that case, this French concern over terrorism might backfire against the terrorists: Instead of destabilizing the country, they might increase French resolve.

Graphic

 
Picture, Joxe says terrorism will not bring foreign policy change, SVEN SIMON


End of Document