PARLEY TO DISCUSS NUCLEAR ACCIDENT
The New York Times
May 3, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 529 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TOKYO, Saturday, May 3
Body


Shortly after President Reagan arrived here for the economic summit meeting of industrialized democracies, the Administration indicated today that it expected the Soviet nuclear accident to become a major focus of three days of meetings.
Administration officials said that it was uncertain whether the seven leaders who would meet here would go beyond international agreements already in place that called for cooperation in the nuclear area, but they said the issue would definitely be on the agenda.
''What better time to have these people meeting than now,'' the White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said, commenting on the timeliness of the summit session in relation to the issues of nuclear safety and terrorism. The meeting opens Sunday.  The leaders of Britain, the United States, Italy, West Germany, Japan, France and Canada began arriving here Thursday, with the Italian Prime Minister, Bettino Craxi, the first.
Security Is Heavy
Mr. Reagan arrived amid heavy Japanese security Friday, carrying from the Indonesian island of Bali economic policy recommendations from the foreign ministers of the six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Japanese officials had virtually shut down the Tokyo area around the hotel where Mr. Reagan is staying, which is near the American Embassy. Guests and other visitors were subjected to rigid security screenings and many areas of the hotel were closed.
Helmeted Japanese policemen were out in force on the streets.
The economic conference has been overshadowed by the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear reactor a week ago. It is expected to be discussed when the leaders convene their first session. Secretary of State George P. Shultz said he was certain the issue would be discussed. He insisted United States statements had not exaggerated the extent of the disaster. Referring to Soviet assertions that only two people had been killed, he said: ''I can't give you a number, but the number of two, I'll bet you $10, is very low.'' Mr. Shultz, at a briefing to set the stage for the summit meeting, said the Soviet Union had not been as forthcoming about the accident as it should be, and that all summit nations shared that concern.
 
Question of Terrorism
Administration officials said before leaving Washington Friday that they expected the response to terrorism to be a key focus of the political issues discussed here, and perhaps the most significant matter.
The response of the United States' allies to the American bombing of Libya has been mixed. The raid was carried out in retaliation for the bombing April 5 of a discotheque in West Berlin in which an American soldier was killed.
Mr. Speakes said today that he expected ''a desire on the part of all the leaders to seek more information'' about the nuclear accident.
Mr. Speakes said the accident underscored the need ''to do away'' with nuclear weapons, a result he asserted Mr. Reagan has been seeking.
Mr. Reagan arrived here about 8:30 P.M. from Bali, where he said goodbye to his wife, Nancy, on the tarmac of the airport, kissing her twice. Mrs. Reagan flew on to Malaysia and then to Thailand for a series of events related to her drive against drug abuse.


End of Document