PARLEY ON TV NEWS TO BE TELEVISED
The New York Times
October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 54, Column 1; Cultural Desk
Length: 443 words
Body


CBS News will televise a one-hour prime-time documentary in December based on a conference about television's role and responsibilities in relation to terrorism, privacy and business. CBS News is sponsoring the conference with Columbia University.
Announcement of the conference was made by Van Gordon Sauter, president of CBS News, and Fred W. Friendly, senior program adviser for Columbia's Media and Society Seminars, which will organize the proceedings.
CBS News will televise a one-hour prime-time documentary in December based on a conference about television's role and responsibilities in relation to terrorism, privacy and business.
The conference will take place on Nov. 6 and 7 in Princeton, N.J.  It will consist of three seminars, each lasting three hours and each devoted to a discussion of a hypothetical case based on a real-life situation. The panelists will include executives and correspondents from CBS and other news organizations, as well as public officials and leaders in business and law.
 
Will Tape Nine Hours
CBS will videotape all nine hours, but only one of the cases will be edited for broadcast. A CBS News aide, Ramona Dunn, said that the selection of the topic - terrorism, privacy or business - will be made during the conference.
More than 90 Media and Society Seminars have been conducted in the last eight years in cooperation with various news organizations. The CBS conference is the first in this country with a commercial broadcaster, and the first to be televised nationally in the United States. More than 15 have been televised in Britain.
The forum employs a moderator who uses a Socratic dialogue technique to engage panelists in examining issues that involve the relationship of the press to other elements of society. ''The name of the game is to get people to put themselves in other people's shoes,'' said Mr. Friendly. ''The key is to put them into situations so agonizing that they can escape only by thinking.''
Among the more than 30 participants in the November seminar will be Dan Rather and Mike Wallace of CBS; Geraldo Rivera and Barbara Walters of ABC News; Tom Brokaw of NBC News; William Agee, chairman of the Bendix Corporation; Tom Wicker of The New York Times; Representative Millicent Fenwick, Republican of New Jersey; James B.  Schlesinger, former director of the Central Intelligence Agency; Floyd Abrams, a lawyer specializing in the First Amendment; and Oliver Revell, assistant director of criminal investigation for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The moderators will be Charles R. Nesson awnd Arthur R. Miller of the Harvard Law School, and Benno C. Schmidt Jr. of the Columbia Law School.


End of Document