Party Platforms Draw in Jewish Groups
The Forward
August 15, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 3
Length: 692 words
Body


A concerted effort by Jewish groups  to weigh in with Republican and  Democratic officials involved in formulating  their respective party's  platforms appears to signal a sizable  shift in communal priorities  since the last presidential election,  four years ago.
In official submissions to each  party's platform committee, and  in unofficial proposals made in  closed-door meetings, Jewish communal  officials sounded a similar  alarm on Iran, arguing that dealing  with Tehran's nuclear ambitions  ought to top America's foreign  policy agenda. In the run-up to  the 2004 presidential elections,  the major concern of many Jewish  activists was confronting terrorism.  Fighting poverty also rose to the top  of Jewish groups' domestic concerns,  which four years ago were  dominated by civil rights issues,  including church and state separation  and the combating of hate  crimes.
Party platforms have long been  dismissed as largely ceremonial  declarations with little impact on  policymaking. But national Jewish  organizations have made a substantial  effort in recent weeks to  convey their views and concerns  to leaders of both Democrats and  Republicans.
On July 21, the Anti-Defamation  League sent both parties a document  that listed the group's suggestions  for issues that should  be addressed in the Democratic  National Committee and Republican  National Committee platforms.  The ADL argues that the United  States and the wider international  community must convince Iran to  abandon its nuclear program by  use of incentives and sanctions,  but adds that no options should  be foreclosed to prevent Iran from  achieving the ability to produce a  nuclear weapon.
A Jewish communal official  involved in the contacts with both  the Democratic and Republican  Party leadership said that every  Jewish group that had talked to  members of the platform committee  had raised the issue of  Iran. According to the official, all  groups put forward a request to  see the next administration and  Congress, whether Democratic or  Republican, take on the Iranian  threat as a leading foreign policy  priority.
The focus on Iran is a marked shift  from four years ago. For example,  Iran was mentioned only in passing  by the ADL in its 2004 submission  to the parties' platform committees,  and then only in the context  of Tehran's sponsorship of terrorism.  Fighting terrorism was then  the main foreign policy issue for  Jewish groups.
The lone major exception was  the American Israel Public Affairs  Committee, which raised the issue  of Iran's nuclear ambitions before  the 2004 elections and called on  presidential and congressional candidates  running that year to take  action in order to stop Iran from  becoming nuclear.  Iran was raised as a top priority
for the Jewish community at an  August 1 meeting of the Democratic  platform committee in Cleveland.  Ira Forman, executive director of  the National Jewish Democratic  Council, told committee members  that the Democratic Party should  update [its platform] and include  language that supports our use of  tough, principled diplomacy. The  United States must use both carrots  and sticks.
Another emerging priority conveyed  by communal officials to  Democratic and Republican leaders  is to fight the poverty afflicting an  increasing number of lower-income  Americans. The Jewish Council for  Public Affairs led an interfaith initiative  calling on Democrats and  Republicans to address the issue of  poverty in their conventions. The  group also sent out interfaith letters  to both parties, stressing the need  to deal with problems of the poor  and not just those of the middle  class.
The Democrats have already  agreed to include in the conference  a prime-time address by former  vice president candidate John  Edwards that deals with the issue  of poverty. The Republicans have  yet to respond to the request.
Dealing with poverty is not something  new, said Hadar Susskind,  JCPA's Washington director and a  participant in a communal meeting  last month with members of the  Democratic platform committee.  But now we are highlighting it to  the top of the Jewish agenda.

Load-Date: August 10, 2008


End of Document