Passenger recalls bathroom trip for suspect in terror trial
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
October 12, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. A3
Length: 293 words
Body


DETROIT (AP) - A fellow passenger thought a Nigerian man was just making a routine bathroom trip during a Christmas 2009 flight from Amsterdam to Detroit, but the government contends the man was actually performing a ritual before attempting to detonate a bomb in his underwear.
Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab took a small bag to the bathroom and was gone 10 to 15 minutes, Mike Zantow of Madison, Wis., testified yesterday as the first witness in Abdulmutallab's terrorism trial.
"It's wasn't real quick. I thought he was freshening up for arrival in Detroit. ... We had less than an hour to go," Zantow said.
A prosecutor said Abdulmutallab was performing a cleansing ritual to prepare for death before returning to his seat to try to detonate a bomb in his underwear on behalf of al-Qaida, an act that badly burned him but didn't destroy Northwest Airlines Flight 253.
Abdulmutallab, 24, is charged with eight crimes, including conspiracy to commit terrorism and the attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction. In his opening remarks to jurors, Assistant U.S. Attorney Jonathan Tukel said the son of a wealthy Nigerian banker believed his calling that day was martyrdom.
"He was preparing to die and enter heaven," Tukel said. "He purified himself. He washed. He brushed his teeth. He put on perfume."
Zantow, who is expected to resume his testimony today, said he helped move Abdulmutallab out of his burning seat and heard another passenger say: "Hey, dude, your pants are on fire."
Abdulmutallab's attorney, Anthony Chambers, surprised the courtroom when he announced he would save his opening statement until later in the trial. That means the jury will not hear any hint of the defense case, possibly for weeks, while the government calls a parade of witnesses.

Load-Date: October 12, 2011


End of Document