PASSAGE MARKS GRIM DATE;
TERRORISM BILL UNDERLINES OKLAHOMA CITY ANNIVERSARY
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 19, 1996, Friday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: GENERAL,; (ljb)
Length: 672 words
Byline: Mark Johnson; Media General News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


As guards at federal buildings prepared for today's anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing with strengthened security, Congress recognized the date by passing the anti-terrorism bill yesterday.
By a 293-133 vote, the House voted to enact new means to stop, prosecute and deport terrorists. The vote completes almost a year's struggle to enact legislation strengthening the nation's ability to fend off bombers and other violent menaces.
The bill, a compromise worked out between Republicans and Democrats, helps ''protect our shores and our people,'' said Rep. Martin Frost, D-Texas. Virginia's delegation voted 10-1 for the measure, with Rep. Robert C. Scott, D-3rd, voting against.
The Senate passed the bill Wednesday. A White House official said President Clinton will sign it next week.
Among its key provisions, the legislation makes federal crimes out of several offenses, such as committing a terrorist act or murdering an on-duty federal employee, and makes them punishable by death.
The bill provides $ 1 billion for anti-terrorism efforts and increases the penalties for a variety of terrorism-related offenses involving explosives or firearms. It also requires placing taggants, microscopic labels, in plastic explosives to make them traceable.
To undermine and dismember terrorist organizations, the legislation prohibits fund-raising by such groups, gives the president new powers to designate terrorist groups and freeze their assets and speeds up deportation of foreign terrorists.
While Congress worked out the anti-terrorism bill, officials at federal buildings across the country increased security in anticipation of the Oklahoma City anniversary. At the Justice Department, additional guards monitored entrances and closely checked identification cards, while others stationed themselves on street corners outside the building.
Ironically for a bill timed in remembrance of the Oklahoma City bombing -a crime allegedly committed by Americans -- the legislation passed yesterday is aimed mostly at terrorists based outside the United States.
''We're very tough on foreigners,'' said Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., criticizing the bill as incomplete.
Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., a leading Republican sponsor of the bill, said,
''We have, I think, all the tools we need domestically.''
Republicans included several provisions in the bill that deal more with the public frustration with the criminal justice system than the threat of terrorism. For instance, the legislation requires criminals to pay restitution to crime victims.
More significantly, it changes the appeals process for death row prisoners, limiting the types of federal appeals and time within which a condemned criminal can file them. Some Democrats and civil liberties groups say that this erases a basic constitutional protection.
''(The bill) will do little, if anything, to reduce terrorism, while at the same time it will terrorize our Constitution,'' said Scott.
In reaching the compromise, Republicans cut out measures sought by Democrats that expanded wiretapping authority for the FBI, granted federal investigators greater access to phone bills and other customer records and permitted the military to assist with incidents involving biological weapons or weapons of mass destruction.
Democrats said those omissions substantially weakened the bill. Rep. John Conyers of Michigan called it ''gutless.''
But Conyers' colleague, Rep. Charles Schumer of New York, warned his fellow Democrats not to balk. ''We cannot wait for perfection,'' Schumer said. ANTI-TERRORISM BILL Key provisions: * Provides stricter limits on federal appeals by death row inmates and other prisoners. * Makes it a federal crime to murder or attempt to murder a federal employee or member of the military while they are performing their duties. * Makes it easier to deport aliens with links to terrorist groups. * Bars foreign terrorist groups from raising money in this country. * Empowers State Department to designate foreign groups as terrorist and bar members from entering the country.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 23, 1996


End of Document