Passenger ferry security unfortunate but vital;
The war on terrorism touches even life on Maine's islands.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
March 18, 2004 Thursday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2004 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14A
Length: 366 words
Body

Few traditions are as defining for this state as those that frame life in Maine's island communities. Even as the state's economy has changed from manufacturing-based to service-based, even as suburban sprawl has transformed fast-growing communities, the islands have managed to remain a place apart.
An island tucked along the coast in the corner of the country, however, is not beyond the reach of the global war on terrorism. Mainers who cherish island life may be unhappy with new security measures for ferry services, but this is now the world in which we live.
A federal law passed in 2002 is now forcing all but the smallest of island ferry operations to change the way they do business. For people who live on or visit the islands, this is lamentable.
An island wharf is more than just a place where people and goods board ferries, after all. In island communities they are town squares where old and new friends can meet. For the regulars, especially, the wharves offer a connection to neighbors.
This is true on Peaks Island, where the ferry landing serves as the center of community life. Trouble is, regular car ferry service and the presence of relatively large numbers of passengers make the Casco Bay Lines service to Peaks a security concern.
Passengers will likely see their movements restricted on busy wharves. They'll have to show identification when boarding ferries. They may be subject to search. It's not the kind of thing that comes to mind when one thinks of the slower pace of island life.
One need only look at events in Spain last week to appreciate the need for better security. A series of concealed bombs, detonated on passenger trains, killed more than 200 people. This was not a high-tech assault. Rather, once again, terrorists showed themselves to be both clever and resourceful.
The unfortunate truth is that we live in a world with a network of thousands of people who want to kill us. While no security plan can foresee every possible means of attack, it would be foolish if the government did not take action to make potential targets more secure.
Life is going to change for island residents, but that's not really news. Life changed for all of us on Sept. 11, 2001.

Load-Date: March 18, 2004


End of Document