Pataki Calls for Stronger Laws To Fight Crime and Terrorism 
 The New York Times
January 8, 2004 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1027 words
Byline:  By AL BAKER
Dateline: ALBANY, Jan. 7  
Body


Setting out an agenda for the next decade, Gov. George E. Pataki called on lawmakers Wednesday to pass a raft of laws to fight crime and terrorism. But he spoke little about how he would improve New York's schools or cut its escalating health care costs.
     On those contentious issues, which he left for the final paragraphs of his 75-minute speech, Mr. Pataki said that more money alone was not the answer to fixing inequities in New York City's schools and in other troubled districts. 
 "We cannot simply provide additional resources and maintain business as usual," he said. "Rather, we must enact broad-based reforms that ensure more of the money we spend on education makes it to the classroom, and that someone is held accountable for how it's spent and how it helps our children."
And he strongly suggested that cuts to Medicaid were on the horizon, praising a State Senate plan to rein in Medicaid costs to ease the burden on local governments.
"Clearly, we need to improve the Medicaid system," he said. "Let's work together to reduce state and local Medicaid expenses this year and begin to reverse the costs that have squeezed the finances of so many county governments."
But the three-term Republican governor also used his 10th annual address to the State Legislature to say he agreed with legislators on both sides of the political aisle who oppose raising taxes in this election year to close an estimated state budget deficit of up to $6 billion.
Mr. Pataki listed dozens of ideas, big and small, from cutting taxes for manufacturers to help keep jobs in the state to requiring all new school buses to run on clean fuel. Signaling that he may seek a fourth term, he spelled out several long-range goals, including the creation of a million jobs over the next 10 years; driving the crime rate down even further, until New York is the safest state in the nation in five years; and making the Hudson River so pristine that bathers will be able to swim in any part of it by 2009.
Mr. Pataki, however, also sounded like a man set on international affairs, national security and the Republican National Convention that is coming to Manhattan this summer. He voiced unqualified support for the Bush administration's Iraq policy.
He also hailed the progress in rebuilding Lower Manhattan after Sept. 11, 2001, and said he would help New York City build a convention center on the West Side, develop the waterfronts in each borough and attract the 2012 Olympics.
More than two years after the terror attack, Mr. Pataki invoked the patriotic spirit that lingers, laying out his plan to make New York safe, in part by forming teams of state police officers to help upstate cities battle crime. On terrorism, he called for many programs: creating new felonies for criminal possession and use of chemical or biological weapons, eliminating the statute of limitations for all terrorist offenses, and subjecting terrorists' property outside New York to civil forfeiture.
His theme was freedom; he used the word dozens of times, saying it means safety, security, more jobs, a healthy environment and good education, among other things.
The governor's speech raised the curtain on another legislative session in Albany, one filled with many difficult issues. He urged lawmakers to change the way business is done in Albany. But he was vague about how he would address some of the most contentious issues, including a lingering budget gap.
Democratic legislators, including Sheldon Silver, the speaker of the State Assembly, said it was hard to assess many of the governor's proposals since Mr. Pataki did not provide details. Lobbyists and the state comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, said they were astounded that the governor did not mention the projected deficit in his speech.
"I am disappointed in the fact that it took 30 pages and about an hour to get to education and to even address it," Mr. Silver told reporters after the speech. "I think it's addressed on Page 28 of his text. I really think, and I am sure my colleagues in the Legislature on both sides of the aisle will tell you, that education is the key issue in New York State."
Senator David A. Paterson, the Democratic minority leader of the Senate, said the speech left him feeling as if he had attended a pep rally.
"If there is going to be a battle, I don't even know what it will be over because I don't know his plan," Mr. Paterson said.
Mr. Pataki will present his state budget later this month. The leader of the Senate's Republican majority, Joseph L. Bruno, said that he did not hear any proposals that he would oppose and that the speech was a conciliatory act by the governor to the Legislature. Mr. Bruno predicted "a year of togetherness."
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York City, another fellow Republican, said he was buoyed that Mr. Pataki was "behind the big projects that we need," like the rebuilding of Lower Manhattan, the expansion of the Javits Convention Center and the development of the West Side. "The governor addressed some of the issues that really are key to New York," the mayor said.
In his speech, the governor urged lawmakers to "enact sweeping and comprehensive reforms to bolster New Yorkers' confidence in all areas of government." Government watchdog groups and others have been focused on more concrete ideas.
On the environment, he called for a commitment to the development of renewable and clean energy. He said that thousands of trees would be planted in urban neighborhoods and that 20 state parks would be created over the next five years.
But many said the speech was noteworthy for what it left out.
"He listed the things we have to deal with, he just didn't deal with them," said Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Democrat from Westchester County who is a frequent critic of the governor. "I just wonder where the rest of it is."
In the end, the governor's cursory words about Medicaid reform bothered county executives from around the state.
"Monumental disappointment," said Steve Levy, the Suffolk County executive and a Democrat. "We were hoping Medicaid and mandate relief would encompass five or six minutes of his speech, and instead we got a token five seconds."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Gov. George E. Pataki speaking yesterday. (Photo by James Estrin/The New York Times)(pg. B1); Before addressing lawmakers, Gov. George E. Pataki gave the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a copy of his annual speech to the Legislature. (Photo by James Estrin/The New York Times)(pg. B4) 

Load-Date: January 8, 2004


End of Document