Pataki's Bill On Terrorism Passes Senate 
 The New York Times
February 12, 2003 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1012 words
Byline:  By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr. 
Dateline: ALBANY, Feb. 11  
Body


Gov. George E. Pataki rammed antiterrorism legislation through the Republican-controlled Senate today, throwing down the gauntlet to the Assembly's ruling Democrats on a bill that rolls back some civil rights to help the police ferret out terrorists.
     The bill was passed by a vote of 52 to 8 after a bitter debate. Some Republican senators accused Democrats who had questioned the bill's provisions of being unpatriotic, while several Democrats accused the Republicans of trampling the chamber's rules to rush through flawed legislation as a publicity stunt. 
 The hasty vote, without a public hearing or even the normal three-day waiting period, appeared to be part of a concerted political campaign by the governor to focus public attention on two broad themes: fighting terrorism and keeping taxes low. The messages are in line with the agenda of the Bush administration and the national G.O.P.
The debate in the Senate set the stage for what is likely to be one of the most contentious issues in this year's session: how the state should respond to the growing threat of terrorist acts and how to achieve a balance between public fears and civil rights.
After the vote, Mr. Pataki made a rare appearance on the Senate floor to congratulate the majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, and emphasize that the legislation was his top priority, given the nation's heightened state of alert. He called the measure "unquestionably the most important bill that will be taken up this year."
"The threats against the people of New York are real," Mr. Pataki said as he left the Senate floor. "We have got to be proactive and do everything in our power to try to protect the people of New York and try to prevent attacks from occurring."
He added that refusal to pass a similar bill last year had endangered people.
"This is legislation the Senate passed last year," he said, "and I can't help but think what a better position we could be in today if we had had this power for local and state law authorities throughout 2002."
The bill was printed on Monday evening and rushed through a committee on Tuesday morning over the strong objections of Democrats, who said its complexities deserved to be hashed out in a full public hearing.
In a speech Monday night to Conservative Party members at an Albany hotel, the governor lambasted liberals in the Assembly for blocking the bill. Today, he gave the Senate what is known as "a message of necessity," letting Senator Bruno skip the three-day wait a bill must normally go through before a vote.
The bill would create several new felonies with stiff sentences. Among the crimes covered are money-laundering for terrorism, conspiracy to commit terrorism and criminal facilitation of terrorism. The measure would also make it a penalty punishable by life in prison to possess a weapon of mass destruction.
The bill gives local police and prosecutors several new powers already held by the federal authorities. The local authorities could obtain a single wiretap order for every telephone a suspect uses rather than a separate order for each telephone line. That provision would apply to all crimes, not just terrorist acts. The prosecutors could also convict a terrorist based solely on the testimony of accomplices, something now illegal under New York law.
Another section of the bill mandates that evidence obtained without a search warrant in terrorism cases would be admissible at trial, if a judge determined at a hearing that the police had acted "in good faith." Many Democrats said they were worried that the provision amounted to a serious erosion of the Constitutional protection against unreasonable search and seizure.
"Any time we start fiddling around and striking parts of the Constitution, I get a ticklish feeling in my stomach," said Senator Kevin S. Parker, a Brooklyn Democrat who voted against the bill.
The Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, could not be reached today because of a death in his family. Mr. Pataki's antiterrorism bill died in the Assembly last year, largely because of worries about the civil rights of defendants. There is also a strong feeling among Assembly Democrats that Mr. Pataki's bill duplicates the federal laws aimed at terrorists.
"We should be concentrating on not creating unnecessary legislation, but filling in what the federal law left out," said Assemblyman Joseph R. Lentol, the chairman of the codes committee.
But Mr. Bruno and other Republican senators argued that the state should give similar tools to local law enforcement agencies, which have some 70,000 officers compared with about 700 federal agents in the state. Several appealed to patriotism, saying their Democratic colleagues owed it to the soldiers abroad to pass a bill to protect the home front.
Senator William J. Larkin Jr. suggested that a No vote would be un-American and asserted that many of the Senators opposed to the bill had never been in combat. The bill's sponsor, Senator Michael A. Balboni of Long Island, appealed to the public fears of an attack, saying opponents would be sorry if an attack occurred before the bill passed.
Democrats fired back, saying it would be un-American not to question provisions in a bill that undermined constitutional rights. Several also said that the way the bill was rushed to the floor made a travesty of the legislative process. Senator Eric T. Schneiderman of Manhattan called the bill "a publicity stunt" for the governor.
Senator Thomas K. Duane, another Manhattan Democrat who voted no, said he failed to understand how the lawmakers could understand and act on such a complex bill -- 20 pages of dense legalese that refers to dozens of other statutes -- without the benefit of a public hearing. "It's like we are in a parallel legislative universe here," he said. "The way we do it is absurd, and that's why we are a laughingstock."
Republicans, however, said the timing was right to pass the bill, with the federal government issuing ominous warnings about possible terrorist attacks. "Don't stand on technicalities," Senator Balboni urged his colleagues. "Stand on principle."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Gov. George E. Pataki visited the State Senate yesterday to congratulate Senator Joseph L. Bruno after passage of antiterrorism legislation that he called "the most important bill that will be taken up this year." (Associated Press)(pg. B5) 

Load-Date: February 12, 2003


End of Document