Patriot Act renewal splits GOP presidential hopefuls
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 9, 2015 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 449 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


WASHINGTON • Republican senators eyeing the presidency are split over the renewal of the Patriot Act surveillance law, with civil libertarians at odds with traditional defense hawks, who back tough spying powers in the fight against terrorism.
The political divide will be on stark display this month as Congress debates reauthorization of the post-Sept. 11 law ahead of a June 1 deadline. The broader question of privacy rights has gained attention since a former National Security Agency systems administrator, Edward Snowden, disclosed in 2013 that the NSA had been collecting and storing data on nearly every American's phone calls for years.
On one side, Sens. Marco Rubio of Florida and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina want Congress to permanently reauthorize parts of the law, giving the NSA much of its surveillance authority. If there were another attack, "the first question out of everyone's mouth is going to be: ‘Why didn't we know about it?'" Rubio asked this week in a speech on the Senate floor. "And the answer better not be because this Congress failed to authorize a program that might have helped us know about it."
The rise of Islamic State militants, the continued threat from al-Qaida and the ongoing civil war in Syria have pushed national security to the forefront in the 2016 race for the GOP nomination, with some candidates determined to show their toughness. On NSA surveillance, however, Americans are wary of government intrusion.
Sens. Ted Cruz of Texas and Rand Paul of Kentucky say the law infringes on citizens' privacy.
"They want nothing more than to keep the national security spy state growing until it tracks, traces and catalogs virtually every detail about every aspect of our lives," Paul said in a campaign email to his supporters. "Once government bureaucrats know every aspect of our lives - what we watch, what we buy, what we eat, where we worship - it won't be long until they try to run them ‘for our own good.'"
Under the law, the NSA collects information on the number called and the date and time of the call, then stores it in a database that it queries using phone numbers associated with terrorists overseas. Officials say they don't use the information for any other purpose, and that the legal powers that enable the program are essential to the hunt for terrorists. Opponents say the seizure and search of telephone company records violates Americans' expectations of privacy under the Fourth Amendment. Adding a wrinkle to the debate was Thursday's federal appeals court ruling that the bulk collection of Americans' phone records is illegal. The court all but pleaded for Congress to sharpen the boundaries between security and privacy rights.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this April 15, 2015 file photo, Republican presidential candidate Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla. speaks in Washington. Republican senators eyeing the presidency split over the renewal of the Patriot Act surveillance law, with civil libertarians at odds with traditional defense hawks who back tough spying powers in the fight against terrorism. (AP Photo/Molly Riley, File)  FILE - In this April 7, 2015 file photo, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky. announces the start of his presidential campaign, in Louisville, Ky. Republican senators eyeing the presidency split over the renewal of the Patriot Act surveillance law, with civil libertarians at odds with traditional defense hawks who back tough spying powers in the fight against terrorism. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster, File)  FILE - In this March 12, 2015 file photo, Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., speaks on Capitol Hill in Washington. Republican senators eyeing the presidency split over the renewal of the Patriot Act surveillance law, with civil libertarians at odds with traditional defense hawks who back tough spying powers in the fight against terrorism. (AP Photo/Manuel Balce Ceneta, File)  FILE - In this April 29, 2015 file photo, Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas speaks at the National Press Club in Washington. Republican senators eyeing the presidency split over the renewal of the Patriot Act surveillance law, with civil libertarians at odds with traditional defense hawks who back tough spying powers in the fight against terrorism. (AP Photo/Cliff Owen, File) 

Load-Date: May 10, 2015


End of Document