Patriot Act revision sought;
Bush wants it renewed; his allies balk
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
March 23, 2005 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 709 words
Byline: BOB DART
Body


Washington --- From anti-tax activists to defenders of gun rights, some of President Bush's usual conservative allies declared opposition Tuesday to his effort to re-enact the Patriot Act without changes.
"We remain very concerned" that parts of the anti-terrorism law passed hurriedly after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks "infringe on the rights of law-abiding Americans," the lobbying group Patriots to Restore Checks and Balances said in a letter to the president.
Headed by former Rep. Bob Barr, a Georgia Republican who has championed privacy rights, the nonpartisan group's membership ranges from the American Civil Liberties Union to the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms.
In its letter, the group expressed alarm that Bush wants Congress to make temporary provisions of the Patriot Act permanent "without any recognition of the serious reservations many Americans have about secret searches of their homes and their possessions by federal agents, as well as other far-reaching provisions."
In a recent speech to the Justice Department, Bush said the Patriot Act is still needed.
"We must not allow the passage of time or the illusion of safety to weaken our resolve in this new war," Bush said. "To protect the American people, Congress must promptly renew all provisions of the Patriot Act this year."
Some parts of the law will expire at the end of 2005 unless Congress votes to extend them. The group urged Bush to reconsider his endorsement of powers in the act that it views as intrusive and unchecked, including:
 
* The so-called sneak and peek provision, which allows federal agents to secretly search people's homes and businesses without any deadline on giving notice that the intrusion had taken place.
 
* A section that allows federal agents to collect personal data on American citizens --- such as their medical history, books they check out at the library and goods they purchase --- without evidence that the people in question are connected to terrorism.
 
* A section that opponents say defines terrorism so broadly that "ordinary people trying to exercise their First Amendment rights on issues across the political spectrum might get charged as terrorists."
"Our goal is not to gut the Patriot Act," Barr said. But the congressional battle over curbing the law's reach will be "the single most important issue that will be facing this country over the next two years," he said.
Former Attorney General John Ashcroft defended the Patriot Act and his successor, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, has said he will make renewal of the expiring provisions a high priority.
"Unfortunately, a small but vocal minority has attempted to mischaracterize the Patriot Act," Gonzales recently told an association of county officials from around the country. "The critics have dealt in conjecture and hypotheticals. We can point to solid results, saved lives and a nation that is safer. For more than three years, there has not been one verified civil rights abuse under the Patriot Act."
But leaders of the Checks and Balances group charge that the Patriot Act itself threatens some of those constitutional freedoms.
"I don't think most Americans realize that the federal government can come into your house" and even confiscate your property under the Patriot Act, said Paul Weyrich, chairman of the conservative Free Congress Research and Education Foundation. "And they don't even have to notify you that this has happened."
Parts of the act could also jeopardize the Second Amendment right to gun ownership, said John Snyder, public affairs director of the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms.
Barr conceded that the group faces "very much an uphill battle" to persuadeCongress to tighten controls in the domestic fight against terrorism. To spark public opinion, he said, "we are going to be working … in communities across America and on Capitol Hill."
"For too long, conservatives assumed this was someone else's job," said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform, a coalition opposing higher taxes.
"The ACLU stands firmly behind our conservative friends" on this issue, said Laura Murphy, director of the ACLU legislative office. Commitment to America's freedom's transcends any political ideology."

Graphic

 
Bob Barr seeks tighter controls in the domestic fight against terrorism.

Load-Date: March 23, 2005


End of Document