PATRIOT Act not so bad
University Wire
February 6, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 The Pitt News via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 754 words
Byline: By Carson Davis, The Pitt News; SOURCE: U. Pittsburgh
Dateline: PITTSBURGH 
Body


Backlash against the USA PATRIOT Act and the recent discovery of a federal government-enacted domestic spying program have created strong political anti-sentiment. The political left tends to treat the USA PATRIOT Act as sheer madness in writing. This group portrays the act as being one of the worst legislations ever to come into being. In reality, the PATRIOT Act is far from being any sort of government-led oppression.
The PATRIOT Act was conceived after the events that occurred on Sept. 11, 2001. President George W. Bush signed it into law on Oct. 26, 2001. Its primary purpose has been to increase the legal power of the American government in order to combat terrorist actions.
Among the affected areas of law are surveillance, banking and immigration. The act is expressly designed to halt terrorism both domestically and abroad, and also to address a few areas of law unrelated to terrorism.
Provisions include monitoring foreign students in the United States, developing passports that can be scanned by machine, addressing surveillance issues and identifying individuals at American ports of entry through fingerprint scans.
Two of the more controversial provisions of the PATRIOT Act deal with the ability of the government to search individuals and specific records that were previously unavailable.
The PATRIOT Act enables the government to search and seize the property of suspicious individuals when deemed necessary. The government is also not necessarily required to notify the individuals involved of the search at any time. This feature is designed to eliminate destruction of evidence, and to prohibit the individuals in question from fleeing.
Under the act, the federal government is also able to obtain library and business records of suspicious individuals, and the records of people connected to such individuals. It is this facet of the PATRIOT Act that angers its detractors.
Constant bellyaching occurs over the possible violation of civil liberties. Many believe that these liberties are far too important to be jeopardized under any cirsumstances. But what about the circustances of life and death? The PATRIOT Act is designed to save lives by preventing terrorism. What good are civil liberties to Americans if we aren't alive to use them?
The shock and anger felt by Americans after the events that occurred on Sept. 11, 2001, seem to have been replaced by a general apathy regarding the presence of terrorism. Political infighting over the possible violation of civil liberties has replaced any sense of unity that was present after the attacks.
The fervor over surveillance and rights to privacy has only increased in the wake of recent reports that the Bush administration has authorized domestic spying on individuals deemed a threat to homeland security.
President Bush sponsored a covert program that enabled the National Security Agency to listen in on international phone calls and view e-mails between Americans and suspected terrorists. Democrats have accused Bush of acting illegally in this regard, and some circles have even called for his impeachment.
In a White House news conference, Bush argued that the program was "designed to protect civil liberties," and stated: "There's no doubt in my mind it is legal."
Are perceived violations against civil liberties important enough to prohibit any sort of defense against terrorism?
At the time of the Patriot Act's legislation, the majority of polls and surveys regarding the PATRIOT Act indicated that the American public supported the provisions of the act. A Gallup poll taken in August of 2003 asked Americans if they thought the Patriot Act went too far. This report showed 22 percent believed that it went too far, while 69 percent believed that it did not.
In April of 2005, the results were quite different: 45 percent believed that it did, while 49 percent believed that the PATRIOT Act did not go too far.
The events that occurred on Sept. 11, 2001, obliterated close to 3,000 lives. It's vital to take every possible measure to ensure that tragedies of this nature are prevented.
The actions taken by the government were not designed to simply invade the life and private business of the average American. Their purpose is to protect that life.
This is not some Orwellian attempt to control the American public; rather it is an effort to contain those who hope to harm it.
Please be informed that any e-mails that you send to Carson at racecarson@aol.com may be redirected to President Bush's address.
(C) 2006 The Pitt News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 6, 2006


End of Document