PATRIOT ACT: NO ROOM FOR COMPROMISE;
 WHEN IS IT OK TO TRAMPLE ON CIVIL RIGHTS TO COMBAT TERRORISM?
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 20, 2003 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 724 words
Byline: TORSTEN OVE, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


After exchanging backstage accusations of spreading "propaganda" about the USA Patriot Act, U.S. Attorney Mary Beth Buchanan and American Civil Liberties Union legal director Witold Walczak took to television yesterday to trade views.
 The condensed version of their debate during a taping of "KD/PG Sunday Edition" goes something like this:
 Government: Patriot Act good.
 ACLU: Patriot Act bad.
 The details of why it's good or bad, of course, are a lot more complicated, because the Patriot Act is so long at 340 pages that even lawyers have a hard time simplifying it enough to digest. Sound-bite material this isn't.
The act, passed overwhelmingly by Congress weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, gave federal authorities expanded powers to investigate terrorism.
 But it's been a lightning rod for critics on both left and right who say it lets the government trample on civil rights.
 Walczak said many sections of the act, which President Bush now wants to expand further, are appropriate and necessary revisions of old laws adapted for the new realities of terrorism.
 But he said some provisions, such as expanding the ability of agents to examine library or business records, give law enforcement agencies too much power to snoop into people's lives without judicial oversight.
 "The ACLU and other critics of the administration say you need to have judges who can meaningfully review any kind of invasions of privacy, any kind of requests for secret hearings, any kinds of detentions," he said. "Because that, under our system of separation of powers, is the check" on too much government power.
 Walczak said government secrecy in the name of combating terrorism is a cause for concern in light of past abuses in American history, such as investigations of the Black Panthers in the 1960s or the roundup of Japanese-Americans during World War II.
 "I have reporters asking me how often have these [secret] warrants been used, how often has this surveillance occurred in Pittsburgh," he said. "Nobody knows. Unless you are indicted, you're never going to know."
 Buchanan said the Patriot Act does nothing more than expand government powers that were already available to law enforcement for nonterrorism investigations, such as organized crime or narcotics trafficking.
 One example, she said, is the use of a "roving wiretap," which must be approved by a federal judge. The roving wiretap, which allows agents to tap any phone used by a suspect instead of a specific phone, had previously been used mostly to investigate members of drug rings who often switch cell phones to keep agents from listening in.
 The Patriot Act now allows those taps to be used in terrorism investigations, too. Regardless of the type of investigation, however, the wiretap must still receive the approval of a judge.
 "Vic Walczak has still not pointed to a particular provision in the Patriot Act that has limited judicial review," Buchanan said. "He's still unable to do it. And I have taken the Patriot Act side-by-side and talked about the powers that we had before and the powers that we have now. The Patriot Act simply expands the powers under traditional criminal laws and applies them to terrorism-related cases."
 Walczak and Buchanan also debated another aspect of the Patriot Act that has increased government power under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978. Under that law, a special court in Washington, D.C., can approve secret investigations for cases involving national security.
 Walczak said the Patriot Act has now broadened the special court's jurisdiction to "get around" the Fourth Amendment protection against illegal search and seizure in other cases that don't involve "agents of a foreign power," which is the language of the 1978 law.
 But Buchanan disputed his interpretation, saying the Patriot Act makes only one change in how the special court operates. She said the act has expanded the use of secret Foreign Intelligence Service Act warrants to include terrorism cases, which previously hadn't been considered. If agents also uncover other criminal activity by use of the warrants, they are now allowed to use them to pursue the other crimes.
 But Buchanan said the special court is not being used to initiate investigations of traditional crimes, nor would it be.
 "KD/PG Sunday Edition" airs at 8:30 a.m. tomorrow on KDKA.

Notes

Torsten Ove can be reached at tove@post-gazette.com or 412-263-2620.  

Load-Date: September 21, 2003


End of Document