Patriot Act good step in fighting terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
November 18, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. C3
Length: 695 words
Byline: Sen. Peter Fitzgerald
Body


On Oct. 26, President Bush signed into law the USA Patriot Act, legislation that will greatly improve federal authorities' ability to investigate and prevent terrorism.
Attorney General Ashcroft has already put this new law to use, arresting and detaining terror suspects, freezing assets of terrorist organizations and employing new surveillance authority to detect and disrupt future terrorist attacks.
Much of the new anti-terrorism law is a common-sense update of existing procedures, adapting investigators' techniques - and the legal hurdles to which they are subject - to the new generation of technology.
For example, it used to be common for people to have just one telephone, at home, through which they would make almost all of their calls. (And it would not be unusual if they didn't even own that phone, but rather leased it from the phone company.) As a result, court orders for wiretaps were made specific to one telephone.
Today, however, people commonly communicate with others through a number of connections - home and work phones, cell phones, pagers, faxes and e-mail.
The terrorists behind the Sept. 11 attacks, for example, are now known to have coordinated their actions via e-mail and cell phones.
The new law recognizes the changes in technology by making surveillance warrants specific to the person rather than the phone. Now police will be able to seek one court order to cover every medium of communication that a suspect uses, instead of proceeding to court every time the suspect switches phones.
Another important change made by the new law is the improved access that it provides to key information about terror suspects, especially information discovered in grand-jury proceedings.
In the trial following the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center's parking garage, much was learned about the perpetrators during the Manhattan grand jury's investigation of the terror suspects' activities. Unfortunately, outdated limits on prosecutors kept the grand jury from sharing this information with U.S. intelligence agencies.
This barrier has been lifted by the new law, which allows sharing of information - and maximum coordination - among the different law enforcement agencies fighting terrorism.
Finally - and perhaps most importantly - the anti-terrorism legislation recognizes that we cannot hope to stop terror simply by catching terrorists only after they have infiltrated our enormous country.
The new law increases immigration officials' power to make sure that terrorists never arrive and settle here in the first place.
America is uniquely vulnerable to terrorist schemes because we are an open, free, and diverse society. It is easy for anyone to travel in the United States, and to live among us without arousing hostility or suspicion. Some of the Sept. 11 hijackers lived in this country for years, enjoying the fruits of American freedom and tolerance, while secretly plotting our destruction.
The new law expands the grounds for excluding and deporting terrorist suspects and their allies.
Now, the attorney general will be able to hold terror suspects for up to a week. He will be able to deport any individual who has helped our enemies, including those who have aided terror groups by gathering information, raising money or harboring individuals or weapons.
For those initially seeking entrance to this country, the grounds for exclusion are even broader: The new law bars admittance to representatives of groups that endorse terrorism, to prominent individuals who endorse terrorism and to the immediate family of any individual who is deportable on terrorism grounds.
We will reduce the ability of those who wage war on America to promote their cause from within our borders.
The anti-terrorism law is only a part of the solution to the current crisis. Our war in Afghanistan, by destroying the terrorists and their bases, will also disrupt their ability to attack our citizens again.
But the new law is an important step, one element of the broad cooperation across our society - between federal officials, state and local police, private citizens and our men and women in the armed forces - that is needed to keep America safe and secure.

Load-Date: November 20, 2001


End of Document