Paul Fanlund: Why do Americans so love war rhetoric?
The Daily Cardinal: University of Wisconsin - Madison
December 28, 2015 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1089 words
Body


In the holiday spirit, let's stipulate that a progressive can grasp why some people are Republicans: they prefer unregulated markets, very low taxes and puny safety nets. It's the every-person-for-himself spirit they think built this country.
But as 2016 dawns, one political topic defies any understanding. I find it, well, terrifying.
That subject is terror.
My alarm grows from headlines like this one from FiveThirtyEight: "Americans are worried about terrorism, and that could help the GOP."
Shortly thereafter, a new poll from the Pew Research Center said the Republican Party has a sizable advantage over Democrats on terrorism: 46 percent say the GOP can do better on the terrorist threat at home, compared with 34 percent who favor Democrats.
Yes, it is hard to describe the horror and sadness felt by everyone over terror attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, California, but do they really justify what Pew characterized as "plummeting" support for the federal government's handling of the threat of domestic terrorism, from 72 to 46 percent?
This edge for the GOP is nothing new. Republicans have had the polling upper hand in fighting terror since 2002, despite what one would assume are cautionary lessons from an unjustified and tragic Iraq war initiated by a macho GOP president.
Could it really be that many Americans actually find Republican tough talk to be appealing without even pausing to analyze that most of it is nonsensical?
Ted Cruz, the bellicose Texas senator and currently the presidential hopeful with the most apparent momentum versus Donald Trump, put it most colorfully in his promise to destroy the Islamic State: "We will utterly destroy ISIS. We will carpet bomb them into oblivion. I don't know if sand can glow in the dark, but we're going to find out."
Stupid and wrong, but that apparently doesn't matter to the GOP base.
Carpet bombing by definition is widespread, saturation bombing, not the kind of targeted attack everyone agrees is required against an enemy intermingled among innocent civilians. PolitiFact, the Pulitzer Prize-winning fact-checking website, bluntly condemned his use of the term.
Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton, epitomizing her adult talking style, had this to say about Cruz: "Shallow slogans don't add up to a strategy. Promising to carpet bomb until the desert glows doesn't make you sound strong - it makes you sound like you're in over your head."
The quote exemplifies the stylistic difference between parties. One could have imagined, maybe even hoped for, a Clinton retort more like this: "Cruz is a buffoon, an ignoramus and a chicken hawk to boot."
Maybe the thoughtful and calibrated approach to fighting ISIS by President Obama and such non-hysterical rhetoric from most Democrats will eventually be rewarded with broader popular support, but for now, bluster is required for Republican presidential hopefuls.
Certainly media coverage - in which every terror event is a major story with exhaustive live imagery and repetitious analysis - fuels the reflexive, let's-bomb-the-bastards instinct.
Yet this visceral, revenge response is not new.
Andrew Kydd, a political science professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and an expert on terrorism, traces it back to President George W. Bush and 9/11.
"Certainly Bush and the neoconservatives and the foreign policy establishment he brought in with him viewed the appropriate response to 9/11 as being a military one, that we were at war, that the idea there's any other approach is outdated. So any kind of policy approach that fell short of actual war is not good enough, and a lot of Democrats went along with that," Kydd said in an interview last week.
Today, it's clear why Republicans running for president rattle rhetorical swords. By 72 to 18 percent in that recent Pew poll, Republicans agree that using military force is the best way to defeat terrorism, while Democrats, by 66 percent to 27 percent, said relying too much on force creates hatred and exacerbates terrorism. Among all respondents, the Democratic view edged a military response by just a single percentage point - 46 percent to 45 percent.
As in the debate about climate change, Republicans find that experts are overwhelmingly aligned against them.
Kydd pointed me to a recent essay in the Washington Post by two political scientists, Stephen Biddle of George Washington University and Jacob Shapiro of Princeton University, titled: "Here's why we can only contain the Islamic State, not bomb it back to the Stone Age."
They make the convincing case that more than a decade of continuous war against militants in Afghanistan, Libya, Iraq and elsewhere has taught us that destroying the Islamic State would cost vastly more American lives than the country would tolerate.
Instead, the best policy is to contain or suppress ISIS. "And this is essentially what the administration's current policy amounts to," Biddle and Shapiro wrote. They argued that taking and holding Islamic State territory would require at least 100,000 troops.
They acknowledged that containing the Islamic State by exhausting its economy will take time and relegate those in conquered territory to suffering. "But what alternative is there?" they asked. "Moving a little bit further, a little bit faster, up the escalation ladder by adding 10,000 to 20,000 more troops will increase the costs to Americans - without much changing the outcome. We've see this movie before."
Kydd expressed similar views in a blog on the website "Political Violence @ a Glance" after Paris. "There are two clear paths to our own defeat. One is to pretend that we can ignore the problem and it will go away," he wrote. "The second is to allow the Islamic State strategy of provocation to divide us. If we succumb to sectarian conflict, we not only forget the very principles for which we fight, we forget the most important rule of strategy: maximize the number of your allies, minimize the number of your enemies."
Politicians like Trump and Cruz don't listen to such experts; they have a GOP base to rile. Logic and nuance are not required. Lessons from Iraq are unheeded.
And yet, in 2016, most pundits predict that any new acts of domestic terrorism will bolster the prospects of the GOP warmongers.
Um, happy new year.
Share your opinion on this topic by sending a letter to the editor to tctvoice@madison.com Include your full name, hometown and phone number. Your name and town will be published. The phone number is for verification purposes only. Please keep your letter to 250 words or less.

Load-Date: December 28, 2015


End of Document