Peabody awards for terrorism, 9;
11 shows
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 4, 2003 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Pg. E12
Length: 677 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ATHENS, Ga.
Body


Several television networks have won Peabody Awards for their coverage last year of the war on terrorism and the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks.
CNN's Terror on Tape analyzed al-Qaeda instructional videos, and ABC's Nightline focused on people who helped injured victims of the attacks.
CBS's 48 Hours was honored for its "9/11" piece by two French filmmakers whose cameras rolled inside the collapsing World Trade Center as they documented the life of a rookie New York firefighter.
National Public Radio's All Things Considered received an award for a history of the trade center with rare recordings and oral histories.
Thirty-one TV and radio programs were recognized this year, using the prestigious Peabody's only criterion: excellence in broadcast. The annual George Foster Peabody Awards are administered by the Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication at the University of Georgia. This year's honors, announced Wednesday, went to programs produced in 2002.
The awards will be presented at a ceremony set for May 19 in New York. Barbara Walters will host. For the first time in Peabody's 62-year history, the ceremony will be televised nationally, on A&E sometime in June.
Several TV dramas won Peabodys, including HBO's Six Feet Under and NBC's Boomtown. Producer David E. Kelley received a Peabody for the episode of Fox's Boston Public featuring a "highly charged exploration" of a racial epithet in the classroom.
Judges also cited HBO's Russell Simmons Presents Def Poetry Jam for making poetry fun and giving it rare TV coverage.
Here are the winners:
Terror on Tape, CNN Productions.
Six Feet Under, HBO from Janollari Studios and Actual Size with HBO Original Programming.
The Gathering Storm, HBO, Scott Free Productions; story of Winston Churchill.
Russell Simmons Presents Def Poetry Jam, HBO, Simmons/Lathan TV.
The Interrogation of Michael Crowe, Court TV from JB Media and Hearst Entertainment; examination of children in criminal-justice system.
Bang Bang You're Dead, Showtime from Viacom Productions, A Jersey Guys Production.
Door to Door, TNT from Rosemont Productions International with Angel/Brown Productions; based on true story of salesman Bill Porter, who battled cerebral palsy.
The Complete Angler, ESPN, Lake Champlain Productions; exploration of fly fishing.
Almost Strangers, BBC America with Talkback Productions, presented on BBC; examination of family relationships in contemporary England.
Boomtown, NBC.
Boston Public, Fox. Producer David E. Kelley.
"9/11" edition of 48 Hours, CBS News.
Nightline: "The Survivors" and "Heart of Darkness," ABC News.
Frontline: "Shattered Dreams of Peace: The Road From Oslo," SET Productions, C-Films Productions for WGBH, with France 2, Abu Dhabi Television, Tel Ad Israel.
Bringing Down a Dictator, York Zimmerman, presented on PBS.
EGG: The Arts Show and Stage on Screen: Beckett on Film, Thirteen/WNET, New York, presented on PBS.
ExxonMobil Masterpiece Theatre: "Othello," WGBH, London Weekend Television.
ExxonMobil Masterpiece Theatre's American Collection: "Almost a Woman," WGBH, ALT Films.
"Monkey Trial," Nebraska ETV and The American Experience, WGBH (Boston); on the Scopes trial.
The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow, Thirteen/WNET (New York); four-part series on U.S. post-slavery racism.
Sounding the Alarm, WISN-TV, Milwaukee; on fire safety.
DNA Protects Men of Dishonor, KPRC-TV, Houston.
Fake Drugs, Real Lives, WFAA-TV, Dallas.
The Sonic Memorial Project/SonicMemorial.org, Lost and Found Sound from the Kitchen Sisters Productions, presented on NPR and Sonic Memorial Project Web site; memories of 9/11.
The Yiddish Radio Project, NPR, Sound Portrait Productions; special on the Golden Age of Yiddish radio.
Stories of Home, WBEZ/Chicago Public Radio; personal stories on different meanings of "home."
File on 4: "Export Controls," BBC Radio 4; on "dual-use" material to develop nuclear weapons.
The Hepatitis C Epidemic: A 15-Year Government Cover-up, Fuji Television Network, Japan.
How High Is the Mountain, Public Television Service Foundation, Taiwan; on families divided by geography, politics.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Russell Simmons and his "Def Poetry Jam" won an award.

Load-Date: July 19, 2005


End of Document