Peace on the line in terrorism summit Clinton trying to save legacy of Israel's Rabin
USA TODAY
March 12, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 607 words
Byline: Susan Page
Body


President Clinton went to the Mideast five months ago to mourn
slain Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. Now he returns to try to
salvage Rabin's legacy.
At a Red Sea resort at the tip of the Sinai Peninsula, Clinton
and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak will host a summit Wednesday
they hope will prevent a series of suicide bombings in Israel from
destroying three years of hard-won progress toward peace.
"Yitzhak Rabin was a good friend of mine," Clinton told a New
Jersey audience Monday. He said the former general told him Israel's
survival was the result of "hard work and effort and courage and
ultimate sacrifice to a common cause."
"I will go to Egypt to try to advance that cause and beat back
the terrorism that threatens it today."
But many question whether the gathering of presidents, prime
ministers and kings will be enough to stop terrorists who threaten
the peace process and the two leaders who are trying to keep it
alive, Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres and Palestinian leader
Yasser Arafat.
The meeting the White House calls the "Summit of the Peacemakers"
is clearly more symbol than substance. The public opening statements
are slated to last twice as long as the one-hour private session
that follows.
But the "class photo" is expected to be historic. It will show
the largest collection of Arab leaders ever to stand with an Israeli
prime minister.
Prince Saud al-Faisal will become the highest-ranking Saudi ever
to meet with a leader of the Jewish state. Russian President Boris
Yeltsin, French President Jacques Chirac, British Prime Minister
John Major and Jordan's King Hussein also will attend.
"This proves the Woody Allen principle: 90% of life is showing
up," says Richard Haass of the Council on Foreign Relations. "The
real meaning of the summit is simply that it's happening."
U.S. officials predict some concrete results:
-- Increased communication and coordination among intelligence
agencies in the region to locate and arrest suspected terrorists.
Deputy CIA Director George Tenet met last weekend with the chiefs of
Israel's security police and the Palestinians' internal security
force to urge more cooperation.
-- A request by Arafat for more aid, including an emergency fund
to help Palestinians who have lost jobs because of Israel's military
blockade.
-- Increased international isolation of nations suspected of
harboring or financing terrorism, including Iran, Iraq, Libya and
Sudan. They were not invited to the summit.
Syria and Lebanon declined invitations, disappointing the White
House. A last-minute acceptance was still possible.
The deaths of 62 people in four bombings has cost Peres his lead
in the May 29 Israeli elections and strengthened the opposition
Likud Party, which opposes the land-for-peace compromises Israel has
made.
And Arafat, under pressure from Israel and the United States, has
launched a crackdown on the militant Islamic group Hamas that some
fear will divide Palestinians and fuel a new round of violent
resistance.
"If there are no more bombs, then it's going to be a close call
but the peace process can still be saved," says Geoffrey Kemp of the
Nixon Center for Peace and Freedom. "But if there's another bombing,
all bets are off."
Since the breakthrough accords were signed by Rabin, Peres and
Arafat in 1993, more Israelis have been killed in terrorist attacks
than at any time in the Jewish state's history.
The message in Clinton's speech Thursday at the Tel Aviv Center
for the Performing Arts will be that the Israelis are not alone in
their grief, aides say. He also will meet with Peres and Likud
leader Benjamin Netanyahu.
And he will visit Rabin's grave at the Har Herzl Cemetery with
Rabin's widow, Leah.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Joe Marquette, AP; PHOTO, b/w, AP; In Hackensack, N.J.: President Clinton shakes hands Monday with Arline Duker, mother of Israel bombing victim Sara Duker. Clinton is headed to a one-day Mideast peace summit on Wednesday. Summit site: A worker waters plants outside the Movenpick Hotel in Sharm al-Sheikh, Egypt.

Load-Date: March 13, 1996


End of Document