Peace advocates address war on terrorism;
 Peace church leader will discuss Christian alternatives to militarism
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
April 17, 2004, Saturday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: RELIGION,
Length: 622 words
Byline: Lori Van Ingen
Body


Since historic peace churches traditionally have been against violence, peace advocates said peace churches in the county need to address what their role is, or should be, during this new age of terrorism.
Lancaster Friends Meeting, 110 Tulane Terrace, is hosting a forum on Sunday from 2 to 3:30 p.m. to stimulate an ecumenical dialogue among the peace churches - Quakers, Mennonites and Brethren.
Forum panelists are Dale W. Brown, a fellow at the Young Center for Pietist and Anabaptist Studies at Elizabethtown College; Donald B. Kraybill, senior fellow at the Young Center and interim provost of Elizabethtown College; and Steven Baumgartner, executive director of Pendle Hill Quaker Retreat Center, Wallingford.
John A. Lapp, executive secretary of the Mennonite Central Committee who directed international peace initiatives, will respond to the panel. Wilbur Forwood, clerk of Lancaster Meeting, is the moderator.
#PEACEA17#
Baumgartner will speak on the history of the Quaker peace testimony and how it should be manifested in the war on terror, war on Iraq and war on Afghanistan.
Baumgartner said George Fox, who was the founder of Quakerism in the mid-1600s, used biblical sources and the life of Jesus to determine that the primary foundation of Friends is that it should be against the violent resolution of conflict.
That's why, during World War II, they started the conscientious objector movement and afterward were involved heavily in the reconstruction efforts in Germany, he said.
"The question we're investigating on Sunday is that in a war as strange and new and unprecedented as the war on terror, what is the role of the peace churches," Baumgartner said.
Baumgartner believes that it is "quite clear" that the United States has "embarked on the wrong path."
"The government believes that its war on terror would create more security for us, but it's having the opposite effect. There is very deep enmity among all the cultures involved," Baumgartner said.
Part of the role of peacemakers is to broaden the dialogue by using diplomatic means to build longlasting friendships, he said.
"Some people misconstrue this to mean that Quakers are not supportive of our troops. It's just the opposite. We're deeply supportive and pray for their safety," Baumgartner said.
Kraybill will examine ways for peace churches to address violence and militarism in the society and the world. He also will explore ways the churches can work constructively together to advance peacemaking initiatives.
Brown, professor emeritus of theology and peace studies at Bethany Theological Seminary, will discuss the biblical and theological foundations for peacemakers.
He will discuss the first words of Jesus, "Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand," and the words of Paul, "Do not be overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good."
Brown said if two people are angry with each other, both should apologize - and there will be renewed friendship from a bad relationship.
"It's almost impossible to stop the violence in Israel with its conflict with Palestine. What the answer is, is make friends not enemies."
Sending in the Army to stop the violence in Iraq is the wrong way to go about it, Brown said. "There are a lot of people ready to move in and help them recover. Instead (the U.S. government) created more enemies. We need to repent and overcome evil with good," he said. "The war is getting too costly; it drains what we can do here (to prevent poverty and starvation)."
As the respondent to the panelists, Lapp said he will emphasize strengthening the cooperation between Quakers, Brethren and Mennonites and making connections to all other peace groups, from Catholic to Pentecostal.
Lori Van Ingen's e-mail address is lvaningenlnpnews.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, (1)D. Kraybill (2)D. Brown (3)S. Baumgartner (4)J. Lapp

Load-Date: May 5, 2004


End of Document