PEACE ACCORD MAY SPUR  POOL RE RATE REDUCTION  
Business Insurance
April 20, 1998


Copyright 1998 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: International; Pg. 37
Length: 478 words
Byline: EDWIN UNSWORTH  
Body


LONDON-The leading provider of terrorism insurance in the United Kingdom might decrease rates in light of the Northern Ireland peace settlement.
Michael Watson, secretary and financial controller for Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd., said any review depends on two things: the results of referendums on the peace deal expected to take place May 22 in both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, and then on a sustained period of peace if the referendums come out in favor of the settlement.
Mr. Watson said that given Pool Re's usual Jan. 1 renewal date and a customary two-month notice period, the earliest practical date for a change in rates would be July 1. However, he said he thinks it is more likely a change would come later in the year.
''The likelihood is we will want to see a real proven cease-fire, probably for a bit longer than that,'' he said.
Because of increased competition and an absence of claims against Pool Re in 1997, terrorism insurance rates already were falling before this month's historic peace agreement. Effective Jan. 1, Pool Re offered a discount of 20% for city properties and 40% for properties in other locations (BI, Dec. 15, 1997).
Its main competitor is syndicate 33 at Lloyd's of London. The syndicate, managed by Hiscox Syndicates Ltd., not only increased its terrorism capacity for 1998 to 100 million pounds ($167.9 million) from 45 million pounds ($75.6 million) for individual properties, but also launched a new U.K. terrorism policy offering rates 20% below Pool Re's reduced 1998 rates.
Linda Crossman, a terrorism underwriter on syndicate 33, said the syndicate has no plans ''at the moment'' for a rate reduction. She declined to speculate how long a period of terrorist-free acts it would take for the syndicate to consider cutting rates.
Although Mr. Watson acknowledged that a successful Northern Ireland peace agreement would mean ''the need for Pool Re would be greatly diminished,'' he maintained there would continue to be a role for the insurer. He pointed out that Pool Re provides cover for all acts of terrorism committed in the United Kingdom, not just those perpetrated by the Irish Republican Army.
Mr. Watson also said he thinks it is unlikely reinsurers would step in and provide the same degree of unlimited coverage as Pool Re does. While the company set up Pool Re Nuclear a year ago to cover the risk of terrorist attacks on nuclear installations, Mr. Watson denied a newspaper report in London saying that Pool Re is considering further diversification in view of the reduced terrorism threat.
Pool Re was set up by the U.K. government and insurance industry in 1993 to provide insurance against terrorist activities after most underwriters withdrew because of IRA bombings in London the previous year.
U.K. insurers cover the first 100,000 pounds ($166,810), but anything above that is paid out by Pool Re.

Graphic

 
The Stormont Agreement document, which will be delivered to all households in Northern Ireland. The agreement won the approval of Unionist leaders.

Load-Date: April 23, 1998


End of Document