PEMA PROMISES TO FIND MISSING EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 21, 2003 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE,
Length: 373 words
Byline: CHRISTOPHER SNOWBECK, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency officials pledged yesterday to find out why a local anti-terrorism group has never received $1.5 million worth of needed equipment even though the state received federal money for the gear back in 2000-01.
 PEMA officials traveling in Pittsburgh yesterday with Lt. Gov. Catherine Baker Knoll -- the chairwoman of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Council -- said the state was given money by the federal Office of Justice Programs to buy equipment for Pennsylvania's nine anti-terrorism work groups. But the homeland security group in southwest Pennsylvania -- the Region 13 Working Group -- has complained loudly that they've never received the gear, said Shawn P. O'Connor, Knoll's spokesman.
The equipment included personal protection gear, detection and monitoring devices, cameras and other high-tech items.
 The Region 13 Working Group is a consortium of 13 southwest Pennsylvania counties and the city of Pittsburgh that meets once a month to coordinate anti-terrorism activities in the region. Knoll attended the group's regular meeting yesterday at the Allegheny County Emergency Operations Center in North Point Breeze.
 The federal Office of Justice Programs allocated more money for the state's anti-terrorism groups in its 2001-02 budget. But rather than wait for the region's $2.7 million share of that money to make its way through the state government, Allegheny County will "front-fund" the money to members of Region 13, said county Chief Executive Jim Roddey. At a press conference with Knoll yesterday, Roddey said he had assurances that PEMA will reimburse the county promptly.
 Knoll said more homeland security money is on the way with the passage last week of a massive spending bill in Congress that included $3.5 billion for police, firefighters and emergency service workers.
 But Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge said only $1.3 billion of that total would go to states for anti-terrorism measures.
 Pennsylvania expects to receive 4 percent of the money -- about $140 million -- this spring, Knoll said.
 During a conference of lieutenant governors in Washington last week, Ridge pledged that 75 percent of the new money would go directly to local governments, Knoll said.

Notes

Christopher Snowbeck can be reached at csnowbeck@post-gazette.com or 412-263-2625.  

Load-Date: February 21, 2003


End of Document