Pennsylvania terrorism bulletin raises ire
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 30, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 589 words
Byline: Brad Bumsted
Body


HARRISBURG -- State police Commissioner Frank Pawlowski said state Homeland Security's use of sensitive information obtained from Port Authority of Allegheny County police increased his concern and efforts to call attention to terror bulletins a private state contractor compiled. 
Pawlowski told the Tribune-Review the incident helped bring to a head state police concerns about Homeland Security's use of the contractor to publish bulletins that were disseminated throughout the state. 
The 2008 incident involving Port Authority police is among those recounted in e-mails revealed during a Senate committee hearing, which outlined complaints by police brass to Homeland Security Director James F. Powers about the Institute of Terrorism Research and Response. The group, which held a $103,000 contract, sent information to Homeland Security, which forwarded it to about 800 law enforcement, government and private security officials. 
Sen. Lisa Baker, R-Luzerne, the panel's chairman, said Wednesday she intends to hold another hearing and invited Gov. Ed Rendell's chief of staff, Steven Crawford, to testify. He is heading a task force the governor ordered to deal with the state's entire process of terror alerts. 
The e-mails, from December through August, showed state police Maj. George Bivens and Pawlowski criticized as uncorroborated the institute's information.  
Pawlowski said yesterday the Port Authority incident raised serious concerns. 
A Port Authority officer -- one of 40 with jurisdiction around transit stops and in Pittsburgh -- e-mailed Powers in June about an incident on June 6, 2008, involving a van Port Authority police stopped. 
Bivens wrote in an e-mail that "unfortunately, the officer chose to reach out to Jim Powers out of curiosity." 
The Port Authority officer told Powers he checked the van's license plates and learned the FBI listed the van and its owner on a database of those who potentially have terrorist ties. Police found three international driver's licenses not belonging to either of the van's two occupants. But police made no arrest because of the low-level threat. 
"There was no specific information that warranted an arrest at that time," said Port Authority spokesman Jim Ritchie. "State and federal agencies have established protocols for making such reports and Port Authority police followed those protocols." 
Bivens told state police Lt. Col. Tedescung L. Bandy in an e-mail that Powers forwarded the Port Authority's information to the institute, including additional information from the transit officer. All of that information was then sent out on Homeland Security's terror bulletins, Bivens wrote. 
Powers doesn't recall the institute adding the suspect's name to its bulletin, said his spokeswoman Maria Finn. She said the transit officer "reached out to him," and Homeland Security passed along the suspect's name for "analysis and feedback." 
That was a "clear violation" of the FBI's Terrorist Screening Center's information handling agreements, Bivens wrote. He said FBI agents in Pittsburgh "were not happy." 
"The report did not indicate there were any restrictions on dissemination, nor did the officer communicate any such restriction to Director Powers," Finn said. 
Pawlowski said that incident prompted Bivens in June to press for a meeting with Robert French, director of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, which oversees Homeland Security. But Bivens testified that French essentially paid no heed to complaints about the institute, a for-profit company. 

Load-Date: September 30, 2010


End of Document