Pennsylvania congressman addresses Villanova U. students
University Wire
February 21, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 The Villanovan via U-Wire
Length: 292 words
Byline: By Tara Powers, The Villanovan; SOURCE: Villanova U.
Dateline: VILLANOVA, Pa. 
Body


Members of Villanova University's College Democrats that came out to support their party and hear Congressman Joe Sestak (Pa.-7) address their group in the West Lounge of Dougherty Hall on Feb. 18.
Sestak discussed Congress' agenda for the remainder of the session as well as his actions on behalf of the Pennsylvania residents he represents.
Sestak was also on the Villanova campus on Feb. 5 to speak with the Navy ROTC battalion.
During that trip, Congressman Sestak addressed the battalion of 90 to 100 midshipmen in the Mendel Science Center lecture hall.
Battalion Commander Megan Kunkemoeller (Class of 2008), Colonel Glen Wagner, Commander Scott Calvert and Lieutenant Christopher Morris accompanied the Congressman as he spoke to the group and conducted a question-and-answer session.
Born and raised in Delaware County, former three-star Admiral Joe Sestak served in the Navy for 31 years and now serves as the representative from the Seventh District of Pennsylvania.
He led a series of operational commands at sea, including commander of an aircraft carrier battle group of 30 U.S. and allied ships with over 15,000 sailors and 100 aircraft that conducted operations in Afghanistan and Iraq.
After 9/11, Sestak was the first director of "Deep Blue," the Navy's anti-terrorism unit that established strategic and operations policies for the Global War on Terrorism.
He served as former President Clinton's director for defense policy at the National Security Council in the White House and holds a Ph.D. in political economy and government from Harvard University.
According to the office of the House Historian, Sestak is the highest-ranking former military officer ever to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives.
(C) 2008 The Villanovan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 21, 2008


End of Document