Pennsylvania Homeland Security chief to testify
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 23, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 517 words
Byline: Brad Bumsted and Andrew Conte
Body


HARRISBURG -- State Homeland Security Director James F. Powers Jr. plans to testify Monday at a Senate hearing examining the agency's no-bid contract for a security bulletin that monitored dozens of peaceful protest groups. 
Michael Perelman, a former York police officer and co-director of the nonprofit that prepared the bulletins under the $103,000 contract, "is definitely going to testify," said his attorney, Jeffrey Miller of Philadelphia. 
A Senate committee on Wednesday voted to give Chairman Lisa Baker the power to subpoena witnesses in the investigation into the Rendell administration's contract with the Institute of Terrorism Research and Response. The granting of subpoena power was "precautionary" in case witnesses who say they will testify change their minds, said Baker, R-Luzerne County. 
The Senate Veterans and Emergency Preparedness Committee will delve into the contract that Gov. Ed Rendell sharply criticized last week. The bulletins included events organized by Quakers and other anti-war activists, Tea Party rallies and environmentalists opposing natural gas drilling in the Marcellus shale formation. Rendell said the reports were of "no value" to the state. After news stories called attention to the institute's bulletins, he announced he would not renew the contract.  
State Sen. Jim Ferlo, D-Lawrenceville, has called on Powers to resign or be fired. Rendell, who has a little more than three months left in office, says that there was "collective responsibility" for the contract and no one will be fired. 
The institute provided bulletins to Homeland Security about events overseas and in Pennsylvania that supposedly pose terror risks. The bulletins, in turn, were sent to local government officials and law enforcement.  
Powers thus far has not commented. Reached yesterday, he referred questions to his press secretary, Maria Finn. She has declined comment during the past week. 
Perelman has defended the institute's work, saying its research provides a heads-up to local agencies about potential security threats. 
The institute is registered with the state as a nonprofit, but it does not appear by that name as a federally tax-exempt organization.  
Perelman and Aaron Richman incorporated the nonprofit in 2004, and three years later incorporated a separate nonprofit foundation with the same name -- the Institute of Terrorism Research and Response Foundation, state records show. Both are registered to a York address.  
State and federal officials said it's possible for an organization to be registered as a nonprofit in the state but not as tax-exempt by the Internal Revenue Service.  
"Not all nonprofits choose to seek nonexempt status," said Leslie Amoros, spokeswoman for the Pennsylvania Department of State.  
"Our Office of Homeland Security did not check into their nonprofit status," Rendell spokesman Gary Tuma said. "It would have made no difference to them either way."  
It wasn't relevant to Homeland Security's "intelligence mission," he said. "Powers researched their ability to provide the service he believed he needed to carry out his duties." 

Load-Date: September 23, 2010


End of Document