Penn discusses terrorism insurance
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
July 16, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 316 words
Byline: Civia Katz, Correspondent
Body


Penn Township supervisors discussed the merits, but decided Monday against spending $522 for a terrorism insurance policy.
Meanwhile, other policies carried by the township jumped 17 to 137 percent.
The cost of employee insurance for Penn climbed 17 percent to $89,837. The policy with Americana/St. Paul & Guard Worker's Compensation cost the township $76,545 for the same coverage a year ago.
#PENNTWP.U166es#
Tim Ruhl of Ruhl's insurance attributed the increase to frivolous lawsuits.
The law enforcement liability premium soared 137 percent, rising from $4,227 to $10,017.
"There was nothing that Penn Township police department did," Ruhl said. "It's just our society has driven the insurance rate especially for law enforcement."
The general liability increased from $4,893 to $9,770. "That's pretty much average in what I'm seeing in the market place," Ruhl said. "I think we've done our homework on that. We've shopped the market."
Ruhl said Manheim Central School District also opted out of the coverage for terrorism. Because the district has more property, it was looking at a cost of $1,800 for insurance.
Supervisors heard Ruhl suggest terror scenarios.
He said, "What if Ferrell's gas plant went? What the fire department told me was that the town would be leveled."
"Yeah, you've got a major problem there, whether the east side takes a real blast or not," police Chief Larry Snavely said.  "You're looking at a situation that has potential."
Even a situation as horrendous as a gas plant explosion may not be terrorism. Ruhl said, under the new Federal Terrorism Risk and Insurance Act, an act of sabotage must meet specific criteria to be considered terrorism.
Ruhl said the damage must total over $25 million and the terrorists must be foreign. So, for example, the Oklahoma City bombing of the Murrah Federal Building would not be considered terrorism because the bombers were U.S. citizens.

Load-Date: July 18, 2003


End of Document