Pensions scrutinize investments for links to terrorism
USA TODAY
March 13, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: MONEY;
Length: 404 words
Byline: Christine Dugas
Body

As war with Iraq looms, some cities and states are taking steps to ensure that their pension fund investments don't unwittingly support terrorism.
New York City Comptroller William Thompson Jr. last month submitted shareholder resolutions to Halliburton, ConocoPhillips and GE, calling on their board members to review operations in terrorist-linked countries. The city's five pension funds have about $ 1 billion invested in the companies.
Many publicly traded corporations legally conduct business in countries that support terrorism. Yet, a growing number of state and municipal officials are trying to get a better fix on the nature and extent of those business dealings with countries such as Iraq, Iran, North Korea and Syria, all designated as terrorist-sponsoring nations by the U.S. State Department.
The so-called financial war on terrorism could result in public pressure on some companies to curtail questionable foreign operations. Arizona State Treasurer David Petersen says he wants to be sure that companies capitalized with public funds don't help provide advanced equipment, technology or financing for governments that assist terrorist groups.
Among recent developments:
 * The Arizona Legislature is considering a bill that would require pension fund managers to report on investments in companies operating in terrorist-sponsoring nations so the state could decide whether to divest them. The bill soon will go to the full Legislature for a vote.
 * California Public Employees' Retirement System, the nation's largest public retirement fund, has asked Congress and administration officials to identify companies that might unwittingly support terrorism.
 * The Claremont Institute, a conservative think tank, recently sent letters to each state urging them to review pension investments for ties to terrorist-sponsoring countries.
One risk-monitoring service has identified 400 public companies conducting business in countries known to sponsor terrorism. Among the companies on the list, about 35% are European, 25% are Asian and 15% are North American, according to the Conflict Securities Advisory Group, a co-creator of the service.
The multinational companies that New York City has targeted say they comply with U.S. law and have only limited operations in Iran and Syria. GE opposes the shareholder resolution. Halliburton is in discussions with the comptroller and ConocoPhillips is arranging a meeting.

Load-Date: March 13, 2003


End of Document