Pentagon Flooded With Ideas To Combat Terrorism
Federal Times
December 17, 2001 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2001 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 1217
Length: 651 words
Byline: By Vince Crawley; Special to Federal Times
Body


A Pentagon office seeking   ideas on combating terrorism   and solving cutting-edge military problems expects to receive at least 10,000 formal   proposals by the Dec. 23 deadline.
Anti-terror squads already   carry bomb disrupters and   other high-tech gadgets that   originated in past projects by   the Pentagon's Technical Support Working Group, which   has a mission to cut through   red tape and rush new technology to users in the field.
In response to the Sept. 11   attacks, the group announced   Oct. 25 it is seeking formal   proposals on "combating terrorism, defeating difficult targets, conducting protracted   operations in remote areas   and developing countermeasures to weapons of mass destruction."
As of Nov. 30, more than 700   submissions had come in, said   Jeffrey David, deputy director   of the Combating Terrorism   Technology Support Office,   part of the Technical Support   Working Group.
David expects many more to   arrive before the deadline.   "Prior experience tells us that   90-plus percent of submissions   come in the last two days," he   said, adding he expects the   final tally to be 10,000 to   20,000 submissions.
John Reingruber, the Pentagon's deputy assistant secretary for combating terrorism,   said so many responses will   make finding the best ideas   like hunting for the proverbial   needle in the haystack.
However, the first 700 ideas   yielded at least one that could   be revolutionary. Reingruber   could not discuss details because of security and privacy   concerns, but said he swiftly   passed it to the Pentagon's acquisition chief, who sent it to a   war-fighting general in the   field. Officials are waiting to   hear back.
"It's rare that I see something I think is really new and   interesting," Reingruber said.   "And this one definitely was."
It was not sent in by a wellestablished defense contractor, either. "I think it's a guy in   his garage," Reingruber said.
The group's previous ideas   include bomb disrupters that   use a small robot to break   apart components of live   bombs, preventing them from   going off. These are now required for every federally   sanctioned bomb squad.
Also developed by the group   is a special bomb-detecting X- ray machine for packages. The   military recently bought 700   of them, and the FBI is buying   400 for nationwide bomb   squads.
Special bomb suits also have   been developed by the group   and are being fielded, as is a   new bio-agent sampling kit   that is 20 times more efficient   than older kits.
The new models are being   delivered at the urgent request of federal agencies responding to this autumn's anthrax mail attacks, David   said.
New software being fielded   allows terror fighters to track   contamination in water supplies, reservoirs or rivers.   That technology will be in   place for the Winter Olympics   in Salt Lake City.
The group also worked on   what it calls a blast-mitigation   program in the wake of truck   bombings in Oklahoma City,   the 1993 World Trade Center   attack and the Khobar Towers   attack against U.S. troops in   Saudi Arabia in 1996.
In studying blast sites, the   group determined the greatest   cause of death in such attacks   was progressive collapse of   structural columns, David   said. Also, "flying debris - not   from the bomb but from walls   and windows - was the greatest cause of injury," David   said.
So the group focused on reducing both. For example, the   Pentagon was renovated with   a special steel skeleton that on   Sept. 11 prevented the building from collapsing for more   than half an hour, allowing   dozens or hundreds of people   to escape the stricken section   before it toppled, according to   building engineers.
In addition, a curtain of protective Mylar was placed behind the Pentagon's limestone   exterior to contain flying debris.
More information on how to   submit ideas can be found online at www.bids.tswg.gov. 

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document