Pentagon official: Gitmo transfers killed Americans; House committee hears testimony on closing facility.; WAR ON TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 24, 2016 Thursday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A3
Length: 405 words
Byline: ByRichard Lardner
Body


WASHINGTON - Americans have been killed by prisoners released from the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a senior Defense Department official told lawmakers Wednesday, triggering sharp criticism from Republicans opposed to shuttering the facility in the wake of deadly attacks by the Islamic State group in Brussels and Paris.
Paul Lewis, the Pentagon's special envoy for Guantanamo detention closure, declined to provide the GOP-led House Foreign Affairs Committee with details. He would not say whether the incidents occurred before or after President Barack Obama took office in January 2009.
"What I can tell you is unfortunately there have been Americans that have died because of (Guantanamo) detainees," Lewis said during an exchange with Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Calif.
"When anybody dies, it is tragedy and we don't want anybody to die because we transfer detainees," Lewis said.
An Obama administration official said Lewis was referring to an incident that involved an Afghan prisoner released from Guantanamo while George W. Bush was president. The official was not authorized to speak publicly and requested anonymity.
During the Bush administration, 532 prisoners were released from Guantanamo, often in large groups to Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia - the two nationalities that made up the greatest number of prisoners.
The Obama administration has released 144 detainees after a screening process that involves representatives from six government agencies and departments who must make a unanimous decision to release.
Lewis testified before the committee along with Lee Wolosky, the State Department's special envoy for Guantanamo closure. They argued that the prison is a powerful propaganda tool for the Islamic State group and that keeping it open damages U.S. national security.
Republicans and a few Democrats in Congress have repeatedly thwarted Obama's effort to close the prison and blocked any attempt to move detainees to U.S. prisons in legislation the president has signed into law.
Wolosky said the Guantanamo prison did not prevent Tuesday's attacks in Brussels or the November 13 attacks in Paris.
"There are unfortunately going to be acts of terrorism, probably whether the facility is opened or closed," Wolosky said. "The proper analysis is, 'What are the risks of keeping it open in light of the very obvious use of that facility as a propaganda tool,' which, frankly, you should not have to question."

Load-Date: March 24, 2016


End of Document