Pentagon moves to protect U.S. capital against terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 21, 2004 Tuesday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A04
Length: 301 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Pentagon has established a new military headquarters whose mission is to defend the nation's capital and to assist civil authorities in responding to a terrorist attack.
The Joint Forces Headquarters for the National Capital Region is based at Fort McNair, a small Army post in Washington on the banks of the Anacostia River.
The idea of the new Joint Forces Headquarters is not to fend off foreign armies but to prevent if possible -- and respond to, if not -- surprise attack by terrorists using nuclear, chemical, biological or other unconventional means, Army Maj. Gen. Galen B. Jackman said Monday.
"There are vulnerabilities in the nation's capital," he said without being specific.
One of those vulnerabilities is the proximity of the White House, the Capitol and other government buildings to commercial air traffic, as shown by the Sept. 11, 2001, attack on the Pentagon.
Jackman is commander of the new headquarters. The deputy commander is Rear Adm. Jan Gaudio, who also is commandant of the Naval District of Washington, which provides support services to naval installations within a 100 mile radius of the Pentagon.
Jackman and Gaudio briefed reporters Monday about the arrangement and the new operations center, where they can monitor a broad range of information from the FBI and other government agencies.
The new outfit also has a mobile command center, a $3.2 million truck chock full of computer, telephone, TV and other communications to enable Jackman or others to travel to the scene of an emergency and remain in touch with the secretary of defense as well as other agencies.
The idea is to improve the military's ability to coordinate a post-attack response, as well as complicate a potential attacker's planning by varying the placement and visibility of security measures, Jackman said.

Load-Date: September 21, 2004


End of Document