Pentagon scrambling after rulings on detainees
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 6, 2007 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 476 words
Byline: By Anne Flaherty The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Failed attempts to charge two terrorism suspects left the Pentagon scrambling Tuesday to determine a next step and emboldened Democrats who said the rulings exposed a flawed court system.
Military judges ruled Monday that the Pentagon could not prosecute Salim Ahmed Hamdan and Omar Khadr because they had not first been identified as "unlawful" enemy combatants, as required by a law passed last year by Congress.
Hamdan, of Yemen, is believed to have been chauffeur to al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden. Khadr is a Canadian who was arrested at age 15 on an Afghan battlefield, accused of killing a U.S. soldier.
The decision dealt a blow to the Bush administration in its efforts to begin prosecuting dozens of detainees regarded as the nation's most dangerous terrorism suspects.
U.S. officials chalked up the ruling to semantics and said they were considering their options.
"We certainly disagree with the ruling," said White House spokeswoman Dana Perino on Tuesday. The Defense Department "is looking at the opportunities for appeal, and what they would say."
Lawmakers and legal experts agreed the decision was not necessarily a showstopper for the trials, and that new legislation might not be necessary to convict Hamdan and Khadr. Democratic critics, however, said the ruling proved the current law was shabbily written.
Last year, Republicans and the White House pushed through legislation authorizing the war-crimes trials after the Supreme Court threw out President George W. Bush's previous system as illegal and in violation of international treaties.
Bush established the special tribunal system shortly after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks but had not been able to convict any terrorism suspects because of legal hurdles. After the law passed, the administration convicted Australian David Hicks, who pleaded guilty in March to providing material support to al-Qaida. He is serving a nine-month sentence in Australia.
"Five-and-a-half years later, we find what happens with that kind of arrogant, go-it-alone attitude - even conservative courts say 'no,'" said Sen. Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Leahy, D-Vt., and other Democrats have drafted legislation that would address various aspects of the law they say is unfair or unconstitutional.
Leahy's panel is expected on Thursday to pass a bill that would allow detainees to protest their detentions in federal court; the law passed last year specifically stripped federal courts of their ability to hear habeas corpus challenges. The measure is likely to be offered as an amendment to a $649 billion defense policy bill on the Senate floor later this month.
Co-sponsors of the Judiciary bill include Sen. Arlen Specter, the top Republican on the Judiciary Committee, and Democratic presidential hopefuls: Sens. Hillary Rodham Clinton, Barack Obama, Christopher Dodd and Joe Biden.

Load-Date: June 26, 2007


End of Document