Pentagon 'information operations' chief moves on
USA TODAY
August 9, 2013 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 430 words
Byline: Tom Vanden Brook, USA TODAY,
Body


The Pentagon's point man for "information operations," Austin Branch, is moving on to the National Counter Terrorism Center.
Branch has led military's IO effort -- referred to by some as propaganda -- during a period of rapid expansion and, of late, criticism from Capitol Hill. He will be replaced by Mike Banaszewski, who is chief of staff for the deputy assistant secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Counter Terrorism, according to Navy Cmdr. Amy Derrick-Frost, a Pentagon spokeswoman.
Neither Branch nor Banaszewski was available for comment.
Information operations has existed in a gray area for the military: It's an acknowledged specialty but its practices are mostly kept secret. Despite the high costs, the programs' effectiveness is hard to prove, according to numerous reports, including one by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) this spring on what the military calls Military Information Support Operations.
The report, meant only for government eyes but obtained by USA TODAY, described the program as using "information and actions to influence foreign audiences to change their behavior to be favorable to U.S. interests."
Spending on IO rose from $9 million in 2005 to $580 million in 2009, mostly for programs in Iraq and Afghanistan, Pentagon and congressional records show. The budget has dropped as the war in Iraq ended and the draw down in Afghanistan continues. Its recent budgets: $488 million in 2010; $355 million in 2011; $202 million in 2012. Branch oversaw the reduction in spending.
In 2011, USA TODAY published an investigation of the program and found that much of the money was spent on efforts whose effectiveness could not be measured. The programs include leaflets and billboards urging Afghans to support their government. Millions are also spent on radio and television broadcasts and advertisements whose U.S. sponsorship is often hidden from Afghans because, military officials acknowledged, the information wouldn't be trusted if Afghans knew its source.
In an exit interview in February, then-Defense secretary Leon Panetta expressed doubt about the value of IO programs. "It's always been tough to quantify, frankly," he said. "I've always been a little skeptical about how much good you can get out of that."
The GAO report in April raised more questions about IO's value. It found that the propaganda programs are inadequately tracked, their impact is unclear, and the military doesn't know whether it is targeting the right foreign audiences. Now the Senate Armed Services Committee is trying to cut some of its funding. 

Load-Date: August 9, 2013


End of Document