Pentagon gambling on terrorism
University Wire
July 31, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 Independent Florida Alligator via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 495 words
Byline: By Taylor Mitchell, Independent Florida Alligator
Dateline: Gainesville, Fla.
Body


Uncle Sam's Pentagon workers have managed to crank out a new way to add some flare to the mundane topic of military and political conflict.
The punch line: A terror-wagering futures market. The only problem is that it's not a joke.
U. Florida
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has developed a program that would allow investors to buy future contracts based on their predictions of terrorist attacks.
The Policy Analysis Market was scheduled to open this Friday for registration to trade on Middle East future affairs, but was slammed down by Congress last Monday. It should be emphasized that the grant for this project has been drawn from federal tax dollars.
Furthermore, another $ 8 million was requested by the Department of Defense in order to expand on the terrorism futures market project.
Need we remind our Department of Defense of current affairs? We have the highest unemployment rate since the Hooverville years. Low income housing, college students and the head start program for inner-city children are losing aid. And we have a $ 450 billion deficit.
We need innovation to help the common man as well as the privileged one. However, at this time, the city on a hill is occupying itself and our dollars with plans of wagering on terror attacks. The only beneficiaries of this program: those select few, privy to classified intelligence within the government, the government's friends and best of all -- the terrorists who know when they plan to attack.
Paul D. Wolfowitz claims he "first learned of it through the news accounts." It's a good sign when the deputy defense secretary of our country does not even know about programs developing from within the Department of Defense.
What kind of communication breakdown must have occurred if a program that would have revolutionized future markets as we know them was presented to Congress before being discussed by the Pentagon leaders, including Bush's cabinet member, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld.
If they did know about the terrorist futures market program, then the stench of failure and neglect rises. Their jobs are to protect the citizens of the United States to the best of their ability -- not to make the public a guinea pig in an aristocratic gambling affair or the next lives to be lost in terrorist attacks.
It is not plausible that higher administration was not aware of the future terrorist wagering program and the continued mishaps in intelligence handling within our Department of Defense are worrisome.
Though a few token officials have been fired after taking the blame for the program's existence, this state of affairs poses a much greater risk than may initially be apparent.
We should not neglect to further investigate the house where such plans grew, because despite the fact that a few pawns have been removed from the chessboard, consenting or brutally incompetent authority still remain in power.
(C) 2002 Independent Florida Alligator via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 31, 2003


End of Document