Pentagon update refocuses on terror; In its latest strategic plan, it aims to strengthen special operations but not boost ground forces.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 4, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A08
Length: 1056 words
Byline: Drew Brown, Inquirer Washington Bureau
Body


WASHINGTON- The Pentagon plans to strengthen its special-operations forces to fight terrorists and insurgents in the coming decades, but it will not increase the military's ground forces or eliminate any of its most expensive weapons programs, according to a long-range plan released yesterday.
The Quadrennial Defense Review, the Pentagon's strategic plan that is updated every four years, makes the war on terrorism the military's top priority, Gen. Peter Pace, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said.
Some analysts said the plan would not reshape the military enough to meet new threats because it would not increase military manpower for dealing with situations such as Iraq. It also does not call for trimming spending on expensive weapons, used primarily in conventional warfare, to help pay for the emphasis on fighting terrorists, they said.
The document calls for increasing U.S. special-operations forces by 15 percent, drawing these new highly trained forces from the pool of active-duty members of the military. Other provisions call for new coastal and river patrol forces and a new fleet of long-range bombers, 35 percent of which would be unmanned drones.
Those plans, according to officials, reflect a shift in a strategy that had focused almost exclusively on fighting conventional wars. The new plan, they said, will prepare the military to defeat other armies, as well as low-tech insurgents, terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction, and countries or groups that acquire disruptive new technologies that threaten U.S. dominance.
Daniel Goure, a defense analyst with the Lexington Institute, a public policy research group in Arlington, Va., questioned whether the military would have enough ground troops.
"What is the one thing that we've learned about the global war on terrorism?" he asked. "The one unalterable thing is that it takes numbers... . And for another Iraq-like scenario, which is what they're planning on, they don't have the numbers."
Defense officials said the review incorporated lessons from the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks - primarily that the United States must be prepared to defeat a wide range of enemies.
"I can tell you now that U.S. forces, in all probability, will be engaged somewhere in the world in the next decade where they're not currently engaged," said Ryan Henry, principal undersecretary of defense for policy, during a briefing yesterday. "But I can't tell you with any resolution at all of where that might be, when that might be or how that might be, and that's indicative of the uncertainty that we face."
While lawmakers and analysts have applauded the report's recommendation to increase special-operations forces, there was some concern on Capitol Hill that the Pentagon failed to call for more ground forces. Plans call for 482,400 soldiers in the active-duty Army and 533,000 Reserve and National Guard troops by 2011. That would be a decrease from the current authorized strength of 512,000 active-duty Army soldiers and 555,000 National Guard and Reserves.
The Army has 493,000 active-duty soldiers and 522,000 National Guard and Reserves.
Rep. Ike Skelton of Missouri, the ranking Democrat on the House Armed Services Committee, questioned whether the military would have enough troops.
"Today's Army is severely stretched by deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan," Skelton said. "It is not clear to me that an Army of 70 BCTs [brigade combat teams] can sustain the 'long war' envisioned... while simultaneously executing the missions that are necessary to support major conflicts in the future."
Pentagon officials said that concerns about the number of ground troops missed a broader point - that the number of soldiers an army has is less important than what those soldiers do.
"It's not about numbers," Henry said. "Being able to generate operational effects on the battle space - that's what it's about."
Lawrence J. Korb, the Pentagon's top personnel official in the Reagan administration, advocates increasing the Army by 86,000 soldiers. He suggested eliminating the national ballistic missile defense system, research into space-based weapons programs, and production of the F-22 stealth fighter, the Virginia-class submarine, the DD(X) destroyer and the V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor plane. The Pentagon's plan calls for preserving all those programs.
"United States' weapons systems are not matched to threats, and the Pentagon has more programs on the drawing board than it can afford, given the Bush administration's record-setting deficits," Korb wrote in a recent report for the Center for American Progress, another policy research group.
The Origins of 'Long War'
With its formal embrace this week of the term "long war," the Bush administration has turned a simple descriptive phrase into an official name for the war on terrorism and possibly catapulted it into the ranks of such other era names as "Cold War" and "World War."
The phrase has a long history:
It was applied to the 15-year war between the Hapsburg monarchy and
the Ottoman Empire that started in the 1590s. It also was a name proposed by University of Texas law professor Philip Bobbitt to cover a collection of 20th-century conflicts, from World War I to the Cold War, that resulted in democracy triumphing over communism and fascism.
According to several military officers, its recent rise to rhetorical prominence in the U.S. military began in 2004 with Gen. John Abizaid, the Central Command chief who oversees military operations in the Middle East. Abizaid invoked the phrase to underscore the long-term challenge posed by al-Qaeda and other Islamic extremist groups.
James Jay Carafano, a senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation, co-wrote a book last year titled Winning the Long War: Lessons From the Cold War for Defeating Terrorism and Preserving Freedom. Carafano said the name captured the only major element of the war about which everyone agreed. "We can't agree it's global, we can't agree it's terrorism, but we all generally agree it's a war... [and] it's going to be long," Carafano said. "Transnational terrorism is the problem of the 21st century."
And in his State of the
Union address this week, President Bush declared: "Our own generation is in
a long war against a determined enemy."
SOURCE: Washington Post
Contact reporter Drew Brown at 202-383-6104 or dbrown@krwashington.com.

Load-Date: February 4, 2006


End of Document