Pentagon foresees at least two more years in Somalia; Leaders outline combat operations against militants.; WAR ON TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 11, 2017 Monday


Copyright 2017 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A6
Length: 367 words
Byline: Charlie Savage and Eric Schmitt
Body


WASHINGTON- Amiditsescalating campaign of drone strikes in Somalia, the Pentagon has presented the White House with an operational plan that envisions at least two more years of combat against Islamist militants there, according to U.S. officials familiar with internal deliberations.
The proposed plan for Somalia would be the first under new rules quietly signed by President Donald Trump in October for counterterrorism operations outside conventional war zones. The U.S. military has carried out about 30 airstrikes in Somalia this year, twice as many as in 2016. Nearly all have come since June, including a Nov. 21 bombing that killed over 100 suspected militants at an al-Shabab training camp.
In a sign that the Defense Department does not envision a quick end to the deepening war in Somalia against al-Shabab and the Islamic State, the proposed plan is said to include an exemption to a rule in Trump's guidelines requiring annual vetting by staff from other agencies - including diplomats and intelligence officials - of operational plans for certain countries.
Instead, the Pentagon wants to wait 24 months before reviewing how the Somalia plan is working, according to the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive matters. Moreover, they said, the Defense Department wants to conduct that review internally, without involvement from other agencies -a request that would further a Trump-era pattern of giving the Pentagon greater latitude and autonomy.
Luke Hartig, a senior director for counterterrorism at the White House National Security Council during the Obama administration, said he supported delegating some greater authority to the Pentagon over such matters, but found it "problematic" that the military wanted to be unleashed for so long without broader oversight.
According to the officials familiar with it, the Pentagon plan would exempt operations in Somalia from another default rule in Trump's guidelines: that airstrikes be allowed only when officials have determined there is a near certainty that no civilians will be killed. Instead, the officials said, the plan calls for imposing a lower standard: reasonable certainty that no bystanders will die.

Load-Date: December 11, 2017


End of Document