PENTAGON PLANS TO HELP U.S. CITIES COMBAT TERRORISM;
PROGRAM WOULD TRAIN LOCAL OFFICIALS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 17, 1997, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 06A
Length: 436 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


As the anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing approaches, the Pentagon has begun a training program designed to help 120 cities deal with the potential terrorist use of chemical, biological or even nuclear weapons.
Local police, firefighters, medics and other emergency workers will learn to identify such deadly weapons, deal with victims and carry out any decontamination that might be required, officials said Wednesday.
Under this year's $ 42.6 million program, the military will set up a multiservice "Chem-Bio Quick Response Force" of up to 500 people. Members of the force will travel around the country training local officials, and the Pentagon plans to set up a hot line and an Internet site with further help. Specialized training also will be done at some military installations.
The commander of the Army's Chemical Biological Defense Command, Maj. Gen. George Friel, will be in charge of the training program.
Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., a member of the House National Security Committee, has pressed for such help for local authorities. He called the Pentagon program "a good step . . . long overdue, but it's not enough."
"The first responder to terrorism is not the military," Weldon said. "It's the 1.2 million men and women across the country . . . who day in and day out respond to disasters." He said local emergency workers, many of them volunteers, could be overwhelmed before federal assistance arrived.
Carl Hooker, deputy chief of the Houston Fire Department, welcomed the program.
"There's no way cities can prepare properly for something like that," Hooker said. "No question about it, it will make us more secure in dealing with a terrorist event."
Hooker said interest in dealing with such a crisis had grown, especially since the bombing in Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995, of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, which killed 168 people. As the bombing anniversary nears, federal agencies are quietly fortifying security. The FBI sent out a reminder about the date and its history. Some agencies, like the Social Security Administration, issued a list of precautions about reporting suspicious events, abandoned packages and the like.
Pentagon officials said the training would be coordinated through the Federal Emergency Management Agency and make use of experts from the FBI, the Public Health Service, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Energy Department.
By Oct. 1, 27 cities, including Chicago, will be assessed for setting up the initial programs. Over the next three years, the officials said, they hope to reach the nation's 120 largest cities - if those cities want to take part.

Load-Date: April 18, 1997


End of Document