PENTAGON DROPS PLAN FOR TRADING ON TERRORISM;
ON FUTURES MARKET, PROFIT FROM PREDICTIONS WAS NAME OF THE GAME
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 30, 2003 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1; ANALYSIS; DEFENSE DEPARTMENT'S DEFENSE RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY; POLICY ANALYSIS MARKET
Length: 791 words
Byline: Ken Guggenheim The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Under fire from all sides, the Pentagon on Tuesday dropped plans for a futures market that would have allowed traders to profit from accurate predictions on terrorism and assassinations.
Republicans said they knew nothing about the program -- which was due to start in the fall -- and would never have approved it. They called the head of the Pentagon agency overseeing the project to Capitol Hill to answer questions.
Democrats demanded details of any related Pentagon programs, an apology from the Bush administration and the firing of those responsible for the market.
"I think those who thought it up ought not only close down the program," said Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D, at a news conference. "They ought not be on the public payroll any longer."
At a hearing where senators criticized the program, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said, "I share your shock at this kind of program." But he also defended the Pentagon office that came up with the project, saying "it is brilliantly imaginative in places where we want them to be imaginative."
Dorgan and Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., touched off the furor Monday by disclosing details of the Policy Analysis Market, a project that seemed so bizarre that some lawmakers said they thought it was a hoax.
The Pentagon's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, working with two private partners, would have set up an Internet futures trading market on events in the Middle East. Traders could buy and sell futures contracts based on their predictions about what would happen in the region.
From the trading patterns, the Pentagon agency, known as DARPA, hoped to gain clues about potential terrorist attacks. In statements Monday and Tuesday, it said markets are often better than experts in making predictions.
But the response from both parties was outrage.
"This program could provide an incentive actually to commit acts of terrorism," Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said on the Senate floor. He described it as a "plan to trade in death."
Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn., asked Appropriations Committee Chairman Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, and Armed Services Chairman John Warner, R-Va., to make sure the market wasn't funded.
"I cannot conceive of any reason why the United States government should be involved in a project of this nature," Frist said.
By late morning, Warner and Wolfowitz, at separate hearings, announced the program would be ended.
As he praised the Pentagon agency at a Senate Foreign Relations hearing, Wolfowitz said with a smile, "It sounds like maybe they got too imaginative."
Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., told Wolfowitz, "I don't think we can laugh off that program."
"There is something very sick about it," she said. "And if it's going to end, I think you ought to end the careers of whoever it was thought that up. Because terrorists knowing they were planning an attack could have bet on the attack and collected a lot of money. It's a sick idea."
Warner said he had spoken with the head of the agency, Tony Tether, who agreed the program should end.
Warner said in an interview that the agency "didn't think through the full ramifications of the program."
Senators said they had only vague information about the project that included the market. That project, FutureMAP, or "Futures Markets Applied to Predictions," will end along with the market Web site, the Pentagon said.
The Pentagon had requested $3 million for FutureMAP next year. The senators said the money attracted little attention in the overall $3 billion budget proposal for the research projects agency.
About $750,000 had been approved for FutureMAP in past budgets.
"It's totally unauthorized as far as we're concerned," Stevens said. "No funds should have been used for it at all. It's really a serious mistake on the part of DARPA."
Tether was called to Capitol Hill to meet with Warner and Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan., chairman of the Intelligence Committee and Armed Services' emerging threats subcommittee.
Warner's spokesman, John Ullyot, described the meeting as businesslike and professional. He said the senators will submit written questions to Tether and will await responses before deciding if hearings or other actions are needed.
Tether was asked as he left whether retired Adm. John Poindexter, who runs the agency division that included the market program, would keep his job.
"I don't see why not," he said.
Poindexter, who runs the agency's Information Awareness Office, is used to political storms. A former national security adviser to President Ronald Reagan, Poindexter was a key figure in the 1980s Iran-Contra scandal. In addition to FutureMAP, his office oversees the Terrorism Information Awareness project, a computerized surveillance program that has raised privacy concerns.

Notes

See sidestory on Page A1: "What is Policy Analysis Market?"

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz called a terrorism market program "brilliantly imaginative."

Load-Date: July 30, 2003


End of Document