PENTAGON ACTS ON REPORT ABOUT MARINE BOMBING
The New York Times
February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 923 words
Byline: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr. 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8
Body


The commanding officers of the 241 marines and other servicemen killed last fall in the bombing of the Marine compound in Beirut will receive ''appropriate administrative letters,'' the Defense Department said today.
It declined to discuss the content of the letters other than to characterize them as ''nonpunitive.'' Officials noted that President Reagan said several weeks ago that he did not think any commanders should be punished as a result of the bombing on Oct. 23, and he took upon himself to accept blame for any security failure.
The issuance of the letters was disclosed in a summary of Pentagon findings in the bombing, which also said that that new measures were being contemplated to counter terrorist attacks against American military personnel around the world. It did not describe the countermeasures other than to say they dealt with ''terrorism as a mode of warfare.''
Defense Department, releasing summary of its findings about bombing of Marine compound in Beirut last fall, says commanding officers will get 'appropriate administrative letters;' says letters are 'nonpunitive;' cites steps taken to counter new terrorist attacks (M)
It did disclose, however, that a number of measures, mainly in the form of physical defenses, had already been taken in Beirut.
 
Commanders Not Identified
The Pentagon refused to identify any of the commanding officers to receive letters. It said personnel files were confidential.  It said the letters and the safety precautions were among 10 measures ordered by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger in response to an investigation into the Beirut bombing by a special commission.
This group, headed by a retired admiral, Robert L. J. Long, concluded that, although the military contingent in Beirut faced difficult circumstances in terms of location and opposing forces, it had improperly utilized available intelligence and had not established adequate security. The entire chain of command was to blame for the security failure, the commission said.
Mr. Weinberger tended to agree with the main findings, notably with regard to a recommendation that alternative means be found to achieve United States objectives in Lebanon.
''We agree that such a reassessment is desirable,'' the summation of Mr. Weinberger's position said. ''The Secretary has pursued this matter within the National Security Council.''
The summary made no mention of President Reagan's latest decision to move the marines from Beirut airport to ships offshore.
 
Less Sweeping About Breakdown
Mr. Weinberger was less sweeping about the breakdown in the chain of command. He limited the administrative letters to ground commanders and said, in effect, that hindsight was not reason enough for stronger action. As the summary of his findings put it:
''The chain of command took actions to plan and supervise security measures which were viewed at the time as sufficient. The tragedy itself demonstrates that these measures were not sufficient. Such a retrospective determination, however, does not represent a determination that specific commanders in the chain of command were negligent in their duties.''
While Pentagon officials said the letters to be sent to commanders would not be ''punitive,'' they did not rule out the possibility that the careers of some of the recipients would be adversely affected.
''It depends on what else is in the personnel file,'' one official said.
 
Measures Against Terrorism
As for the new security measures against terrorrism, the summation of Mr. Weinberger's findings conceded that ''our current antiterrorist posture could be improved.'' But then it added:
''Although we have taken many actions to implement the recommendations of the Long Commission, we should not generate overly optimistic predictions about combatting terrorism. Terrorist attacks occur even in homogeneous societies where effective police agencies and sophisticated intelligence organzations exist. Although improvements can be made that may reduce the likelihood of successful terrorist attacks, it is not reasonable to expect that changes can be made that will eliminate the possibility of such attacks.''
In an effort to improve security for the Marine force in Beirut, the summary said, Mr. Weinberger has ordered American commanders to conduct ''periodic'' inspections of facilities, and a specific set of orders - rules of engagement - has been drawn up for handling terrorist attacks.
The summary described the new measures taken in Beirut as additional barricades, relocation of forces and headquarters, and the addition of special perimeter guns and bunkers.
 
Improvements in Intelligence
It said that, in response to findings by the Long commission, efforts were under way to improve the flow of intelligence. The summary said Mr. Weinberger had found merit in the commission's conclusion that intelligence had been available, but had not been properly analyzed or used.
In response to commission recommendations, Mr. Weinberger has also ordered United States forces to review their medical evacuation plans and to improve record-keeping and the use of personnel identification tags. After the Beirut bombing, there was some criticism of decisions to send some of the wounded to hospitals as distant as West Germany.
Criticism was also voiced about the absence of duplicate personnel records - many records were destroyed in the blast - and the fact that many men were not wearing their identification tags when the explosion occurred. As a result, many of the victims were not identified for several weeks.


End of Document