Pentagon offers list of tribunal crimes;
Terrorism suspects would be tried for them at a military tribunal, with limits on rights.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 1, 2003 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A08
Length: 572 words
Byline: Pauline Jelinek ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Pentagon yesterday released a draft list of two dozen crimes, including terrorism, rape and using poisons, that could be used when prosecuting terrorism suspects before military tribunals.
The Defense Department is seeking public comments on the proposal before completing the list of crimes in the next few weeks, Pentagon officials said.
It includes the elements of each crime that military prosecutors would have to prove for a defendant to be found guilty by a military tribunal. The crimes were chosen because they met internationally recognized war-crimes definitions that could be prosecuted under such tribunals, according to Pentagon experts who discussed the rules on the condition of anonymity.
President Bush approved use of special military commissions after the Sept. 11 attacks with the aim of putting alleged terrorists on trial faster and in greater secrecy than ordinary criminal courts.
The crimes include:
Terrorism, defined as killing or hurting people or attacking property in an attempt "to intimidate or coerce a civilian population, to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion, or to affect the conduct of a government."
Rape during the course of an armed conflict.
"Employing poison or analogous weapons," which would cover the use of chemical weapons or biological toxins.
Using civilian people or property to shield "a military objective" from attack.
Killing or attacking civilians.
Taking hostages.
Hijacking.
Thousands of Taliban and al-Qaeda fighters were captured in the war in Afghanistan; other terrorism suspects have been captured around the world. The U.S. military holds 650 at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, but the most important are in secret locations.
In addition to the detainees in Cuba and elsewhere, the administration may consider sending the case of Zacarias Moussaoui to a military tribunal.
Moussaoui is the lone U.S. defendant charged with conspiring with the Sept. 11 attackers. His trial judge in Alexandria, Va., has ruled he should have access to a captured lieutenant of Osama bin Laden's, Ramzi Binalshibh, a decision the government opposes and is appealing.
If it is not overturned, the administration could decide to transfer the case, preferring secret testimony before a tribunal rather than open court.
The Pentagon lawyers said they and other experts studied international laws and treaties governing war crimes to identify crimes for which the suspects could be tried.
"Membership crimes" - making joining al-Qaeda a crime in itself - are not on the list. But the list includes an additional seven "related offenses" that allow prosecution of people not directly involved in a crime. Those related offenses include conspiracy, aiding or abetting, attempting, soliciting or ordering any of the 24 direct crimes on the list.
More than a year ago, the Pentagon announced rules under which the tribunals would operate. They are to offer defendants many of the same rights as in regular U.S. trials - they would be presumed innocent, given attorneys, and convicted only if the evidence were beyond a reasonable doubt.
But the rules also limit many rights. To keep the cases out of federal courts, for example, defendants would have a very restricted right of appeal to a special review panel made up of one military official and two outside experts deputized by Bush. Defendants could not appeal to a lower federal court or directly to the Supreme Court.

Load-Date: July 14, 2005


End of Document