Pentagon seeks a few good anti-terrorism ideas
Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
November 01, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 New Mexican, Inc.
Section: Main; Pg. A-1
Length: 712 words
Byline: The Washington Post
Body


Portable lie detector, X-ray vision prototypes and lots of other high-tech gizmos encouraged by Dec. 23
WASHINGTON -- In peacetime, the news release might have passed without much notice. "Pentagon Seeks Ideas on Combating Terrorism," it said. Please submit a description of your idea to the Defense Department by Dec. 23.
But as a jittery populace watches a weird new war unfold, perhaps it isn't the most reassuring announcement to emanate from the Pentagon: Help.
Specifically, the military wants to know about technologies that might assist U.S. troops hunting for terrorists hiding in caves -- or, as the news release put it, "conducting protracted operations in remote areas."
It turns out you can do more to help Uncle Sam than remaining calm and going shopping.
"We've got a new kind of problem here, so if anyone's got good ideas, that can be helpful," notes James Kurtz, a researcher at the Institute for Defense Analyses who spent 32 years in the Army. "They're looking for the guy in the basement of the high-school science building who's got a new idea. Nobody has a lock on all good ideas."
The Pentagon, as reported last week, is seeking anti-terrorist "concepts" in 38 categories, including "countermeasures to weapons of mass destruction" -- say, air samplers to sniff out germ agents, sensors to detect small nuclear devices and gizmos to identify truck bombs.
The announcement left some defense observers puzzled. "You read that list and wonder: What have they been doing?" asks Ralph Peters, a retired Army lieutenant colonel and author of Fighting for the Future: Will America Triumph?
Perhaps, amid increasingly dire pronouncements about "credible" terrorist threats, you've personally felt confused, helpless and driven to drink. Well, buck up: Haven't you heard there's a war on? It's time to put on your thinking cap and repair to the workbench in your garage.
Visit the Web site www.bids.tswg.gov and pick a category. Handy with cameras? "Develop high-fidelity through-wall imaging capability." Let's see those terrorists hide from American X-ray vision.
"Unconventional surveillance and reconnaissance systems are desired," the Pentagon says. Especially one to "detect, locate and map underground/concealed cavities that may serve as secure havens for terrorists."
The Pentagon also requests, "Develop a deception detection device for use with counterterrorism-based structured interviews for passengers in various modes of transportation." In other words, a portable lie detector. Finally, ticket agents can verify the answers to those important questions: "Have you had your luggage in your possession at all times? Has anyone unknown to you asked you to carry anything on board?"
If Hewlett and Packard could launch a high-tech behemoth from a garage, then why can't you invent an algorithm-based software that can identify and analyze voices -- specifically to "incorporate Pashtu, Urdu, Farsi, Arabic dialects and other minor Middle Eastern and central/south Asian languages into an existing Automated Speaker Recognition System" that can be used by "selected intelligence and counterintelligence agencies"?
The Defense Department says it wants concepts that can be "developed and fielded" in 12 to 18 months. Pentagon officials express confidence in rapid results, given American ingenuity.
"We're trying to find every possibility, to find everything to make us the best equipped and give our people the best protection, which they deserve," says Air Force Maj. Michael Halbig, a Pentagon spokesman.
Paul Taibl, assistant vice president for policy at the nonprofit Business Executives for National Security, applauds the Pentagon for casting a wide net for anti-terrorism tools.
"I'd like to think that if anyone's got access to this technology, it ought to be the government, but that's no longer the case," he says. "The Department of Defense is not the technology leader that it was during the height of the Cold War."
In recent years, the Pentagon and various congressional commissions have poured untold sums into studies to identify terrorist threats. But concrete solutions aren't so readily offered.
"Maybe somebody's got a better idea out there," Halbig says.
Remember to mail in your idea by Dec. 23. That is, if you can find a functioning post office.

Load-Date: November 1, 2001


End of Document