Pentagon: Strikes will be sustained; Retaliation: Action will be directed at roots of terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 14, 2001 Friday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 286 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The United States will launch sustained military strikes against those behind the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington as well as their support systems, a senior Pentagon official said Thursday.
In the most explicit description yet of the Bush administration's intentions, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz said the military retaliation would continue until the roots of terrorism are destroyed.
"One has to say it's not just simply a matter of capturing people and holding them accountable, but removing the sanctuaries, removing the support systems, ending states who sponsor terrorism," he told a news conference in a Pentagon briefing room that still smelled of smoke and soot.
Other defense officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the administration was considering options that included the use of air, sea and land forces over a lengthy period. They said it was clear the administration would go well beyond the limited strikes of recent years against Iraq, Afghanistan and Sudan.
"This is not going to be a short program," said Navy Secretary Gordon England.
President Bush was considering a request by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to call several thousand members of the National Guard and Reserve to active duty in the next few days, a defense official said. The last presidential call-up was in January 1991 when 265,322 reservists were federalized for the Gulf War.
The military's fleet of sophisticated radar planes - called AWACS - have been ordered to stop flying missions over the nation's airspace, Rumsfeld said Thursday night on CNN's "Larry King Live."
The decision coincided with the resumption of commercial airline flights Thursday morning.
$$ @122:Aftermath of attacks

Load-Date: September 14, 2001


End of Document