People's faith on the State government has increased: CM Sarbananda Sonowal
The Sentinel
December 10, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 468 words
Byline: Sentinel Digital Desk
Body


Sonowal launches schemes and distributes land patta and revolving fund at Tingkhang
GUWAHATI: Giving a new dimension to the development initiatives undertaken by the State government, Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal on Wednesday inaugurated several schemes at Tingkhang, Dibrugarh for development of the area and distributed land pattas to 1959 landless indigenous people while starting the reconstruction work of 55 namghar under Asom Darshan scheme.
In today's programme, 51 roads built by PWD, renewal of 17 water supply schemes under PHED, crches built at 20 tea gardens with funds from 14 Finance Commission, repairing work of embankments under Water Resources Department were inaugurated while revolving funds to 638 women SHGs under Kanaklata Mahila Sabalikaran scheme were also distributed. Moreover, the Chief Minister inaugurated 262 reconstructed school buildings made with the funds from 14th Finance Commission and distributed 2477 PMAY (rural) houses to beneficiaries.
Speaking at the meeting held on the occasion, Sonowal said that State government has fulfilled the promises it gave in 2016 while coming to power and Tingkhang constituency has reaped benefit of these development measures as local MLA Bimal Bora has been rendering his services sincerely. State government has achieved considerable success in fulfilling its promise of a pollution free, corruption free, illegal foreigner free and terrorism free Assam.
He also highlighted Assam's success in combating COVID-19 with the joint effort of health workers, police, food and civil supplies, transport, administration in the spirit of Team Assam. Nearly ten thousand militants have surrendered during the time of the present government and strong action against corruption has been taken by Assan Police including cleaning of APSC, he added. He also informed about the increasing forest area by 222 square kilometre in the State as shown by the Forest Survey of India and highlighted the fact that State government has successfully planted 8.5 crore saplings till now.
Saying that 1 lakh 10 thousand landless indigenous people have been provided landpattas by the State government, Sonowal informed that 1 lakh additional land pattas would be distributed by January next year. He stressed on the need for fostering stronger ties among various communities in the state to harness Assam's full potential and make the state AtmaNirbhar.
Local MLA Bimal Bora also spoke on the occasion and highlighted the rapid development achieved under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal. MoS of Revenue and Disaster Management Department Jogen Mohan, MLAs PrashantaPhukan, ChakradharGogoi, Nabanita Handique, Rituparna Barua were also present at the programme among other dignitaries, stated a press release.

Load-Date: December 10, 2020


End of Document