PEOPLE SHOULD NOT CONFUSE ISLAM WITH TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 25, 1998, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. B7, COMMENTARY COLUMN
Length: 441 words
Byline: Angela Stephens; Progressive Media Project
Body


In the wake of the U.S. attacks in Afghanistan and Sudan, we must heed President Bill Clinton's words and not turn this into a U.S. war against Islam.
At the time of the embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania two weeks ago, a gathering of Islamic leaders half a world away was discussing world peace in the 21st century.
"Religion has never called for terrorist actions," said Sheikh Hisham Kabbani, chairman of the second International Islamic Unity Conference, held in Washington. "It is extremists, with their narrow-minded interpretations, who hide behind the name of religion to justify terrorist acts."
Some commentators utter the term "Islamic extremist" when they talk of the embassy bombings as though the two words were inextricably linked. Yet extremism is neither characteristic of, nor condoned by Islam, as Clinton noted.
The Prophet Mohammed, who revealed Islam in the 7th century, is recorded as having told his followers: "You should not be extremists." Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's observation after the bombings that "terrorism is not a manifestation of religious faith" was an elementary yet profound reminder that political acts carried out under the guise of religion are no reflection on the value of that religion.
No true Muslim could possibly justify these acts of violence. Islam's holy book, the Koran, reminds Muslims of God's instructions to the Jews not to commit murder: "We laid it down for the Israelites that whoever killed a human being, except as a punishment for murder or other villainy in the land, shall be looked upon as though he had killed all mankind."
Though the Koran encourages Muslims to defend themselves, it warns against aggression: "Fight for the sake of God those that fight against you, but do not attack them first. God does not love the aggressors."
The vast majority of the world's 1 billion Muslims are living peaceably with their neighbors, including those in this country. But the impression many people are left with - particularly if they have had no contact with Muslims - is that practitioners of Islam are violent, anti-American terrorists.
Incidents of harassment and violence against American Muslims and Arabs have risen sharply following dramatic and devastating events such as the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing and 1996 crash of TWA flight 800, even though in both events there was no connection to Islam or the Middle East.
Don't be misled by political zealotry cloaked in a religious banner. The bombings in East Africa, like previous attacks on Americans in Saudi Arabia and Lebanon, are political acts of war hiding behind religion. The bombers are pretenders to their faith.

Load-Date: August 25, 1998


End of Document