Perspective on terrorism: the right to travel safely
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 8, 1986, Tuesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Editorial; Pg. 23
Length: 495 words
Body


THE public understandably longs for some reassuring perspective on the continuing eruptions of terrorism, whether occurring aloft, as in last week's TWA flight to Greece, or on the crowded dance floor of a West Berlin discotheque last weekend.
Many practical steps for travelers have been taken. Airport security has generally been improved where it had been lax. Given the huge volume of air travel, imposing measures as stringent as those, say, adopted by Israel, with its one international airport and small fleet, would strangle Western world transportation. Airline pilots have proposed cutting off flights to Libya and Syria until those governments quit aiding or abetting terrorist operations.
Governments are trying their hand. With last month's naval maneuvers in the Gulf of Sidra, the United States has attempted to put the fear of American military wrath into Libya's Colonel Qaddafi, to as yet no discernible effect. To a degree, American allies in Europe are coming more into line with the American view that Qaddafi should be quarantined.
Allies who had allowed the free movement of known terrorist group members, in exchange for exemption from terrorist strikes, are ending that tacit cooperation as their own countries have been hit. International cooperation against terrorism - attacks on essentially innocent people as a means to gain attention, create confusion, and compel or thwart government action - should continue its recent advances.
Governments are investing in greater security for foreign-service personnel abroad. In Washington, the White House and State Department are ringed with concrete buffers.
All prudent steps.  All based on continuing the business of commerce, travel, and government without giving in to the terrorists' attempt to freeze the free world in a paroxysm of fear.
This is as it should be. Of course, not all steps taken may work. Some may provoke more violence. Other forces - such as the ambitions of Damascus and Tripoli to lead the Arab world - make use of terrorism for their own ends. The stirrings of Muslim fundamentalism, the unresolved West Bank issue, keep the Middle East in ferment. But it is only fair to say that considerable effort is being undertaken to curb terrorism.
Meanwhile, the individual has the right to consider his or her own safety, assessing his motives for travel, or for going to public places that may become targets.
These are not the first times of danger in history. Relatively speaking, these are safe times. The ruins of towers, the silted-in moats of Europe, are reminders of periods of greater personal risk.
The persistence of the threat to individual safety through history suggests the relevance of the Psalmist's assurance: ''The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth, and even for evermore.''
This counsel to go forward with confidence in the rewards for obedience, righteousness, and trust seems fully appropriate to the traveler seeking safety today.


End of Document