PERSONAL TECHNOLOGY;
NETWATCH;
THE AJC'S DAILY ONLINE GUIDE;
Anti-terrorism proposals criticized
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 4, 1996, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 04R
Length: 814 words
Byline: Art Kramer
Body


Online civil liberties groups are lining up against President Clinton's anti-terrorism proposals.
In the wake of the bombing at Centennial Olympic Park, Clinton reintroduced several measures that had been removed from anti-terrorism legislation he signed earlier this year. The proposals included requiring that "taggants," or identifying chemicals, be included in explosives and approving "roving wiretaps" that follow suspected criminals if they use more than one telephone.
"There's no evidence the tragedy in Atlanta would have been averted with expanded wiretap authority," said Marc Rotenberg, director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center.
Clinton also endorsed 25 anti-terrorism proposals approved at a conference of the G-7 industrialized nations in Paris last week.
 
Some of the proposals disturb civil libertarians and others.
The Global Internet Liberty Campaign, a coalition including EPIC, the American Civil Liberties Union and others, last week announced its opposition to the G-7 proposals, including efforts to limit dissemination of information, such as bomb-making instructions, on the Internet. The group also opposes the G-7 adoption of "key escrow" ---which makes a key available to governments to unlock coded communications on the Internet.
The group is urging Webmasters to post its symbol on their pages. In its first 24 hours online Wednesday, the group received messages of support and information about the successes of electronic freedom movements in France and several other countries, said Barry Steinhardt, associate director of the ACLU.
"There are no borders in cyberspace," Steinhardt said. "Decisions made by international bodies like the G-7 nations affect all Internet users. The U.S. government may not accomplish through an international end-run what the U.S. Congress and the U.S. courts have rejected."
The Council of Better Business Bureaus will certify business sites on the Web with a new program called BBBOnLine. Businesses can display an online seal of approval, which will serve as a link to the BBBOnLine home page, at http://www.bbbonline.org. The system is expected to be fully operational in early 1997.
 
HOT / NOT
Aldous Huxley ---SOMA WEB: A thoughtful and well-conceived site devoted to this writer, whose words ring ever truer. Witness: "The early advocates of … a free press envisaged only two possibilities: the propaganda might be true, or it might be false. They did not foresee … the development of a vast mass communications industry, concerned in the main neither with the true nor the false, but with the unreal, the more or less totally irrelevant. In a word, they failed to take into account man's almost infinite appetite for distractions."
 
http://www.primenet.com/ matthew/huxmain.html
Wheels On-Line: If it has wheels, they'll advertise it. Park your pointer here to see older cars, newer cars, classic cars, yachts and so on. (OK, yachts don't have wheels, but you get the idea.) The service is based in Alabama, but the listings come from all over the United States, usually with a picture.
 
http://www.snsnet.net/wol/ 
YOUR PICK
Hacking: It's not just a job, it's a hobby for M.C. Mykel, an Avondale Estates cabdriver who navigates the Web when he's not behind the wheel. Mykel is also known as an existential deconstructionist philosopher by passengers frequenting his DeKalb cab, most of whom have been journalists during the Games, he says. He doesn't like to talk about himself, so he was surprised recently to discover how much personal information his Web browser was revealing without his knowledge. Check out your own blabbermouth browser at the Center for Democracy and Technology privacy demonstration at http://www.cdt.org. Thank Mykel for the tip next time you get in his taxicab. He'll be the one wearing a Net W
 
If you want a Net Watch, go to http://web.ajc.com/netwatch 
/sendurl.htm and tell us about your favorite Internet address. If we pick your pick, we'll make you incredibly famous and send you an actual time-keeping device.
 
TODAY
8 p.m. Marion Hammer, the National Rifle Association's first woman president, on AOL. Location: Coliseum. Keyword: KidCare.
 
9 p.m. Singer Marilyn McCoo visits Prodigy. Jump: Pseudo.
9:05 p.m. Bad Company in concert live from the Coca-Cola Starplex in Dallas, via AudioNet, http://www.audionet 
 
.com/concerts/badco.htm.
NETC . . .
This or that. The finale of Lollapalooza is live on the Web all day long from Irvine, Calif., with Metallica, the farewell performance of the Ramones and much more, via RealAudio at http://lollapalooza.com. Or you can check out "lollap-WHO-za," the Big Stink festival from Estacada, Ore., beginning at 3 p.m. and continuing into Monday. Headliners are 7 Mary 3, Spacehog and the Verve Pipe, via AudioNet at
 
http://www.audionet.com/concerts/stink/. 
For the digital version of this report, point your browser to http://web.ajc.com/netwatch 

Load-Date: August 5, 1996


End of Document