Persidential candidates speak out on terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 23, 2015 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 568 words
Byline:  From news services  
Body


Several of the Republican presidential candidates have offered their own ideas on dealing with the Islamic State.
DONALD TRUMP
Trump said the United States should bring back waterboarding and other enhanced interrogation techniques to fight the Islamic State, saying "we have to be strong" in the face of extreme brutality.
"You know, they don't use waterboarding over there," the GOP front-runner told George Stephanopoulos in an interview that aired Sunday on ABC's "This Week." "They use chopping off people's heads. They use drowning people. ... We have to be tough."
Stephanopoulos was asking Trump about comments he made recently to Yahoo News that after Paris, the United States needed to be doing things that were "unthinkable" a year ago to fight the Islamic State.
Trump affirmed Sunday that waterboarding was what he had in mind.
"I think waterboarding is peanuts compared to what they'd do to us," Trump said. "... I would absolutely bring back interrogation, and strong interrogation."
Trump said that "trouble's coming out of the mosques" in the United States and that "we're being foolish, we're kidding ourselves" if law enforcement didn't keep close surveillance on those houses of worship.
He said such monitoring was needed as part of a terrorism-fighting strategy - even if there was strong push-back to that idea. He said that "we've taken political correctness to a point where we can't do anything as a country anymore."
Trump also said he wanted a database, watch lists and unspecified other "checks and balances" to track Muslims in the U.S.
On "This Week," Trump was asked whether he ruled out a database on all Muslims in the U.S.
Trump says: "No, not at all. I definitely want a database and other checks and balances. We want to go with watch lists. We want to go with databases."
BEN CARSON
Carson, who is second to Trump in a new national Washington Post-ABC News poll, also didn't rule out waterboarding in an interview that aired Sunday with Stephanopoulos, though Carson didn't explicitly endorse it as Trump did.
"I agree that there's no such thing as political correctness when you're fighting an enemy who wants to destroy you and everything that you have anything to do with," Carson said. "And I'm not one who is real big on telling the enemy what we're going to do and what we're not going to do."
President Barack Obama banned waterboarding, which was reportedly used by the CIA for at least three suspects in the 9/11 terrorist attacks during the administration of President George W. Bush.
Carson also said he backed broad intelligence-monitoring any place where there was "a lot of radicalization going on." Just where? Churches, mosques, schools, shopping centers are some of the examples he cited.
He told "This Week" on Sunday that the country needed "to get very serious about our intelligence" to ensure Americans' safety.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO
Rubio begins his first national television campaign ad this week, focusing on the terrorism threat of the Islamic State group.The Florida senator appears by himself in the ad and says there is "no middle ground" in America's fight against IS because "these are radical terrorists who want to kill us."
He says it is "a civilizational struggle" and that "there can be no arrangement or negotiation" with IS, "either they win or we do."
The Rubio campaign said in a statement on Sunday that the 30-second ad will air nationwide, beginning Tuesday.

Load-Date: November 24, 2015


End of Document