Perspective: 'Faceless' adds nothing new to a familiar terrorism topic
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 19, 2018 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GO!; Pg. G14
Length: 319 words
Byline:  By Aisha Sultan St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


Let's set aside that this conversation always involves terrorism.
That the drama must always center on religious identity and its relationship to violence against the country. One religious identity in particular.
And it's always on trial.
For "Faceless," opening Friday at the Repertory Theatre of St. Louis, playwright Selina Fillinger chose to explore a familiar setting and a familiar narrative about Islam and Muslims in America. It's a story that feels weary to those who have lived with it their whole lives.
To her credit, Fillinger explores it through the eyes of two interesting female characters, both Muslim. One is a young, white, radicalized convert, the other a Harvard-educated, American Muslim lawyer. The latter is persecuting the former for alleged ties to terrorism.
Somewhere in the process of being jailed and on trial, the defendant goes from being the committed fiance of a jihadist to a repentant young woman who realizes she has been duped. In the play's script, this transformation happens inelegantly. It may be a more nuanced portrayal in the hands of a skilled actor.
Ultimately, the play ends up reading much like an episode of "Law & Order." It's well-paced and well-written but formulaic - and in the end, the writer pulls back. "Law & Order" wouldn't deny its audience that way.
It also leaves the premise in the work insultingly obvious: Yes, there are Muslim-Americans fighting terrorism in this country when it involves Muslim suspects, even when those suspects don't seem guilty of much more than being young, gullible and stupid. I kept waiting to see what comment Fillinger was going to make about this conflict.
This story was only willing to go as far as to suggest that it's complicated.
Well, yes, but that's as predictable as another story about a Muslim terrorist on trial.
> Aisha Sultan, who is a Muslim-American, writes about children and family issues for the Post-Dispatch.

Graphic

 
 Lindsay Stock, (left), who plays a young American Muslim convert, rehearses a scene in "Faceless" on Friday, Jan. 12, 2018, with Ross Lehman for an upcoming production at the Loretto-Hilton Center for the Performing Arts. "Faceless" tells the story of play about a young American female convert to Islam who has been arrested for terrorism, and a Muslim-American female prosecutor seeking to convict her. Photo by Christian Gooden, cgooden@post-dispatch.com 

Load-Date: May 28, 2018


End of Document