PERSPECTIVE NEEDED ON TERRORIST TRAGEDY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 7, 1989, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 533 words
Byline: George Will
Body


WASHINGTON (REST) Writer V.S. Naipaul watched Tehran volunteers, full of revolutionary fervor, loading hot bread on open trucks in winter to take to flood victims. ''It was frenziedly stuffed - as though it was a matter of life and death - into sacks and dumped into a truck with blankets and clothes. Wouldn't this bread have turned to stone by the time it got to Khuzistan? But the bread didn't matter.  The gesture and the excitement mattered.'' We are back making gestures at murderous gesturers, saying things we do not mean to people who do not care what we say. Worse, some American voices are sincerely deploring, with fine impartiality, terrorism and Israel's measures against it. Bob Dole, senator from Kansas (which is not lapped by angry waves of Islamic fanaticism), accuses Israel of acting irresponsibly.  One person, Samuel Lewis, former U.S. ambassador to Israel, gets it right: ''Israel is at war. We are not.'' Right on both counts. Israel has a solemn compact with its soldiers: It will do whatever it can to get them out of captivity. We have sold arms to the terrorist state that runs the group that killed Lt. Col. William R. Higgins. The State Department has written scripts for a terrorist group (the PLO), for a charade of conversion to civility.  This so we can do openly what hitherto we did in violation of stated policy: Deal with the PLO. So today, U.S. diplomats sit across the table from a PLO ''diplomat'' who planned the murder of two U.S. diplomats.
Given the U.S. record of hypocrisy, incoherence and impotence, it is demoralizing to watch Washington shift into its well-rehearsed, highly routinized melodrama mode. There are so many cameras, microphones and pens hovering over poised notepads that episodes like this unleash a torrent of talk. In Washington, the intensity of talk about a problem is usually inversely proportional to the number of ideas for doing something about it.  Archimedes said, ''Give me a firm spot on which to stand and I shall move the Earth.'' Iran, standing (through its marionettes) on Lebanon's artillery-churned earth, and using the leverage of hostages - a renewable resource - moves the U.S. government. It moves it into the awkward position of demonstrating a dangerous asymmetry between words and capabilities.  At times like this, a president must perform a cathartic function, expressing the nation's anger. But he also must conspicuously proceed with the normal agenda of governance, lest terrorists be magnified, and for that reason multiply.  Terrorism, the gesture of the weak, is a tragedy for individuals but not a crisis for nations. It conquers no territory, topples no regimes.  Terrorism's goal is maximum commotion with minimal risk of retaliation. So until Bush finds a way to retaliate, he is right to minimize the commotion: Call the pope but proceed with the barbeque, which he did.  But the Bush administration bears a burden of proving two things: that we do not know Iran's involvement in the killing of Higgins, and that we lack the ingenuity and military assets to make Iran pay. If we do not know and lack those assets, people should be fired by the battalions for failures of intelligence and procurement.

Load-Date: October 25, 1993


End of Document