Peru: crackdown on terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 12, 1986, Wednesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 7
Length: 794 words
Byline: By Charles Lane, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Lima, Peru
Highlight: Emergency decree seen as politically risky
Body


Beset by the worst wave of urban crime and terrorism to hit Peru since he took office six months ago, President Alan Garcia Perez is cracking down.
His imposition of a state of emergency last Friday in the capital is seen as a politically high-risk move. Its practical impact is still in doubt, though it is at least a tacit admission that the government's antisubversion policies are not working as well as hoped.
Under President Garcia's emergency decree, all residents must be off the streets between 1 a.m. and 5 a.m.
The Social Democrat, citing a week-long ''series of attacks, fires, kidnappings, blackouts, and assassinations,'' said that ''the state cannot remain impassive because it would be very dangerous for democracy not to defend itself.''
Under the emergency decree, similar to martial law, constitutional guarantees such as habeas corpus and the right to assemble have been suspended for 60 days.
Nineteen provinces are currently under emergency decree because of Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) guerrilla activity. This is the first time since the guerrillas began their campaign to turn Peru into another version of Mao's China that the capital has been under an emergency decree. It is also the first curfew since the restoration of civilian rule in 1980.
Within just hours of the President's speech, police patrols had hit the streets in unusual force and Army troop transporters were rumbling past bemused cafe patrons in the glitzy district of Miraflores.
Garcia was particularly stung last month when the members of his peace commission - who were supposed to explore alternative solutions to the violence, such as negotiations with the rebels - offered to resign en masse, citing a lack of support from the President. Garcia refused the resignations. In Friday's speech he promised to ''affirm the necessity of a peace commission as the critical conscience of the government.''
Nevertheless, the decree met with instant public approval. It is seen not only as Garcia's way of answering a challenge to his personal authority as President but also as a decisive gesture that, at least for now, has relieved public anxiety that the city might slip out of the government's control.
Terrorist activity is nothing new in Lima and its environs, where there were 502 incidents last year. But Garcia was apparently moved by the brazenness of last week's bombings and assassinations, which totaled 26 attacks in all.
The most spectacular incident took place last Tuesday, when phosphorus bombs planted at a department store, about 500 feet from the Palace of Government, set off a blaze that destroyed 30 adjacent properties. The next day, gunmen killed a prominent former Army intelligence officer as he was leaving his home. Two police officers were also gunned down. A navy officer who was about to go on trial for a massacre of 50 peasants in the guerrilla-infested area of Ayacucho was abducted.
Lima is also in the midst of a major war of kidnappings-for-ransom. Many fearful upper-class residents - the kidnappers' primary targets - are buying guns, taking out expensive kidnap insurance, and sending their children to live overseas. This atmosphere has only served to underscore concerns about ineffectiveness and corruption in Peru's three national police forces - both current and former members - which are believed to be masterminding the kidnappings.
Garcia has been spending more money on guns and equipment for the historically underfinanced police forces, and trying to clean them up by sacking hundreds of officers. In his speech, Garcia hinted that some of the latest violence may be the work of recently fired police who are forming ''new groups with a reactionary ideological orientation.'' Pamphlets, signed by ''the organizing committee of the unified movement for police defense,'' calling for a police strike began appearing last week, according to local press reports.
In this sense, the emergency decree is seen as an attempt to rein in the police, as well as the terrorists. The decree puts the military in command of the police, which would head off, in theory, any possible police uprising.
Meanwhile, Garcia pressed ahead with his police shakeup last week, signing an order to remove 930 more senior officers. He said the three forces will be unified over the next 18 months and named a new chief for each of them in the meantime.  But it is still an open question whether any of Peru's security forces can track down the terrorists in this Los Angeles-sized conurbation.
''The emergency decree is like putting a Band-Aid on a serious wound,'' says the security chief of a foreign multinational firm. ''The security forces still lack effective intelligence, and as long as you can't penetrate these groups you can't bring them to a halt.''

Graphic

 
Picture, Peru military on parade last July: emergency decree puts military in charge of police, JULIO MITCHEL/FILE; Map, PERU, JOAN FORBES -- STAFF


End of Document