Peru Wants Stability More Than Due Process
The New York Times
April 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Column 4;; Letter
Length: 645 words
Body


To the Editor:
The events you report in "Peru Suspends Democracy, Citing Revolt" (front page, April 7) may seem dramatic and alarming at first glance; however, the institutional takeover by President Alberto K. Fujimori and the army deserve at least a careful investigation. Independent polls show that more than 70 percent of Peruvians agree or go along with the measures taken by the President. The international community has nothing but condemnation, and that is understandable. International observers see only an assault on elected institutions. Peruvians see a ray of hope.
The institutional takeover was announced to alleviate the pressing problems of Peru: terrorism, violence, corruption and economic disarray, almost anarchy.
Everyone agrees that something had to be done. The international community adheres to solutions worked out through the democratic process. The Fujimori Government has a different view, in which the electoral processes and elected institutions were an obstacle. Why is it that many Peruvians sided with the President on calling out the military, suspending the constitution and closing Congress? Let's examine three of the most shocking measures.
* Closing Congress: Peruvians elect members of Congress every five years. They are selected from lists supplied by the political parties or coalitions, according to proportional vote. Members of the Senate are elected at large, and the members of the House of Representatives are supposed to represent a province. They do not represent and are not really accountable to their districts and the country. They have a history of voting themselves annual pay raises, the latest figure showing them at $2,000 a month, in a country where the minimum wage is $50 a month. Members of Congress have immunity from criminal prosecution, and they have certainly abused that power.
The political clout of Congress, its constant abuse of privileges and support of the status quo made it very unpopular. Mr. Fujimori is also correct to blame Congress for blocking necessary legislation to spur economic growth and stop terrorism.
* Suspending the Constitution: It may seem the Government really went too far, and perhaps it did. Why are the people so indifferent? The Peruvian Constitution, although a valuable legal document, is full of technical flaws and ambiguous articles. Peruvians associate it with excesses like parliamentary immunity, extra protection for the powerful and terrorists. The average Peruvian feels that the Constitution works only for the ruling elite and the politicians.
* Calling on the military: Peruvian history is plagued with military governments. It is safe to assume Peruvians dislike military governments. Why are they supporting the military? This is no ordinary military takeover. Some analysts say it is not a military government at all. The President and commander in chief is an elected civilian, and that is the most striking difference.
Military intervention comes as a relief to the millions of Peruvians who are victims of violence, terrorism, corruption and social unrest. Law enforcement cannot stop the constant attacks by terrorist groups and organized criminal bands. Furthermore, a large sector of the police and the judiciary is corrupt. Criminals, drug dealers and terrorists walk the streets, while ordinary, often innocent, people wait years for a trial in a deplorable judicial system. For average Peruvians the priority is law and order, not due process.
It seems also that President Fujimori has at least a temporary vote of confidence from the people of Peru. His record in two years is one of defiance and skillful attempts to put Peru back in the international economic system. The Peruvian people are giving President Fujimori and his plan a chance. So should the international community, at least for now.
 
WALTER PALOMINO-VILLAMONTE
Chicago, April 10, 1992

Load-Date: April 21, 1992


End of Document