Peru's Chief, Vowing Democracy, Sets Date for a Revived Congress
The New York Times
July 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 399 words
Byline: By JAMES BROOKE,

By JAMES BROOKE,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LIMA, Peru, July 28
Body


Promising a "full return to democracy," the President of Peru announced today that a new Congress would take office Jan. 2 and that mayoral elections would be held Feb. 7.
President Alberto K. Fujimori has come under steady pressure to reverse his April 5 decision to close Peru's courts and Congress.
In addition to pressure from the United States and Europe, domestic opinion polls show that his popularity has receded to the level he enjoyed before embarking on one-man rule.
After closing the courts and Congress, the President watched his popularity jump from 59 percent to 82 percent, according to Apoyo S. A., Lima's leading polling organization. In an Apoyo poll released Monday, his popularity had fallen back to 60 percent.
 
Eroded Credibility
 The President's slide in popularity is largely attributed to a recent burst of terrorism by Shining Path guerrillas. On July 2, Peru's intelligence police announced the arrest of the Maoist "logistical apparatus in Lima."
Two weeks later, the guerrillas began a terror wave in Lima that involved 30 car bombs and nine tons of explosives, according to estimates. By the time the violence subsided on Saturday, about 40 people were dead and hundreds were wounded.
"The President's credibility has been strongly eroded," Manuel d'Ornellas, one of Lima's most widely read newspaper columnists, wrote today. "Already no one -- or very few people -- think that he will be able to conquer the Red terrorism by 1995, as he used to assure triumphantly."
After the President's speech, one terrorist unit fired a rocket grenade at the army command headquarters here, a cement structure known as the "little Pentagon" which has housed the President since his April 5 seizure of powers. There were no damages or injuries.
Today, on Peru's independence day, 30,000 soldiers and policemen patrolled this capital searching for terrorist squads. On Sunday, explosives experts in Lima's port, Callao, deactivated a car bomb put near a housing complex for officers' families. On Monday, guerrillas in Callao burned two minivans because their owners violated "armed strike" orders last week. Today, another "armed strike" stopped all transport and trade in Ayacucho, the birthplace of the radical movement.
And breaking tradition, Presideht Fujimori did not greet foreign ambassadors in an annual ceremony on Monday. Today, he did not attend a high mass at Lima's cathedral.

Load-Date: July 29, 1992


End of Document