PERU OFFERS LAWS TO COMBAT TERROR
The New York Times
August 21, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 894 words
Byline: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LIMA, Peru, Aug. 19
Body


Arguing that Peru's democracy should do more to defend itself against terrorism, President Alan Garcia has proposed a series of laws to limit the freedom of action of the Shining Path guerrilla movement.
States of emergency in 35 of Peru's 170 provinces already give the armed forces special powers to fight the insurgency. But Shining Path has continued to grow in the last eight years, partly because of its ability to take advantage of existing laws.
''We all know that terrorism uses our democracy, and we must not allow this to happen,'' President Garcia said in his annual State of the Union address on July 28. ''We all know that terrorism takes advantage of the freedom of the press that exists in our country.''
Three laws now awaiting congressional approval would strengthen police powers to investigate suspects, increase penalties for the illegal possession of weapons and explosives and authorize stiff punishment for those who use newspapers, radio or television to incite or praise terrorism.
The move to curb terrorist propaganda seems aimed at El Diario, the Lima daily that for the last two years has served as a propaganda outlet for Shining Path. On July 31, it published a 48-page interview with the fugitive rebel leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso. Since then, though, it has had difficulty finding a printer and is now putting out a small ''emergency edition.''
 
Concern on Rightist Killings
While President Garcia appears to be responding to both stepped-up guerrilla actions in urban areas and mounting public frustration with the Government's ineffectiveness against Shining Path, the impact of his new proposals has been partly blunted by new concern over extra-judicial methods being used against suspected leftists.
On the same day as the President's address, gunmen kidnapped and killed Manuel Febres Flores, the defense lawyer for Osman Morote Barrionuevo, the second in command of Shining Path, who was arrested in June. A group calling itself the Rodrigo Franco Command - taking its name from a Government official killed by guerrillas last year - claimed responsibility.
The Rodrigo Franco Command later bombed the tomb of a slain rebel leader, Edith Lagos, in Ayacucho, and threated a prosecutor, Carlos Escobar, who is investigating charges of human rights abuses by the military. In one statement, the group said, ''For every murdered mayor, soldier or policeman, a leader of Shining Path or its support groups will die.''
At the same time, what appear to be Government efforts to smother investigation of a reported massacre of 28 peasants by soldiers in the Andean town of Cayara in May have been complicated by the discovery of an unmarked grave containing five of the victims. Until now, a special commission headed by a Senator from the governing party had discounted insistent reports that a massacre took place.
Mr. Garcia has promised clarification of the Cayara killings, but he has indirectly defended the armed forces. ''We must guarantee the legality of their actions,'' he said, ''but we cannot turn them into a permanent focus of scandal or have them discouraged by insults because, at the same time as they are presented as aggressors, they are expected to produce results in the fight against true aggression.''
 
President's Tone Changes
Opposition politicians have argued that, while Mr. Garcia was highly critical of human rights abuses by security forces after he took office in 1985, his tone has changed significantly in the face of rebel advances and complaints by the military that it lacked adequate political backing for its counterinsurgency activities.
Since the insurgency began in Ayacucho Province in 1980, various Government figures show that between 11,500 and 15,000 people have been killed, at least one-third of these unarmed civilian victims of either the terrorists or the armed forces. The Roman Catholic Church estimates that 1,500 people have disappeared, presumably kidnapped by security forces, since 1982.
Asked why the number of disappearances continues to grow, Bishop Luciano Metzinger, head of a new National Campaign for the Detained and Disappeared, linked the phenomenon to the failure of security forces to crush the guerrillas. ''As a result, they are harder on suspects of the crime of subversion,'' he said. ''But I do not see that declaring states of emergency has had the effect of reducing terrorism.''
Some Government officials have argued privately that human rights abuses committed by security forces will be reduced if the new anti-terrorist legislation closes legal loopholes that until now have been skillfully exploited by Shining Path and its lawyers.
For example, while jailed guerrillas may have to wait several years before coming to trial, the record shows that about 90 percent are eventually acquitted, usually on technical grounds that are either authentic or discovered by a judge whose life has been threatened.
 
POLICE RAID PAPER'S PRINTER
 LIMA, Aug. 20 (AP) - The police raided a printing company, arrested the owner and four employees and confiscated 100,000 copies of the newspaper El Diario, which supports the Shining Path guerrillas, the paper's editor said today.
The editor, Luis Arce, told reporters that 40 police officers swept into the Lima printing company before dawn on Friday. Police officials confirmed that the raid took place, but refused to provide details.


End of Document