PERUVIAN POLICE ARREST 5,500 IN WEEKEND OF RAIDS IN LIMA
The New York Times
July 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 370 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: LIMA, Peru, July 23
Body


The police arrested more than 5,500 people in a drive against crime and terrorism over the weekend, officials said today.
Maj. Luis Cuba of the Peruvian civil guard said no one suspected of being a major figure in the Shining Path guerrilla movement was found in the 12- hour operation, which took place Saturday and Sunday.
Officials said the the arrests were made in cantinas, dance halls, discoth eques, arcades and parks in metropolitan Lima,
But a civil guard intelligence official asserted that Laura Zambrano, a Shining Path leader in Lima known by guerrillas by the code name Comrade Meche, was arrested in a separate operation.
Guerrilla Arrested in Cuzco
A top guerrilla leader identified as Wilfredo Ferrer Irigoyen, was also arrested in Cuzco, 725 miles southeast of Lima, the official said.
Major Cuba reported 5,310 people without proper documentation were arrested in Lima and the adjoining port of Callao. He said they were being questioned Monday.
An unspecified amount of cocaine and marijuana was seized by 300 civil guards making the sweep, Major Cuba said.
The guards also found 479 abandoned children, arrested 283 prostitutes and seized more than 300 vehicles from owners who lacked registration papers, he said.  The operation was carried out under a state of national emergency declared by President Fernando Belaunde Terry after stepped-up guerrilla attacks in central Peru and the Lima area.
 
Prepare for Independence Day
The civil guard said the mass arrests were ''to clear away criminal and terrorist elements'' in preparation for July 28 Independence Day crowds.
The Government last week canceled the traditional parade of an estimated 6.2 million students across the nation to mark Peru's independence from Spain in 1821.
But in Ayacucho, the state capital 350 miles southeast of Lima, where the guerrilla fight is centered and where Mr. Belaunde Terry sent 4,000 soldiers and policemen to fight the rebels, school officials said students would parade as usual.
The police in Ayacucho said the guerrillas cut power in the city of 80,000 for 45 minutes Saturday night by dynamiting a power substation. The police said more than 200 people without documentation were arrested in Ayacucho over the weekend.


End of Document