Peru students protest police raid, arrests
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 23, 1987, Monday


Copyright 1987 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 11
Length: 464 words
Byline: Kathryn Leger, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Lima, Peru
Highlight: But many people back effort to rout rebels
Body


One week after police carried out extensive antiterrorist operations at three Peruvian universities, student unrest shows no sign of dissipating.
Students plan another major demonstration for tomorrow, although three demonstrations staged last week involving some 8,000 people provoked tear gas and the arrests of dozens of students.
A major focus of the protests is the continued detention of some 273 students arrested after 4,000 police officers conducted a suprise early morning raid on the three schools Feb. 13. The operation was so secret that not even university officials were advised. The universities are known for student populations that identify with Peru's leftist parties.
Some 793 students were rounded up while police searched for guns, explosives, and ''subversive'' materials leaving extensive damage to university facilities.
Deputy Interior Minister Augustin Mantilla said that at least 36 of those held already had police records for subversive activities. And 180 others were being investigated for allegedly possessing subversive materials and weapons.
The government of President Alan Garcia Perez defended its decision to raid the schools, saying they had become active breeding grounds for the Shining Path and Tupac Amaru guerrilla groups. But critics said unnecessary force was used and that little proof was found that guerrillas operate from the campuses.
The students have received the support of a significant number of the country's labor unions, many of which publicly denounced the attack as ''fascist.''
But those in favor of the police action wondered why the government, plagued by incessant terrrorist activities such as bombings and assassinations, had waited so long. University walls at San Marcos, for instance, are full of guerrilla slogans.
Some political observers suggested that the government felt the political climate was ripe to proceed. The university invasions followed a wave of terrorist attacks that began in mid-January.
Soon after the attacks, Mr. Garcia announced his government would be implementing a tougher antisubversive strategy with better intelligence forces.
Cardinal Juan Landazuri Ricketts, the highest authority in the Peruvian Roman Catholic church, said the police incursions were ''regrettable, but in response to a growing public clamor'' for government action against terrorism. The Cardinal did join calls for the government to compensate the universities for damages.
Garcia has convoked an extraordinary session of the Chamber of Deputies from Feb. 23 to March 5 to push through a series of laws to help combat terrorism.
The proposals include the establishment of special courts to hear terrorism cases, better protection and higher pay for judges treating those cases, and stiffer sentences for those found guilty.

Graphic

 
Picture, Student protesters hurl stones at police, AP


End of Document