Philpot, Matheson crank up the ire in KTVX debate
The Salt Lake Tribune
October 27, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: POLITICS; News; State
Length: 459 words
Byline: By David Montero The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Republican Morgan Philpot channeled Ronald Reagan. Democratic incumbent Jim Matheson rolled his eyes and laughed during his rival's answer to a question. And both took their hacks at each other Wednesday night, heightening what has become a spirited and sometimes testy match between the candidates seeking Utah's 2nd Congressional District seat.
The debate, airing Sunday on ABC-4, raised the heat through Chris Vanocur's format -- having the candidates ask each other questions. It was like throwing chum into the ocean -to lure sharks, and at one point gave Philpot the opportunity to quote Reagan by saying, "There you go again."
Philpot got his standing request in asking Matheson if he would support retaining House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in a leadership role. Matheson got to tag Philpot with his 2004 vote in the Utah Legislature for a resolution to support President George W. Bush's effort to combat terrorism.
"I couldn't tell you my voting record off the top of my head," Philpot said, getting exasperated. "But I would ask, how does that affect us going forward today?"
But Matheson -- seemingly weary of constant attacks by Philpot and his campaign challenging a decade's worth of service in Congress by questioning what he's accomplished -- has decided in recent weeks to pull out the record from Philpot's term in the state Legislature.
Matheson asked why Philpot didn't support the resolution backing Bush's war on terrorism.
In an earlier debate on KSL radio, Matheson questioned why Philpot didn't vote for a tax on strip clubs and escort services that would've directed money toward victims of domestic violence.
Philpot ripped Matheson for being a part of a Congress that has run up the largest deficit in United States history and attacked him for voting to adjourn session instead of passing an extension of the Bush tax cuts.
"He wants to refocus this campaign on misdirection and falsifications about me because he doesn't want this to be about his 10 years in Congress," Philpot said. "He doesn't want to talk about how in June he's running with the president and in November he's running as an independent."
Then they bickered about, well, bickering.
Not surprisingly, they also disagreed on the anti-illegal immigration law passed by Arizona.
Philpot said he "sympathized" with the state for passing the law because the federal government had abdicated its responsibility in enforcing its own laws. Matheson said it the Arizona law was misguided and said the issue had been held hostage by both parties.
But he was resolute in his opposition to Arizona's law.
"I think it was too harsh and will lead to racial profiling," he said. The debate airs Sunday at 8 a.m.
dmontero@sltrib.com Alt Heads:
Philpot, Matheson crank up the ire in KTVX debate

Load-Date: October 28, 2010


End of Document