Philip sees override if governor vetoes anti-terrorism bill
Chicago Daily Herald
February 6, 2002, Wednesday Cook/DuPage/Fox Valley/Lake/McHenry


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 479 words
Byline: John Patterson Daily Herald State Government Editor
Body


SPRINGFIELD - Illinois Senate President James "Pate" Philip blasted Gov. George Ryan's plan to veto part or all of a sweeping anti-terrorism bill because of the governor's concerns over the death penalty in the state.  
"I just think it's a mistake. I don't understand that at all," Philip, a Wood Dale Republican, told reporters Tuesday. "When somebody kills 3,100 people that you can account for, I think they deserve the death penalty."  
The governor faces a Friday deadline for action on the terrorism-fighting plan lawmakers and Attorney General Jim Ryan sent to his desk last fall. Without action, the bill will become law Saturday. On Monday, the governor said he plans to reject the whole plan or the part that includes expanding death penalty eligibility.  
The governor did say he is open to a compromise that would enact the remainder of the proposal, which includes potential prison sentences for carrying guns onto airplanes, but that his primary concern is the provision expanding the death penalty to include terrorists.  
He has vetoed lawmakers' previous attempts to expand death penalty eligibility and said signing this plan into law would send the wrong message to the death penalty commission he appointed to come up with ways to fix Illinois' troubled capital punishment system. Since the death penalty was reinstated in 1977, Illinois has executed 12 men while 13 who where on death row have been cleared and freed. The commission's final report is expected in March.  
Ryan's spokesman Tuesday reiterated the governor's concerns and questioned what Philip and other lawmakers hoped to accomplish with the death penalty provision.  
"Do they think that terrorists are thwarted by the threat of the death penalty?" spokesman Dennis Culloton said. "Terrorists so deranged as to crash their planes into the World Trade Center weren't concerned about the death penalty.  
"I think cooler heads need to take a look at what we're trying to do here."  
If the governor rejects all or any part of the plan, it returns to the Illinois General Assembly for a new round of votes. Philip said that before the governor vetoes the plan, he should look at the legislative roll calls from when the plan overwhelmingly was passed in the fall. The House approved the plan 106-1, and the Senate passed it 55-0.  
Philip predicted any veto would be overridden if lawmakers get a chance to vote. If the governor rejects the plan, any attempt at an override would begin in the Illinois House. House Speaker Michael Madigan, a Chicago Democrat, was unavailable for comment Tuesday.  
Also calling for an override was state Sen. Carl Hawkinson, a Galesburg Republican and Jim Ryan's handpicked candidate for lieutenant governor. Ryan, an Elmhurst Republican, is running for governor.  
Hawkinson said Tuesday that the death penalty provision is crucial and that Jim Ryan shares his view.

Graphic

 
James "Pate" Philip

Load-Date: February 7, 2002


End of Document