Philippine Officials Say Raid Killed Militants
The New York Times
February 3, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 589 words
Byline: By FLOYD WHALEY
Body


MANILA -- Philippine military officials said Thursday that an early-morning raid had killed one of the top leaders of a regional terrorist network with links to Al Qaeda, as well as other senior terrorism suspects wanted by the United States.
The officials said that government forces killed Zulkifli bin Hir, considered to be a senior leader of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorism network. The United States had posted a $5 million reward for his capture or killing.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation lists Mr. Zulkifli, a Malaysian who also uses the name Marwan, among its most wanted terrorists, identifying him as a member of Jemaah Islamiyah's central command. Trained as an engineer in the United States, Mr. Zulkifli has been accused of conducting bomb-making training for terrorist organizations, including the Abu Sayyaf group in the Philippines.
Philippine officials said that the strikes also killed Abdullah Ali, a Singaporean who goes by Muawiyah. Mr. Ali carried a $50,000 reward from the United States and was also considered a leader of Jemaah Islamiyah.
An Abu Sayyaf leader, Umbra Jumdail, as well as more than a dozen other local militants, were also said to have died in the operation.
''These are notorious terrorist leaders,'' Lt. Col. Randolph Cabangbang, a military spokesman in the area, said by telephone. ''Their deaths will weaken the capabilities of the Abu Sayyaf.''
The predawn raid in a densely forested area near the town of Parang, on Jolo Island, came about after informants alerted the military and the police to the presence of a large number of militants, including foreigners, in an area known as a hide-out for Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah Islamiyah, Colonel Cabangbang said.
Security analysts in the region were cautious about speculating on the implications of the deaths of the high-profile figures, noting that there were only field reports at this point and no confirmation of their identities.
''Our sources say that government security forces are still trying to validate the identity of those killed, as the military could not immediately recover the bodies from the forested area,'' said Mars Buan, a senior analyst with the Manila-based risk consultancy Pacific Strategies and Assessments.
She continued: ''It is still uncertain whether the bodies even included the three personalities. The Abu Sayyaf group reportedly took with them some of the casualties.''
Colonel Cabangbang confirmed that while the verification of who was killed was continuing, the Philippine military was confident, based on field reports, that the high-profile figures were among them.
Ms. Buan noted that even if the strikes were confirmed to have killed the senior leaders, it was not clear that Abu Sayyaf, which has been conducting kidnappings, bombings and beheadings for two decades, would be weakened.
''The Abu Sayyaf group remains a resilient force,'' she said. ''They continue to attract new recruits from among family members, as well as from the disenfranchised, poor and unemployed people of Sulu who believe they have no other option but to join the militant group.''
Bryony Lau, an analyst with the International Crisis Group who is based in Jakarta, Indonesia, was similarly skeptical about the impact of the raid on Thursday.
''The Abu Sayyaf group is quite decentralized,'' Ms. Lau said. ''When high-profile figures have been killed in the past, you still have the Abu Sayyaf operating. As to whether or not this is a significant blow to the group, that would be an extremely difficult judgment to make at this point.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Zulkifli bin Hir                                                     

Load-Date: February 3, 2012


End of Document