Philippine leader to visit, seek aid ; White House is welcoming Arroyo after her strong support in fight against terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 19, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a6
Length: 560 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo will get a grand reception at the White House today, a meeting with President Bush and a state dinner. It's payback for her loyal support of the fight against international terror, but she wants to take home more than memories.
Arroyo is asking the United States for economic aid, trade concessions and money to combat terrorists.
For Bush, the state visit offers an opportunity to join another ally in a "victory lap" over the U.S.-led military success in Iraq, said Catharin Dalpino, an expert on U.S.-Asian relations at the Brookings Institution.
"With the bombings in Riyadh and Morocco, we're going to see some charges that the Bush administration was not paying proper attention to the war on terrorism when it was focused on Iraq," Dalpino said. "This is a way for the Bush administration to signal that yes, they are."
Arroyo was among the first world leaders to call Bush and express condolences after the Sept. 11 attacks. Arroyo and Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, of Singapore, were the only two Southeast Asian leaders to support the U.S.-led war in Iraq, and she expelled two Iraqi diplomats after Bush asked U.S. allies to do it. The Philippines has sent a 175-member humanitarian mission to postwar Iraq.
Singapore's Goh visited Washington last week and signed an agreement that would wipe out tariffs and other trade barriers on about $$ @33 billion in annual trade and give U.S. banks and companies more access to one of Asia's main financial centers. Now it's Arroyo's turn. 
Besides Bush, during her visit she is scheduled to talk with Secretary of State Colin Powell and members of Congress, meet with representatives from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, give a speech at the U.S.-ASEAN Business Council and receive an honorary degree at Fordham University in New York.
She's seeking duty-free privileges for Philippine products, such as dried mangoes, pineapple juice and tuna.  Arroyo also wants to see Philippine businesses get reconstruction contracts in Iraq and is trying to lure U.S. companies to invest in operations on the islands.
The Philippines' interest in trade and fighting terror probably will dominate discussions between Arroyo and Bush - leaders with a few personal things in common. Both are 56. Arroyo is the daughter of a former president; Bush is the son of one. Both took office on the same day in 2001.
Further assuring her welcome from Bush, Arroyo ordered aerial and artillery strikes on Muslim rebel strongholds just hours before leaving on her eight-day trip to the United States. Philippine air force planes and helicopters pounded what she said are "terrorist cells" of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, a separatist group in Mindanao where bombings and attacks have left more than 210 people dead this year.
The bombings this week in Morocco and Saudi Arabia, as well as U.S. intelligence reports that suggest the possibility of terror attacks in Southeast Asia, add to the urgency of Arroyo's request for more U.S. military aid for the only former U.S. colony.
"What she's looking for is an expansion in U.S. military assistance in terms of equipment, training and advisers," said Patricia Paez, a spokeswoman at the Philippine Embassy in Washington. "The U.S. forces will not play any combat role, but they will help us in routing out the terrorists ourselves."

Graphic

 
mug: Gloria Macapagal Arroyo

Load-Date: May 19, 2003


End of Document