Philly cops seek info on 2 taking subway pix
The Philadelphia Daily News
September 25, 2009 Friday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; P-com Biggie News Update; Pg. 12
Length: 336 words
Byline: By DAVID GAMBACORTA

gambacd@phillynews.com 215-854-5994
Body


Philadelphia police are trying to identify two men who were separately spotted photographing parts of the Broad Street subway line earlier this week.
Aware that the mere mention of such activity could trigger terrorism fears, authorities were quick to note yesterday that neither incident seemed ominous.
"We don't believe either one of these events are terrorism-related, or that there's any connection to what's been going on in New York," said Homeland Security Chief Inspector Joseph Sullivan, alluding to an alleged terrorist plot there that had led to three arrests.
The first incident in the local subways occurred about 5:30 p.m. on Tuesday, when a bearded white man in his 20s apparently took pictures of the underground area at the Snyder Avenue stop in South Philadelphia, Sullivan said.
SEPTA security cameras captured footage of the man, who had a backpack and a ponytail, as he left the station. 
Shortly after 7:30 p.m. on Wednesday, a SEPTA cashier noticed a clean-shaven "Middle Eastern" man with close-cropped hair taking pictures at the Lombard Street station, he said. 
The cashier confronted the man, who proceeded to show her images of other subway facilities on his camera. He then indicated that he was deleting the pictures and left, Sullivan said.
No footage was taken of the man because the security cameras at the Lombard station were not working. 
"We feel confident this is nothing to be alarmed about," Sullivan said, "but we do implore people to call us when you see something unusual, and let us make the determination."
Investigators frequently respond to reports of people taking photos of trains and subways. "Usually, they just turn out to be art students or train buffs," he said. 
SEPTA spokeswoman Jerri Williams said members of the public are allowed to photograph subway stops and other portions of the transportation line and regularly do. 
These two people "were brought to our attention, so we'd just be interested in talking to them and learning a bit more about what they were doing." 

Load-Date: September 25, 2009


End of Document