PHILA. POLICE LOOK FOR LINK TO TERRORISM IN COP'S SHOOTING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
January 9, 2016 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE; Pg. A-1
Length: 593 words
Byline: Aubrey Whelan, Mari Schaefer, Jeremy Roebuck and Stephanie Farr  The Philadelphia Inquirer
Body


Hours after he shot a Philadelphia police officer with a stolen police firearm Thursday night, Edward Archer confessed to investigators that he had acted "in the name of Islam," authorities said.
"I follow Allah. I pledge my allegiance to the Islamic State, and that's why I did what I did," Mr. Archer told detectives, according to Homicide Capt. James Clark.
Investigators are still working to determine whether the 30-year-old man from Yeadon, Delaware County, had any ties to terrorist groups or whether he had acted alone.
Investigators are scouring Mr. Archer's Internet activity to see if he may have had contact with ISIS members or other radical Islamic groups. A law enforcement source said late Friday that so far they had not found any indication that he had been in contact with known terrorism suspects.
Federal authorities are also looking into two trips Mr. Archer made to the Middle East. In the fall of 2011, he traveled to Saudi Arabia for a pilgrimage to Mecca and stayed for several weeks, an FBI spokesman said. The next year, he went to Egypt for reasons that are unclear and spent several months there.
"We will see where the investigation leads us," said Philadelphia Police Commissioner Richard Ross, who is in his first week on the job.
Police praised the bravery of the wounded officer, Jesse Hartnett, who was shot three times in the arm but still managed to wound Mr. Archer as he fled the scene of the shooting at 60th and Spruce streets. The officer, 33, was in critical but stable condition.
It was extraordinary, Commissioner Ross said, that Officer Hartnett had survived at all.
"This guy tried to execute the police officer," the commissioner said in a pre-dawn briefing on the shooting. At a news conference Friday afternoon, he said of the officer: "The bravery he demonstrated was absolutely remarkable."
Local and national officials condemned the attack.
Jacob Bender, executive director of the Philadelphia chapter of the Council on American Islamic Relations, said the incident "should not be seen as representative of Muslims or the faith of Islam," and called for a thorough investigation of the shooting.
Officer Hartnett, an 18th District police officer with five years on the force, was patrolling alone on 60th Street when Mr. Archer strode toward his cruiser around 11:40 p.m. Thursday.
Mr. Archer was armed with a 9mm pistol -a police-issued firearm that had been reported stolen from an officer's home in 2013, Commissioner Ross said.
In video of the shooting obtained by The Inquirer, Mr. Archer was captured walking toward Officer Hartnett, his arm extended, firing shot after shot and pocking the cruiser with bullets.
Then he leaned into the officer's squad car and opened fire again before sprinting back down the street.
Officer Hartnett was hit three times in the arm. Bleeding heavily, his arm limp, he struggled out of his car and managed to run after Mr. Archer and fire back, wounding him.
Over the police radio, officers heard Officer Hartnett's frantic voice as he called for help: "Shots fired! I'm shot! I'm bleeding heavily."
The first officers to arrive on the scene hurried Officer Hartnett into a police car and rushed him to Penn Presbyterian Hospital.
A block away, at 60th and Delancey, another group of officers captured Mr. Archer, who had been shot once in the buttocks. His gun lay next to him, with the slide locked, the officer said - Mr. Archer had fired every bullet in his gun.
Officer Hartnett suffered a broken arm and nerve damage and has "a lot of recovery ahead of him," Commissioner Ross said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Edward Archer \ \ PHOTO: Joseph Kaczmarek/Associated Press: An investigator walks through the scene of a shooting Friday in Philadelphia. A police officer was shot multiple times by a man who ambushed him as he sat in his marked police cruiser, authorities said.

Load-Date: January 12, 2016


End of Document