PHYSIOLOGY OF GETTING HOOKED ON JINGLES
The New York Times
April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 339 words
Body


To the Editor:
In ''The Iliad and the Oddity'' (Op-Ed April 17), Mark Edmundson compares the function of today's commercials to that of yesterday's myths. I have been struck by the similarity of jingles and viruses.
A jingle is not a musical cell but a quasi-musical parasite that invades the memory, lies there quiescently and now and then awakes, obsessing consciousness for no apparent reason.
In ''The Iliad and the Oddity'' (Op-Ed April 17), Mark Edmundson compares the function of today's commercials to that of yesterday's myths.
Like viruses, jingles have no life of their own, but need to feed on a host in order to replicate. A virus is a bit of nucleic acid; a jingle is a sequence of musical ''hooks.'' A virus has no cellular envelope, and it functions only to commandeer host-replicating machinery - much as terrorists, lacking the envelope of a state, hijack the media with jingoistic agitprop.
I know no cure for terrorism, but jingles can be readily cleansed from the mind by a dose of real music, such as Beethoven, where the hooks are connected to a cellular envelope of passion and an infrastructure of conviction, replicating the full extent of nature's bounteous design.
But, beyond mere analogy, can music have an immunological effect against real viruses? The secrets of mind, memory and the immune response are by no means deciphered, but reports are turning up in science magazines to the effect that the brain controls the immune response - that mood on the molecular level, like morale in the military, affects the readiness of our defenses. Military morale is in fact conventionally boosted with marching bands.
Stress is reported to activate a dormant herpes virus. Music has always been said to soothe the savage breast. There seems clearly to be a connection. Jingles might even be stored, physically, in the myelin sheathes of neurons, where viruses also sleep and wake.
MICHAEL NEWMAN, New York, April 17, 1982.
The writer is associated with the Warm Spring Harbor Laboratory for Qualitative Biology in New York.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document