Pilgrims hear cleric denounce terrorism;
As two million Muslims gathered for the hajj,
a top Saudi sheik urged support for Palestinians.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 22, 2002 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A15
Length: 482 words
Byline: Hamza Hendawi ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MOUNT ARAFAT, Saudi Arabia
Body


Sweltering under a merciless sun, Muslim pilgrims gathered yesterday amid tight security near the holy city of Mecca as Saudi Arabia's top cleric distanced Islam from terrorism and urged support for the Palestinians.
The convergence on Mount Arafat marks the high point of the annual Muslim pilgrimage, known as the hajj. The plateau and a rocky hill, called the Mountain of Mercy, is the site where the prophet Muhammad gave his last sermon, in 632.
"Islam orders respecting people's rights, money, honor and lives … and instructs against killing children, women and the unarmed," Sheik Abdul Aziz Al al-Sheik told the pilgrims in a sermon.
He stressed that Islam was incompatible with terrorism and said attributing terrorism to Islam was unjust.
"Fighting the oppressed Muslims in Palestine is terrorism and repression," he said, referring to Israel. "The nation of Islam is going through immense events today, requiring attention be paid in order to be one nation defending its belief."
Security was tight throughout the area, reflecting the tension prevailing in Muslim nations after the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and the U.S.-led war against terror, which many Muslims see as a war against their faith.
Chanting "at thy service, my God, at thy service," the pilgrims began to converge on Arafat shortly after sunrise. As police sirens wailed and helicopters hovered above, many climbed the Mountain of Mercy to perch on its rocks and pray for forgiveness or to read from the Koran, Islam's holy book.
After a pleasant start, temperatures steadily rose, hovering near 100 degrees. Authorities eventually turned on water sprinklers that were fixed on poles two stories high to cool off the pilgrims below.
Any hardship faced by the two million pilgrims - about 1.3 million of them from abroad - as they performed the ritual pilgrimage in the midst of huge and often disorderly crowds did not negate the spiritual experience.
"I have waited a long time for this day," said Mohammed El-Sir, 45, a teacher from Sudan. "I shall never forget it as long as I live."
Able-bodied Muslims are required to perform the hajj at least once in their lifetime if they can afford it. The ritual, which begins in the holy city of Mecca - birthplace of Islam and its prophet - is a spiritual journey that, according to tradition, cleanses the soul of sins.
Iranian pilgrims held a rally to denounce the United States and Israel, Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency reported. Saudi Arabia had said before the start of the pilgrimage that it would not tolerate any anti-U.S. demonstrations, but the rally apparently was allowed because it was confined.
After sunset, the pilgrims were to leave Arafat and head to nearby Muzdalifah to collect pebbles for the next phase of the pilgrimage - the symbolic stoning of the devil represented by three pillars in Mina, just to the north.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
HASAN SARBAKHSHIAN, Associated Press
Muslim pilgrims gather to pray on a rocky hill called the Mountain of Mercy, near the Saudi holy city of Mecca. An estimated two million Muslims met there yesterday to mark the high point of the annual pilgrimage known as the hajj. (A02)

Load-Date: March 8, 2002


End of Document