PILL TO FIGHT TERRORISM MAY BE TOO HARD TO SWALLOW
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 30, 1996, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 11B; GREGORY FREEMAN COLUMN
Length: 754 words
Byline: Gregory Freeman
Body


MY WIFE AND I FELL asleep with the television on Friday night, and I awoke about 5 o'clock Saturday morning.
Still hazy, I thought I was dreaming at first: words of an explosion, Olympics, people hurt, deaths.
I rubbed my eyes and realized it wasn't a dream. Once again, a terrorist had penetrated a happy occasion to create havoc and fear.
My thoughts first went to those in Centennial Olympic Park early Saturday morning, relaxing, enjoying themselves, reveling in the first Olympics on American soil in 12 years. I thought about the families who'd traveled to Atlanta to enjoy the festivities and the innocent people who had been hurt - and the two people who died - as a result of some idiot's effort to make a statement.
Then my sympathy turned to anger. Anger at those who seem to take some perverse pleasure in seeing blameless people hurt and killed. Anger at those who clearly have no regard for human life. And anger at those so selfish they believe their political statements are more important than the lives they destroy in making them.
I thought of the passengers on TWA Flight 800. Both Time and Newsweek last week spotlighted some of the innocent victims on that flight: a man from France who had planned to give his girlfriend an engagement ring; a youngster on a trip with his high school French class who had never been on a plane before and was afraid of flying; an Italian construction worker returning to his wife and kids by way of Paris.
Few, if any, of the passengers on that plane had done anything to any terrorists. But they suffered because of the senseless selfishness of someone making a political statement.
First the World Trade Center. Then Oklahoma City. Then Flight 800. Now Atlanta. Where does it stop?
Americans have a marvelous ability to heal. Life is back to normal in Oklahoma City. Americans continue to fly anywhere they want to go. Centennial Olympic Park is expected to reopen today. Those attending the festivities refuse to give in to the terrorists.
But like most Americans, I want it to stop. I suspect most Americans agreed with President Bill Clinton, who called the Atlanta bombing "an evil act of terror."
"An act of vicious terror like this is clearly directed at the spirit of our democracy and it seems to rip also at the spirit of the Olympics," the president said.
"We cannot let terrorism win," he said. "That's not the American way."
In one sense, we haven't let it change us. The Olympics continue, and Americans are still watching the games in droves.
But while the president's words provide medicine for our souls, I worry a bit about the medicine he offers for our bodies, namely his proposals to make us safer.
One proposal doesn't bother me: Clinton's request to Congress to require chemical markers to be placed in the most common forms of explosives. This would create chemical "fingerprints" to make the source of a bomb easier to trace. That makes good sense and would be helpful in tracking down some perpetrators.
The other proposal is more difficult: it would extend wiretapping authority to all 1,300 federal felonies. Under current law, the FBI can seek court-approved wiretaps for only a handful of felonies.
The president argues that the FBI can't stop terrorism in its tracks without the ability to gather intelligence about those who may be planning violence.
That may be the case, but I remain troubled by the fact that we may have to give up certain civil liberties - in this case, the right to privacy - in order to be safe. How many rights must we give up in order to maintain our safety?
I'm angry at the terrorists. I want them captured and I want them punished. But I'm not sure I want to give up some of my basic rights to achieve that goal.
If Congress considers the president's recommendations - and House Speaker Newt Gingrich has indicated that it will - I would hope that it would move cautiously when it comes to the issue of wiretaps. In the hands of ethical people, such ability should be of no concern. But it's ,icj tp sppm tp fprget tje grpss excesses of J. Edgar Hoover. Do we really need Big Brother hovering over all of us to make us safe?
Despite all the terrorism, I'm not sure we're ready for this.
Gregory Freeman's column appears Sunday, Tuesday and Friday. You can reach him on PostLine at 923-2323, then tap in 4076, by fax at 340-3050, by e-mail at gfreeman@pd.stlnet.com or write him at the Post-Dispatch, 900 North Tucker Blvd., St. Louis, Mo. 63101. You can find online discussion of his column at  www.stlnet.com/freeman on POSTnet.

Load-Date: July 31, 1996


End of Document