PILOTS' GROUP VOTES TO BOYCOTT NATIONS PROMOTING TERRORISM
The New York Times
April 16, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 291 words
Byline: By RICHARD WITKIN
Body


The International Air Line Pilots Association has authorized boycotts of countries that promote terrorist acts against civil aviation or fail to provide adequate airport security, the 60-nation group announced yesterday.
The action was taken at the pilots' annual meeting in London, which just ended, and was disclosed at a news conference by the group's president, Reg Smith of Air Canada.
''We will not do nothing while our passengers, crew members, and aircraft are threatened,'' Captain Smith said.
The boycott resolution was approved in a secret ballot by 42 of the 44 pilots' units at the London session, according to sources who attended. The other two units voted ''no.''
The pilots' action came at the end of a long campaign for systematic sanctions to help stem the spreading incidence of hijackings, bombings and other acts of violence.
 
Help From Unions Sought
The next step will be to enlist help from other international labor and industry groups, and from government agencies. This would be vital, spokesmen for the pilots said, to increase the effectiveness of any boycott by interfering with the servicing on the ground of airliners from offending nations and by interrupting shipping and other non-aviation transport.
The head of main pilots' union in the United States, the Air Line Pilots Association, flew home from the London meeting even before the boycott ballot was held, in order to speed the process of gaining outside cooperation.
The official, Henry A. Duffy, said he planned to meet this week with Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., and with an American labor representative with ties to the International Transportation Federation. Mr. Duffy said he also planned to confer with an official of the State Department.


End of Document