Pilots discuss terrorism, safety concerns at summit
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 22, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P9A
Length: 323 words
Byline: KARIN FISCHER
Body


DAILY MAIL WASHINGTON BUREAU
WASHINGTON - In a year that terrorism and financial instability rocked their profession, airline pilots refocused their attention on ongoing safety concerns.
At a safety summit here Wednesday, the Air Line Pilots Association considered threats to safety, ranging from terrorism to more work-a-day concerns, like runway collisions.
Incoming Federal Aviation Administrator Marion Blakey warned, "Serious safety issues are still lurking and could be waiting to spring."
She particularly singled out the issue of runway incursions, when one or more planes ends up on the same runway. Last year, a passenger jet taking off in Milan collided with a business plane that had strayed onto the active runway, killing 118.
There were 383 runway incursions last year, nearly double six years earlier, said Blakey, the current head of the National Transportation Safety Board.
She said the lack of fatalities in this country could be attributed to luck. She called for technological improvements, but said vigilance by pilots also was important.
Still, the spirit of Sept. 11 hung over the proceedings. "We live and work in a changed world," said John Cox, chairman of the group's air safety committee.
The pilots' union has strongly advocated allowing pilots to carry guns in the cockpit as a last line of defense against potential hijackers. Airline safety legislation passed last fall also has tightened up aspects of aviation, federalizing airport screening and mandating air marshals on certain flights.
Association president Duane Woerth reminded the assembled pilots that Sept. 11 caused a lack of security in airlines' bottom lines. US Airways earlier this month filed for bankruptcy and other large carriers have said they may be forced to follow suit.
"When the economy gets cold, the airline industry gets pneumonia," Woerth said.
Writer Karin Fischer can be reached at (202) 662-8732 or by e-mail at kfischer@dailymail.com.  

Load-Date: August 23, 2002


End of Document