PIRATED-CD SALES IN SOUTH AMERICA TIED TO TERRORISM
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 13, 2001 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 895 words
Byline: Kevin G. Hall KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: CIUDAD DEL ESTE, Paraguay
Body


On the streets of this gritty frontier city, where CDs by popular U.S. and Brazilian artists sell for $2 apiece, not all the buyers know that the illegal bargains might be helping to finance international terrorism.
But diplomats from several countries said Ali Khalil Merhi, an alleged "bigfoot" in Paraguay's criminal underworld, sold pirated CDs in neighboring Brazil to raise money for al-Moqawama (Resistance), an extremist arm of the militant Islamic group Hezbollah (the Party of God) in southern Lebanon.
Since its bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in 1983, which killed 241 Americans, Hezbollah has kidnapped more than a dozen Americans in Lebanon, hijacked a TWA jetliner, and staged numerous other attacks against American, Israeli, French, British and other targets.
Merhi, 32, who has a police record for assault and piracy, was arrested here Feb. 25, 2000, and charged with selling millions of dollars' worth of illegally copied music and software. He fled Paraguay in June 2000 after Esteban Aquino, a prosecutor in Paraguay's Secretariat for Prevention and Investigation of Terrorism, recommended that the investigation of Merhi be expanded to include his alleged ties to terrorist organizations.
The prosecutor said Merhi had access codes to restricted Web sites that promoted international terrorism, and when police raided his apartment, they found software that Merhi allegedly was distributing to raise money for al-Moqawama. According to Aquino, the software featured film footage of terrorist attacks and interviews with suicide bombers before they died.
It also provided a bank-account number in Lebanon, where money could be sent to support al-Moqawama. In a certified translation of the software CD's Arabic contents, provided to Knight Ridder by Aquino, an unidentified radical leader exhorts listeners to strike at the United States and Israel.
"Do you not see the total silence before the will of Israel and America?" the leader said. "That's why we must recharge our forces and strengthen our decision and put ourselves on the proper battle. If not, the death of a martyr will be like any other death, a death in vain."
At the time Merhi disappeared, Argentine authorities were also trying to question him in connection with the unsolved March 17, 1992, bombing of the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires that killed 28 people, and the July 18, 1994, bombing of a Jewish community center in the Argentine capital that killed 86.
Growing concern about terrorist activities in Paraguay prompted the Clinton administration in late 1999 to station its first full-time FBI person at the U.S. Embassy in AsunciUn. Former embassy officials and other diplomats believed Merhi was linked to terrorists and wanted a closer look at him.
"The suspicion we always had is he was utilizing piracy not only for his own benefit, but [as] a means to originate cash to finance Hezbollah," said a former U.S. Secret Service agent, who now investigates piracy for the recording industry.
The Worldwide Recording Industry Association estimated that pirates operating mostly out of Ciudad del Este cost the Brazilian music industry $300 million last year, and entertainment software makers $250 million.
In an article she wrote before leaving office, former Attorney General Janet Reno warned that criminal organizations appeared to be using proceeds from counterfeiting "to facilitate a variety of enterprises, including guns, drugs, pornography and even terrorism."
But Washington puts a higher priority on antidrug efforts in Latin America; penalties for CD piracy are light, and it is generally considered victimless. In Paraguay, authorities have disrupted operations of accused pirates such as Merhi, but none has served jail time.
"Terrorists are looking for the least obtrusive way to make some money," said Keith Prager, a Miami-based security consultant and retired U.S. Customs expert on counterfeiting. "Piracy is not going to draw a lot of fire from law enforcement."
Merhi was unobtrusive enough to be freed on bail twice in Paraguay, despite prosecutors' objections. After his second release, he crossed into Brazil and took a flight to Paris. While out on bail, he also appeared publicly with top officials of the Colorado Party, the longest-ruling - and some say most corrupt - party in Latin America.
Merhi slipped away despite the international attention he drew. On March 13, 2000, Juan Jose Galeano, an Argentine federal judge, asked that Merhi be interviewed on behalf of his country while behind bars, but Merhi was granted bail. The bail was later overruled, but by the time Argentina issued a second request in July, the Paraguayan courts had ignored warnings that Merhi might flee - and he did.
"Merhi was a financier - that was his business," said one Argentine diplomat, confirming that his government wanted to investigate Merhi and associates in connection with the Buenos Aires bombings. Argentine prosecutors also would like to talk with Merhi's brother, Mustafa Khalil Merhi, who is married to an Argentine, and a Merhi associate named Assad Ahmad Barakat.
While the Merhi brothers and Barakat have disappeared, Aquino said he and others investigating piracy and its links to terrorism had been getting death threats. "Threats and great pressure exist," he said, "and this extends to my family."
Kevin Hall's e-mail address is khall@krwashington.com.  

Graphic

 
DANIEL ORTIZ, ABC Color - Ali Khalil Merhi (left), shown here under police guard in the Paraguayan border city of Ciudad del Este, faced charges of massive CD and software counterfeiting when he fled to Lebanon in June 2000.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document