Piscataquis to offer threat, risk assessment class
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
March 7, 2007 Wednesday
All Editions


Copyright 2007 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. B3
Length: 287 words
Byline: DIANA BOWLEY OF THE NEWS STAFF
Dateline: DOVER-FOXCROFT 
Body


The Piscataquis County Emergency Management Agency will sponsor a three-day class on threat and risk assessment in connection with terrorism.
Believed to be the first such course offered in the state through the Department of Homeland Security, the class scheduled March 27-29 is expected to draw law enforcement, firefighters, emergency responders, health care workers and others from throughout the state.
Some may think Piscataquis County would be an unlikely location for terrorism but no place is safe since the 2001 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C., said Tom Iverson Jr., Piscataquis County's EMA director.
"We're not immune to a threat of any type," Iverson said Tuesday.
Vince Rose of Texas A & M Engineering Extension will teach the class in Piscataquis County.
Iverson said the class will combine lectures, small group discussions, activities and scenarios to improve the capability of emergency responders to prevent, react to or recover from a terrorism incident.
"[It] might be one of the first steps in really linking needs and difficulties to funding opportunities, and even more importantly, to understanding what is likely a risk and what is likely not," Iverson said.
On the second day of training, the participants will be divided into teams for a field trip to various locations, where they will conduct an actual threat and risk assessment, according to Iverson.
The EMA director said there are several sites in the county that are susceptible and some of these will be looked at.
"The exercise will show the vulnerability of these areas," Iverson said.
For information about the class, contact Iverson at 564-8660 or e-mail him at pcema@verizon.net. The free class is limited to 40 participants.

Load-Date: March 7, 2007


End of Document