Pitts: Change asylum law  ; Resolution would identify friends and foes
Intelligencer Journal (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
August 23, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 1
Length: 587 words
Byline: Dave Pidgeon, Intelligencer Journal Staff
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


DAVE PIDGEON
Between 10,000 and 15,000 foreign refugees each year are denied asylum in the United States, even though they might have fought alongside U.S. troops.
Among those foreigners are anti-Castro Cubans, groups who supported American troops during the Vietnam War and women forced under threat of death to support militant groups.
The problem is U.S. law bars asylum to anyone who has provided "material support" to any armed group, even if the group is supported by America or if the refugee was coerced.
U.S. Rep. Joseph Pitts, the Chester County Republican who represents Lancaster County, aims to change the law with a measure supported by organizations like Human Rights Watch.
Pitts' foe in the November election, however, said Tuesday the congressman's measure raises as many questions as it answers.
At the end of July, Pitts introduced a House resolution that would plug loopholes in the Immigration and Nationality Act. It could be voted on as early as this fall.
Pitts was traveling Tuesday and could not immediately be reached for comment.
His office released a statement saying the proposed changes to the law won't inadvertently undermine safeguards to prevent terrorists from entering the United States.
"The bill I've introduced maintains these strong and necessary protections while also making certain that innocent refugees and asylum seekers are not turned away by the United States because of unintended consequences from existing law," the statement said.
The problem is U.S. asylum law is blind to distinguishing between anti-American groups like al-Qaida, the terrorist organization behind the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, and pro-American groups or organizations supported by the United States.
The current language denies asylum to anyone who has provided "material support" to any armed group, not just anti-U.S. organizations,
"It's just bizarre if the U.S. can't distinguish in its laws between its friends and its foes," said Jennifer Daskal, U.S. advocacy director for Human Rights Watch.
Pitts' resolution would prevent the United States from inadvertently labeling pro-American groups as terrorist organizations. New criteria would mandate that the group be a threat to national security or U.S. citizens to qualify as a terrorist organization.
This proposed change would allow refugees belonging to pro-American organizations to be granted asylum.
"It's an important piece of legislation that will protect refugees that are being inadvertently caught in the absurdities of these overbroad laws," Daskal said.
Pitts' resolution also would allow those forced into servitude by an anti-American organization under threat of death or serious harm to receive asylum.
Other examples of people unable to gain asylum into the United States are:
Burmese refugees and asylum seekers fleeing a repressive regime.
Colombians terrorized by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, the military wing of that country's communist party.
Liberians, Sierra Leoneans, Somalis and Sudanese forced under the threat of death to provide money, food or shelter to armed rebel groups.
Lois Herr, the Democratic nominee running against Pitts, said Tuesday Pitts' proposal has loopholes of its own.
Herr said the proposal implies that terrorism is only the act of an anti-American group.
"Are we defining terrorism based on its target or its method?" she said. "I would condemn the method of terrorism wherever it occurs."
Independent candidate John Murphy, who also is running for Pitts' seat, was not immediately available for comment.

Load-Date: August 23, 2006


End of Document