Pitts and Herr debate; Focus on Iraq War, terrorism and government spending
Intelligencer Journal (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
October 12, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: B; Pg. 1
Length: 781 words
Byline: Madelyn Pennino
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


U.S. Rep. Joe Pitts and his Democratic challenger, Lois Herr, clashed Wednesday afternoon at the Farm & Home Center over a number of issues at the forefront of the upcoming election.
The debate, which focused on questions about the war in Iraq, terrorism, government spending and health care, was organized by Lancaster Rotary Club.
Herr is trying to unseat Pitts, a six-term incumbent, in the 16th Congressional District, which includes Lancaster County, southern Chester County and southwest Berks County.
During a discussion on terrorism, Herr blasted the Bush administration and said it has failed to keep the country safe.
"Instead of capturing or killing Osama bin Laden, the administration went after Saddam Hussein, on flimsy evidence and with no plan to speak of, and now we're spending kids' lives and $80 billion a year in Iraq," Herr said.
Pitts countered Herr and said there have been measurable gains in national security.
"People need to understand that we haven't had an attack since 2001 because we took the fight to the terrorists," Pitts said. "Retreating from the Middle East will only move the front lines from Baghdad back to New York."
Pitts said regardless of the rationale for going into Iraq, it is imperative that U.S. troops stay there.
"The fact is, now we are there and have to win," Pitts said. "We've made mistakes, including some bad ones. It was a mistake not having adequate, overwhelming force so we could control the country after defeating Saddam."
In a visit to Iraq earlier this year, Pitts said, he told Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki that Americans are growing impatient with the war.
"The president has said that as the Iraqi military steps up, we will step down. They have done this just about everywhere but Baghdad and the broader Sunni Triangle. We're in the middle of a serious effort to get Baghdad under control," Pitts said. "American soldiers are dying to do it. The Iraqi government needs to take advantage of this opportunity and maintain control of the capital, even if the cost to them is high."
But Herr said the Bush administration already has made too many mistakes in Iraq.
"It's time to start bringing our troops out of the middle of a civil war and home to a hero's welcome they deserve," Herr said. "And to make sure that the benefits they richly deserve are fully funded, another thing Congress failed to do this year."
Herr said she agrees with Pentagon officials who have said the only way to end the war in Iraq is by a political solution.
"We must redeploy our troops to the edge of the battlefield, so that they are not the targets in an Iraqi civil war, begin an intensive diplomatic effort to bring resources from Arab countries, pressure the factions in Iraq to create a real, inclusive political solution and, if necessary, temporarily or even permanently create partitions between Sunnis, Shi'a and Kurds to keep the peace long enough to see if a federal Iraq can work," Herr said.
On the issue of government spending, Pitts said Republicans have a much better record than Democrats.
"The real problem is entitlements, and the Republican efforts at reform have always met with opposition from the Democrats. The Democrats, unfortunately, have never proposed a serious plan to prevent the bankruptcy of Social Security and Medicare," Pitts said. "We are headed for a fiscal tsunami in Washington ... the Democrats need to join us in a bipartisan effort and not demagogue this incredibly important issue. If we don't do something to reform Social Security, we are headed toward disaster."
Pitts said Democrats do not have a plan to save Social Security.
"The most they have proposed is another stopgap tax increase, which is the same thing we've done the last 22 times Social Security looked like it was going to come up short," Pitts said. "But with the baby boomers retiring, there is no tax increase large enough to fix the system. The Democrats apparently do not care."
Herr said the Bush administration claimed tax cuts would pay for themselves, but they haven't. "What this decade has shown us, so far anyway, is that tax cuts directed at the wealthiest instead of the middle-class families do not increase consumer spending, which is the engine of our economy," Herr said.
Instead, Herr proposed reforming the tax code along the lines of the Flat Tax Act, gradually eliminating the cap on the payroll tax, cutting funding for weapons systems and eliminating fraud and waste in all departments. "If we don't stop the reckless spending of Republicans, we're going to continue to borrow hundreds of billions of dollars, much of it from people who aren't our friends, and pay hundreds of billions in interest to them," Herr said.

Load-Date: October 12, 2006


End of Document