Pitt gets frenzy of threats as terrorism task force joins probe
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
April 6, 2012 Friday


Copyright 2012 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 349 words
Byline: Bill Vidonic
Body


Hours  after U.S. Attorney David J. Hickton said Pittsburgh's Joint Terrorism  Task Force is investigating the recent rash of bomb threats at the  University  of Pittsburgh campus, a frenzy of new threats began. 
Shortly  after 4:30 p.m., the university sent out an emergency alert saying, "A  general bomb threat has been received for the Cathedral of Learning.  Please  evacuate the building." At 6:15 p.m., another alert said: "A general  bomb threat has been received for Lothrop, Holland, Forbes and  Sutherland halls." 
A search of Lothrop Hall ended shortly after 8:30 p.m. and students were allowed to return. Sutherland Hall reopened about an hour later and students were allowed back in Holland Hall around 10:30 p.m. 
There  have now been 31 building threats on the campus in Oakland since  mid-February. All of the previous threats have been hoaxes. 
"The  safety and welfare of the University of Pittsburgh community is a top  priority," Hickton said in a prepared statement this morning. "The bomb  threats  since Feb. 13 are being vigorously, aggressively and thoroughly  investigated through every possible means." 
The threats have been written in bathrooms or emailed to university officials and local newspaper reporters. 
The  Joint Terrorism Task Force, according to the FBI's website, is a  cooperative effort of federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies  that work  to prevent acts of international and domestic terrorism and to maintain  an intelligence network to identify terrorism subjects. 
Members  include the Secret Service, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms  and Explosives, FBI, state police, Allegheny County police and sheriff's  departments  and Pittsburgh Police. 
"We  cannot comment upon the specifics of the investigation, but, we will  continue to work cooperatively and aggressively in partnership with the  University  of Pittsburgh and the FBI to investigate this criminal activity and to  enforce the law," Hickton said. 
Anyone with information about the bomb threats is asked to call the FBI at 412-432-4000. Pitt also offers a $50,000 reward. 

Load-Date: April 6, 2012


End of Document