Plane makes crash landing at sea, killing at least 13; Official in Palermo says terrorism can be ruled out
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 7, 2005 Sunday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a8
Length: 287 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ROME
Body


A Tunisian passenger plane carrying 39 people crash-landed in the Mediterranean Sea on Saturday while trying to make an emergency landing in Sicily because of engine trouble, and at least 13 people were killed, officials said. Three others were missing.
Palermo Prosecutor Piero Grasso told The Associated Press that 23 people survived and were taken off rescue boats on stretchers at Palermo's port. Some survivors clung to the plane's wings in rough seas while waiting for rescuers to arrive, media reports said.
Grasso said 13 people were confirmed dead and three were missing. He said the toll of 19 he reported earlier was based on overlapping information from several rescue groups, including the fire department, coast guard and border police.
"There are no bodies in the wreckage," Grasso said.
He added that the fuselage of the ATR-72 was being towed to shore.
Palermo port official Vincenzo Pace told SKY TG24 TV that some bodies were found several miles from the wreckage, apparently having been carried away in rough seas.
Nine survivors were reported in serious condition. At least three crew members survived.
Grasso said the twin-propeller plane was forced to make a water landing about eight miles off Sicily because of a "technical problem" that was being investigated by authorities and Italy's ENAV air safety agency.
"We can rule out terrorism," Grasso said.
The plane left Bari, Italy, on its way to Djerba, Tunisia. It was operated by Tuninter, an affiliate of Tunisair, the national airline of Tunisia. Tuninter said it had no immediate word on victims.
"The plane had engine problems and was trying to (emergency) land in Palermo and had to land in the sea," ENAV spokeswoman Nicoletta Tommessile told the AP.

Graphic

 
AP Photo

Load-Date: August 7, 2005


End of Document