PLANE FLOWN BY TEEN HITS SKYSCRAPER IN FLORIDA;
 OFFICIALS SAY IT'S NOT TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 6, 2002 Sunday Early Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 458 words
Byline: Vickie Chachere The Associated Press
Body


A small plane with a student pilot took off without permission Saturday and crashed into a skyscraper after ignoring a Coast Guard helicopter's signals to land, authorities said.
Despite indications that it wasn't terrorism, the televised image of a plane blasting a hole in the side of a skyscraper was a chilling reminder of the World Trade Center attacks. The plane's tail dangled near the 20th floor of the 40-story Bank of America building.
Capt. Bill Wade of the Tampa Fire Department said there was no word yet of casualties from the aircraft, a four-seater, but he said no one was hurt in the building or on the ground.
Pinellas County Sheriff Greg Tita identified the pilot as Charles Bishop, 15, a high school student from Palm Harbor, Fla. Tita said Bishop was the only person aboard the plane.
Tita refused to say whether the teen-ager was killed. But WFLA, a local television station, reported that Bishop had died in the crash.
A government official in Washington who spoke on condition of anonymity said that at 15, the pilot was a year too young to qualify for flying solo.
Air traffic controllers at the St. Petersburg-Clearwater Airport notified the Cost Guard that the four-seat Cessna 172 had taken off without clearance, said Coast Guard St. j.g. Charlotte Pittman.
A Coast Guard helicopter intercepted the plane and attempted to give the pilot visual signals to land at a small airport, but the plane did not respond, Pittman said.
She said the plane was only a few yards from the helicopter when it was signaled to land. Pittman said she has no doubt the pilot understood what the Coast Guard helicopter was indicating.
In Portland, Ore., White House spokesman Scott McClellan said "there is no indication" of terrorism.
He said that President George W. Bush was briefed on the incident, and that White House officials had been in touch with Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge and the Federal Aviation Administration.
Wade, the fire captain, said there was no sign of any major fire at the crash site. He said firemen had reached the affected area of the building about an hour after the crash.
The streets below were quickly cleared by police. The plane's wings and other parts of the aircraft had fallen to the ground and the tail section of the plane was dangling from the building.
Eric Reyes, 25, said he had stopped at a traffic light when the plane crashed.
"I saw a big cloud of smoke," Reyes said. He said he saw one wing fall and hit the ground, followed moments later by the other wing.
The plane was said to be owned by Clearwater-based National Aviation Holding Inc.
Bank of America, based in Charlotte, N.C., is the third-largest U.S. bank. It employs about 143,000 people and service about 30 million households in 20 states.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by David Kadlubowski / Tampa Tribune - The fuselage of a single-engine plane dangles from the Bank of America building Saturday in Tampa, Fla. A 15-year-old student pilot crashed into the skyscraper after an unauthorized takeoff from St. Petersburg-Clearwater Airport.

Load-Date: January 7, 2002


End of Document