Players receive terrorism warning
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 4, 2010 Monday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 9C
Length: 455 words
Byline: JERRY ZGODA; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


NBA security officials briefed the Timberwolves at their afternoon practice in London after the U.S. State Department issued a travel alert Sunday that urges American citizens in Western Europe that Al Qaeda attacks may be looming there.
Wolves forward Kevin Love said Sunday he was worried, but not about terrorism.
"I'm worried about the Lakers," he said, referring to Monday's preseason opener against the two-time defending NBA champions at the O2 Arena.
An NBA communications official released a statement Sunday that said the league has been in contact with the State Department and other federal authorities and is "taking all appropriate security measures."
Both teams were briefed at their respective practices on Sunday.
"They mentioned there was that threat, but it's nothing that we need to be really worried about," Love said. "You have to be aware of everything around you -- mind your P's and Q's -- but there's no need to worry about it."
Show time
Ten days after they held their first training-camp practice in Mankato, the Wolves meet their first real opponent on Monday. And what an opponent it is, even if Lakers center Andrew Bynum is injured and the minutes of Kobe Bryant and Lamar Odom likely will be carefully measured.
So ... are the Wolves ready?
"We'll find out," Wolves coach Kurt Rambis said. "Our guys are competing [in practices]. I like that. They're getting after it, they like to compete. I enjoy that. There will be a certain amount of erratic play because guys are going to be nervous and excited about the game.
"I expect fouls and disorganization, but I want to see them play hard. We'll put different lineups on the floor and see how they fit together."
Resting up
Rambis allowed players to sleep in some on Sunday and recover from a long trip from Minnesota and a six-hour time change. They gathered for an early afternoon practice and then had the rest of the day to rest or explore London on their own.
"Our guys are still tired, their sleep patterns are still off," Rambis said. "Will they be back to normal [by Monday night's opening tip]? No. They'll probably be in sync with Europe the day we play in Paris [Wednesday night against New York] and then leave. That's the day they'll be in sync."
Etc.
-The Knicks opened NBA preseason play by beating European club Armani Jeans Milano 125-113 Sunday night in Milan, Italy. Amare Stoudemire scored 32 points and Danilo Gallinari had 24 points in a return to his hometown. The Wolves and Knicks play Wednesday in Paris.
-Rambis on his caricature that was painted on the wall of the Palm Restaurant in London and greeted him when the Wolves and Lakers dined there Saturday night: "It was a lot better looking. I wish I looked like my picture. I had hair."

Load-Date: October 7, 2010


End of Document