Plea deal for Somali terrorism suspect; Kamal Said Hassan, 24, of Plymouth, is linked to the recruitment of Somali youth.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
August 13, 2009 Thursday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3B
Length: 525 words
Byline: JAMES WALSH, RICHARD MERYHEW, STAFF WRITERS
Body


A third man pleaded guilty Wednesday to terror-related charges stemming from a federal investigation into Americans traveling to Somalia to fight with Islamic militants.
Kamal Said Hassan, 24, acknowledged lying to FBI agents in February about the case and admitted spending time at a training camp run in Somalia by Al-Shabaab, a group designated by the U.S. government as a terrorist group linked to Al-Qaida.
Hassan, of Plymouth, admitted Wednesday to a federal judge in Minneapolis that he had liedwhen he told federal agents that he had traveled directly to Yemen after spending time in the training camp. He told U.S. District Judge James Rosenbaum that he had fought with Al-Shabaab in Somalia.
Hassan also admitted concealing the identities of people he associated with in Minnesota and Somalia.
The sweeping federal investigation into the recruitment of up to 20 Somalis from the Twin Cities to fight in a civil war in their homeland is one of the most far-reaching counterterrorism probes since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in 2001.
Two other men -- Abdifatah Isse, of Seattle, and Salah Ahmed, of Brooklyn Park -- pleaded guilty to providing material support to terror groups after each returned to Somalia and trained with Al-Shabaab.
The government's case against Hassan dates back months but was made clear for the first time Wednesday, when his Feb. 18 plea, previously kept under seal, was made public.
Hassan returned to the United States last winter, apparently after having a change of heart about his activities, several Somali community sources told the Star Tribune in March.
FBI special agent E.K. Wilson declined Wednesday to comment about how or why Hassan returned. Other details of Hassan's case were not available, as much of his court file remained sealed.
Hassan waved to his family briefly before deputy U.S. marshals led him from the courtroom. His family declined to comment as they left the courthouse.
Hassan's attorney, Manny Atwal, said she could not comment about the case.
"I'm concerned about my client's safety,'' she said.
Hassan is believed to have been one of seven or eight local Somali men to have returned to Somalia in late 2007 or early 2008. Two others who left about that time -- Shirwa Ahmed, 26, and Zakaria Maruf, 30 -- have since died there.
Ahmed blew himself up in a suicide attack in Somalia in October 2008. Maruf died in early July during intense fighting in the Somali capital of Mogadishu. The circumstances of his death remain unclear.
Two other Minneapolis men who left for Somalia late in 2008 also were killed there this summer.
Burhan Hassan, 18, died in early June after he apparently was shot in the head for refusing an order, his mother has said.
Jamal Bana, 20, a former student at Minneapolis Community and Technical College, was killed in early July. His family learned of his fate after stumbling onto a Somali website that contained photos of his corpse. As with Hassan, it appeared Bana had been shot in the head.
Staff writer Allie Shah contributed to this report.
The Associated Press contributed to this report. jim.walsh@startribune.com - 612-673-7428 richm@startribune.com - 612-673-4425

Load-Date: August 13, 2009


End of Document