Please, Bam, give us truth
Daily News (New York)
September 12, 2016 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 737 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


Dear Mr. President:
We are all mothers, fathers, wives, husbands or children who lost loved ones in the cruel and devastating attack on America 15 years ago Sunday.
We miss them. And we grieve at what they have missed in lives cut short by terrorists whose immediate targets were innocents and whose ongoing target is everything America has stood for, fought for and promised to protect and defend since our union was formed. And we anguish especially as we witness the spread of the poisonous ideology that is determined to ensure that 9/11 was only the beginning.
It is a hard day for all of us. But, as we are sure you must know, they are all hard, not just the anniversaries. For some of us, though, this anniversary is harder than any since the attack and we want you to understand why.
We and so many other families have fought for years to know all of the truth about 9/11. We have fought to ensure that anyone and any entity that may have had a responsible role in the murder of 3,000 people in New York, at the Pentagon and across a field in Pennsylvania is held to account for their actions. And, we have struggled to make sure that our laws - and those who are sworn to uphold them - leave nothing undone in our battle against terrorism.
The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act addresses a missing piece of America's anti-terrorism campaign - a piece that is missing because of grievously errant misconstructions of earlier laws meant to ensure that the families of Americans harmed or killed as a result of terrorist attacks with respect to which foreign governments may be complicit will be able to seek justice in our courts. That right is important for our nation, because it will help to deter state-sponsored terrorism. It will help uncover truth, such as the mysteries surrounding the ability of 19 hijackers - barely educated, not speaking much English and without visible resources - to come to America, learn to fly, set up camps in several cities and hijack four commercial airliners, crashing them spectacularly into the heart of our government and the heart of our economy.
You have had your differences with us about JASTA. And we have been supportive of the reasonable efforts Congress has made to address your misgivings. But, now, Congress has acted, and the result is legislation that both the United States Senate and the House of Representatives passed without a single dissenting voice.
JASTA will be delivered to you soon, perhaps Monday. And, here lies the reason this anniversary is made even harder than past ones: We don't know what you will do. We are left to wait, to hear remembrances and reassurances and regrets.
Mr. President, we don't need your comfort. We have each other. We don't need words - other than the words, "I will sign JASTA into law when it reaches my desk." We need those words and a simple action - the stroke of the only pen that can give us and the American people the assurance they need that your foreign policy and your defense of this great nation include a determination that truth be our guidepost, that victims of terrorist attacks also have rights in our courts and that the justice delayed for the 9/11 families will not become justice denied.
Please, Mr. President, don't slam the door shut and abandon us. We need the executive branch to join Congress and protect us and all future victims of terrorism. Please sign JASTA.
Sincerely,
Terry Strada, widow of Tom Strada, north tower
Sylvia Carver, sister of Sharon Carver, Pentagon
Veronica Carver, sister of Sharon Carver, Pentagon
Bill Doyle, father of Joseph Doyle, north tower
Gordon Haberman, father of Andrea Haberman, north tower
Alice Hoagland, mother of Mark Bingham, Flight 93
Emanuel Lipscomb, survivor, civilian rescuer, New York City
Marge Mathers, widow of Charles W. Mathers, north tower
Ellen Saracini, widow of Capt. Victor Saracini, pilot of Flight 175
Kristen Breitweiser, widow of Ronald Breitweiser, south tower
Curtis F. Brewer, widower of Carol K. Demitz, south tower
Gail Eagleson, widow of John B. Eagleson, south tower
Lisa Friedman, widow of Andrew Friedman from World Trade Center
Tim Frolich, personal injury survivor, north tower
Monica Gabrielle, widow of Richard Gabrielle, south tower
John Jermayn, personal injury survivor, FDNY
Mindy Kleinberg, widow of Alan Kleinberg, north tower
Kathy Owens, widow of Peter J. Owens Jr., north tower
Charles G. Wolf, widower of Katherine Wolf, north tower

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: September 13, 2016


End of Document