PLO TO PAY KLINGHOFFERS IN SUIT OVER FATAL CRUISE SHIP HIJACKING
Daily News (New York)
August 12, 1997, Tuesday


Copyright 1997 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  6
Length: 421 words
Byline: By GREG B. SMITH
Body


The Palestine Liberation Organization has settled a lawsuit with the family of Leon Klinghoffer, the tourist shot in his wheelchair and pushed from the cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985.
Without admitting responsibility for Klinghoffer's death, the PLO will pay an unspecified amount of cash to his survivors as part of the secret deal, both sides said.
"Both parties have agreed not to reveal [the amount]," said the PLO's lawyer, former Attorney General Ramsey Clark.
A spokeswoman said the family of the slain tourist whose killing awoke many Americans to the horrors of Mideast terrorism was relieved the legal fight was over.
"They're pleased that it's finally been resolved," said long-time family friend and spokeswoman Letty Simon. "It is an amicable settlement."
A travel agency that handled the Klinghoffers' ill-fated vacation, Crown Travel of Massachusetts, also received an unspecified payment in the secret pact.
"It's been a long road," said Rodney Gould, attorney for the travel agency. "I can't tell you the amount of the settlement because it's under seal."
The deal appeared to eliminate an agreement in principle for the PLO to fund an institute in Klinghoffer's name "designed for peace studies aimed at the prevention of terrorism."
"That was something we were very hopeful about, but I think it fell along the wayside," Clark said. "Its viability depended upon support, and the continued difficulties in the peace process insured that such support would be problematic."
Klinghoffer, 69, and his wife, Marilyn, took a cruise to the Mediterranean aboard the Achille Lauro in October 1985.
On Oct. 8, four terrorists tied to the PLO took the passengers hostage, shot Klinghoffer in the head and pushed him overboard.
Terrorist Abu Abbas was sentenced in absentia to life in prison by Italian authorities. He remains at large and was seen attending a meeting of PLO officials this year.
A month after Klinghoffer's killing, his daughters, Lisa and Ilsa, took the unprecedented step of holding an organization accountable for an act of terrorism by suing in Manhattan Federal Court. In 1990, Judge Louis Stanton ruled that the PLO could be sued.
After a drawn-out legal battle, the PLO and Jay Fisher, the attorney for the Klinghoffer estate, met this summer and reached a secret agreement two weeks ago, one month before the case was to go to trial.
Brian Jenkins, a terrorism expert for Kroll Associates, said the settlement shows the PLO wants to improve its image with the American public: "This is public relations."

Load-Date: August 12, 1997


End of Document