PLO'S TWO-STAGE PLAN TO ANNIHILATE ISRAEL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 5, 1989, THURSDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 546 words
Byline: George Will COLUMN
Body


WASHINGTON Nine months after a diplomatic debacle, the United States is in danger of making matters worse. The Bush administration may well pick up where the Reagan administration left off in appeasing the Palestine Liberation Organization. The question is: What will happen if Yasser Arafat requests a visa to visit his kindred spirits, of which there are all too many, at the United Nations?  Late last autumn, to enable it to do what it had long wanted to do - deal directly with the PLO - the State Department became Arafat's lyricist, coaxing him to sing the right (well, the State Department's idea of the right) words.  The three U.S. conditions were recognition of Israel, acceptance of U.N.  Resolution 242 and renunciation of terrorism. The PLO did none of the three, but feigned agonies of surrender, so the State Department ruled that it had done all three.  The PLO slightly softened its rhetoric of implacable hostility toward Israel, hostility still enshrined in the PLO covenant, which declares Palestine ''indivisible'' and vows ''elimination of Zionism in Palestine.'' The PLO accepted Resolution 242 (as the PLO misconstrues it to require complete withdrawal to the 1967 borders). But the PLO accepted 242 in the context of relevant U.N. resolutions. These - ''Zionism is racism,'' and the rest - have the cumulative meaning of mandating Israel's destruction.  Today, as 10 months ago, the PLO, speaking to its constituencies, reassures them that its diplomatic maneuvers are merely part of a phased approach to the liquidation of Israel.
The two-stage, two-state strategy is to reduce Israel to indefensible borders by means of a PLO satrapy on the West Bank, and then use violence.  Regarding terrorism, the PLO said: We never have used it, we promise to stop using it and attacks against Israelis are not terrorism. Since then, the PLO has increased terrorism in three ways. There have been more attacks across the border, including squads from the Fatah faction. PLO radio from Baghdad incites and praises terrorism within pre-1967 Israel, such as plunging an Israeli bus into a ravine. And there has been a sharp increase in murders of moderate Palestinians - 89 so far - on the West Bank.  Concerning whether the PLO is a terrorist organization, the State Department's position is: It cannot be such an organization because we are talking with it and we are not allowed to talk with terrorists. The point of the PLO ''umbrella'' structure is to allow appeasement-minded Westerners to say they cannot trace a thread of responsibility for Palestinian terrorism.  Six months ago, Arafat reaffirmed the PLO goal of ''the complete liberation of the Palestinian soil and the establishment of a Palestinian state over every part of it.'' Five months ago the head of the PLO's Political Department said: ''We shall pitch our tent in those places which our bullets can reach. .  . . This tent shall then form the base from which we shall later pursue the next phase.'' The Bush administration, which prides itself on believing that all differences are splitable, cannot imagine implacability, and therefore cannot recognize it in the PLO. Or so say critics, who hope they are not proven correct by a visa for Arafat.  Copyright 1989 Washington Post Writers Group

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document