Plotted attacks on rails fan fears
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
May 7, 2011 Saturday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 504 words
Byline: Carl Prine
Body


Acting on intelligence seized during the raid on terrorist mastermind  Osama bin Laden's Pakistan compound, the Department of Homeland  Security has warned the nation's freight and passenger rail lines that  al-Qaida was plotting to derail trains in major American cities. 
Digital files retrieved from Sunday's SEAL Team 6 assault on bin  Laden's Abbottabad mansion showed that terrorists were in the early  stages of fomenting plans for assaults on the U.S. rail network,  possibly slated to coincide with the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11,  2001, attacks or in February 2012. 
A similar bulletin to law enforcement issued Monday by the FBI warned  of possible reprisal attacks by terrorists loyal to bin Laden. 
While urging freight rail companies, Amtrak passenger trains and  other rail operations to "remain vigilant," a Homeland Security  statement issued Wednesday has stressed that the plot "is based on  initial reporting, which is often misleading or inaccurate and subject  to change." 
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano stopped short of hiking  the threat level on the National Terrorism Advisory System, a decision  that drew criticism from Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, the powerful  minority leader of the Homeland Security Committee. 
"Earlier this week, I urged the Secretary of Homeland Security to  increase the threat level, at least for the next two weeks, while an  intelligence assessment is conducted of the data seized from Osama bin  Laden's compound and as a precautionary measure given the possibility of  a retaliatory attack," Collins said in a statement issued to the  Tribune-Review. 
Homeland Security did not return messages from the Trib seeking  comment about the senator's concerns. 
The department's Transportation Security Administration, however,  told the Trib that more than 200 surface security inspectors are working  closely with freight and mass transit carriers nationwide to ramp up  protection. 
Amtrak's Downtown passenger terminal in Pittsburgh is at "a  heightened state of vigilance," said department spokeswoman Danelle  Hunter, and railroad police are now tied into joint terrorism task  forces nationwide and prepared to respond to threats. 
Western Pennsylvania's top rail freight carriers ? Norfolk Southern  and CSX ? remain mum on specifics but said they also were cooperating  with federal authorities. More than 139,000 tanker cars of chemicals or  petroleum products annually begin or end their journey on Pennsylvania's  5,760 miles of track, according to the state's Department of  Transportation and the Association of American Railroads. 
The most lethal of those cargoes ? potentially catastrophic  shipments of explosives or poison gases ? were the focus of a Trib  investigation in 2007. The newspaper found chemicals and explosives  stored in unprotected cars on rail lines here and in highly populated  parts of Georgia, Washington, California and Nevada. Homeland Security  and the major carriers say they have since resolved those security  issues. 

Load-Date: May 7, 2011


End of Document