PLUM STUDENTS WEIGH PLUSES, MINUSES OF TAKING ACTION AGAINST TERRORISTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 13, 1998, Sunday,
VOICES EAST EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: METRO,; YOUNG OPINION
Length: 277 words
Body


Correspondent Michelle Croyle asked students at Plum Senior High School: ''Do you think the attacks by American cruise missiles on bases in Afghanistan and Sudan are an effective way to combat terrorism?''
''Yes, but why wasn't terrorism combated after the Oklahoma building was bombed, and hundreds of lives were taken, and when it was on American soil? Not as many Americans were killed in Afghanistan, but Clinton was so quick to strike.
Was it in America's interest to bomb Afghanistan, or was it to get the heat off of Clinton?''
 
Paul Letzetter, 17
''I guess you could classify it as a significant step toward combating terrorism, but the motives behind such action seem diluted. The attack was more than warranted, and the message to terrorists worldwide was very clear. However, the use of military force to divert the public's attention from domestic moral issues doesn't sit well with me.''
 
Tom McCarthy, 18
''No, because I don't think violence really solves anything. I'm sure that we could have responded differently than just bombing them back. That really didn't solve anything.''
 
Becky Paul, 15
''By bombing them, we are stooping to their level. It would have been better to talk things out with them, and then hopefully innocent people wouldn't have died.''
 
Christina Pampena, 15
''Absolutely. Terrorists don't really respond to much reason and logic. This was a good way to get their attention.''
 
John Ajay, 17
''No, because I believe it has made the problem worse. Since we have bombed the terrorist bases, we have just fueled their reasons for hating us. Also, now they wish to spread their anti-American feelings across the Middle East.''
Doug Russell, 16

Graphic

 
PHOTOS (6), PHOTOS: (no caption for any)

Load-Date: September 17, 1998


End of Document