PNC PARK DISASTER DRILL WILL HAVE CAST OF THOUSANDS;
 MOCK TERRORISM TO TEST REGIONAL AUTHORITIES' RESPONSE TO PANDEMONIUM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 26, 2004 Thursday
SOONER EDITION  Correction Appended


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 635 words
Byline: JONATHAN D. SILVER, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE
Body


Local authorities yesterday began planning in earnest for a September real-time terrorism drill at PNC Park by participating in a "table-top" exercise that involved two explosions and the mock dispersal of a deadly nerve agent.
 While the daylong disaster preparedness scenario at the Allegheny County Emergency Operations Center in Point Breeze was largely off-limits to media coverage, Mayor Tom Murphy offered a few details about the upcoming drill during a news conference.
 The goal is to use actors -- Pirates fans in this case -- to approximate full-scale pandemonium in an effort to test plans for mass evacuation at a large, public site under siege.
 It is hoped that the PNC Park drill will employ thousands of volunteers -- perhaps as many as 15,000 -- compared with mere hundreds of actors used in other such exercises around the country.
"This goes to another scale," Murphy said.
 "I think it's going to be a pretty ground-breaking event," Raymond DeMichiei, Pittsburgh's deputy director of emergency management, said after the table-top session.
 The logistics of the stadium exercise are still being worked out, so authorities could not say what day it will occur or what incentives will be given to Pirates fans to participate.
 But DeMichiei said the event will be similar to the table-top exercise, which began with a suspicious package being discovered in PNC Park's left field rotunda during a playoff game against the Philadelphia Phillies.
 In the scenario, the package was deemed to be a bomb, and an evacuation was ordered.
 With 12,000 fans already outside 15 minutes after they began streaming from the ballpark, two vans exploded in one of the stadium's parking lots, spewing deadly nerve gas into the air.
 People outside tried to get back in the stadium, while those inside were still trying to get out.
 By day's end, 35 people were dead, 143 were hospitalized, 230 were treated and released and hundreds more were decontaminated.
 "It's all a testing of our ability to respond," Murphy said. "The goal of this exercise is to be sure we understand what it means to communicate well, to coordinate."
 Also attending the news conference were county Chief Executive Dan Onorato and Kevin McClatchy, the Pirates managing general partner and chief executive officer.
 Down the hall from the news conference, more than 200 city, county, state, federal, military and private sector officials gathered in the county's "situation room," a state-of-the-art facility, for the beginning of the table-top exercise.
 The federal Department of Homeland Security conceived of drills involving Major League Baseball because games are high-profile events that draw large crowds.
 A table-top exercise was performed in October for Oriole Park at Camden Yards in Baltimore, but not on the same scale as yesterday's session, said Michael Forgy, branch chief for state and local exercises in homeland security's Office for Domestic Preparedness.
 It is hoped that PNC Park will be the first professional ballpark to be used for a drill in which emergency personnel are deployed.
 The exercise will cost in excess of $100,000, to be funded by federal and state grants. Forgy said a successful drill will pave the way for scenarios to be played out at baseball stadiums throughout the country.
 The Department of Homeland Security has been in contact with the National Football League for similar exercises, and officials from the Steelers' home, Heinz Field, were observing yesterday's exercise.
 Forgy said there have been no perceived or known threats to any ballpark, but the government wanted to prepare for the possibility of a terrorist strike on sites of mass gatherings.
 "Though it's a topic that nobody's excited about, in the long run, the more we understand, the more lives we can potentially save," McClatchy said.

Notes

Staff writer Michael A. Fuoco contributed. Jonathan D. Silver can be reached at jsilver@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1962. /  
Correction

2004.< The last name of Pittsburgh police Chief Robert W. McNeilly Jr. was misspelled in a photo caption in yesterday's editions.
Correction-Date: February 27, 2004

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Darrell Sapp/Post Gazette: Pittsburgh Police Chief Robert McNeilly listens to Pirates officials yesterday in the situation room at the Allegheny County Emergency Operations Center in Point Breeze.  The group was meeting to plan a terrorism drill at PNC Park. The drill will involve two mock explosions and the mock dispersal of nerve agents. 

Load-Date: February 27, 2004


End of Document