Point/Counterpoint: Should drones be used in the war on terror?
Anchor: Rhode Island College
November 25, 2015 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS-3; Pg. 1
Length: 633 words
Body


Josh Estrella vs. Shane Inman
Josh: Using drones to combat terrorism in the Middle East is neither effective nor humane. These extrajudicial executions carried out by the United States are done without any type of trial and the collateral damage from drone strikes has slaughtered innocent men, women and children, with the Bureau of Investigative Journalism stating drone strikes have resulted in more deaths than the 9/11 attack.
Shane: First, let's get this whole "trial" thing out of the way. In war, there are not, and cannot be, trials before every pull of the trigger; if someone is deemed with reasonable certainty to be a threat (as drone targets are), it is completely legitimate to attempt to kill them. As for the collateral damage: yes, drones kill innocent people, but so does every single other type of military strike. Civilian casualties are an unavoidable tragedy of war, and drone strikes are actually instrumental in avoiding future carnage.
Josh: I'm glad that you mentioned war. The United States Congress has not issued a declaration of war since 1941 and yet, without the approval of Congress, and shrouded mostly in secrecy, the president has carried out countless assassinations. I also fail to see the logic in your claim that it is legitimate to kill them, or how it will hinder terrorism in any way. What is so terrifying about terrorism, ISIS specifically, is that it is an idea. Slaughtering "militants" in the Middle East will not stop ISIS. If every ISIS member died today there would be more tomorrow, these drone strikes are acts of terror in themselves that create more terrorists.
Shane: The issue of war declarations is a whole other rabbit hole, which encompasses all our military actions and extends way beyond drone strikes, so I'm gonna leave that alone for right now. As for the rest, yes, it's hard to fight an idea, but precision drone strikes are a better way of doing this than any other method. A ground war mostly kills disposable insurgents, bombs take out non-existent infrastructure, but drones are able to target and eliminate terrorist leaders. Is it a foolproof way to stop ISIS? Of course not, but if anything will work, it's the assassination of the organization's leadership.
Josh: No, precision drone strikes are absolutely not the best method. And I am also not suggesting we combat terrorism with ground warfare or bombing as the slaughtering of many is not what will bring an end to ISIS. In fact, even drone operators have admitted that the drone strikes which result in countless deaths of innocents have acted as a driving force for terrorists like ISIS. Which brings up a major issue of drones: accuracy. We do not know who we are killing. Even if killing their leaders was effective, which it is not, we have failed constantly at killing actual enemies.
Shane: Fair enough, I don't doubt that ISIS uses the aftermath of drone strikes to recruit (although I think they would use any type of attack we made, drone or not). What I do wonder is: if you think we shouldn't use troops, bombs, or drones to combat ISIS, how do you suggest we fight them? The fact of the matter is, we have limited options in this situation, and drones are the lesser of the evils available to us.
Josh: Billions, if not trillions, of dollars has been spent on the "war on terror", yet our tactics have made us no closer to stopping terrorism than the day we started. My suggestion for fighting terrorism: nonviolence. Bettering education systems and assisting with social and economic development programs in countries known for terrorism. This method won't be instantaneous, and it will not necessarily stop all terrorism. But it is a more productive step forward, and a foot in the direction of stopping the U.S. from being terrorists themselves.
Follow and like us:

Load-Date: November 25, 2015


End of Document