Poindexter's new caldron;
Senators suspect admiral in terrorism wager plan
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 31, 2003 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 617 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- Lawmakers who uncovered the controversial Pentagon plan for a terrorism futures market are following the trail further, checking for signs of John Poindexter.
Was Poindexter --- a Naval officer who was a major figure in the Iran-Contra scandal of the 1980s --- involved? It is a question that continues to surface as Congress investigates the now-dismantled plans for the program in which traders would have speculated on the prospect of future terrorist activities.
"We believe that he was responsible for it," Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D., one of the senators whose revelation of the program led to its demise, said Wednesday. "But we've asked for an investigation. We've asked the Pentagon to explain to us who was accountable, who was responsible. I think those who were responsible for doing this ought not be on the public payroll."
AJC
At a Tuesday hearing on Iraq, Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) asked Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz to identify who was responsible for the proposed Policy Analysis Market, which has drawn criticism from lawmakers in both political parties. The program was envisioned as a Web-based market that Defense officials said could help forecast catastrophic events.
When Wolfowitz replied that he didn't know, Nelson, who has been critical of Poindexter in the past, shot back: "Is it Admiral Poindexter?"
Poindexter, a 66-year-old retired admiral who served as President Ronald Reagan's national security adviser, is no stranger to controversy. He found himself in its company in the 1980s. It has reappeared since he joined a Defense Department research agency after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
Poindexter was at the center of a storm when critics began to focus on his data-mining project called Total Information Awareness late last year.
The program, renamed Terrorism Information Awareness, involves a massive effort to search for terrorists by analyzing vast volumes of data on individuals. Poindexter brought the idea to defense officials after Sept. 11, and it landed him the position at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
Public interest groups spoke out against the project, citing privacy concerns. Poindexter was denounced on the floor of Congress but defended at the White House and the Pentagon. He even became the subject of the "John Poindexter Awareness Office" on the Web that urged people to send in information about him, such as sightings and personal items he purchases.
Poindexter, described by acquaintances as quiet and reserved, gained national attention, along with his aide, Lt. Col. Oliver North, when the Iran-Contra scandal broke in 1986. Iran-Contra was a tangled foreign-policy affair that involved covert arms sales to Iran and illicit diversion of funds to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Poindexter's convictions for charges that included lying to Congress were overturned on appeal when the court determined that his congressional testimony, given under a grant of immunity, was improperly used against him. His fall came after a career that had risen steadily.
Poindexter graduated first in his class at the Naval Academy in 1958 and later earned a doctorate in nuclear physics from the California Institute of Technology. In the Navy, he achieved the rank of vice admiral and served Navy secretaries at the Pentagon before going to the White House. He is said to be a computer expert as well.
The Pentagon research agency where Poindexter works, known by its acronym, DARPA, is involved in a vast array of high-tech projects and works closely with numerous research universities and businesses. It was started after the Soviets launched Sputnik in 1958 and played a major role in the development of the Internet.

Graphic

 
Photo: Sen. Byron Dorgan (D-N.D.) points to an example of a Defense Department Web site that he and Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) (left) say would have allowed investors to trade on "futures" in terrorism events they think are likely to happen. / From DARPA Web site; Photo: John Poindexter was a central figure in the Iran-Contra affair in the 1980s.

Load-Date: July 31, 2003


End of Document