Point man on terrorism knows security issues
USA TODAY
May 22, 1998, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1203 words
Byline: M.J. Zuckerman
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON
For more than two years, federal officials have engaged in a sometimes
bitter debate over who is supposed to coordinate the nation's
counterterrorism efforts.
Today, President Clinton will announce that person is Richard
Clarke -- the little-known career State Department official he's
naming to the newly created post of national coordinator for security.
Clarke, 47, spurns the title "terrorism czar," which some have
dubbed his new role. He won't have that kind of power, he says,
and he insists he will "facilitate," not supervise.
Still, his appointment marks the first formal centralization of
federal counterterrorism efforts, which now involve more than
40 federal agencies and at least $ 7 billion in spending. And it
underscores the importance placed on counterterrorism.
In an exclusive interview with USA TODAY, Clarke sums up the threat:
"Our military superiority . . . forces potential future opponents
to look for ways to attack us other than traditional, direct military
attacks.
"How do you do that? Through truck bombs. Through nerve gas attacks
on populated areas. Through biological attacks in populated areas.
You do it by sitting back in your own country, getting on the
telephone lines or the Internet, hacking your way into the command
structure for our private sector -- telephones, power, banking
and financing -- and destroying them as surely as if you'd dropped
a bomb on them. "
A 20-year veteran of the State Department and White House, Clarke
has been in charge of coordinating policy during some of the Clinton
administration's most complex national security confrontations,
including the military deployment in Haiti and the withdrawal
from Somalia. He directed U.S. policy in the peacekeeping missions
in Bosnia and ran the campaign to dump Boutros Boutros-Ghali as
head of the United Nations.
Today he is regarded as second only to national security adviser
Sandy Berger in the White House national security apparatus.
Yet few have heard of him.
"The job of a National Security Council staff person is to remain
behind the scenes," Clarke says. "However, part of being national
coordinator is being a spokesperson on these issues, and that's
one job I'll do."
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright discovered Clarke when she
was directing Clinton's national security transition team in 1992-1993,
and kept him on as the only NSC hold-over from the Bush administration.
He provided "continuity" to the new administration, he says.
Others say privately that he held the place together while the
new administration was getting up to speed.
Those experiences, he says, are what has prepared him for a tricky
new post that lacks explicit power.
"The national coordinator will have a great deal of access to
senior levels of government -- access but not authority," Clarke
says. "The national coordinator's only weapon . . . will be persuasion."
Focused on teamwork
Building cooperation, as well as gracefully twisting arms, are
widely regarded as Clarke's specialties.
Preparing the nation for the future of terrorism "requires the
pairing of odd bedfellows," he says.
"You need the Public Health Service to work with the Department
of Energy. Normally, that pairing doesn't occur. Even agencies
. . . such as the FBI and CIA require a little better assistance
at cooperating.
"I think I've gained a reputation as being able to bring together
diverse teams to fix problems," he says.
His low profile apparently helps, and it's been very, very low
-- all but invisible, even inside Washington.
A recent computerized search of 8,500 major news outlets worldwide
over the past 10 years turned up just 43 mentions of Clarke. Just
14 of those were anything beyond a passing reference; only five
had his name more than once.
But Clarke has been busy.
Since the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, just weeks after
Clinton took office, there has been growing awareness by the administration
of the threat of terrorism.
Clarke says he watched as awareness turned to deep concern during
the summer of 1996, when there was a terrorist bombing at the
Atlanta Olympics and the crash of TWA Flight 800 -- wrongly assumed
for months to be an act of terrorism.
In a flurry of activity that followed those incidents, military
officials, law enforcement authorities and White House study groups
concluded there was a lack of coordination of the many levels
of federal response to a domestic terrorist incident.
There also was some outright tension among the players, notably
the departments of Justice and Defense, the FBI and the CIA, each
of which felt it should be in charge.
In fact, the FBI and Pentagon remain at a standoff over such things
as who picks up the tab when the military helps the FBI gather
intelligence or return a fugitive terrorism suspect for trial.
"We can't let the terrorism program become like the drug program,"
says Bob Blitzer, supervisor of the FBI's Domestic Terrorism/Counter-Terrorism
Planning Section. "There's a lot of money and a lot of turf-fighting
out there."
Blitzer, however, is among a chorus of senior officials who speak
of Clarke as someone they believe can sort out the mess.
"Dick is someone we have a long history with," Blitzer says.
"He runs great meetings, he's very focused on the key issues
and listens to all of us. Most important, he doesn't force anything,
but finds consensus."
One such meeting, on July 17, 1996, began within 90 minutes of
the crash of TWA Flight 800 and lasted until well after sunrise.
Using the government's Secure Video-Teleconferencing System, Clarke
moderated the continuous discussions between top officials of
the NSC, intelligence agencies, law enforcement and the departments
of Transportation, State and Defense.
Criticized earlier
But as recently as a few months ago, feelings toward Clarke like
those expressed by Blitzer weren't so warm.
Earlier this year, officials across a wide spectrum of government,
including Justice, Defense and Energy, fired off angry letters
to the White House expressing deep reservations about Clarke's
new counterterrorism apparatus. They feared it would enable the
NSC, a policy-making body, to "go operational."
The last time that happened was when Lt. Col. Oliver North, while
assigned to the NSC, began selling arms to "moderate Iranians"
and sending the profits to rebels in Nicaragua.
The Presidential Decision Directive -- the classified document
that outlines the roles, lines of authority and agencies created
in the new war on terrorism -- was seen as giving the coordinator
too much oversight.
"You really have to be paranoid to get there," Clarke says.
But to blunt critics, language was added "that says what is already
the case: That the national coordinator shall not direct agencies,"
and he offers a personal pledge to have no role in supervising
or budgeting.
"Each agency has specific assignments and roles and missions.
So for whatever function you mention, I can tell you who's in
charge. And it's never the NSC."
The State Department is the lead agency on any terrorist attack
involving Americans overseas; Justice is in charge domestically.
Defense and the CIA have supporting roles.
But it has not gone unnoticed that Clarke's suite of offices in
the West Wing of the White House includes North's old office.
"We've checked behind the walls," Clarke says. "He left nothing
behind."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, H. Darr Beiser, USA TODAY

Load-Date: May 22, 1998


End of Document