Point: Edward Snowden is a patriot
The Current: University of Missouri - St. Louis
August 19, 2013 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 373 words
Body


- POINT-COUNTERPOINT: Is Edward Snowden a patriot or a traitor for releasing secret NSA information?
Graphic by Christian Kessler for The Current. © The Current 2012
By The Current Editorial Staff
In a free country, people deserve to know. How else are we to make decisions about what kind of country we want and what kind of government oversight we will accept?
Edward Snowden did the American people a great favor when he revealed the extent of government spying and data collection by his release of NSA data. Last week, the Washington Post published an article exposing the thousands of times the NSA overstepped their legal authority. Some congressmen who supported the original USA Patriot Act are now alarmed by the scope of what the NSA is doing.
We are now having the discussion we should have had on government surveillance. Without Snowden, none of this would be taking place, because we simply would not know.
Benjamin Franklin said that people who would trade freedom for security deserve neither. The Fourth Amendment was intended to protect Americans from an intrusive government, something with which the Founding Fathers were familiar based on government abuses in Europe. Some people felt that we were giving up a large measure of freedom with the USA Patriot Act and warned about its expansion of government powers and lack of public oversight. But the public debate on the Patriot Act largely never happened - neither when it was first passed under President Bush nor when it was renewed under President Obama.
That debate has always been hampered by the very secrecy it created. The American people deserve the right to talk about this and make our own choice. Whether we feel that the threat of terrorism is so awful, it is worth giving up our privacy, or whether we feel that keeping our freedom from government intrusion is worth running some risk of terrorism, it should be the decision of we, the people - not a few individuals in government, elected or not.
But without the knowledge of what is being done, we cannot really even have the discussion - and we would not be having that discussion if not for the actions of Edward Snowden. In the minds of those who treasure freedom, Snowden is a patriot.
© The Current 2013

Load-Date: September 18, 2013


End of Document