Poland passes privatization bill
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 1, 1993, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; WORLD DIGEST; Pg. 8A; DIGEST
Length: 579 words
Dateline: WARSAW, Poland; WASHINGTON; NICOSIA, Cyprus; PARIS; N'DJAMENA, Chad; BEIJING; ROME
Body


Parliament's lower chamber approved a mass privatization plan Friday that a  government minister said proved Poland's commitment to market reforms. The  powerful Sejm voted 215-178 with 22 abstentions to accept the bill, which  would privatize 600 state-owned enterprises. If the bill is approved by the  Senate, which is likely, and signed by President Lech Walesa, who has  advocated market reforms, Poland will become the third former Communist  country to launch a mass privatization program, after the former  Czechoslovakia and Russia. The bill calls for turning over a majority of  shares in 600 state-owned enterprises to national investment funds. Shares in  the funds will be sold to all adults. 
POLAND-PRIVATerrorism fell 
 
last year, U.S. says 
 
WASHINGTON - International terrorism in 1992 fell to its lowest level since  1975, the United States said Friday. In its annual report on patterns of  global terrorism, the State Department said Latin America for the third year  was the region most plagued by extremist incidents, and Iran was designated  the "most dangerous sponsor of state terrorism." The report counted 361  terrorist incidents in 1992 versus 567 in 1991. 
 
Iran deploys 
 
submarine in gulf 
 
NICOSIA, Cyprus - Iran deployed its Russian-made submarine, the first acquired  by any Persian Gulf state, during military exercises Friday. Iranian  television showed the Kilo-class submarine cruising at sea level in the  Persian Guilf escorted by a low-flying helicopter. Gulf Arab states and their  Western allies consider Iran's Russian-made submarine a potential security  threat in the waterway, through which most of the West's oil imports pass. 
 
Andorra becomes 
 
sovereign nation 
 
PARIS - The tiny country of Andorra, nestled between Spain and France, has  become Europe's newest sovereign state. President Francois Mitterrand signed  the country's new constitution Friday, ending a 715-year-old arrangement that  defined Andorra as a "co-principality" ruled by France and the bishop of  Urgel in Spain. The 9,123 voters in the mountain enclave - one-fifth the size  of Rhode Island - voted overwhelming for the constitution March 14. 
 
Chad admits role 
 
in civilian massacre 
 
N'DJAMENA, Chad - The Chadian government says its secret service butchered  unarmed villagers in the south, confirming reports by human rights  organizations of a massacre early this month. Over 100 people were slaughtered  in the massacre April 5, human rights groups have said. In a television  broadcast Thursday night, transitional Prime Minister Fidel Moungar said  agents of the Center for Research and Intelligence Coordination (CRCR)  involved in the killings had been arrested and would be tried. He said the  CRCR would be disbanded. Human rights groups in Chad have reported killings by  government troops in the south who are fighting a rebellion by army deserters  from the region. 
 
Elsewhere . . .
BEIJING: A train rammed a school bus at a fog-shrouded crossing Friday,  killing at least 28 children and eight adults. At least 38 people were  injured. The students and teachers were heading for an outing in Yingkou,  about 310 miles northeast of Beijing, the official Xinhua News Agency  reported.
ROME: Thousands of angry demonstrators packed historic squares in Rome and  Milan on Friday night to protest political corruption. Signs were growing,  however, that Italy's new government, which has pledged to begin the process  of political reform, would survive.

Load-Date: May 3, 1993


End of Document