Police arrest 12 after night of terror in heart of London
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 5, 2017 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1366 words
Byline:  By DANICA KIRKA, JILL LAWLESS and GREGORY KATZ Associated Press  The Washington Post contributed to this report. 
Body


THREAT LEVEL STEADY: Police believe attackers are all accounted for but fear copycat actions POLITICS IN RESPONSE: British Prime Minister Theresa May makes overtly political remarks ahead of general election TALES OF HEROISM: Brits armed with chairs, beer bottles fought back against attackers
LONDON - British police arrested a dozen people Sunday in a widening terrorism investigation after attackers using a van and large knives turned a balmy evening of nightlife into a bloodbath and killed seven people in the heart of London. The Islamic State group claimed responsibility.
Although the attackers were also dead, authorities raced to determine whether others assisted them, and Prime Minister Theresa May warned that the country faced a new threat from copycat terrorist attacks.
The country's major political parties temporarily suspended campaigning with only days to go before the general election. May said the vote would take place as scheduled Thursday because "violence can never be allowed to disrupt the democratic process."
The assault unfolded over a few terrifying minutes late Saturday, starting when a rented van veered off the road and barreled into pedestrians on busy London Bridge. Three men then got out of the vehicle with large knives and attacked people at bars and restaurants in nearby Borough Market until the men were shot dead by police.
"They went ‘This is for Allah,' and they had a woman on the floor. They were stabbing her," witness Gerard Vowls said.
Florin Morariu, a Romanian chef who works in the Bread Ahead bakery, said he saw people running and some fainting. Then two people approached another person and "began to stick the knife in ... and then I froze and I didn't know what to do."
He said he managed to get near one attacker and "hit him around the head" with a bread basket.
London police said officers killed the attackers within eight minutes of arriving at the scene. Eight officers fired some 50 rounds, said Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley, the force's head of counterterrorism.
The three attackers were wearing what appeared to be suicide belts, but the belts turned out to be fake, Rowley said.
A bystander was also wounded by the gunfire, but the civilian's injuries were not believed to be critical.
Forty-eight people, including two police officers, were treated at hospitals. Twenty-one remained in critical condition Sunday.
'A VERY NICE GUY'
Counterterrorism officers raided several addresses in Barking, an east London suburb, and arrested 12 people there Sunday, police said. Neighbors at the site of one raid in Barking said a man who lived there resembled one of the attackers shown in news photographs.
"He's lived here for about three years," Damien Pettit said. "He's one of our neighbors. I've said hello in passing more than 50, 60 occasions. He has two young kids. He was a very nice guy."
Armed officers also conducted a raid in the East Ham area of London.
The rampage was the third major attack in Britain in the past three months, including a similar vehicle and knife attack on Westminster Bridge in March that left five people dead.
On May 22, a suicide bomber killed 22 people and injured dozens at an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester, in northwest England. Grande and other stars performed Sunday night at a benefit concert for victims under tight security in Manchester.
The Islamic State group also claimed responsibility for the Manchester bombing.
AN OMINOUS TREND
May said the attacks were not directly connected, "but we believe we are experiencing a new trend in the threat we face" as "terrorism breeds terrorism" and attackers copy one another. She said five credible plots had been disrupted since March.
"It is time to say, enough is enough," she said.
For the first time in speaking of such attacks, she was overtly political.
"While we have made significant progress in recent years, there is - to be frank - far too much tolerance of extremism in our country," May said in a veiled criticism at her main rival, the Labour Party's Jeremy Corbyn.
After the bombing at a concert in Manchester, England, Corbyn suggested that Britain's intervention in wars abroad had fueled the risk of terrorism at home.
While it is unclear how Saturday's attack and its aftermath might affect the election, the unspoken convention that deadly terrorist attacks shouldn't be used in political campaigns has been abandoned. May said the time had come to have "some difficult, and often embarrassing, conversations."
U.S. President Donald Trump criticized London's Mayor Sadiq Khan on Sunday after Khan sought to reassure residents about the stepped-up police presence on city streets. Trump argued on Twitter for leaders to "stop being politically correct" and focus on "security for our people."
The mayor's spokesman said he was too busy to respond to Trump's "ill-informed" tweet.
Britain's official terrorism threat level was raised from "severe" to "critical" after the Manchester attack, meaning an attack may be imminent. Several days later it was lowered again to "severe," meaning an attack is highly likely. Home Secretary Amber Rudd said Sunday that the level would remain at severe because police believe there are no perpetrators still on the loose.
COURAGE, COMPASSION
Amid the violence and fear were stories of compassion and heroism. The British Transport Police said one of their officers, among the first to arrive, took the attackers on armed only with his baton and was seriously wounded. He was described later as being in stable condition with injuries that were not life-threatening.
Witnesses described how passers-by threw chairs and beer glasses at the attackers in an attempt to stop them.
Richard Angell, who was in a restaurant, said he looked out and saw "a guy who is throwing a table at somebody, and it's very unclear about what is happening. And it turns out to be a heroic guy who saw what was happening and just bombarded these terrible cowardly people with stuff."
Vowls also saw people striking back at the attackers and said he joined in.
"I went 'Oi, terrorists, cowards, Oi!'" he told The Associated Press. Then he picked up a chair.
"I chucked it, but I think I missed one of them, and then I picked up a stool, and I threw it at him. And he looked at me. He started running towards me, and then he decided not to.
"Then I was screaming at them, picking up bottles from a beer barrel. I was just throwing it at them, trying to get them to chase me so I could get them out into the main road where the police could see them and obviously take them down."
A CALM 'HERO'
Amid the outrage and sorrow, Britons have responded to the attack with distinctly British humor, hailing a man pictured walking away from the mayhem holding a pint of beer as a tongue-in-cheek symbol of defiance. Television footage of crowds running away from the attack includes a man in a red shirt walking slowly with a mostly full beer in his hand.
A picture of the man was posted on Twitter by Howard Mannella, who tweeted: "People fleeing #LondonBridge but the bloke on the right isn't spilling a drop. God Bless the Brits!"
BALKING AT TRAVEL BAN
As Trump renewed his push Sunday for a travel ban in the wake of the latest terrorist attack in England, new opposition emerged from Republican and Democratic lawmakers.
Several lawmakers suggested in TV interviews Sunday that Trump's proposed ban, which blocked immigrants from six majority-Muslim countries but was halted by federal courts, was no longer necessary since the administration has had the time it claimed it needed to develop beefed-up vetting procedures to screen people coming to the United States.
"It's been four months since I said they needed four months to put that in place," Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., a member of the Intelligence Committee, said on Fox News Sunday.
Sen. Mark Warner, Va., the top Democrat on the panel, agreed that Trump's administration had had plenty of time at this point to examine how immigrants are let into the United States and make any improvements that are needed.
"If the president wanted 90 days to re-examine how individuals from certain countries would enter the United States, he's had more than 90 days," Warner said on CBS' Face the Nation.

Graphic

 
 Police forensic officers on London Bridge Sunday June 4, 2017 following Saturday night's terrorist incident. The assault began Saturday night when a van veered off the road and barreled into pedestrians on busy London Bridge. Three men fled the van with large knives and attacked people at bars and restaurants in nearby Borough Market, police and witnesses said. The attack unfolded quickly, and police said officers had shot and killed the three attackers within eight minutes. (Andrew Matthews/PA via AP)  A small child lays flowers at a corner tribute in the London Bridge area of London, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (AP Photo/Frank Augstein)  Police guard a corner near a tribute of flowers and posters in the London Bridge area of London, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (AP Photo/Frank Augstein)  Police surround the van used by the attackers at London Bridge, Saturday June 3, 2017. The assault began Saturday night when a van veered off the road and barreled into pedestrians on busy London Bridge. Three men fled the van with large knives and attacked people at bars and restaurants in nearby Borough Market, police and witnesses said. (AP Photo/Kevin Dunne)  In this image taken from video footage, people run from the scene of attack, alongside a man strolling holding a pint of beer, right, in London, late Saturday, June 3, 2017. People in the U.K. have responded to the deadly London Bridge attack with sorrow and distinctly British humor, hailing a man pictured walking away from the mayhem holding a pint of beer as a tongue-in-cheek symbol of defiance. (Sky news via AP)  A tribute of flowers has been placed on the pavement and a poster with a photo of London Bridge is taped on a wall in the London Bridge area of London, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (AP Photo/Frank Augstein)  Two women hug after bringing flowers to add to tributes laid on the north side of London Bridge following last night's terrorist incident, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (David Mirzoeff/PA via AP)  Two women hug after bringing flowers to add to tributes laid on the north side of London Bridge following last night's terrorist incident, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (David Mirzoeff/PA via AP)  A woman hands flowers to a police officer to lay on the north side of London Bridge following last night's terrorist incident, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (David Mirzoeff/PA via AP)  A man lays flowers at a corner tribute in the London Bridge area of London, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (AP Photo/Frank Augstein)  Armed police on St Thomas Street, London, Sunday June 4, 2017, near the scene of Saturday night's terrorist incident on London Bridge and at Borough Market. Several people were killed in the terror attack at the heart of London and dozens injured. Prime Minister Theresa May convened an emergency security cabinet session Sunday to deal with the crisis. (Dominic Lipinski/PA via AP)  Chairman of the London Fatwa Council, Mohammad Yazdani Raza hold a sign as he marches near Borough Market in London, Sunday, June 4, 2017. Police specialists collected evidence in the heart of London after a series of attacks described as terrorism killed several people and injured more than 40 others. (AP Photo/Frank Augstein) 

Load-Date: June 8, 2017


End of Document