Police treat Parliament car crash as terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
August 15, 2018 Wednesday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2018 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: WORLD_; Pg. 2
Length: 325 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


LONDON — Police flooded central London streets and cordoned off the city's government district Tuesday, after a speeding car plowed into cyclists and crashed outside Parliament in what authorities were treating as an act of terrorism. With the driver in custody, counterterror detectives were working to uncover the motive behind what they suspect is the fourth vehicle attack in Britain — and the second on Parliament — in 18 months. "Given that this appears to be a deliberate act, the method and this being an iconic site, we are treating it as a terrorist incident," Assistant Commissioner Neil Basu, Britain's top counterterrorism officer, told reporters. 
A rooftop camera recorded the silver Ford Fiesta driving past Parliament and suddenly veering sharply to the left, striking cyclists waiting at a set of lights, then crossing the road and crashing into a barrier outside Parliament. Armed police surrounded the car within seconds, pulling a man from the vehicle. Police said the driver was alone and no weapons were found in the car. Three people were hurt, none critically. Police arrested the 29-year-old driver, a resident of England's Midlands region who was not previously known to counterterrorism police or the intelligence services. Basu said the suspect was not cooperating with police. Security Minister Ben Wallace said the man, whose name was not released, was a British citizen originally from another country. Police said the car was driven from Birmingham in central England to London late Monday and was in central London for more than seven hours before the crash. Detectives were searching two properties in Birmingham and one in another Midlands city, Nottingham. Police said they did not believe there was any ongoing threat from Tuesday's incident. After a meeting of the government's crisis committee, COBRA, officials said Britain's terrorism threat level would remain at "severe," meaning an attack is highly likely.

Notes

Eds: New approach. Updates photos, links new video, AP Graphic. With AP Photos. AP Video.

Graphic

 
Associated Press Forensics officers work Tuesday near the car that crashed into security barriers outside the Houses of Parliament in London. Authorities said a man in his 20s was arrested on suspicion of terrorist offenses.

Load-Date: August 15, 2018


End of Document