POLITICS AS USUAL SINCE 9/11?;
ANALYSTS DOWNPLAY IMPACT OF TERRORISM
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 13, 2001 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 492 words
Byline: Peter Hardin, Times-Dispatch Washington Correspondent Contact Peter Hardin at (202) 662-7669 or phardin@mediageneral.com,  
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Armed with questions about American attitudes since Sept. 11, sophisticated political pollsters fanned out to suburban Richmond and to Mount Laurel, N.J., in advance of Election Day.
From focus groups convened there and other surveys, analysts who monitored elections of governors in Virginia and New Jersey believe many Americans have changed their lifestyles and increased their trust in government since the terrorist attacks.
But politics in the governors' races was not changed dramatically, except for a suspension of the campaigns for a time immediately after the attacks, according to analysts who examined the elections yesterday.
"The central issues of the state remained the central issues at the end," Democratic pollster Peter Hart said at a forum yesterday on politics after Sept. 11.
Terrorism and security didn't play a major role in the state elections, Hart's firm concluded. Voters don't easily see a governor's role in cq> fighting terrorism, a report by the firm said.
People in the focus groups considered the events of Sept. 11 a call for national leaders to put their differences aside and focus on national interests; and there was somewhat less tolerance for negative campaigning, Hart added.
"Give me the facts and only the facts and leave out all the name-calling and finger-pointing,"an anonymous Richmonder was quoted as saying. "Put aside dirty politics and give me the plain facts. I am smart enough to interpret them."
Two opposing political operatives gave different views of how that sentiment played out in the Virginia governor's race. Democrat Mark R. Warner, a wealthy businessman who has not held office, defeated Republican Mark L. Earley, a former attorney general.
"There was less of a tolerance for politics as usual," said Steve Jarding, Warner's campaign manager. Negative opinions of the Republican candidate "seemed to go up" when he was attacking Warner, Jarding said.
But an adviser to the GOP campaign said the only time Earley drew close behind Warner in polls was a week after Earley launched a TV ad accusing the Democrat of favoring a tax increase.
Christopher J. LaCivita, a national GOP strategist on loan to the Earley campaign, said he didn't see a change after Sept. 11 in the way people reacted to what he called "contrast," rather than negative - political advertising.
Earley hit Warner's support for a proposed sales-tax referendum in Northern Virginia. Warner said he didn't favor a tax increase.
Seeking to draw contrasts with Warner, the Earley campaign succeeded in boosting the number of voters who viewed taxes as the No. 1 issue, LaCivita said.
"The problem was, that was our only issue," he added.
Warner ran to the right of center. He emphasized fiscal conservatism and avoided such issues as abortion and gun control that have tripped up Democrats in the past.
The forum was sponsored by the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania and The Alliance for Better Campaigns.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document