Police and FBI ready for terrorism;
 But congestion, crowd-control problems are more likely
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
January 19, 1992, Metro Edition


Copyright 1992 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 4A
Length: 633 words
Byline: Neal Gendler; Staff Writer
Body


Teams of Minneapolis police officers and FBI agents have been training for weeks for a Super Bowl problem they believe is unlikely: an act of terrorism by a group or a serious disturbance from an individual at the Metrodome.
 But it won't be like last year. Because of the Persian Gulf War, Tampa Stadium had the trappings of a fort. A concrete barrier made a 100-yard buffer. Trucks twisted along a zigzag route to make deliveries, and even pop and pretzels were inspected. Aircraft were kept away from the stadium and police helicopters circled overhead. Fans were restricted even more than usual as to what they could bring into the stadium.
This year, police are not discounting the possibility of terrorism, but they appear to be more concerned about traffic congestion and crowd control.
 "Last year there was the war, there were a lot of rumors going around Tampa," said Minneapolis deputy police chief David Dobrotka. "Tampa police and federal agencies had received articulated threats; we have received none."
 But a game with an estimated 750 million viewers provides a worldwide audience for a political statement. "We're taking very seriously that the potential exists," Dobrotka said.
 Minneapolis police have primary responsibility for security during the game and related events. Dobrotka and Lt. Greg Hestness, head of Minneapolis' Emergency Response Unit, spent last year's Super Bowl with police in Tampa and began planning for the 1992 game immediately afterward. They have included the FBI, the State Patrol, the Hennepin County Sheriff's Department and police from other cities in their plans.
 Minneapolis has scheduled about 350 officers to cover an 18-hour period on game day. About 100 uniformed off-duty officers hired by the NFL will work in the Dome. About 45 sheriff's deputies also will work the Dome area, police and sheriff's reservists will assist and state troopers will escort vehicles.
 Plans were made "for moving a team of people around under full-house conditions and in the chaos of the Super Bowl," Hestness said.  Teams have practiced several times in the Metrodome since November, preparing for hostage-taking, a robbery, barricaded suspects and other situations involving an armed assailant.
 "Anything that some ne'er-do-well could dream up, that's what we've tried to anticipate," Dobrotka said. "We've come up with about a dozen different scenarios," and rehearsed them with actors in sessions lasting four hours.
 The FBI has helped Minneapolis police with communications, including getting signals through radio dead spots, and it is providing its own SWAT team.
 "Our role has been quite narrowly defined, and that is counterterrorism," said David Cid, FBI foreign counterintelligence program supervisor in Minneapolis. Concern over terrorism was greater last year because of "war with a state that sponsors terrorism," he said. "But there's continued enmity between the civilized nations and those that sponsor terrorism, and until that enmity is resolved, we'll continue to be involved at special events."
 Cid said he expects the FBI team to wear military battle dress but not be visible to fans. Minneapolis SWAT members will wear regular blue uniforms, which Dobrotka said makes them readily available for any need.
 "My biggest concern is traffic control," he said. He has worked with American Indians planning demonstrations against team names and wants to prevent confrontations between them and spectators.
 Although no agency has intelligence indicating a threat, "I don't think we've underestimated anything," Hestness said.
 "There are always people who see themselves as aggrieved in some way and see violence as the only way to redress their grievances," Cid said. "We take appropriate precautions."
 Staff writer Randy Furst contributed to this report.

Load-Date: January 21, 1992


End of Document