Police will train eyes to combat terrorism - Correction Appended
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2002 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 609 words
Byline: Brett Lovelace
Body


After the Sept. 11 attacks, Lancaster city police were inundated with telephone calls from residents reporting everything from suspected terrorist cells in their neighborhoods to suspicious Middle Eastern men wandering their streets.
"Suddenly, a man wearing a turban and working at a mini-mart was a labeled a terrorist," said Sgt. William Gleason, Lancaster city police crime prevention coordinator. "Those type of reports don't help the police or the community."
#CATEYES.A14T#
In an effort to eliminate stereotypes and help citizens identify possible terrorist activity in their neighborhoods, Gleason attended a January meeting at Harrisburg Area Community College to learn about a new federal program called Community Anti-terrorism Training Initiative (CAT Eyes).
Gleason will be talking about CAT Eyes during two public meetings this week. The first will be held Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. at Southern Market Center, South Queen and Vine streets, and the second on Thursday at 7:30 p.m. at Maple Grove Community Center, 1420 Columbia Ave. The meetings are free and open to the public.
The program was developed by U.S. military officers as part of an effort to prevent domestic terrorism. The Burlington County (N.J.) Sheriffs Office, U.S. Department of Justice and the New Jersey Regional Community Police Institute in Bergen County, N.J., were the first groups to sponsor CAT Eyes.
More than 30 New Jersey police departments have already undergone CAT Eyes training.
"Lancaster has about 130 community block groups and CAT Eyes is a way to educate residents on terrorism," Gleason said. "After Sept.  11, many of the block groups turned their focus away from their neighborhoods because of what was happening across the nation and world."
CAT Eyes teaches citizens ways to understand what terrorism is; increase awareness for spotting pre-attack surveillance; identify post-attack symptoms for biological or chemical weapons; identify locations terrorist could target for an attack; and establish communication between residents and local law enforcement.
For the past three months, Gleason has worked with David Greiner, president of Lancaster Council of Neighborhoods, and Gene Duncan, a city councilman who is Lancaster city's emergency management coordinator, to implement CAT Eyes Lancaster. The two men also want to teach residents about Community Emergency Response Teams (CERT).
Greiner included an article about CAT Eyes and CERT in 180 newsletters recently sent to block group members.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency developed CERT as plan for residents to follow during a major disaster. The purpose of CERT training is to provide private citizens with the basic skills and knowledge required to take care of themselves and respond to their community's needs in the aftermath of disaster.
"Our communities are now faced with larger issues than just graffiti, trash and drugs," Greiner said. "CAT Eyes and CERT are ways to educate citizens and put information in their hands to help deal with situations like terrorism or an emergency like a crash or large fire."
Residents can participate in a free training class to learn disaster preparedness, disaster fire suppression, disaster medical operation and light search-and-rescue operations. The class also will take residents through a series of realistic practice exercises in triage, fire suppression, extrication and search and rescue.
Duncan said Lancaster could become one of the first cities in the state to implement CAT Eyes and CERT training.
"We are hoping for a large turnout," Duncan said. "Residents should come with the expectations of learning something that could help save lives."
Correction

The starting time for the meetings Tuesday and Thursday is 7 p.m.
Correction-Date: April 16, 2002

Load-Date: April 18, 2002


End of Document