Political Insider; A guide to the prevention of nuclear terrorism
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
November 18, 2008 Tuesday
Online Edition


Copyright 2008 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Length: 496 words
Byline: JIM GALLOWAY

Staff
Body


Tuesday, November 18, 2008, 03:55 PM
This afternoon, the Nuclear Threat Initiative published a thick to-do list for the Barack Obama administration --- a guide, if you will, to avoiding the holocaust of nuclear terrorism.
NTI is the group co-chaired by CNN founder Ted Turner and former Georgia senator Sam Nunn, who is now an informal advisor to the Obama transition team. Which means Nunn's priorities could reflect those of the new president. Or vice versa.
You can click here to read an 18-page executive summary of "Securing the Bomb 2008." Or read the entire report on the NTI web site. But don't read either in bed. You'll never sleep again.
Mundane things first: The report notes the failure of the Bush administration to assign a specific individual in the White House to address nuclear terrorism.
"The president who takes office in January 2009 should appoint a senior White House official who has the president's ear --- probably a deputy national security advisor, though the title would depend on the person and the structure of the [National Security Council]," the report recommends.
That person would not be Nunn, we're assured.
Now for the stuff of night sweats. These are just a few excerpts: 
--- [The next president] "should intensify programs to work with countries around the world to build strong security cultures, putting an end to staff propping open security doors for convenience or guards patrolling with no ammunition in their guns." Who knew that nuclear sites and shopping malls used the same security service?
--- "The best chances to stop [a nuclear terrorist plot against the U.S.] lie not in exotic new detection technologies but in a broad counter-terrorist effort, ranging from intelligence and other operations to target high-capability terrorist groups to addressing the anti-American hatred that makes recruiting and fund-raising easier, and makes it more difficult for other governments to cooperate with the United States.
"In particular, the United States should work with governments and non-government institutions in the Islamic world to build a consensus that slaughter on a nuclear scale is profoundly wrong under Islamic laws and traditions (and those of other faiths)...."
--- "The United States should also put in place the best practicable means for identifying the source of any nuclear attack --- including not just nuclear forensics but also traditional intelligence and law enforcement means --- and announce that the United States will treat any terrorist nuclear attack using material consciously provided by a state as an attack by that state, and will respond accordingly.....Policymakers should understand, however, that nuclear material has no DNA that can provide an absolute match."
* Full election coverage: News, photos and more
* Get instant notification of Political Insider updates: Sign up on Twitter
http://www.ajc.com/metro/content/shared-blogs/ajc/politicalinsider/entries/2008/11/18/a_guide_to_the_prevention_of_n.html

Load-Date: January 27, 2009


End of Document