Police: Man claims he was on way to kill senator
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
November 12, 2020 Thursday


Copyright 2020 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 323 words
Body


By Pat Reavy
deseret news
SALT LAKE CITY - A Utah man who claimed he was on his way to Missouri to kill a former U.S. senator was arrested after UHP troopers caught him driving up to 130 mph in the snow while impaired.
George William Stahl, 36, of Cottonwood Heights, was booked into the Summit County Jail early Wednesday for investigation of making a threat of terrorism, failing to stop at the command of police, reckless driving, speeding, DUI and drug possession. 
About 12:45 a.m. Wednesday, Stahl was spotted by a Utah Highway Patrol trooper traveling 115 mph on I-80 in Summit County, according to a police affidavit. 
"I activated my emergency lights immediately and the vehicle appeared to accelerate faster and pull away from me. I caught up to the vehicle who was still traveling over 100 mph and the vehicle accelerated again and pulled away," the affidavit states. 
Despite light snow falling and slick roads, the vehicle reached speeds of at least 130 mph, according to the affidavit. 
After another trooper spiked the vehicle's tires, Stahl was arrested. 
"Stahl was belligerent and appeared heavily intoxicated. He smelled of an alcoholic beverage and his eyes were glassy and bloodshot. There was an empty 12 pack of Budweiser beer in his vehicle as well as a partially consumed other 12 pack. Stahl stated that he was on Adderall and LSD and beer," the affidavit states.
Stahl was taken to the North Summit Fire Station to be medically evaluated and then to the Summit County Jail and continued to be belligerent while being transported, according to the affidavit.
"He stated that he was on his way to Missouri to kill (former U.S. Sen. Claire McCaskill) if she wasn't dead already. Stahl also stated that he hit the spikes going 135 mph," the affidavit states. "Stahl made several real threats to Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill. He stated that he was on his way to Missouri to kill her several times."
EMAIL: preavy@deseretnews.com

Load-Date: November 12, 2020


End of Document