POLITICAL NOTEBOOK: SENATORS, CONGRESSMEN, LOBBYISTS LEARN THAT TERRORISM SELLS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
December 2, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. c1
Length: 744 words
Byline: GREGG HERRINGTON, Columbian staff writer
Body


Members of Congress learn fast about getting their names in the papers and on the tube.
The rules for that game changed Sept. 11, and now terrorism gets the attention while more mundane concerns such as the national debt, whooping cough and global warming are shunted aside.
So, terrorism it is.
Sen. Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., who is interested in safeguarding information on computers and fighting credit card fraud, announced last week that she's introducing legislation to combat "identity theft."
That's the buzz phrase for what happens when bad guys steal credit cards or checkbooks and go shopping.
But where's the terrorism?
It's there on Page 2 of her press release. It says her bill would make more information available to victims and police and "therefore increases the likelihood that any identity theft associated with terrorist activities will be caught."
Bit of a stretch
Wait, there's more: something about "examining ways the government can better share information it may have on terrorists ..."
If that seems to be a stretch, don't blame Cantwell. She's doing her job, trying to build momentum for the bill under the new rules.
On the other hand, the connection is clearer between 9/11 and the successful effort by Cantwell and Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., to get money for more guards on the U.S.-Canadian border.
That was a nice publicity generator, which doesn't mean it's not a good thing. But terrorism made it happen.
In the House, Rep. Brian Baird, D-Vancouver, is primary sponsor of a proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution. It would establish an emergency procedure for replacing House members if 25 percent of them are dead or incapacitated at any given time.
New reality
Translation: If a terrorist flies a jetliner into the Capitol and wipes out 109 or more of the 435 representatives, the House wouldn't be left without a quorum.
The proposal won plenty of publicity for Baird, including a spot on CNN.
But the proposal is shelved in the House Judiciary Committee, and Chairman James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., has no plans to give it a hearing.
Which isn't to say Baird's motive isn't sincere. After that plane went into the Pentagon, who would suggest his horrific scenario couldn't happen?
The new reality isn't lost on lobbyists. Take the American Traffic Safety Services Association. Please.
It traditionally lobbies for more highway safety money so its member companies will sell more traffic signs, barricades and highway safety gear.
Now, according to The Associated Press, the lobbying group is saying more road signs and other traffic-routing devices would help motorists flee cities faster and more safely during a terrorist attack.
Hooo-boy.
Overlooked stories
Perhaps the least-read newspapers in American history were the morning editions of West Coast dailies on Sept. 11.  Before we could open 'em up, most of us were watching TV in stunned disbelief.
It was not until preparing this column that I learned former Yacolt Mayor Emily Jones had died at age 97, and that builder and civic activist A.J. "Barney" Anthony died at 63. Their obituaries were in The Columbian on Sept. 11.
So were these stories:
"WASHINGTON -- A majority of Americans say they are prepared to roll back President Bush's $ 1.35 trillion tax cut to help deal with the shrinking federal budget surplus.
"A majority believe that Bush … bears responsibility for a problem that has suddenly put him on the defensive."
By that afternoon, Bush was on the offensive, politically as well as militarily, and still is.
"WASHINGTON -- Whooping cough is one of those diseases most people think is history, but the germ that can leave sufferers gasping for air is making a comeback."
Apparently the whooping-cough-vaccine lobby hasn't linked this to terrorism yet.
Paying attention
Baird is worried about stories like those going untold or unheeded.
"The national debt and Social Security and health care are of enormous concern," he said last week. "Our state is in a real crisis.
"We have hospitals in Southwest Washington on the verge of closing. It's almost impossible to find doctors who'll take Medicaid patients. Nothing's been done about the high cost of prescription drugs."
It was a litany of hot topics gone cold since 9/11.
"The American people need to pay some attention to what's been happening in the Congress," he said, "and to what's not happening."
Gregg Herrington covers state and local issues. He may be reached at 360-759-8025, or via e-mail at gregg.herrington@columbian.com.  

Load-Date: December 3, 2001


End of Document