POLICE DEPARTMENTS UNPREPARED FOR TERRORISTS' THREAT, STUDY SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 27, 1995, Thursday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 5B
Length: 656 words
Byline: Tim Poor Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


STATE AND LOCAL law enforcement officers perceive a growing threat from terrorists - particularly extreme right-wing groups - says a recent study commissioned by the Justice Department.
But the study adds that many law enforcement departments are inadequately prepared to respond.
The two-year study, by the Rand Corp., was completed in February and released last month, but it got little attention. Rand surveyed state police and emergency management officials from 39 states and 148 communities. Towns in Missouri and Illinois were among those surveyed, but Rand promised them confidentiality and so will not identify them.
The survey showed that - long before last week's bombing in Oklahoma City - "there was a tremendous concern out there with the threat of terrorism, especially hateful acts by (extreme) right-wing groups," said Kevin Jack Riley, one of the authors of the report.
While preparedness and cooperation with the FBI are fairly good in large and medium-size cities, it tends to break down in smaller, rural areas of the sort sought out by many extremist groups, Riley said. "The whole issue of terrorism is being thrust upon them. They are on the front line of a changing law enforcement problem."
There are about 10 regional, joint task forces on terrorism across the country that provide quick access to intelligence, but small communities lack the money to participate or to do much intelligence-gathering on their own, Riley said.
The biggest worry is in small communities that might house targets such as military bases or nuclear plants, he said. "There's a real concern by local law enforcement agencies. They feel that terrorism preparations are not as good as they could be."
The survey found that, besides resource problems, departments also were constricted by their own guidelines in investigating suspect groups, especially when there is no evidence that the groups have committed any crimes. "It really is a difficult situation from a civil liberties standpoint," Riley said.
Many small departments find it hard to justify having officers working on preventive intelligence with no immediate payoff, especially with public pressure to respond immediately to crimes that are occurring. "It's a classic problem in law enforcement, made all the more serious by the stakes involved in terrorism."
The survey showed that state and local police have a broader definition of terrorism than the FBI, which often doesn't include individual violent acts by members of groups like anti-abortion or animal-rights activists. This fact has frustrated some communities when seeking help from the FBI.
mr'i
The FBI defines terrorism as "the unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof in furtherance of political or social objectives." The report says the FBI also seeks "a conspiratorial dimension" that excludes incidents, like the killing of a doctor who did abortions in Pensacola, Fla.
The report says the FBI shouldn't overlook many incidents that it may not classify as terrorist-related, because "such reports can provide important early warnings to the FBI that an organized terrorism effort is emerging. . . ."
The Rand report describes five types of groups with terrorism potential:
Ethnic separatist and emigre groups.
Left-wing radical organizations.
Extreme right-wing racist, anti-authority, survivalist-type groups.
Foreign terrorist organizations.
Issue-oriented groups, such as anti-abortion, animal-rights and environmental groups.
The report says extreme right-wing terrorists "are extremely violent, have no reservations about killing, spawn successor generations, and often are oriented toward specific political issues. . . ."
The report adds: "(Extreme) right-wing terrorist organizations are organized in many regions of the country, in cities both large and small, and have formed a loose nationwide network."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - A guard watches as a concrete barrier is lowered into place Wednesday in front of the Federal Court House in Minneapolis.

Load-Date: April 28, 1995


End of Document