POLICY CHANGE : Taking cover; Building owners confront terrorism insurance
Crain's Chicago Business
July 1, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 9
Length: 1230 words
Byline: STEVE DANIELS
Body


As terrorism-insurance legislation languishes in Congress, many commercial property owners are struggling to decide whether they need the pricey coverage, typically procuring it only when their lenders or investors demand it.
A lack of terrorism insurance hasn't kept local commercial buildings from selling or being refinanced, or tenants from striking deals with building owners. But lenders and owners warn that, unless something changes, the lack of such insurance eventually will block building sales and financing for new projects.
Lenders don't want to accept any risk, so they are requiring terrorism insurance even for some low-profile properties like suburban office buildings as well as for skyline-defining downtown buildings like the Sears Tower and John Hancock Center, insurance brokers say.
''It's really coming into a banking situation more than anything else,'' says Richard Forand, senior vice-president at Aon Risk Services of Illinois, a unit of Chicago-based insurance brokerage giant Aon Corp.
Other insurance brokers say that clients whose policies are expiring in the next two months are getting letters from their lenders warning them to obtain terrorism insurance for the full value of their properties or risk having the lenders buy the insurance and charge them for it.
''We don't know if that's an idle threat or not,'' says Michele Levin, vice-president of the real estate practice group at Chicago-based Near North Insurance Brokerage Inc. ''Everybody's paying very close attention.''
Terrorism wasn't an insurance issue before Sept. 11. ''All risk'' policies issued to property owners included terrorism protections, or at least didn't explicitly exclude them. But as those annual policies expire, insurers are almost uniformly excluding coverage for terrorist acts.
As a result, stand-alone terrorism policies are available in the U.S. from just four insurers: New York-based American International Group; Omaha, Neb.-based Berkshire Hathaway Inc.; Lloyd's of London, and Bermuda-based Ace Group of Cos. And the prices greatly exceed the normal cost of property insurance.
Typically, the policies cover no more than $100 million in losses and require high deductibles on any claims. And coverage usually is limited to damage from bombs and airplane crashes, but not from nuclear, chemical or biological attacks. Finally, insurers often retain the right to cancel the policies at any time for any reason.
With the limited choices, large commercial property owners around the country have discussed alternatives, including pooling their resources and forming their own captive insurance company that would cover potential terrorism losses, sources say.
They're also considering alternatives because of the extremely high cost of terrorism insurance. Before Sept. 11, the owner of an ordinary $100-million office building might have paid $100,000 a year for property insurance. Today, on top of that $100,000, the owner would pay $150,000 for a terrorism policy.
For trophy properties, or even buildings adjacent to them, that price is even higher.
'Best we can do'
At the request of its lenders, Shorenstein Co., the San Francisco-based owner of the John Hancock Center, bought terrorism insurance in April on its entire portfolio. Richard Chicotel, chief financial officer at Shorenstein, declined to specify policy limits, but allowed that they are no more than $200 million. Shorenstein paid $221 million for the Hancock alone in 1998.
Mr. Chicotel wouldn't comment on the cost of the insurance.
''We're getting the best that the market offers,'' he says. ''That's what I've tried to tell our lenders. It's the best we can do.''
''It's a scarce commodity and an expensive commodity,'' says Manuel Ribot, senior vice-president in Chicago with Marsh USA Inc., the insurance brokerage unit of New York-based Marsh & McLennan Inc. ''Because of its scarcity, it seems like a lot of insureds will end up without the coverage.''
Aon Center, the city's second-tallest building after the Sears Tower, hasn't faced the issue yet, because it renewed its policy, with terrorism coverage intact, three days after the World Trade Center attack. But New York-based Blackstone Group, owner of Aon Center, is bracing for difficult insurance negotiations if Congress doesn't act.
Insurers and property owners have been lobbying Congress for months to pass legislation requiring the federal government to cover losses beyond what the insurance industry says it can afford. The bill has been stymied by a dispute over limiting damages that plaintiffs' attorneys could seek in future lawsuits.
''Trophy properties are clearly impacted in the cost, scope and availability of terrorism insurance,'' says Gary Sumers, senior managing director at Blackstone Real Estate Advisors L.P. in New York
Despite speculation that Blackstone might try to sell Aon Center and take advantage of the high prices downtown office buildings are fetching right now, Mr. Sumers says the firm doesn't intend to do so anytime soon. If it did, terrorism insurance would be a difficult hurdle, he acknowledges.
''We've seen other major transactions in other markets that have not been able to be closed because of the inability to get terrorism insurance,'' he says.
Chicago-based Equity Office Properties Trust-the largest office property owner in the country, controlled by billionaire Sam Zell-could secure just $200 million of terrorism coverage for all 768 buildings it owns in the U.S.
Small property owners declined to be interviewed for this story.
And most owners won't take an expensive hit to buy the insurance unless forced to by their lenders.
In Chicago, lender-owner skirmishes have yet to escalate into full-fledged court battles. But that has happened in other markets, notably Minnesota, where the owner of the gigantic Mall of America sued its lender to stop a forced purchase of terrorism insurance before finally agreeing to buy it.
In addition, Chicago-based LaSalle Bank N.A. is part of a group of lenders that were sued in New York by the owners of a 48-story Manhattan office building that challenged the lender's right to require them to buy terrorism insurance.
No such conflicts have emerged with LaSalle's extensive portfolio of Chicago high-rises, according to Bruce Duncan, group senior vice-president at LaSalle. (LaSalle has been perhaps the most active construction lender on high-rise condominiums downtown during the last four years.)
''In very few instances to date has the (terrorism insurance) issue been raised-for me, at least,'' Mr. Duncan says. ''For future high-rises, though, I think it's going to be an issue.''
Lenders seek protection
Property owners aren't the only ones considering terrorism insurance. Some lenders with substantial real estate exposures are investigating it for themselves.
Chicago-based Corus Bankshares Inc., with the vast majority of its loan portfolio tied up in commercial real estate projects around the country, has begun looking at protecting itself.
''We are in the midst of exploring insurance for our own portfolio,'' says Chairman and CEO Robert J. Glickman.
But he worries about exclusions for biological and chemical attacks. Without those protections, the insurance may not be too useful, he says.
''I'm not too concerned about more airplane crashes,'' he says. ''These three (nuclear, chemical and biological attacks) are the ones that scare me.''

Graphic

 
High stakes: Michele Levin of Near North Insurance Brokerage says brokers are watching to see whether lenders will buy insurance for owners and charge them for it.

Load-Date: July 3, 2002


End of Document