POLICE TEST NEW TERRORISM INFORMATION NETWORK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 28, 2004 Saturday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 17
Length: 482 words
Byline: Peter Shinkle/ Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


* The goal of the system is to provide a secure method of rapidly alerting the nation in case of a terrorist threat.
St. Louis police got access to a new national threat reporting system on Friday, and they immediately started training for its use.
The Department of Homeland Security is expanding its computer-based counterterrorism communications system to all 50 states and 50 major urban areas, including St. Louis.
Frank Libutti, undersecretary of homeland defense, said at a news conference here Friday that the St. Louis area would get three new laptop computers as a first step in the expansion.
The goal of the network, called the Joint Regional Information Exchange System, is to provide a secure method of rapidly sharing information about terrorist threats. The system, which requires authorities to have a password to use it, is intended to speed the flow of information to Homeland Security headquarters in Washington, and from headquarters back across the nation.
"Our great expectation is that we not only push information out, but that we also welcome information back into Homeland Security," Libutti said at the news conference, which was attended by Mayor Francis Slay, Police Chief Joe Mokwa, Gov. Bob Holden and other police and security officials.
The idea is to alert the nation quickly to a threat, Libutti said in an interview later. "It's real-time, and I'm talking seconds and minutes, not hours."
St. Louis police intelligence officials spent Friday training on use of the laptop and the system, said police spokesman Richard Wilkes. The other laptops went to the St. Louis office of the FBI and the St. Louis County Police.
The expansion of the system will cost about $11 million, a cost to be borne by the Department of Homeland Security, Libutti said.
The system, known by the ungainly acronym JRIES, may have as many as 20,000 users by the end of this year, Libutti said. Users can include police as well as health care authorities and other emergency responders, he said.
Tom Bush, the special agent in charge of the FBI office in St. Louis, said the system operates in essence as an "electronic bulletin board," a place where information about security threats can be posted and quickly distributed.
The system is different from another computer-based system that St. Louis authorities have deployed in the fight against crime and terrorism. That system, the Gateway Information Sharing Initiative, holds millions of documents in a searchable data archive.
U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft described the Gateway system in 2002 as revolutionary, and said it is a model for other crime-fighting data bases.
Gateway includes 60,000 FBI documents, 15 years worth of Missouri Highway Patrol reports and years worth of St. Louis police reports.
Authorities use Gateway most often for investigative purposes, and the work is mostly oriented toward crime, not terrorism, he said.

Notes

Reporter Peter Shinkle/ E-mail: pshinkle@post-dispatch.com/ Phone: 314-621-5804  

Load-Date: February 28, 2004


End of Document