POLICE REPORT: TERRORISM DRILL TAKES A TURN WHEN SUSPICIOUS PACKAGE IS FOUND
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 19, 2000, Sunday


Copyright 2000 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. b3
Length: 344 words
Byline: LORI BETTINESKI, Columbian staff writer
Body


A biological terrorism drill in downtown Vancouver took an unexpected turn Saturday morning when authorities discovered a suspicious package that wasn't in the script.
The three-hour exercise was staged to give response teams practice in handling potential terrorist threats at the Federal Building on West 12th Street.
The scenario called for an employee in the building to open an envelope containing a powdered substance and a note indicating she has been exposed to anthrax.
During the exercise, emergency crews secured the scene and Vancouver Fire Services HazMat collected a sample of the biological agent for analysis. Vancouver Police maintained security and contacted the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The drill ended with police pursuing a "possible suspect" who was standing outside the federal building to witness the effect of his crime.
Employees of the Clark Regional Communications Agency, Federal Protective Services and Government Services Administration all participated in the drill.
Vancouver Police Sgt. Dave King said a blue box was found outside the building's main entrance near the end of the drill.
"Because we didn't know what it was, our plan was to take it as a suspicious box and do what we would normally do," he said.
The Portland Bomb Squad was called out to X-ray the box, which had been transported to the nearby Vancouver fire station. It was empty.
"It was an interesting twist and a chance to exercise the lessons we had learned," King said.
Injury accident: A 22-year-old Vancouver woman was injured Saturday after her car struck a retaining wall on the right shoulder of Interstate 5 near the Evergreen overpass.
Andrea M. Walker suffered a concussion and back injuries in the single-car accident.
She was transported to Southwest Washington Medical Center, where she was listed in satisfactory condition Saturday night.
According to Washington State Patrol, Walker was driving north on Interstate 5 when her 1993 Nissan Sentra hit a retaining wall, crossed the roadway and struck a concrete barrier on the east side of the freeway lanes.

Load-Date: March 20, 2000


End of Document