Police arrest 18-year-old for London train attack
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 17, 2017 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2017 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 297 words
Byline: Emma Ross-Thomas, Thomas Penny and Benjamin Katz Tribune News Service
Body


LONDON - Police have arrested an 18-year-old man on England's southeast coast in connection with the detonation of an improvised bomb on a London tube train that injured at least 29 people.
 The man was arrested Saturday in the port area of Dover, a major ferry hub for travel to France, and is being held under a section of the United Kingdom Terrorism Act, the Metropolitan Police said in a statement.
 "We have made a significant arrest in our investigation this morning," Neil Basu, senior national coordinator for counterterrorism policing, said in the statement. "Although we are pleased with the progress made, this investigation continues and the threat level remains at critical." The man in custody wasn't identified by police.
 The U.K. terrorism threat level was raised to "critical," indicating that further attacks may be imminent, Prime Minister Theresa May said late Friday, as police hunted for suspects who set off the improvised bomb at the Parsons Green station about 8:20 a.m., causing what witnesses described as a fireball.
 May said earlier that the device was "intended to cause serious harm." Sky News broadcast images of a small fire in a bucket and Lidl shopping bag with wires protruding and said the device, which had a timer, had probably not detonated fully.
 In the Saturday update, London police said the public should "remain vigilant" as it works through a "complex investigation." Troops have been deployed as part of an operation to free up some 1,000 armed police so they can protect transport hubs and events.
 The attack is the fifth this year in the U.K. and Londoners are growing accustomed to the sight of armed police patrolling the transport network. Police said Thursday that terrorism-related arrests had risen 68 percent over the past year.

Load-Date: September 17, 2017


End of Document