POLITICAL RISK COVERAGE OFFERS STABILITY  AS UNCERTAINTY ROCKS GLOBAL MARKETS, POLITICAL RISK INSURERS PROVIDE NEEDED RELIEF  
Business Insurance
June 14, 1999


Copyright 1999 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Special Report; Pg. G4
Length: 1225 words
Byline: SARAH GODDARD  
Body


The world's a scene of changes, poet Abraham Cowley said.
Five years ago, the so-called tiger economies of Southeast Asia were roaring and the former Soviet Union was a magnet for international investment.
But uncertainty and instability seem to have taken the place of the shining future promised in the middle of this decade for emerging economies. Nevertheless, multinationals operating from saturated marketplaces still must extend their reach if they want to grow. It is here that the political risk insurance market steps in, providing a safety net for the risks associated with doing business in new and alien environments.
At the same time, it has not been an easy ride for such insurers of late. Like many other sectors of the insurance market, political risk business has fallen prey to overcapacity and an abnormally low claims experience in recent years, with both factors pushing premium rates down. But as political instability has begun to grow, so, too, have claims, and political risk underwriters are expecting some capacity to exit the market as the losses start biting.
''During the last renewal season there was a definite tightening of the reinsurance market, and reinsurers became more wary,'' said Robert Chase, underwriter in the marine and special risks division of Lloyd's of London syndicate 510, managed by R.J. Kiln & Co. Ltd. What's more, he said he expects some reinsurance capacity to withdraw from the business, affecting primary rates.
Already, political risk underwriters are seeing rates bottoming out, and some are increasing premiums. But because the business is written on a case-by-case basis, rather than under a standard policy, it is impossible to say how much rates are increasing, and certain policyholders are seeing their premiums remain steady, underwriters say.
Some insurers are concerned that reinsurers may repeat the events of the early 1980s, when they withdrew wholesale from political risk business in the London market. Currently, Aon Group Ltd. in London is investigating ways to counter this threat, by pooling its reinsurance and political risk expertise.
Last year was particularly eventful on the claims front. Political risk insurers still are waiting to find out how much they will have to pay out for canceled power utility projects in Indonesia and Pakistan. The Pakistan projects represent more than $4.2 billion in investments from U.S., Japanese, European and Middle Eastern companies, according to the U.S. Department of Energy. The Asian financial crisis is blamed for the Indonesian government's suspension of several power purchase agreements, with long-term consequences reaching in the billions of dollars of lost business for investing companies. Claims from companies that invested in Indonesia could reach up to $100 million for London-based political risk insurers, according to market sources.
More recently, the Balkans conflict has interrupted shipping on the Danube River between Hungary and the Black Sea and has caused property losses for foreign companies that had invested in Serbia. As the conflict in Kosovo began to unfold, several Lloyd's underwriters responded by offering war risk policies for a number of classes of business, including cargo, marine and aviation exposures. Hiscox Syndicates Ltd., the Lloyd's managing agency arm of Hiscox P.L.C., went one step further, setting up a ''rapid response underwriting service'' for brokers, enabling fast-track quotations for clients wanting coverage for exposures in the Balkans.
Nevertheless, Yugoslavia is considered a ''hot spot,'' according to Rupert Morgan, a broker at First City Trade & Political Risks, part of First City Insurance Brokers Ltd. in London. In general, Mr. Morgan said ''there is certainly enough capacity to go around,'' though political risk underwriters also are wary of writing business in several African countries. Even so, for a favored client, even these countries are not necessarily uninsurable, he added.
As various political and economic climates become less stable, more potential clients are approaching the political risk market, according to brokers and insurers.
''As you would expect from the sorts of events of last year around the world, there is no doubt we are now seeing inquiries in a larger number of countries,'' said Mr. Chase of Kiln, which offers a trade disruption policy that includes political risk coverage. As the political risk class has become better known, the number of inquiries has increased, he added, and policyholders range from expanding multinationals to small companies dipping their toes in the water for the first time.
Recently, banks that have exposures in these territories are reducing their exposures or even buying more coverage themselves. Some have already been hit by plummeting exchange rates for exposures they have in certain territories, while some been burned by backing long-term projects that have subsequently been canceled.
''The banks are looking more cautious,'' said Mr. Chase, ''giving more opportunities for insurers'' to provide coverage.
''There is quite a lot more banks-related business,'' said Ian Harrison, underwriter for Beazley Furlonge Ltd. ''The banks are looking to work with the insurance market; they are now realizing that political risk insurance policies can sit quite well alongside their own lending policies.''
Although the prospects may be improving for insurers in the international political risk market, terrorism coverage is not seeing the same upturn. In particular, U.K. mainland terrorism risks are benefiting from the Northern Ireland peace agreement, brokered around Easter last year.
Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd., the U.K. government-backed reinsurer of U.K. mainland terrorism risks, was set up in 1993 after the conventional insurance market excluded terrorism exposures from property coverages. Pool Re discounted its rates 85% toward the end of last year to reflect the absence of claims since the Irish Republican Army bombed Manchester city center in June 1996. According to Pool Re Chief Executive Leslie Lucas, the Manchester bomb resulted in L265 million ($423.7 million at a current exchange rate) in claims against the pool. The February 1996 bomb at South Quays, London, an act that unexpectedly shattered an IRA cease-fire, cost the pool about L107 million ($171.1 million at a current exchange rate).
Because Pool Re is the reinsurer of last resort, the 85% discount is solely related to claims activity, said Mr. Lucas, and he pointed out it is not just IRA-related terrorism the pool covers, but any terrorist act aimed at influencing or destabilizing government.
In addition, the uncertain state of the Northern Ireland peace agreement makes it hard to say whether the conventional insurance market will take back terrorism exposures into property coverages. Although an alternative market to Pool Re later emerged to provide buyers with a choice of insurers, it has been forced to heavily discount its rates to keep pace with Pool Re, and some alternative market underwriters are considering reducing their exposures because the rates are too low. Mr. Lucas said he has seen indications that more clients are purchasing cover through Pool Re, but he said it is unclear whether they are new to terrorism coverage or whether they have transferred their business from the alternative market.

Load-Date: June 14, 1999


End of Document