POLICE INVESTIGATE BLAST AT MEXICAN CONSULATE
The New York Times
September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 21, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 390 words
Byline: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR
Body


A special antiterrorism task force was investigating a bomb explosion early yesterday in midtown Manhattant that damaged a gate outside the Mexican Consulate and Mission to the United Nations.
The special unit, the New York City Joint Terrorism Task Force, established 14 months ago, consists of agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and detectives from the city's Police Department.
Spokesmen for both the F.B.I. and the police said no individual or group had claimed responsibility for the explosion, which was described earlier as of ''moderate to high intensity.''
Antiterrorism task force investigates bomb explosion in midtown Manhattan that damaged gate at Mexican Consulate and Mission to United Nations
No injuries were reported in the blast, which occurred at 1:40 A.M. at 8 East 41st Street, near Fifth Avenue and seven blocks from the United Nations.
 
Blast at Consulate in Miami
The New York bombing came several hours after a bomb explosion blew out windows and caused extensive damage to the Mexican Consulate in Miami. There were no injuries there either.
An anonymous caller to a Spanish-language radio station in Miami said the explosion was detonated by an organization known as Omega 7, which opposes the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro. The F.B.I. has called the Omega 7 group the most dangerous terrorist organization in the United States.
Law enforcement authorities in New York declined to comment on the possibility of a link between the two bombings or on a motivation for the attacks while the investigation was under way.
Last month, Mexico and France recognized El Salvador's guerrillaled opposition as a ''representative political force'' in that country. But Mexico and France did not break relations with the military-civilian Government in El Salvador or formally recognize the insurgent movement as a government in exile.
 
Soviet Mission a Target
The insurgents have had the support of the Soviet Union and Cuba while the Reagan Administration has backed the military-civilian junta.
Eight days ago security was increased around the Soviet Mission to the United Nations on Manhattan's Upper East Side after seven firebombs, including one that ex ploded, were placed in the area by a group claiming to be part of the Jewish Defen se League. The Joint Terrorism Task Force has also been investigat ing those incidents.


End of Document