POLICE IN U.S., EUROPE TIGHTEN SECURITY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 18, 1991, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4C
Length: 523 words
Body


WASHINGTON - Police officials across the United States and Europe tightened security Thursday at airports, embassies and other places considered likely targets for terrorists responding to the allied bombing of Iraq.  Some minor incidents of vandalism or violence were reported, but there was none of the large-scale bombings or chemical attacks that some experts had predicted.  For ordinary people in the United States and elsewhere, security was most evident at airports where travelers were advised to arrive early to undergo body searches. They were urged to leave behind cameras, radios, computers and other electronic equipment to speed up luggage searches.  But Newsday reported Thursday that Iraqis had been seeking information on the security of public water systems in the United States, and the FBI has begun warning water utilities about the danger.  A security consulting firm that specializes in protecting public water has been contacted four times since last spring by Iraqis who asked what measures water utilities take to prevent sabotage or contamination, the company's president said in an interview.  The official, Kim Petersen, is a former aide to former secretaries of state Henry A. Kissinger and Alexander M. Haig Jr. He confirmed reports from a water industry source that Iraqis had sought information from his consulting company, HydroSEC of Herndon, Va.  Petersen said the company had given the Iraqis no information and had reported the approaches to the FBI.  Water officials in several regions of the United States, including Chicago and Los Angeles, told Newsday that the FBI had contacted them in recent days to discuss security measures against sabotage.
But utility and security officials stressed that there was no reason for panic and no publicly known evidence that the Iraqis had continued pursuing information on American public water.  In New Delhi, India, police said a bomb had exploded Thursday in an American Airlines office. American Airlines officials in Dallas said the explosion was in a travel agency that had posted an American Airlines sign.  The office was closed at the time of the bombing, and no one was injured.  In the northern German city of Kiel, vandals smashed windows at the ''Kennedy-Haus'' American culture center.  In Milan, Italy, members of an anti-war group hurled firebombs against an international bookstore and a British school overnight.  Rwas Throughout Europe, extraordinary precautions were taken to defend against terrorism.  Eastern European nations, which have generally supported the allied action against Iraq, joined their western neighbors in protecting against the possibility of terrorism.  Extra alerts were in place in Czechoslovakia, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary and even in Moscow. Previous regimes' ill-disguised support for Middle East terrorists had spared the former Soviet Bloc countries.  Police with submachine guns protected American residences in Bonn, and schools for U.S. military families were closed in Germany. The Anglo-American school at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow closed early Thursday and was to stay closed today because of the threats.

Graphic

 
Graphic; LOGO...Gulf War

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document