Policy roundup
The Hill
October 21, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright  2020 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 16
Length: 1223 words
Byline: By The Hill staff
Body


Health care: Coronavirus-related hospitalizations increasing in 37 states: CNBC analysis
  Coronavirus-related hospitalizations are on the rise in a majority of states, a CNBC analysis published Tuesday found.
Hospitalizations were rising by at least 5 percent in 37 states as of Sunday, the network found. It also found several states reached a record high for hospitalization averages, including Alaska, Iowa, Kentucky, Montana, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah, Wisconsin and West Virginia.
By comparison, hospitalizations are only falling in the District of Columbia and Hawaii.
"We are clearly in the second wave in many parts of the Northern Hemisphere and we really need to have more control of this infection at the community level," Isaac Bogoch, an infectious disease specialist and professor at the University of Toronto, told CNBC. "We know exactly what it's like when health care systems are spread beyond capacity. We saw that in New York City. We saw that in Houston. We saw that in many other parts of the United States."
Bogoch added that the numbers have worrisome implications for later in the fall as well as in winter, periods during which people are more likely to be inside and at higher risk of transmission for the virus.
"What's concerning here is that it's only mid-October and there is a long fall and winter," he told the network.
Statistics indicate a new wave of the virus is underway in both the U.S. and Europe after growth slowed over the summer. The seven-day average for new cases in the U.S. is up 13 percent from the previous week, at about 56,000 a day. The number is up from early September's 30,000-per-day average but below the nationwide average of about 70,000 new daily cases seen earlier in the year.
"We're going to get through it. We're probably in the seventh inning of the acute phase of this pandemic right now, but the hardest part is probably ahead," former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb told CNBC earlier this week.
¯ Zack Budryk
International: American terrorism victims reject deal between Trump administration, Sudan
  American victims of terrorism are rejecting President Trump's plan to have Sudan pay hundreds of millions of dollars to settle claims in exchange for dropping its designation as a state sponsor of terrorism.
The majority of victims and the families of victims of the 1998 twin embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania and the majority of victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks say the Trump administration has isolated them and rejected their concerns in negotiations with Sudan.
Trump on Monday announced that the U.S. would lift Sudan's state sponsor of terrorism designation, a pariah status that bars the East African country from engaging with the international community, following the delivery of $335 million to compensate the embassy bombing victims.
The move is part of Trump's efforts to have Sudan open relations with Israel in a foreign policy victory ahead of the Nov. 3 elections.
But the victims, many of whom were foreign nationals working for the U.S. embassies attacked by al Qaeda, say the administration's settlement discriminates against the locally employed embassy staff killed and injured.
Just 12 of the 250 people killed in the twin embassy bombings were Americans. More than 5,000 people were wounded.
U.S. courts in 2014 found that Sudan was liable for providing support to al Qaeda in carrying out the embassy bombings. The victims were awarded $10.2 billion in damages against Sudan, an amount upheld by a Supreme Court ruling in May.
But the Trump administration has negotiated directly with Sudan over settling the claims of terrorism victims as part of the requirements for removing the country from the list of state sponsors of terrorism.
Under that deal, each family of an American killed would get $10 million. Each injured American would receive $3 million.
Many families of African embassy staff killed in the bombings are now U.S. citizens. The deal would give families who suffered a death $800,000 apiece, and $400,000 per family for those that were injured.
"We want a resolution but cannot accept one that betrays so many U.S. embassy victims and the most basic principles of American justice," said Doreen Oport, who was an African employee of the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, and was badly burned in the 1998 attack. She is now an American citizen.
"Sudan's offer intentionally discriminates against victims with the least political clout."
¯ Laura Kelly
Cybersecurity: House Republicans push VA for details on recent data breach
  Republican members of the House Oversight and Reform Committee on Tuesday pushed the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for answers about a recent data breach that exposed personal details of at least 46,000 veterans.
Rep. Jody Hice (R-Ga.), the ranking member of the Subcommittee on Government Operations, led more than a dozen of the committee's Republican members, including House Oversight and Reform Committee ranking member James Comer (R-Ky.), in sending a letter to VA Secretary Robert Wilkie on Tuesday expressing concerns around the security incident.
"Data breaches of any kind are concerning, but particularly so when the targeted data is held in trust by the U.S. Government and where it affects veterans," the members wrote.
The letter was sent more than a month after the VA disclosed that its Financial Services Center had discovered that an unauthorized user had accessed an application used to help veterans pay for medical care and diverted funds meant for community health providers, with Social Security numbers among the data compromised.
The VA noted in September that the compromised system had been disabled while the VA's Office of Information Technology conducted a review of the incident. The VA said notifications were sent out to veterans and next-of-kin of deceased veterans whose data had potentially been compromised and that the agency would provide free credit monitoring.
"Although we commend the VA for its apparent quick response in taking the application offline and investigating the breach, as well as its efforts to notify affected individuals, we are concerned about veterans' personal information being vulnerable and the potential consequences data breaches such as this have on affected veterans," the Republican House Oversight and Reform Committee members wrote Tuesday.
The Republican members requested a staff-level briefing from the VA on the agency's response to the data breach incident, including the potential negative consequences for veterans whose data was exposed and steps the VA is taking to ensure the safety of veteran personal data in the future.
A spokesperson for the VA told The Hill that 13 community care providers were affected by the data breach and only six had payments diverted. The spokesperson noted that the VA is "working with those vendors to compensate the lost funds" along with providing credit monitoring to veterans affected by the breach.
"The Department has made steady progress in improving cybersecurity by taking numerous actions to bolster VA's security posture, including revising policies, adding additional monitoring capabilities, and improving workforce incorporation of cybersecurity and privacy habits," the spokesperson said in an emailed statement to The Hill.
¯ Maggie Miller

Load-Date: January 30, 2021


End of Document