Police: Shootings not part of gang activity
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 21, 2013 Friday


Copyright 2013 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 1
Length: 916 words
Byline: ERIC MANDEL TH staff writer , emandel@wcinet.com
Body


what is the definition of a gang? A gang, as defined by the Department of Justice and the Department of Homeland Security's Immigration and Customs Enforcement: * An association of three or more individuals whose members collectively identify themselves by adopting a group identity, which they use to create an atmosphere of fear or intimidation, frequently by employing one or more of the following: a common name, slogan, identifying sign, symbol, tattoo or other physical marking, style or color of clothing, hairstyle, hand sign or graffiti. * Whose purpose in part is to engage in criminal activity and uses violence or intimidation to further its criminal objectives. * Whose members engage in criminal activity or acts of juvenile delinquency that if committed by an adult would be crimes with the intent to enhance or preserve the association's power, reputation or economic resources. * Other characteristics may include: employing rules for joining and operating within the association; the members may meet on a recurring basis; the association may provide physical protection of its members from others and may seek to exercise control over a particular geographic location or region, or it may simply defend its perceived interests against rivals. The association may also have an identifiable structure.
Contrary to popular belief, the recent shootings and fights in downtown Dubuque are not believed to be gang violence, according to the Dubuque Police Department.
"This is not a gang dispute, per se, where we have two rival gangs disputing over an area of the city," said Assistant Police Chief Terry Tobin. "Essentially what it is is a group of followers, friends - like a clique in high school."
Police arrested Sylvester K. Lewis, 30, of 2410 White St., on Thursday afternoon, making 14 people who have been brought to custody for allegedly participating in a riot that involved gunshots on June 10, with four outstanding warrants yet to be served, according to the Dubuque County Attorney's Office. One man also has been arrested on three felony charges after allegedly shooting at police officers later in the day, and one of the alleged riot participants has been charged with two counts of terrorism for a potentially retaliatory shooting on June 12, when a bullet struck an occupied building.
The participants in the riot have a range of ages, from 18 to 32. In the affidavit for Lewis, Cpl. Craig Salmonson used words such as "rival factions" and a "feud" between "two rival groups." Tobin insists that this is not a gang dispute, but it appears to be centered around "a personal dispute."
The June shootings are an
exclamation point on what Assistant County Attorney Chris Corken calls an ongoing dispute that has been under investigation since March and involves two groups of people.
Despite the descriptions and stereotypes, Corken said these are not gangs in the classic sense.
"It's not that organized; it's fluid," Corken said. "It's just two groups of people that don't like each other, but it has escalated to weapons, and they are putting the rest of us at risk."
The defendants charged with participating in a riot all have received $10,000 bond, which is an abnormally high amount for an
aggravated misdemeanor. Dubuque District Associate Judge Robert Richter kept the bond for one of those men, Cornelius G. Mitchell-Peterson, 23, of 1638 Iowa St., at $10,000 during a bond review hearing Thursday.
Corken has argued that the issue has escalated out of control and is beyond a typical street fight.
"In the past, there weren't guns involved," she said. "This is escalating to where weapons are being used and randomly being shot into the community, and that is simply not acceptable. They have upped the ante."
Corken said the disputes in question are not connected with the fatal shooting involving Marlon Barber, 15, in October or with the shooting allegedly involving Christopher C. Barginear, 29, of 765 Alpine St., in what court records indicate might have been a fight over a woman.
Corken said the fight did not revolve around females, family feuds or drugs.
Dubuque City Council member and NAACP branch President Lynn Sutton agrees with the police that the individuals are not in gangs.
"With gangs, you would see more activity than a shooting," she said.
Sutton agrees with police taking quick action, though she questions the relevance on the charges of "riot" and "terrorism."
"To me, terrorism is a very deliberate action against a person or groups or individuals," Sutton said. "When you think of the Boston Marathon, that definitely was an act of terrorism - it was deliberate. Yes, (Lewis) was using a firearm in public, which is not good, but what is the true definition of terrorism?"
Corken said most of the defendants are originally from Chicago, but some have been residents of Dubuque for multiple years.
Sutton worries about the labels given to all individuals coming from that area.
"People have come here from all over the country," she said. "Let's not label one place. Labels are not good. There have been very positive people who have come from [Chicago]. Judge people on what they do. Judge them on their character."
Tobin said he is pleased with the police response.
"We certainly believe that we've made a measurable dent in the groups that were causing problems last week," Tobin said. "By the same token, we don't really let our guard down. We are continuing to monitor situations to make sure there are no flareups with new groups or old groups."

Load-Date: June 21, 2013


End of Document