Political spats put nation at risk;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
March 28, 2003 Friday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; Our View; Pg.B6; EDITORIAL, COLUMN, COMMENTARY
Length: 334 words
Body


Anti-terrorism measures aren't a joke, but the federal government continues
 to set up punch lines.
 Comedian Jay Leno: ''More warnings issued by all branches of the government
 today that another terrorist attack is imminent.
 We're not sure when, we're not sure where, just that it is coming. Who is
 attacking us now? The cable company?"
Defying all science and delighting all cartoonists, the Department of
 Homeland Security not so long ago encouraged citizens to stock up on duct tape
 and plastic sheeting to ward off deadly radiation.
 Months after Homeland Security unveiled the color-coded alerts, the agency
 clarified that they were meant for emergency officials and didn't carry much
 meaning for the general public. Of course, the alerts were so vague there was
 little a citizen could do anyway - except worry.
 But the most unfunny aspect of anti-terrorism is that politics has
 intruded. Even as the war with Iraq rages, state and local officials are
 battling with the feds on who pays for calling out the National Guard and
 increased security for bridges, ports, railways and nuclear and chemical
 plants. This argument has been going on since shortly after Sept. 11, 2001.
 The New York Times recently canvassed 31 states and found only six followed
 through on the federal directive to call out the National Guard as war with
 Iraq began. Washington and Idaho leaders echoed many other state officials:
 They will wait for a more specific threat. Translation: It's expensive, and
 they don't have the money.
 Anti-terrorism experts say that the $2 billion the administration recently
 proposed for the states isn't enough to adequately prepare for and respond to
 another large-scale terrorist attack. States must balance their budgets, so
 the federal government is the logical choice to finance anti-terrorism
 measures.
 Homeland Security Director Thomas Ridge needs to give states specific
 recommendations regarding security against terrorism, and the feds need to
 fund the necessary supplies and personnel.

Load-Date: April 1, 2003


End of Document