POLL FINDS AMERICANS DIVIDED ON REPLY TO TERROR
The New York Times
February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 910 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Body


Most Americans believe the United States Government could be doing more to combat international terrorism, but they are divided and uncertain about the value of military action, a recent New York Times/CBS News Poll has shown.
Considerable concern about the surge in terrorism emerged from telephone interviews with 1,581 adults from Jan. 19 through 23, as 57 percent said that because of the danger of such attacks they would not want friends to travel abroad this year.
The poll revealed a sense of personal helplessness and a desire for greater government action. Fifty-two percent of those surveyed said they thought there was nothing that individuals could do to protect themselves against terrorism. The poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
By a margin of 79 to 11 percent, those surveyed thought Western European countries could be doing more.
Only 38 percent expressed confidence that the United States Government was doing all it could to protect Americans, and 55 percent thought more could be done. Those who said the Government was not doing enough to protect Americans were most heavily represented among women, blacks, the poor, the less educated and people who disapproved of Mr. Reagan's performance.
 
No Consensus on Response
But there was no agreement on what measures to take to reduce terrorism. Hardly any of those questioned said they believed less news coverage of terrorists would help. Most respondents focused on security, retaliation and punishment rather that attempts to address the grievances of certain groups and other root causes of the violence.
Public support for the use of military force was limited, however, and seemed to have rapidly declined from a peak after Palestinian gunmen attacked passengers in the Rome and Vienna airports Dec. 27.
The drop in the military option's appeal could be seen in a comparison of The Times/CBS News Poll with earlier interviews done in a Harris Survey soon after the airport shootings. Of those questioned by Harris from Jan. 3 through 7, 72 percent endorsed the idea of a warning from leading nations that countries backing terrorism would be invaded. Seventy percent in the Harris Survey approved of ''a policy that would openly call for air strikes'' against terrorist camps and headquarters. That telephone poll of 1,254 people also had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
Two weeks later, The Times/CBS News Poll, phrasing the questions somewhat differently, found considerably less enthusiasm for the use of force. More people thought it would worsen terrorism rather than reduce it.
 
Pessimism on Military Action
Respondents were asked, ''If the United States made it a policy to take military action against a government it believes has trained or financed the terrorists, do you think that would reduce terrorism, or would it only make things worse?'' Forty percent said terrorism would be reduced, and 46 percent said it would make things worse.
A similar question about taking military action ''against those responsible every time a terrorist attack affected Americans'' drew similar replies, with 40 percent saying it would reduce terrorism and 49 percent saying it would make things worse.
Many people who rejected the military option in one situation endorsed it in the other, so that altogether 56 percent of those questioned found a situation in which they thought force would reduce terrorism. When they were asked if such action should be taken even when innocent people might be killed, however, the portion favoring force dropped to 31 percent of the total.
Since military and intelligence officials have usually been unable to find ''clean'' targets - those without innocent civilians nearby - the poll results appeared to suggest a political problem for President Reagan if he were to use military force after the cooling of the immediate outrage after a terrorist attack.
 
Reagan and the Militants
On the other hand, the greatest support for the use of military force came from those groups that are strongest in their support of Mr. Reagan: whites, males and Republicans, as well as those who are under 45 years of age, live in suburban communities, live in the South and earn over $35,000 a year.
Support for military retaliation also came from those who approve of the President's performance in his job and say things are going better in the United States than five years ago.
Perceptions of the problem seemed to correspond closely to the picture being drawn by United States Government officials. Sixty-four percent of the respondents, for example, said they thought foreign governments were involved in planning and financing most terrorist acts. This is a point emphasized recently by Mr. Reagan and other officials in Washington, who have blamed Libya for supporting the Palestinian faction of Abu Nidal, which the United States says carried out the Rome and Vienna attacks.
Those interviewed took the same view, mentioning Libya most often among the countries they saw as responsible for terrorism. Twenty-nine percent named Libya. By contrast, only 3 percent cited Syria, which has not recently been mentioned by American officials, but which Israeli and American intelligence agencies link to terrorist attacks on United States Marine headquarters and United States Embassy buildings in Beirut, Lebanon. The Soviet Union was named by 15 percent of the respondents, Iran by 9 percent and Israel by 1 percent.

Graphic

 
Chart of attitudes toward terrorism, based on 1581 telephone interviews


End of Document