Poll finds more folks have doubts about Bush
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 20, 2005 Wednesday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 351 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Body


Americans have growing doubts about President George W. Bush's honesty and effectiveness, according to a poll taken at a time when people are uneasy with the war in Iraq and nervous about terrorism.
Half of those in the poll taken by the Pew Research Center, 49 percent, said they believed the president was trustworthy, while almost as many, 46 percent, said he was not. Bush was at 62 percent on this measure in a September 2003 Pew poll and at 56 percent in a Gallup poll in April. One of Bush's strong suits throughout his presidency has been the perception by a majority of people that he is honest.
The indication of a slide in trust comes as the White House is answering questions about top aide Karl Rove's involvement in the leak of a CIA operative's identity.
"If the economy were doing better, the Iraq war wasn't as tenuous and people weren't as uneasy about terrorism, then they might be willing to cut Bush some slack on the Rove issue," said Robert Shapiro, who specializes in public opinion at Columbia University. "And it's all tied back to how the war was justified, so it raises all those issues as well."
Only half the public is closely following the allegations that Rove leaked the identity of a CIA operative, according to Pew. Democrats are predictably more inclined to say Rove should resign than Republicans.
But GOP support for Rove is lukewarm. About four in 10 Republicans said Rove shouldn't resign; about the same number said they were not sure.
Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center, said an analysis of the survey suggests the Rove controversy is contributing to the president's credibility problem.
About half, 49 percent, in the Pew poll said they approved of the job being done by Bush on terrorism -- as low as he has been on that issue since Sept. 11, 2001.
Bush's job approval in the Pew poll was 44 percent, with 48 percent disapproving.
The poll of 1,502 adults was taken July 13-17 and has a margin of sampling error of 3 percentage points.
---
STLtoday.com You've read what the scientific poll says. Now vote in our nonscientific poll online. Visit STLtoday.com/news.

Load-Date: July 21, 2005


End of Document