Poll shows Americans protective of civil liberties
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
April 30, 1995, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 713 words
Byline: Los Angeles Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- Even after the Oklahoma City bombing, Americans' concerns about terrorism are strongly bounded by fears that a crackdown could endanger civil liberties, a Los Angeles Times Poll has found.
Although the survey found strong support for specific measures to tighten surveillance of suspected terrorists, it also suggests that Americans are ambivalent about signing over individual freedoms in the quest for greater security from terrorist violence.
Americans say they would be willing to give up some civil liberties to bolster the fight against terrorism. But slightly more of those polled worry that government will go too far in restricting "the average person's civil liberties" than fear government will fail to enact "strong, new anti-terrorism laws."
These concerns are substantially more pronounced among conservatives than liberals -- a finding that may help explain why the Republican-controlled Congress is planning to examine anti-terrorism proposals at a more measured pace after promising breakneck action.
By a margin of more than 9-1, Americans credit President Clinton for an effective response to the catastrophe. And the survey found Americans much more reluctant to blame anyone other than the principal suspect, Timothy J. McVeigh, and the militia movement to which he has been linked. Majorities reject the idea that talk show hosts, conservatives in Congress or gun-control opponents bear responsibility for creating a climate that encouraged the tragedy. Even the militias are fingered with substantial responsibility by only about half of those surveyed.
The Times Poll surveyed 1,032 adults Wednesday and Thursday; it has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.
The most basic measure of sentiment about the country's direction is actually slightly less pessimistic than it was in March, the most recent survey taken before the bombing. In the new poll, 56 percent of those surveyed say the country is headed in the wrong direction, compared to 60 percent in March.
Almost half of those polled say terrorism is a serious problem in the United States. About as many also say they expect terrorist attacks like the bombing to be common in the future -- although only 15 percent say they expect them to be very common. Half of those polled say the attack has shaken their personal sense of security, although only one-quarter say they have been greatly shaken. Perhaps most revealing, just 35 percent say they worry about terrorism while they are in public places -- while 64 percent say they do not.
As a general proposition, those surveyed consider anti-terrorism laws too weak. Just 21 percent say existing laws are adequate to the challenge, while 4 percent say they are too strong; 57 percent say they are not strong enough.
And there is substantial support for giving the FBI greater latitude to monitor and investigate suspected terrorist groups. Nearly three-in-four surveyed support loosening restrictions on FBI infiltration of groups suspected of plotting criminal acts. Sixty-four percent of those polled say the FBI should be given more freedom to trace telephone calls and easier access to information from credit agencies, hotels and airlines, as both Clinton and congressional Republicans have proposed.
But those instincts for a crackdown are tangled in concerns about protecting civil liberties. Fifty-seven percent of those surveyed say they would be willing to "give up some civil liberties if that were necessary to curb terrorism in this country." But when asked whether the fight against terrorism will require the "average person to give up some civil liberties," Americans are closely divide: 49 percent said yes, and 43 percent said no.
But 70 percent say they are worried that new laws may restrict civil liberties, while 31 percent say they are very concerned. (Only 28 percent say they are not worried.)
Although only preliminary, these findings suggest a shifting calculus in the politics of domestic security. With the Communist threat having evaporated -- and concerns over terrorism turning not only toward foreign radicals but to far-right domestic groups -- key elements of the Republican coalition appear to be extending their traditional concerns about intrusive government to include law enforcement.

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document