Poll Shows High Level of Concern Over Terrorism Threat
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
October 8, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 270 words
Byline: MARJORIE CONNELLY
Highlight: President Obama continues to get low marks on his handling of the threat from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. 
Body


President Obama continues to get low marks on his handling of the threat from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. More than a third of the public views his policies as making the country less safe, and over half are concerned about another terrorist attack in the near future, according to the latest CBS News poll.
The poll also found that only a third think that Mr. Obama has done a good job assessing the threat from the Islamic State, although even fewer, 17 percent, say that Congress has done well in evaluating the risk posed by the militant group. American intelligence agencies are viewed slightly more positively by the public: 40 percent say they have done a good job gauging the threat from the group.  
Although the economy tops the list of important issues in next month's election, terrorism comes in second, tied with health care. Just over half of voters say the Republican Party will do a better job dealing with terrorism, while only a third think the Democrats would be better.
Thirty-six percent of those surveyed said Mr. Obama's policies had made the country less safe from terrorism, while 29 percent said his policies had made the country more secure. There are strong partisan differences: 64 percent of Republicans think that Mr. Obama's course of action has made the United States more vulnerable, while 53 percent of Democrats think his policies have made the country safer.
The nationwide telephone poll was conducted Oct. 3 to 6 with 1,260 adults of whom 1,068 said they were registered to vote.  The margin of sampling error for both groups is plus or minus three percentage points. 

Load-Date: October 8, 2014


End of Document