Polled And Confused
The New York Times
October 10, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 765 words
Byline: By JOHN TIERNEY
Body


You may have heard that American voters are disappointed. They are disappointed with Dennis Hastert and the rest of Congress. They are very disappointed with the war in Iraq. They are very, very disappointed with President Bush.
  I share their unhappiness, but I must confess to one further regret. I am disappointed with the voters -- or at least the ones who show up in public-opinion polls. They keep complaining that Washington doesn't understand what they want, but who on earth could?
Early in the Iraq war, Americans told pollsters they favored it and considered it a major part of the war on terrorism. Then they decided the war was a mistake and didn't reduce the risk of terrorism. Yet as they got angrier and angrier at Republicans for making a mess of Iraq, they kept telling pollsters that they didn't trust the Democrats to do a better job of dealing with terrorism. 
  Their feelings on the economy are even harder to fathom. In the New York Times/CBS News poll released yesterday, a solid majority of voters said the economy was doing well. When asked if they were making enough to pay their bills and sock away savings, they also sounded upbeat -- more upbeat than the respondents 10 years ago who were asked that question when the White House was in Democratic hands. 
  Yet this year's respondents solidly disapproved of Bush's handling of the economy and said they trusted Democrats to do a better job of it. In part, the reaction reflected the generalized anger at Bush and Republicans. But there's another factor, too: the voters like each party for the wrong reasons.
  They can't break their old prejudices. They still think of Republicans as the tough, worldly realists best able to deal with foreign enemies, and Democrats as the compassionate idealists protecting the little guy at home. At one time these stereotypes made sense, but not anymore.
  The Republicans have become Wilsonian idealists in foreign policy, the neoconservative innocents abroad who thought they could quickly transform the Middle East. A few Democrats have tried proposing more pragmatic foreign policies -- like treating terrorism as a law-enforcement problem, not a war -- but most are terrified of sounding weak because they read the polls.
  Despite the Republican failures in Iraq, voters maintain their longstanding mistrust of Democrats' handling of foreign policy. Vic Fingerhut, a Democratic pollster working in battleground states, reported Sunday in The Washington Post that swing voters overwhelmingly trust Republicans on Iraq, terrorism and other foreign policy issues.
  On the domestic front, voters still trust Democrats to deal with issues like education and Social Security even though the Democrats have run out of ideas. Their basic educational strategy is to spend more money and keep teachers' unions happy. They have no plan to keep Social Security solvent, except ''taxing the rich,'' which won't do the trick. 
  The G.O.P.'s Social Security plan last year would have left the poor better off than under the current system, but Republicans couldn't overcome their image as the cruel despoilers of the Democrats' New Deal. They did succeed (with President Clinton's grudging cooperation) in reforming welfare. That did more to break the cycle of poverty than anything done during the Great Society, but in voters' minds the Democrats remained the party of compassion.
  Republicans fought to improve schools at the local level by giving more choices and power to students, parents and principals. These reforms (like vouchers and charter schools) were popular in places where Republicans overcame the resistance of Democrats and teachers' unions, but in national polls, voters preferred Democrats to deal with education. 
  So President Bush abandoned the party's principles and made a deal with Ted Kennedy to enact the No Child Left Behind law, a centralized Democratic-style plan that gave the Republicans a brief boost in the polls. Like previous Democratic plans for reviving education with regulations from Washington, it was an expensive flop, but voters still tell pollsters they trust the Democrats to fix the schools.
  Maybe someday a candidate with Republican domestic policies and Democratic foreign policies will miraculously catch fire with voters. For now, the best hope is for a return to divided government and gridlock, so that each party can stop the other from fulfilling its poll-driven agenda. 
  Of course, if that happens, voters will be complaining to pollsters about how little gets done in Washington. But they won't be as disappointed as they are now.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 10, 2006


End of Document