Polls don't deter Bachmann in Iowa
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 31, 2011 Monday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2011 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 426 words
Byline: KEVIN DIAZ; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Body


Amid new polls showing Michele Bachmann far behind the leaders in the GOP nominating race, the Minnesota presidential hopeful showed no signs of losing heart Sunday on ABC's "This Week" with Christiane Amanpour.
"We're doing exactly what we need to do," Bachmann said. "We're looking forward to January 3," the date of the Iowa caucuses.
Her comments came as a Des Moines Register poll showed her with 8 percent support in Iowa, down from 22 percent two months ago. She's now in fourth place behind Herman Cain (23 percent), Mitt Romney (22 percent) and Ron Paul (12 percent). One bright spot: Her main Tea Party rival, Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, logged in at 7 percent, tied with Newt Gingrich.
"And so it's amazing what a difference several weeks can make in the course of a presidential campaign," Bachmann said. "These are snapshots in time".
'On all the states'
Despite her expressions of confidence, Bachmann dodged Amanpour's questions about whether Iowa, as some of the congresswoman's own top aides have said, is a must-win state for her.
"We're focused on it as we are on all the states," Bachmann demurred.
In her 13-minute outing on national TV, Bachmann remained steadfast in her criticism of President Obama's involvement in NATO's mission to help the rebels who recently killed Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. "The last chapter isn't written," she warned.
Immigrant claims
But she had to backtrack from her recent claim on illegal immigration, where she said that "59,000, alone this year, came across the border ... from Yemen, from Syria ... nations that are state sponsors of terrorism."
Yemen has not been classified as a state sponsor of terrorism (as Bachmann had to acknowledge on ABC), and the Border Patrol report she cited was referring to the total number of illegal immigrants apprehended from countries other than Mexico.
Of those, only 663 had ties to countries with links to terrorism, and only a handful of those came from Yemen or Syria. (Amanpour's figures, not disputed by Bachmann on-air: 11 from Yemen, five from Syria).
Nevertheless, Bachmann said, even one is too many, and her critics are "missing the point" about the larger problem of border security.
Amanpour also pressed Bachmann on her claim that Perry took her proposal for flattening the tax rates, an idea that's been around in GOP circles for decades.
In fact, Perry's plan is different in that he'd give taxpayers the option of a single 20 percent rate, while Bachmann would abolish the entire tax code and replace it with several unspecified "flatter" but not flat tax rates.

Load-Date: August 22, 2012


End of Document