Poll: Terrorism concern rises among Pa. voters
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 22, 2004 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL NEWS PHILADELPHIA & ITS SUBURBS; Pg. B08
Length: 612 words
Byline: Tom Infield INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


A new poll of voters in Pennsylvania detects a slight uptick of concern about domestic security and the war on terrorism.
The survey - conducted for MSNBC and Knight Ridder, The Inquirer's parent company - found that, over a month's time, these issues had pushed past the economy as the number-one concern in the state.
"The populace, I think, is really scared," said Charles Stirzel, of Richboro, one of 625 likely voters who responded to a survey.
"The Twin Towers - if that's a prelude to what's going to come, we better do something about it," Stirzel, a Bush voter and retired manufacturing supervisor, said in a follow-up interview.
The electorate's increased concern over terrorism has been reflected in the campaign rhetoric coming from both President Bush and Sen. John Kerry, who in recent days have talked about this subject above all others.
Kerry has charged that the war in Iraq had diverted American resources from the terrorist threat against the United States. Bush has suggested that Kerry's election would make the nation more vulnerable to another major attack.
The poll was conducted over a four-day period, from Oct. 15 through Monday, by Mason-Dixon Polling & Research Inc.
It found that, despite three presidential debates, continued violence in Iraq, and thousands of TV ads, very little had changed in terms of voter opinion from a similar survey done by the same firm in mid-September.
Bush and Kerry remained locked in a statistical tie, with 46 percent of respondents favoring Bush, 45 percent favoring Kerry, and 9 percent saying they were either undecided or committed to a minor-party candidate. In the previous poll, Kerry had 45 percent and Bush, 44 percent, with 11 undecided or supporting a third-party candidate.
The poll's statistical margin of error was plus or minus 4 percentage points.
Bush's job-approval rating remained unchanged. About as many voters said he was doing a good job as said he was doing a bad job.
Fifty percent of respondents said the country was on the wrong track, while 43 percent said it was on the right track.
Among Kerry voters, if not among voters overall, the economy remained the top issue by about the same margin as in September. About three in 10 cited it as number one on their list.
"For me, personally, that's still it - mainly because my daughter graduated from college about a year ago and still can't find a decent job," said Kerry voter Ken Gordon, of Northeast Philadelphia, a federal government employee.
The reason that terrorism, overall, replaced the economy as the number-one issue was a significant rise in the number of Bush voters who put it at the top of their list. Thirty-six percent had done so in September; almost 45 percent did so in the recent poll.
Roseanne Beidler, a retired bank vice president from Bethlehem, said that Bush's strong commitment to fighting terrorism, together with his personal faith in God, had helped her decide he was the better leader.
"Bush's strength to lead the war on terrorism is helped by his deep faith," she said.
The Knight Ridder/MSNBC poll, like many others in recent months, found a sharp contrast in candidate preference between voters who worry a lot about terrorism in general and those who worry a lot about the course of the war in Iraq.
Five times as many Kerry voters as Bush voters said Iraq was first on their list of concerns.
"I think it's Bush's personal war," said Kerry voter John Carbonara, a retired police officer in Philadelphia.
He said the war made it harder for the United States to fight terror and also affected the economy. "Because of Iraq, the economy is not strong."
Contact Tom Infield at 610-313-8205 at tinfield@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: September 1, 2005


End of Document