Poll Rates Hazards to Air Travel
The New York Times
February 3, 1989, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 393 words
Byline: By MICHAEL R. KAGAY
Body


A majority of Americans support increased anti-terrorist measures on international flights. Even so, nearly two out of three say inadequate airplane maintenance poses a greater danger to air travelers than terrorism does, according to a Media General-Associated Press survey.
Fifty-six percent of the 1,162 American adults interviewed said airline security on international flights was inadequate, and 57 percent said the United States Government should be doing more to protect American citizens against terrorism. The margin of sampling error for the poll was plus or minus three percentage points.
As a practical matter, though, terrorism was not the chief danger seen to be facing air travelers. When asked whether terrorism or inadequate airplane maintenance posed a greater danger, 64 percent chose inadequate maintenance, while just 24 percent answered terrorism.
The telephone survey was conducted Jan. 4 through Jan. 12, after a terrorist bomb downed Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland, killing 259 people on the plane and 11 on the ground. In response to the bombing, the Federal Aviation Administration ordered United States airlines to X-ray all checked baggage on flights from Europe and the Mideast.
 
Attitudes on Searches
Ninety-six percent of the poll's respondents said foreign airlines should also be required to X-ray checked baggage. Seventy-three percent said they would support requiring airlines to hand-search all checked baggage on international flights, even if that meant passengers would have to show up three hours before takeoff.
But the respondents were closely divided over any ban against carry-on luggage on international flights; 49 percent supported such a ban, while 45 percent opposed it.
Fifty-seven percent said airlines should be required to announce all terrorist threats they receive. Forty-five percent said the United States Government should also announce all terrorist threats it receives against airlines, even if such threats occurred each day and were of uncertain legitimacy.
The poll did not identify those who had flown recently or those who had taken international flights, so their views could not be studied separately. But the views of respondents with over $50,000 annual income, who might be presumed to fly more frequently, were not substantially different from those of all adults on key questions in the poll.


End of Document