Poll shows support for NYPD on terrorism
USA TODAY
March 14, 2012 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 642 words
Byline: John Bacon with staff and wire reports
Body


Most city voters think the New York Police Department has been effective in fighting terrorism, and a majority say the NYPD has acted appropriately in its dealings with Muslims, according to a poll released Tuesday.
NYPD's surveillance of Muslims since 9/11 has come under scrutiny in recent weeks since revelations that police monitored mosques and Muslims around the New York metropolitan area -- and kept tabs on Muslim student groups at universities in Upstate New York, Connecticut, New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
The Quinnipiac University poll found 82% of those surveyed thought NYPD counterterrorism efforts had been effective. Asked whether the NYPD dealt with Muslims fairly or targeted them unfairly, 58% thought the NYPD acted appropriately, while 29% thought police were unfair.
737 damaged in roll off Atlanta runway
A Boeing 737 sustained "significant damage" when it rolled off a runway at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, officials said.
Delta Air Lines spokesman Eric Torbenson said mechanics were testing  engines when it experienced a problem with the braking system. Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman Kathleen Bergen said there were two maintenance people but no passengers on the plane when the incident occurred. No injuries were reported.
U.S. allowing tribe to kill 2 bald eagles
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has taken the unusual step of issuing a permit allowing an American Indian tribe to kill two bald eagles for religious purposes. The agency's decision comes after the Northern Arapaho Tribe in Wyoming filed a federal lawsuit last year.
"I've not heard of a take permit for a bald eagle," said Steve Moore, a lawyer with the Native American Rights Fund in Boulder, Colo.
Federal law prohibits the killing of bald eagles, the national bird, in almost all cases. The government keeps eagle feathers and body parts in a federal repository, and tribal members can apply for them for use in religious ceremonies.
Boston neighborhoods lose power
A smoky electrical transformer fire  forced emergency crews to shut off power to a large swath of Boston's Back Bay section, leaving neighborhoods  from Kenmore Square to the edge of the Boston Public Garden without electricity.
There were no immediate reports of serious injuries, but streets in the area were shut down.  Subway trains were not stopping at stations in the area. Massachusetts Turnpike exits leading to the area were closed. Mike Duran, a spokesman for the utility NStar, said a problem in one electrical substation spread to a second one. He said the power outage was affecting Back Bay, Chinatown, the theater district and parts of the South End. He said about 20,000 customers were affected.
6 fingers from child found in Hawaii bin
Six fingers found in a sealed plastic bag in a Honolulu trash bin are likely from a girl who's 2 to 4 years old, police said.
Authorities had received no calls a day after making a public plea for information about the discovery, CrimeStoppers Sgt. Kim Buffett said.  Buffett said it was not clear how long the fingers had been in the bag, which was found by a woman digging through trash looking for bottles and cans at the Kukui Gardens housing complex.
"Normally when you find body parts, you find the rest of the body," Buffett said.
Gettysburg pulls assassin's bobblehead
Bobblehead dolls of the man who assassinated President  Lincoln have been pulled from sale at the Gettysburg National Military Park visitors' center bookstore, center officials said.
The dolls of John Wilkes Booth with a handgun were removed from shelves on Saturday, a day after a reporter for The Evening Sun newspaper in Hanover, Pa., asked about them, Gettysburg Foundation spokeswoman Dru Anne Neil said.
"On rare occasions, there's an item that might cause concern, and obviously the bobbleheads appeared to be doing that," Neil said. 

Load-Date: March 14, 2012


End of Document