POLL: BRITONS FEAR SPIDERS MORE THAN TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 20, 2004 Wednesday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2004 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: DAYBREAK; THE SKINNY; Pg. C1; Column
Length: 289 words
Body


That's at least according to a survey of a thousand Britons. Household creepy-crawlies frighten Britons more than terrorist attacks, or even death.
Compiled from World Features Syndicate; This is True; Norfolk Eastern Daily Press; cnnalerts.com; ajokeaday.com E-mail us at theskinny@ madison.com. 
Terrorism only came second on the list of respondents' top 10 fears, according to the survey conducted by RSGB Omnibus for Universal Pictures UK Ltd.
Another phobia -- snakes -- ranked third, followed by a fear of heights. Death came in a surprising fifth place as the nation's greatest fear.
/ Forward-thinking, way back when
Early innovations:
*Sell-by dates on food products -- 1942.
*Use of checkbooks -- 1660 (England).
*Color photos in papers -- 1904.
*Electronic money transfers -- 1871.
*Wal-Mart begins computerizing -- 1966.
/ Gripping tale
David Page, 40, of Coltishall, Norfolk, England, was in his yard when he spotted a strange metallic object.
He picked it up, wiped it off, opened a cap, found a button, pushed that button … and only then decided that perhaps, maybe, such an action wasn't a good idea.
"What if it's a bomb?" he wondered. Still holding the button down, he called for help.
"I thought I was going to be blown into millions of bits," Page said, adding that he taped his thumb to the object to ensure he wouldn't let go.
But after four hours, bomb technicians declared the object safe: it was a spare part from a car.
/ Dopey joke o' the day
Q. How many programmers does it take to change a light bulb?
A. None. That's a hardware issue.
/ Wait! That doesn't make any sense!
In Cleveland, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia banned all audio and video media from the room as he accepted a free speech award from a civic club.

Load-Date: October 21, 2004


End of Document