Poll: War on terror not easing fears;
Despite new security measures, only 24 percent
said they felt safer than they did two years ago.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 10, 2003 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A06
Length: 498 words
Byline: Frank Davies INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Two years after the Sept. 11 attacks, most Americans feel no safer from terrorist threats despite the war on terrorism, efforts at homeland security, and the invasion of Iraq, according to a survey released yesterday.
In a poll conducted last week, 28 percent said they felt less safe than they did two years ago, 48 percent said they were neither safer nor less safe, and 24 percent said they felt safer.
In addition, a trend-line question asked repeatedly over the two years since the attacks shows a steady level of concern about more terrorist attacks at between 70 percent and 80 percent. Last week's poll showed that 73 percent were concerned about the possibility of additional attacks on the United States.
The poll of 1,217 people was conducted by Knowledge Networks for the Program on International Policy Attitudes at the University of Maryland. It has a margin of error of 3 to 4 percentage points.
A majority of those surveyed also think the Bush administration is overemphasizing military and unilateral actions in the war on terrorism and should put more emphasis on diplomatic and economic methods and seek more help from the United Nations and allies.
And 64 percent said the U.S. military presence in the Middle East increased rather than decreased the likelihood of terrorist attacks against the United States. Also, 58 percent agree with the statement that "the United States is playing the role of world policeman in the Middle East more than it should be."
A similar poll by ABC News, also released this week, found that 48 percent said the Iraq war increased the risk of terrorist attacks; 40 percent said it reduced the risk. In April, during the war, almost 60 percent thought the war had reduced the threat of terrorism.
While the University of Maryland survey reveals criticism of some administration policies, it also shows a fairly steady level of support for Bush.
Only 26 percent said they were less likely to vote for him in 2004 because of his handling of the war on terrorism; 41 percent said they were more likely, and 31 said his war policies had no effect on how they would vote.
"We're still seeing a rally-'round-the-President effect, inside the context of terrorism," said Steve Kull, director of the program. "After all, we are at war."
"At the same time, the public seems ready to prod the administration to pursue some different approaches," he added. "There's a feeling that we're overexposed in the Middle East, that we're a target. That doesn't mean pull out completely, but find a way to lower the U.S. profile."
Administration officials have argued that the Iraq war would help transform the Middle East and reduce the threat of global terrorism.
"We are fighting that enemy in Iraq and Afghanistan today, so that we do not meet him again on our own streets, in our own cities," Bush said in his speech to the nation Sunday.
Complete poll results are available at www.pipa.org 
Contact reporter Frank Davies at 202-383-6054 or fdavies@krwashington.com.  

Load-Date: August 16, 2005


End of Document