POLLING PLACES;
PRECAUTIONS AGAINST TERRORISM;
Election workers are briefed on some signs of danger
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 9, 2004, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5B
Length: 311 words
Byline: Mark Brunswick; Staff Writer
Body


Minnesota election workers have been briefed on potential signs of terrorist activity at polling places, including people with shaved heads or short hair and unusual herbal or flower smells.
     A shaved head and the smell of flower water might be signs of "purification" by a suicide bomber, state officials said.
   Concerned that terrorism could disrupt the Nov. 2 general election, state officials also warned poll workers to pay attention to people who may seem to be praying fervently or whispering to someone. They also are being told to watch for unusual shapes or bulges under clothing as possible bombs and to be wary of packages, particularly around heating, air conditioning or air-intake systems.
     Minnesota Secretary of State Mary Kiffmeyer said Wednesday that the warning notices, which will be posted at the state's 3,800 polling places, are designed to raise awareness, particularly after terrorist activity disrupted elections in Spain earlier this year.
     "Terrorism will not win on election day in Minnesota," Kiffmeyer said.
     The precautions should not mean that poll workers, who have good track records with voters, will single anyone out.
     Al Bataglia, the director of the state's Homeland Security & Emergency Management division, said that there is no evidence of increased terrorist activity in Minnesota but that state officials thought it wise to be cautious.
     At a State Office Building news conference, Kiffmeyer said the state has two backup computer databases at undisclosed locations to account for votes in the event of a disruption at a polling place.
     Even in the event of a terrorist attack (or a natural disaster such as flood or snowstorm), the November elections would continue, Kiffmeyer said. State law has no provisions for calling off an election.
     Mark Brunswick is at      mbrunswick@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: September 10, 2004


End of Document