Pondering crime's impact on every corner of society
USA TODAY
March 19, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; MA
Length: 740 words
Byline: Cathy Hainer
Body


Crime is a hot-button issue this election year. The major newsweeklies
have all tackled the subject. Now special-interest magazines are
taking their turn.
SOUTHERN VICE: The Oxford American, a sort of Atlantic Monthly
of the South, has released a special double issue devoted to crime,
and it's a standout. Is crime in the South so different from crime
in New England or the Northwest? Not really. There are rapes and
robberies in Maine just like there are in Mississippi. But the
South has greater stereotypes to overcome. The specter of "the
gracious Old South of . . . chain gangs and carnivorous sheriffs
in Ray-Bans . . . where violence was always bubbling on someone's
back burner" still terrifies Northern liberals, reports Hal Crowther.
Also, the South is the most crime-ridden area of the country in
many categories, including murder, rape and burglary, reports
Dave Shiflett.
Overall, Oxford American avoids the statistics and approaches
crime with odd but interesting human-interest stories, like Florence
King's essay on how crime is affecting the arts. Sister Helen
Prejean contributes a piece on working with death-row inmates
and visiting the set of Dead Man Walking, which is based
on her book. Southern writers Clyde Edgerton and Donna Tartt contribute
short stories. Even the dining review addresses the issue by looking
at how rampant neighborhood crime is changing the New Orleans
dining scene.
The centerpiece of the issue is Dennis Covington's report on "The
Kentucky Race Murder of 1995." In the small town of Guthrie,
a rowdy 19-year-old named Michael Westerman was shot by a black
teen-ager. Interestingly, Tony Horowitz reported on the same story
for the March 18 issue of The New Yorker. Both draw the
same sad conclusion, summed up by a Guthrie resident: "There's
going to be a race war. It's gonna start in Guthrie. I don't know
where it's gonna end up at." (Six issues, $ 24; 800-269-6926.)
SOUTHERN VICE II: The April Emerge also looks at racial crime,
specifically the recent torchings of black churches in the South.
In a rampage reminiscent of the civil-rights movement years, no
fewer than 17 black churches have been destroyed in the last year.
(10 issues, $ 18.95; 800-888-0488)
ANTI-GAY VIOLENCE: In the April Out, writer and gay activist Michelangelo
Signorile re-
ports on how a bungled robbery-turned-murder in Oregon has focused
attention on the controversial labeling of "hate crimes." The
issue, in fact, has split the gay and lesbian community. Anti-violence
activists are pushing for crimes against homosexuals to be legally
classified as hate crimes for two reasons, reports Signorile.
First, to keep a record of anti-gay violence, and second, to seek
more severe punishment for these crimes. Ironically, many gays
and lesbians believe violent crimes motivated by hate should not
get heavier penalties because that would play into their antagonists'
belief that minority groups are getting "special treatment."
But Signorile calls that stance silly. "It is, after all, activists'
duty to exploit every opportunity to advance their message about
homophobia, and to open people's minds." (10 issues; $ 19.95;
800-876-1199.)
TERRORISM BILL: The March 25 issue of the recently redesigned
Nation tackles crime on an international scale, namely terrorism.
April 19 is the anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing, and
Clinton is sure to press the Republicans on their "failure"
to pass an anti-terrorism bill, writes David Cole. But, he ponders,
would an anti-terrorism bill "alter the constitutional balance
between government power and personal freedom"? Those in favor
of increasing governmental power to fight terrorism put forth
two main arguments. One, that terrorism has been taken up by religious
groups and cults who "don't abide by our bounds." Two, that
technological advances have made chemical, even nuclear, weapons
more widely available. But, says Cole, let's put the matter in
perspective. After all, more than 20,000 people are murdered in
the USA every year, yet Congress has passed only "symbolic"
gun control measures. "Thus we knowingly tolerate many conditions
that pose far greater risk of harm to ourselves than terrorism."
(47 issues, $ 48; 800-333-8536.)
SHORT TAKES: By far the most arresting photographs in any magazine
this month are Life's stills of conjoined twins Abigail and Brittany
Hensel, two beautiful little girls joined at the torso. . . .
Cowles Magazines honors Women's History Month with the second
annual issue of Women's History.

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, B/W (3)

Load-Date: March 20, 1996


End of Document