Pool Re competition exemption debated; Opinions vary on whether benefits of government-backed reinsurer outweigh its drawbacks
Business Insurance
February 16, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 29
Length: 901 words
Byline: PETA MILLER
Body


LONDON-Not all in the U.K. insurance industry agree with the provisional conclusion of the Office of Fair Trading that the benefits of the United Kingdom's government-backed terrorism reinsurer continue to outweigh any competition-distorting side effects of the arrangement.
U.K. buyers and brokers, with some qualifications, express support for Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd. and the proposal of the OFT, the government's competition watchdog, that Pool Re be exempted from the 1998 Competition Act because, they say, the system offers fairly priced coverage that is certain to pay out.
The OFR will make a final decision about the proposed exemption following a public consultation period through March 10.
But insurers operating in the terrorism market are divided on the issue. Some say they believe the pool remains the most viable option in the absence of a credible alternative, while others maintain that capacity is available and the government should withdraw.
The OFT, which has powers to investigate suspected infringements under the act, has acknowledged that some of the rules that govern Pool Re-which is backed by the U.K. Treasury and offers reinsurance to direct insurers-do have competition-distorting effects. But it said that the benefits provided by Pool Re, which since its formation in 1993 has ensured that all commercial properties have access to terror coverage, outweigh the negative impact of any competition distortion.
''We are very pleased with Pool Re,'' said David Gamble, executive director of the London-based Assn. of Risk & Insurance Managers.
''Companies have to have insurance in order to carry on doing business; it is a very good example of insurance as an enabler without which a lot of buildings would not be going up in the City,'' Mr. Gamble said, referring to London's business district.
David Larkin, formerly the head of insurance at the London office of Chicago-based real estate company Jones Lang LaSalle and currently a property insurance consultant to Archibald Reid (Insurance Brokers) Ltd. of London, also said he supports the pool and its continued exemption from competition law because of the certainty it gives buyers compared with commercial companies.
Broker Paul O'Connor with London-based Miller Insurance Services Ltd. said he favors the exemption but has some qualifications.
''As a terrorism broker, it would be nice to have competition, but, realistically, none of the markets would be in a position to compete,'' Mr. O'Connor said.
He noted, though, that the pool's rating system is based on location rather than type of risk, which means, he said, that the stand-alone market, in some cases, offers a different view of a risk and a better price than do those insurers backed by Pool Re.
''Because everything is priced by general insurers, there is a slight distortion, because who is to say they are specialized in terrorism?'' Mr. O'Connor said.
Damien Cannings, commercial underwriter at the Manchester, England, office of Leeds-based Markel U.K. Ltd., a division of London-based Markel International Ltd. and a member company of Pool Re, said he believes there has not been much competition for Pool Re-type business since the system announced it would broaden its coverage in 2002 to take into account the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
From the beginning of last year, the pool began offering coverage on an all-risks basis, including impact by aircraft and damage from biological, chemical and nuclear contamination. With the expanded coverage, Pool Re also doubled its rates.
Mr. Cannings acknowledged that it is hard to compete with the depth of coverage Pool Re can offer at prices that other underwriters cannot meet. He stressed, though, that the pool sets rates not to win new business from the competition but to offer affordable terrorism coverage.
Quentin Prebble, a class underwriter at Lloyd's of London Liberty syndicate 282 who writes bespoke, or customized, terrorism insurance coverage, said he too favors Pool Re and its continuing exemption.
''The benefit of cheaper, broader cover is of greater general benefit to everybody than the need to offer individuals the opportunity to buy on a bespoke basis,'' Mr. Prebble said.
But two underwriters spoke out against the pool.
Ben Garston, a partner with Lloyd's of London underwriter Managing Agency Partners Ltd., which writes stand-alone terrorism coverage, said, ''If you believe in free and open markets, you should not have government-subsidized insurers dominating a class.''
There is ''plenty of capacity'' from sources other than Pool Re in the Bermuda, European, Lloyd's and U.S. markets to meet the demand for terrorism coverage from U.K. commercial property owners, he added.
Mr. Garston noted that Lloyd's alone can provide up to 250 million ($461.7 million) per building in coverage and coverage worth 1 billion ($1.85 billion) is possible with the involvement of other international markets. Consequently, he said, Pool Re is ''a bit of an anachronism.''
And a Pool Re member company underwriter at Lloyd's who did not wish to be named added that the pool's rules are very strict and do not allow members to offer stand-alone coverage.
''It is a bit of nonsense. At some stage, the government will want the private sector to take the business back,'' the underwriter said. ''Unless it allows the private sector the flexibility to offer stand-alone cover, that won't happen.''

Load-Date: February 18, 2004


End of Document