Pool Re bill in Parliament;
Rate hike already expected for terrorism reinsurance pool
Business Insurance
May 17, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. 39
Length: 1012 words
Byline: By ADRIAN LADBURY
Dateline: LONDON
Body


The British government may have to dip into its pocket to cover an expected shortfall in the mutual terrorist reinsurance pool to pay for the April 24 bombing in London's financial district.
Meanwhile, rate increases for the pool's members already are being discussed, even though the mutual will not be an official entity until the Reinsurance (Acts of Terrorism) Bill -- introduced last week in Parliament -- is passed.
The 295 members of Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd. are expected this year to pay about 250 million pounds ($ 385.4 million) in premiums to fund the pool.
Once that reserve is exhausted, the pool members must pay an additional 10% of the original premiums they paid to cover losses.
An Assn. of British Insurers spokesman last week said that estimated insured losses from last month's attack on the city of London had grown to between 400 million pounds and 500 million pounds ($ 617 million and $ 770.8 million) from the original estimate of 300 million pounds to 400 million pounds ($ 462.5 million to $ 617 million).
The larger loss would mean a shortfall in the pool of somewhere between 200 million and 300 million pounds ($ 303 million and $ 462.5 million), before members pay the additional 10% levy on their original premiums.
A Pool Re spokesman confirmed last week that there is ''certainly not enough money in the fund'' to cover damages from the April 24 bombing. ''It will clearly be a long time before all the claims are settled, but we will definitely need government assistance,'' he said.
An ABI spokesman agreed that the pool would run out of money because of the latest bomb. ''We feel the government will have to pay up straight away,'' he said.
The mutual reinsurance pool, backed by retrocessional coverage from the British government, was proposed late last November after ABI insurers refused to write terrorist coverage for large commercial properties in the United Kingdom.
Last week the bill to activate the pool encountered no opposition in the House of Commons and is not expected to be opposed in the House of Lords, according to a Department of Trade and Industry spokesman.
The bill would confirm that insurers that participate in the pool must pay up to 100,000 pounds ($ 154,150) per policy for losses on commercial property policies as a result of a terrorist attack, and up to 2.5 million pounds ($ 3.9 million) for an apartment building.  Above these amounts, terrorist claims would be reinsured with Pool Re.
The bill also states that if the pool's funds are exhausted, the insurers must pay an additional sum of up to 10% of the premiums remitted in the pool.
After that, the remaining claims will be paid by the U.K. government.  According to the bill, the government plans to charge an unspecified premium to the mutual for this retrocession coverage once the pool's surplus exceeds 1 billion pounds ($ 1.54 billion). ''The premium structure is designed with the aim of avoiding any net cost to government over a period of years,'' says the bill.
After the bill is passed, Pool Re and the government will sign a retrocession agreement, which is currently being drafted, said the Pool Re spokesman.
Rates charged by the mutual are expected to be raised because of the current shortfall, but the amount of the increase is unknown. The pool may need a temporary loan to pay the claims from last month's explosion, the pool's spokesman said. ''The only other way of raising more money is to sell more cover or put the premiums up, or both.''
A spokesman for the DTI said Pool Re rates are being reviewed. ''Whether the recent events mean a new round of discussions or not I am not sure, but I expect some rates will increase and others will go down,'' he said.
The rates charged by Pool Re, which have been fixed by the mutual and the DTI, are calculated on a simple two-zone basis. Higher-risk inner cities are within zone one and lower risk suburbs and rural areas in zone two.
The ABI spokesman explained the current difference with an example: ''For a building valued up to 100,000 pounds, a company in an inner city such as London, Birmingham or Manchester would pay 0.05% of the value of the property, but in a rural area the cost would only be 0.01%.''
He added that in the next round of increases, the differential could widen further. ''The assumption would be that the rate of increase would be proportionally higher in the cities'' than in the rural areas.
The Pool Re spokesman agreed that the gap could widen. ''The rating largely depends on the government philosophy, but I think higher increases in London than in Birmingham or out in the sticks is in the cards,'' he said.
But it is unlikely that there will be a compulsory levy on all commercial and personal property policies to fund Pool Re as proposed by the Assn. of Insurance & Risk managers in Industry & Commerce (BI, May 3).
''We have made our point to the DTI, Pool Re and the ABI, and that appears to be the end of it,'' said Alan Fleming, chief executive of AIRMIC. ''They have given us no cause for optimism, but they have not said no either. We have let them know our view, and that is as much as we can do.''
Mr. Fleming added that the association is now concentrating on more proactive issues such as working with the ABI and others to develop awareness campaigns and similar measures to prevent damage from terrorist bombings.
The DTI spokesman said the department does not want a compulsory levy.  ''We want a market solution, and that is what we have got.''
The spokesman also said that the rate levels and the question of geographical differences is entirely up to the industry, which has to sell the coverage. He said that the government would not interfere with the rates set by the insurers but confirmed it would have a say in the rate charged to the pool by the government for retrocession coverage.
''We have an interest in protecting the taxpayer,'' he said, ''and we expect to see a certain amount to cover the risk, although we are not prepared to reveal how much. Obviously at the end of the day we will have to reach an agreement with the industry.''


End of Document