Poor treatment furthers terrorism
University Wire
June 30, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Sidelines via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 494 words
Byline: By Callie Elizabeth Butler, Sidelines
Dateline: Murfreesboro, Tenn.
Body


Earlier this month, the Justice Department's Office of the Inspector General issued a report that confirmed allegations of misconduct and abuse made by Muslim men detained since Sept. 11, 2001. This represents the federal government's first acknowledgement of these wrongdoings, which were routinely dismissed in months past.
The report noted that "significant problems" had occurred in regard to the treatment of almost 800 detained individuals. Yasser Ebrahim and Shakir Baloch, along with five other detainees, have filed civil lawsuits against Attorney General John Ashcroft, as well as members of the FBI and prison personnel.
Middle Tennessee State U.
The lawsuit is based on claims by the detainees that they were held solely on the basis of their race and religion.
The conditions they described include being locked in a small, high security cell and deemed a possible terrorist threat. They also claim they weren't allowed access to a telephone or legal counsel.
Ebrahim, Baloch and others were held for eight months, not charged with any crimes and quickly deported.
Government lawyers argue that Ashcroft and the others accused are protected by immunity laws designed to allow them to conduct such investigations and otherwise fulfill their duties.
But, should immunity laws allow government officials to commit horrible abuses against Americans, as well as those of other national origins merely because they have the power to do so?
Does the color of a person's skin or religious beliefs justify abuse and belittlement? What is the government doing about it now?
These crimes weren't simply committed against a group of men who illegally traipsed into the United States. These crimes strike at Americans, too, and raise the question: How well will our own civil liberties will protect us, particularly those of us with brown skin pigmentatio?
Will the Constitution protect the thousands of Middle Eastern citizens living within the United States, or will they, too, fall victim to racism and injustice?
With the panic and fear that has overtaken our country, more than a year and a half after Sept. 11, 2001, we're allowing crimes against humanity to go unchecked. Detaining hundreds of men for questioning merely because of the pigment of their skin or the deity to which they pray fails to make us safer as a nation, even if they entered the country illegally.
It merely furthers hostility and racism and feeds a brewing hate directed at our country. It ultimately encourages terrorism.
Why shouldn't our country be hated? We're sitting by and allowing our government, led at a steady charge by our beloved President George W. Bush, to commit horrid acts of injustice, prejudice and hate against people in our country and outside its borders.
Immigrants and refugees come here seeking equality and a better life, some legally and some otherwise, but if they venture from the Middle East, perhaps they should turn back.
(C) 2002 Sidelines via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 30, 2003


End of Document