Pope, in Christmas Message, Pleads for End to Terrorism and War 
 The New York Times
December 26, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 560 words
Byline:  By FRANK BRUNI
Dateline: VATICAN CITY, Dec. 25  
Body


Pope John Paul II used his Christmas messages to plead fervently for an end to terrorism worldwide and to bloodshed in the Middle East, his concern over recent world events casting a shadow over his traditional holiday celebrations.
     "Save us from the evils that rend humanity in these first years of the third millennium," the pope said in a prayer that he delivered before a dense, broad throng of worshipers in St. Peter's Square on Thursday. 
 "Save us from the wars and armed conflicts that lay waste to whole areas of the world, from the scourge of terrorism and from the many forms of violence that assail the weak and vulnerable," he added, in Italian, as he gave his annual Christmas Day oration.
Less than 12 hours earlier, inside the majestic basilica that towers over the square, John Paul gave voice to the same worries and hopes in his sermon during a grand midnight Mass.
"Too much blood is still being shed on the earth," he said, addressing the thousands of people, from scores of countries, who packed the makeshift pews or stood in small corridors of space between them, alternately singing hymns and snapping photographs with their digital cameras.
"Too much violence and too many conflicts trouble the peaceful coexistence of nations," he said in Italian, according to the official Vatican translation of his remarks.
Those were words that could have been uttered in any previous Christmas season. But in this case, they clearly reflected the specific preoccupations of the pope and other Vatican officials with events surrounding the American invasion of Iraq and with the unabated fighting between Israelis and Palestinians.
Through diplomacy and public appeals, the Vatican sought to avert a war in Iraq, and some Vatican officials have raised pointed questions about American actions there since the fall of Saddam Hussein's government.
The pope's remarks have been vaguer, as they were in his Christmas messages, which he delivered in a quavering and sometimes labored voice that betrayed his long battle with Parkinson's disease.
The decline in his strength over the last few years has forced adjustments to his routines and cutbacks in his schedule, and this holiday season provided fresh examples of that.
On Monday, when the pope was the host at a customary reception for high-ranking members of Vatican departments, the guest list was substantially and deliberately shorter than in previous years, a Vatican official said. 
But he presided over the entirety of the midnight Mass, which lasted until 2 a.m. on Thursday. He also read all of his Christmas message at noontime and delivered brief greetings in more than 50 languages, to the delight of a banner-waving, cheer-roaring crowd under a crystalline blue sky.
The pope's performance represented a clear improvement over many of his public appearances here in October, during the public events tied to his 25th anniversary as pope.
Back then, more than a few Vatican officials and Roman Catholic leaders whispered their doubts or privately raised questions about his ability to persevere until this holiday season.
Now, just a few months later, those same skeptics were saying that they would not be surprised if John Paul became the third-longest-serving pope in the church's history. His papacy is already the fourth longest, and it trails the papacy of Leo XIII by only a few months.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 26, 2003


End of Document