Pope appeals for unity in fight against terrorism Muslims agree, leader says
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 21, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 449 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: COLOGNE, Germany 
Body


Pope Benedict XVI went before an Islamic audience Saturday and delivered the strongest rebuke of terrorism of his papacy, asking Muslims to join Christians in trying to combat its spread and "turn back the wave of cruel fanaticism" behind it.
The pope later traveled in his popemobile outside Cologne to the rain-soaked Marienfeld, a former coal mine near the town of Kerpen, for an outdoor evening service as part of the four-day Roman Catholic youth festival.
Hundreds of thousands of high-spirited pilgrims roared their approval as Benedict arrived in his mother-of-pearl Mercedes-Benz, waving and smiling. The crowd was estimated at 800,000. As if on cue, storm clouds that had threatened to drench the faithful began melting away, unveiling a bright blue sky.
Before giving his homily, Benedict dedicated a huge bell at the foot of the altar to his predecessor, Pope John Paul II, the man who originated World Youth Day. As it chimed, a choir performed a hymn while the crowd sang along.
The meeting with Muslim officials in Germany was part of Benedict's outreach to non-Catholics during his visit to achieve common positions on social issues and world peace. Germany has about 3.5 million Muslims, one of the highest figures in western Europe.
The pope said Muslim leaders had a "great responsibility" in properly educating younger generations.
"I am certain that I echo your own thoughts when I bring up as one of our concerns the spread of terrorism," Benedict told the Muslim leadership, mainly Turks.
"Terrorist activity is continually recurring in various parts of the world, sowing death and destruction, and plunging many of our brothers and sisters into grief and despair," he said.
The pope did not mention any specific attacks, assess responsibility or speak directly about suicide bombings.
Ridan Cakir, president of the Turkish Islamic Union, said the participants shared the pope's position. "With this common platform, we are able together to fight terrorism," he said at a news conference afterward.
The meeting came a day after Benedict visited a Cologne synagogue to meet with Jewish leaders. He also met with Protestant and Orthodox Christian representatives.
Earlier Saturday, Benedict visited German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder and his challenger in Sept. 18 parliamentary elections, Angela Merkel.
Merkel, leader of the Christian Democratic Union and the daughter of a Protestant minister, said, "It was great to meet a German pope on German soil."
Schröder, who also is Protestant, as are about a third of Germans, had no public comment.
Many pilgrims at the vigil were expected to spend the night under the open sky to attend Sunday morning's concluding Mass celebrated by Benedict.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO BY THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - A crowd estimated at 800,000 awaited the arrival of Pope Benedict XVI on Saturday evening at the Marienfeld, near Cologne, Germany. 

Load-Date: August 22, 2005


End of Document