Pope Urges Muslims to Confront Terrorism
The New York Times
August 21, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1176 words
Byline: By IAN FISHER
Dateline: COLOGNE, Germany, Aug. 20 
Body


Pope Benedict XVI used his first meeting with Muslims to deliver a blunt message on Saturday that Christianity and Islam had no choice but to work together to quell terrorism, which he said represented ''the darkness of a new barbarism.''
  In a Europe awash in new antiterror laws and fear of new attacks after the bombings last month in London, the pope said an improvement in relations ''cannot be reduced to an optional extra. It is, in fact, a vital necessity, on which a large measure of our future depends.''
Benedict's words, to a group of 10 Muslims, most of them from an organization of Turks in Germany, were some of the strongest of his young pontificate, and seemed to elevate the issue of terrorism and relations with Islam to the top of his agenda. 
  His tone seemed several degrees tougher than that of his predecessor, John Paul II, who at 60 meetings with Muslims emphasized more their common ancestry in Abraham. Pope Benedict's tone was not contentious and he laid no blame. But he spoke with a more direct urgency. 
  He told the gathering here of the ''great responsibility'' Muslim teachers had to educate their youth, and though he did not say it, he seemed to be speaking of an education against hatred and violence. He also seemed to transmit a broader message on a delicate topic for the church: the rights of Christian minorities to practice their faith in predominantly Muslim countries.
  ''Respect for minorities is a clear sign of true civilization,'' he said in German.
  While the pope has denounced terrorism in the past, his speech on Saturday was by far the most detailed, both in its description of the danger and his view that better communication between Christianity and Islam -- religions which he acknowledged had an often violent past relationship -- was the only answer. 
  ''Terrorism of any kind is a perverse and cruel decision, which shows contempt for the sacred right to life and undermines the very foundation of all civil society,'' Benedict said, according to the transcript of his speech. 
  ''If together we can succeed in eliminating from our hearts any trace of rancor, in resisting every form of intolerance and in opposing every manifestation of violence, we will turn back the wave of cruel fanaticism that endangers the lives of so many people.''
  The meeting was relatively brief, about a half an hour, and was held not in a mosque but at the Catholic seminary where Benedict is staying on his four-day trip here as the star attraction of a huge festival of young Catholics, World Youth Day. It is his first trip abroad as pope.
  But the participants said they appreciated the invitation, and shared the pope's worries about terrorism. Germany is home to about 3.5 million Muslims, most of them Turkish, and many European Muslims worry that they are being eyed with increasing suspicion. 
  ''Terrorism is not only a problem that comes up in countries where there are Christians,'' Ridvan Cakir, president of the Turkish Islamic Committee in Europe, said after the meeting, which unlike one between the pope and Jews in Cologne of Friday, was closed to reporters and television cameras. ''It's a problem that we all share, he said. ''We all have to be aware of that problem and fight against it.''
  Seyda Can, 27, one of three women who attended the meeting, said she believed that the pope's call for a stronger dialogue between Christians and Muslims could bear important results.
  ''When we have this dialogue, we will have trust and we won't be afraid,'' Ms. Can, also a member of the Turkish Islamic Committee, said after the meeting. ''With the dialogue, terrorism will be finished.''
  In the meeting, Mr. Cakir delivered a brief address before the pope spoke, also focusing on the need for more exchanges between Christianity and Islam. 
  ''If we can continue to coexist in dialogue, it will send a signal that the theory of a 'clash of cultures' is baseless,'' he said. ''The more religious and cultural communities can learn about one another, the more they will realize that there is no reason for hostility.''
  Mr. Cakir also touched briefly on an issue that has been a point of contention among some Muslims and Benedict, saying, ''The process of Turkey's accession to the European Union is also an important occasion, one that should be judged in this context.''
  Before being chosen as pope, the man who was then Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger said in an interview last year that he opposed Turkey's inclusion to the European Union, saying that Turkey, as the seat of the Ottoman Empire, had always been ''in permanent contrast to Europe.''
  Before becoming pope in April of this year, Cardinal Ratzinger was aligned to the wing of the church more skeptical toward Islam, seeing it in competition with Christianity in many places -- Africa, Asia and, to some extent, in Europe -- as church attendance dropped and the number of Muslim immigrants rose on the continent. As he did before becoming pope, Benedict has spoken often about the need for Europe to renew its sense of Christian roots. 
  As pope, however, he has made interreligious dialogue a cornerstone of his papacy and has been clear to say that he did not believe that terror attacks were specifically ''anti-Christian,'' as a leaked early version of a Vatican press release condemning the bombings in London had stated. 
  At the same time, he appears to have retained some degree of skepticism. When asked by reporters last month if he believed Islam was a religion of peace, he said: ''Certainly it has elements that favor peace, as it has other elements.''
  His meeting on Saturday seemed aimed at speaking to the elements favoring peace. 
  ''I am certain that I echo your own thoughts when I bring up as one of our concerns the spread of terrorism,'' he said. ''Terrorist activity is continually recurring in various parts of the world, sowing death and destruction and plunging many of our brothers and sisters into grief and despair. Those who instigate these attacks evidently wish to poison our relations, making use of all means, including religion, to oppose every attempt to build a peaceful, fair and serene life together.''
  On Saturday, the day before he returns to the Vatican, the pope paid courtesy calls on German political leaders, including Chancellor Gerhard Schroder and Angela Merkel, the Christian Democrat who is challenging him in elections next month. 
  ''We are very proud to have a German pope,'' said Ms. Merkel, the daughter of a Protestant clergyman. 
  On Saturday evening, the pope also led a vigil in a field outside of Cologne, in preparation for a huge Mass with young Catholics on Sunday that is expected to draw 800,000 or more worshipers from more than 190 countries. 
  ''The church is like a human family, but at the same it is also the great family of God, through which he establishes an overarching communion and unity that embraces every continent, culture and nation,'' he said. ''So we are glad to belong to this great family. We are glad to have brothers and friends all over the world.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Pilgrims headed to a site near Cologne yesterday where a large crowd is expected to hear Pope Benedict XVI. (Photo by Vincent Laforet/The New York Times)

Load-Date: August 21, 2005


End of Document