Pope recalls victims of 'blind' terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 28, 2016 Monday


Copyright 2016 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 7
Length: 288 words
Byline: FRANCES D'EMILIO Associated Press
Body


VATICAN CITY - Pope Francis tempered his Easter Sunday message of Christian hope with a denunciation of "blind" terrorism, recalling victims of attacks in Europe, Africa and elsewhere, as well as expressing dismay that people fleeing war or poverty are being denied welcome as European countries squabble over the refugee crisis.
Tens of thousands of people patiently endured long lines, backpack inspections and metal-detecting checks Sunday to enter St. Peter's Square. Under a brilliant sun, they listened to Francis deliver the traditional noon Easter speech from the central balcony of St. Peter's Basilica.
To their delight, Francis completed a whirl through the square, made colorful with sprays of tulips and other spring flowers, in his open-topped pope-mobile after celebrating Mass on the steps of the basilica. He leaned over barriers to shake hands, as the vehicle ventured past the Vatican's confines, with his bodyguards jogging alongside on the boulevard.
Francis said, for the faithful, Jesus who rose after death by crucifixion "triumphed over evil and sin." He expressed hope that "will draw us closer to the victims of terrorism, that blind and brutal form of violence."
In Jerusalem, the cavernous Holy Sepulcher church - where Christians believe Jesus was crucified, buried and resurrected - was packed with worshippers commemorating the day they believe Jesus was resurrected in Jerusalem some 2,000 years ago.
For years, Islamist extremists in social media have listed the Vatican and Rome as potential targets due to hosting the headquarters of the Roman Catholic church and several basilicas. Despite the threats, Francis has kept to his habit of trying to be in close physical contact with ordinary people.

Load-Date: April 21, 2016


End of Document