POPE PREACHES LOVE IN FACE  OF TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 1, 2016 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 531 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


KRAKOW, Poland - Pope Francis has encouraged hundreds of thousands of young people gathered in a vast meadow to "believe in a new humanity" which refuses to use borders as barriers and spurns hatred among peoples.
Pope Francis spoke Sunday as he wrapped up a pilgrimage to Poland that included meditation at the Auschwitz death camp and an unscheduled prayer stop for victims of terrorism.
For a second straight day, a huge crowd filled the meadow in the gentle countryside outside Krakow for Pope Francis, whose five-day visit to southern Poland was the Argentine pontiff's first-ever time in Eastern Europe.
In the final homily of the pilgrimage, Francis said God "demands of us real courage, the courage to be more powerful than evil, by loving everyone, even our enemies."
Maldives autocracy
COLOMBO, Sri Lanka - The U.S. embassy and other foreign missions on Sunday urged the Maldives president to return to the path of democracy, saying they are concerned over what they call recent erosions of fundamental freedoms and institutions of democracy in the archipelago state.
In a joint statement offices including U.S., Norway, Germany, Netherlands, United Kingdom and the delegation of the European Union said they support all Maldivians' struggling to preserve democracy and human rights.
The statement came ahead of a Parliament debate on Monday on a bill to criminalize defamation which if passed the diplomatic offices say risks being a serious setback for freedom of speech. Critics say defamation may carry heavy fines and jail terms.
Maldives became a multiparty democracy in 2008 after decades of autocratic rule. However, President Yameen Abdul Gayoom is accused of reversing the democratic gains by misusing courts, police and the bureaucracy to muzzle dissent.
Revolt in the Sahara
BAMAKO, Mali - Fighting broke out Saturday in northeastern Mali between a coalition of Tuareg rebels and a Tuareg group allied with the government of this West African country, killing at least six people.
The fighting took place in Edjerer, about 50 kilometers (31 miles) northeast of Kidal, between the government-allied group GATIA and the Coordination of Azawad Movements, a coalition of groups seeking autonomy in northern Mali that includes ethnic Arabs and Tuaregs.
Residents said French forces were out on the streets in Kidal to protect civilians. Fighting last week between the groups in Kidal killed at least 16 people.
Kurds take oil field
KIRKUK, Iraq - Kurdish Peshmerga forces in northern Iraq regained control of an oil field near Kirkuk, after Islamic State militants overran the facility, setting fire to two storage tanks and causing crude production of 175,000 barrels a day to be halted.
"The Peshmerga killed two Daesh suicide attackers who seized the Bai Hassan field this morning, a third blew himself up, and there is a search for others," the Kurdish armed forces said in an e-mailed statement, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State. "The situation is now under near-total control but the fires are still burning at the oil storage tanks."
Also in the world
Israeli troops shot dead a Palestinian who tried to stab soldiers at a West Bank checkpoint on Sunday, the military said.

Load-Date: August 2, 2016


End of Document