POPE ASKS GOD TO BLESS VICTIMS OF WAR AND TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 19, 2003 Saturday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 27
Length: 694 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ROME
Body


* Iraqis take part in the Good Friday procession in Rome. In Jerusalem, fewer Christian pilgrims than usual retrace Jesus' steps to his crucifixion. 
Iraqi families helped ailing Pope John Paul II carry the cross in the traditional procession on Good Friday as the pontiff asked God to bless "victims of hate, war and terrorism."
Thousands of flickering candles held by the faithful lit up the proces sion around the Roman Colosseum, and the 82-year-old pontiff thanked God that he could once again preside over Christianity's most sorrowful day.
John Paul asked God to "look upon the blood shed by so many victims of hate, war and terrorism and kindly permit that the course of world events play out according to your will in justice and peace."
Until two years ago, John Paul carried the tall wooden cross for the entire half-mile procession, an event that symbolizes Christ's path to his crucifixion. He remained seated Friday, relying on others to shoulder the burden.
At one point, an Iraqi mother and her daughter carried the wooden cross for several yards. The two, who declined to give their names, told reporters they fled Baghdad several months ago so that the woman's husband wouldn't have to fight for Saddam Hussein.
Later, the cross was passed to the pope by an Iraqi couple who have lived in Italy for several years.
Before the Iraq war, John Paul repeatedly expressed opposition to the conflict and since has voiced concern for the victims.
Others selected to carry the cross included the widow and son of Carlo Urbani, the World Health Organization doctor from Italy who first alerted the world to the existence of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, in Hanoi, Vietnam, and then died from the illness March 29.
Without naming any country, the pope recalled in his speech the "deaths from hunger and hardship of thousands of innocent adults and children, to the insult of human dignity, unfortunately perpetrated sometimes in the name of God."
John Paul said that it was apt that the procession was held at the Colosseum, "a symbol of times past of this great Roman empire which collapsed, and the Christian martyrs" who gave their lives for the faith in the ancient arena.
Earlier in the day, the pope heard confessions from 10 Catholics in St. Peter's Basilica, keeping up a Holy Week tradition. The frail pontiff was wheeled into the basilica, and his aides helped him into a mahogany confessional booth near the main altar.
Walking Christ's path
In Jerusalem, a thinned flock of Christian pilgrims singing hymns and carrying wooden crosses walked along the cobblestone alleys of Jerusalem's walled Old City, retracing Jesus' steps toward crucifixion in a Good Friday procession.
Several hundred people participated in this year's ceremony. Thirty months of Israeli-Palestinian fighting have kept many foreign pilgrims away, and many Palestinian Christians were barred from reaching Jerusalem due to Israeli military travel restrictions.
A few determined foreign visitors could be seen as the groups wound their way up the Via Dolorosa, or Way of Sorrows, Jesus' traditional route toward crucifixion. There was a heavy Israeli police presence along the route.
"Today is the most important day, it was the last day of Christ," said an Italian woman identifying herself as Mauritzia from Milan. "We came and we see we are safe and protected."
Mauritzia said it was her seventh pilgrimage, but in previous years she came with much larger groups. This year, only 10 people were with her.
Tony Abyath, a 35-year-old Palestinian from Jerusalem, said: "The Lord speaks of peace but there is no peace today. So it remains as a remembrance. As long as there is no peace we can't celebrate, only remember, the death of Christ."
Israel has closed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip, citing fears of terrorist attacks over the Jewish Passover holiday, which began Wednesday and continues for a week.
Meanwhile, the pope planned to challenge his stamina by conducting a vigil service late tonight in the basilica and an Easter Mass in St. Peter's Square, then delivering an Easter message that again is expected to focus on suffering caused by the Iraq war and other conflicts.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by PAOLO COCCO/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - An Iraqi couple hand a cross to Pope John Paul II during the traditional Good Friday procession in Rome. Until two years ago, the pope carried the cross for the entire half-mile procession.

Load-Date: April 19, 2003


End of Document