Portman: Shooting may be linked to terrorists; California massacre might not be case of workplace violence.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 4, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A2
Length: 435 words
Byline: By Marc Baedorf andJackTorry
Body


Portman: "I've been asking my people how did they get the guns"
Sen. Rob Portman said today the shooting deaths of 14 people Wednesday in Southern California by two people armed with automatic weapons may be linked to terrorists in either the Middle East or Pakistan.
Portman, R-Ohio, said briefings by his staff suggests "there may be a terrorist connection here so it may be more complicated than people thought originally when they thought it was a workplace issue" involving a disgruntled worker and his wife engaged in a mass shooting at a social services center in San Bernardino, about one hour east of Los Angeles.
"I've been asking my people how did they get the guns, and there's a lot of uncertainty about that," Portman told the Dayton Daily News.
Police later shot to death the two suspects - Syed Rizwan Farook, 28, and Tashfeen Malik, 27. FBI officials in Los Angeles told reporters that Farook had traveled to Pakistan in the past couple of years while his wife had entered the United States with a K-1 visa, which is issued to a fiancée, and Pakistani passport.
Portman's comments echoed those of President Barack Obama who said the FBI had assumed the lead in the investigation and "it is possible this was terrorist-related," although he quickly added it may be "workplace-related" as well.
The suspected link to terrorism took place as lawmakers debated whether tougher gun laws could have prevented the massacre. But Columbus-area Rep. Pat Tiberi, R-Genoa Twp., said "before we jump to conclusions we need to make sure law enforcement gets all the facts."
Tiberi said the shooting and the murder of 130 people last month in Paris by Islamic State militants should be a "wakeup call" about the danger of terrorism. In particular, Tiberi cited a major change this week of a program which allowed the National Security Agency to gather millions of phone records - known as metadata - in an effort to determine if anyone is involved in terrorism.
Under a law approved this year by Congress, the government can no longer store the records, but instead they are kept by the telecommunications companies. The government can seek records with a court order.
"I am not for them snooping into American citizens' emails and cellphones, but metadata is different," Tiberi said.
"I think based on what we have heard in briefings and what has been reported by different press outlets around the country, terrorists are using the latest material in trying to encrypt messages," Tiberi said. "What we have done, I believe, has clearly tied one arm behind the backs of our law enforcement and intelligence officials."

Load-Date: December 4, 2015


End of Document