Ports' procrastination on anti-terror planning may cause coverage woes
Business Insurance
January 26, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 4
Length: 771 words
Byline: MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


WASHINGTON-Many of the country's ports that have failed to meet a federally mandated deadline to submit plans for strengthening anti-terrorism measures could have difficulty finding insurance coverage unless they rectify their noncompliance soon, brokers warn.
Underwriters, who have generally become more comfortable about offering terrorism coverage, will be leery of facilities that do not meet the requirements, they say.
''If a port is not in compliance, then an underwriter might not be interested in writing it,'' said David D. Carlson, executive vp with Aon Corp.'s Ports and Harbors Group in Seattle.
Ports in the United States were required by the Maritime Transportation Security Act, passed in 2002 and amended last year, to submit to the U.S. Coast Guard by Dec. 31, 2003, detailed vulnerability assessments that included plans for enhancing security. The ports and tenants at their facilities are required to participate in the planning.
Ports face a July 1 deadline for developing or strengthening security measures after the Coast Guard approves the plans.
As of last week, about half the approximately 5,000 ports had submitted plans, according to a Washington-based spokesman for the Coast Guard. The agency is contacting ports that have not filed the anti-terrorism plans and could begin levying fines of up to $25,000 against facilities that are late.
''We are serious about the civil penalties if we don't receive them,'' the spokesman warned.
While many ports have not yet filed their plans, most of the country's major ports did make the deadline, according to a spokeswoman for the American Assn. of Port Authorities.
The spokeswoman said that, of the association's 84 members-which are the large ''major players''-about 75% had filed plans as of last week.
The requirements call for ports to assess physical security, passenger and cargo security, protection systems, procedural policies, contingency response plans and other areas essential to a facility's security. The purpose of the assessment is to identify weaknesses in those areas and develop plans for rectifying those deficiencies.
The Coast Guard and a consulting firm working with the agency are reviewing and approving the plans and can call for changes. The Coast Guard can shut down ports that do not make the July 1 implementation deadline.
Many ports have already put into effect enhanced security measures in anticipation that their plans will be approved, according to the Coast Guard spokesman. He also said that the ports' tardiness in responding to the requirements doesn't necessarily mean that they are in danger. ''We've made tremendous strides since Sept. 11, 2001,'' he said. ''Failure to have 100% of all the plans in is not an indication that port security is lax.''
But ports that are not in compliance may have difficulty finding insurance coverage, said Mr. Carlson of Aon.
He said that while no insurer has declared it won't offer the coverage to ports that aren't in compliance, that is a likely scenario. ''We know our markets pretty well,'' he remarked.
Insurers might write the coverage at a higher price for a port that doesn't make the July 1 deadline, but it is more likely that underwriters would stay away from the risk, Mr. Carlson said. ''If they are buying terrorism coverage and not in compliance, that is going to make the underwriter pretty nervous,'' he said.
Large ports on both coasts have generally bought significant amounts of terrorism insurance coverage, according to Deborah Bovee, executive vp with Aon's Ports and Harbors Group. ''Just about all California ports are buying as much terrorism insurance as they can get,'' Ms. Bovee said.
And, she said, the California ports and others on the U.S. coasts prefer to buy coverage that is broader than that called for in the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, which requires insurers to offer terrorism insurance.
Coverage costs generally amount to 10% to 15% of the premium charged for insurance that covers the risk to be protected by terrorism insurance, Ms. Bovee said. Insurers are required to offer the terrorism protection for each line that they write for a policyholder. So if, for example, a policyholder were to pay $1 million for property insurance, the terrorism premium on its property risk would generally cost from $100,000 to $150,000.
Ms. Bovee said ports can find terrorism insurance limits of from $300 million to $500 million for property risks and from $100 million to $150 million for liability risks. ''As we have gotten further away from 9-11, it's like getting further away from an earthquake,'' she said. ''Insurers are more comfortable with it.''

Graphic

 
Only half of U.S. ports met the federal deadline for submitting plans for safeguarding their operations against terrorism.

Load-Date: January 28, 2004


End of Document