Portland Protests: Far-Right Groups and Antifa Face Off
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 18, 2019 Sunday
2 Edition


Copyright 2019 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 1B
Length: 1733 words
Byline: MIKE BAKER AND NICHOLAS BOGELBURROUGHS © 2019 New York Times News Service
Body


TRUMP: '˜pORTLAND IS BEING WATCHED'
PORTLAND, Ore. ' Hundreds of people gathered Saturday for a rally at a waterfront park in Portland, where far-right groups faced off with counterprotesters and brought much of the downtown area to a standstill. Police arrested at least 13 people and seized metal poles, bear spray and other weapons as they tried to keep the sides apart.
 President Donald Trump weighed in on the tense situation in Portland on Saturday morning, calling out the anti-fascist group known as Antifa on Twitter and suggesting support for labeling it a terror organization. He did not mention any of the right-wing groups, although both they and Antifa have a history of using violence against their opponents.
 "Major consideration is being given to naming ANTIFA an '˜ORGANIZATION OF TERROR,' " he wrote on Twitter. "Portland is being watched very closely. Hopefully the Mayor will be able to properly do his job!"
 In the early afternoon, most of the right-wing groups had left the area via a downtown bridge. Police used officers on bikes and in riot gear to keep black-clad, helmet- and mask-wearing anti-fascist protesters ' known as Antifa ' from following them.
 But hundreds of people remained downtown and on nearby streets, and there were skirmishes throughout the day. Police declared a gathering of mostly left-wing protesters near Pioneer Courthouse Square a "civil disturbance" and told people to leave.
 One person was injured and transported via ambulance, and three other people were evaluated by medics, Portland Police spokeswoman Lt. Tina Jones said. The injuries were minor, she said.
 Jones said at one point there were about 1,200 on the streets, but that number had fallen to about 400 late in the afternoon.
 The events began late in the morning. Flag-waving members of the Proud Boys, Three Percenters militia group and others gathered downtown, some also wearing body armor and helmets. Police said they had seized weapons, including shields, from multiple groups as they assembled along the Willamette River, which runs through the city.
 More than two dozen local, state and federal law enforcement agencies, including the FBI, were in the city for the right-wing rally that was expected to draw people from across the country. Portland police said all of the city's 1,000 officers would be on duty for the gathering that was hyped on social media and elsewhere for weeks.
 Many of the far-right demonstrators support a bill sponsored by Sens. Bill Cassidy, R-La., and Ted Cruz, R-Texas, urging Congress to identify Antifa as a domestic terrorist group.
 The rally was the latest in a series of vocal and at times violent political demonstrations in a city where protest is a rich tradition but residents have grown increasingly weary of extremist saber-rattling on their streets.
 For weeks, police and local politicians have been urging protesters not to show up at all and those who inevitably arrive to be peaceful. Officials and residents feared a melee like one in the city June 29, when a conservative writer was assaulted by black-clad protesters.
 A White House spokesman did not respond to an email seeking an explanation of Trump's tweet, as well as why he chose to target Antifa and not others involving in the escalating tensions.
 But Trump has repeatedly sought to highlight incidents involving Antifa and has accused the news media of not giving the group's tactics enough coverage. He has often highlighted them amid criticism of the rhetoric used by white nationalists.
 Far-right groups, including the Three Percenters, congregated at the south end of the park Saturday morning. Some of those members wore body armor and helmets, and at least one had a visible pocketknife and pepper spray, which he said were to be used "as a last resort."
 Among the other far-right groups were the Proud Boys, an all-male group whose members sometimes share racist or misogynist ideas, and who have fought with protesters before.
 The most vocal promoter of the rally was Joe Biggs, who used to work for conservative conspiracy outlet Infowars. Biggs said he had organized the rally in response to the beating of conservative writer Andy Ngo in the clashes in June.
 Many have blamed Antifa for the beating, which was captured on video. No one has been charged in connection with the assault, which police are continuing to investigate.
 Rose City Antifa, which is based in Portland and is one of the oldest and most organized Antifa groups, had encouraged its followers to attend the rally.
 Law enforcement officials established their presence early, seizing flagpoles and shields from both sides.
 The Portland police said they would use "whatever means necessary" to curb violence.
 "To those people planning to come and inflict violence in our city: We don't want you here," Ted Wheeler, the mayor, said in a recorded admonishment this month. He warned that police would use "whatever means necessary" to uphold the law.
 Police and the mayor have repeatedly said they are not targeting any political group but rather are seeking to stop violence perpetrated by people of any viewpoint.
 Joey Gibson, the leader of another conservative group, Patriot Prayer, which has organized similar rallies in the past, turned himself in to the Portland police Friday after being charged with rioting in another clash in May. He appeared at the rally Saturday.
 Two members of the Proud Boys are on trial in New York after being charged with attempted assault in an attack on people believed to be members of Antifa. The Proud Boys also hosted a free speech rally in Washington, D.C., in June, during which Antifa protesters clashed with police and some conservative demonstrators.
 Opposing groups have faced off in Portland several times in recent years. Sometimes the protests turn violent.
 Now used to the mayhem, residents and event planners in the city have prepared accordingly. A 5K run was moved from one side of the Willamette River to the other to avoid the protest, and police posted a map on Twitter identifying a dozen other events that they said would not be affected by the demonstration.
 Rallies are so common in Portland in part because it is a hub for anarchists and radical political groups, drawn to the city's reputation of upholding the rights to free speech and protest.
 "We're proud of our defense of these core American values," Wheeler, the mayor, said in the video earlier this month. He repeatedly stressed, however, that the city did not want groups coming from out of town to stoke tensions.
 Enrique Tarrio, the Proud Boys chairman, said Friday that he thought the city had created an environment in which leftist protesters could get away with violence, which is in part why conservatives chose to host the anti-Antifa protest in Portland.
 He added that his group planned to be peaceful unless its members were in imminent danger.
 A leftist demonstrator holds a sign of Heather Heyer, who was killed in 2017 while protesting the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Va., as people gather in Portland, Ore., in anticipation of protests on Saturday, Aug. 17, 2019. Far-right groups demanding that "anti-fascists" be labeled domestic terrorists are expected to clash with counterprotesters on Saturday, the latest in a series of vocal and at times violent political demonstrations in the city. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times)
 RUTH FREMSON
 A leftist demonstrator holds a sign of Heather Heyer, who was killed in 2017 while protesting the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Va., as people gather in Portland, Ore., in anticipation of protests on Saturday, Aug. 17, 2019. Far-right groups demanding that "anti-fascists" be labeled domestic terrorists are expected to clash with counterprotesters on Saturday, the latest in a series of vocal and at times violent political demonstrations in the city. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times)
 RUTH FREMSON
 Police officers rode on the side of a vehicle as right-wing demonstrators and counterprotesters gathered in Portland, Ore., for an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally on Saturday. Authorities set up concrete barriers and closed streets in an effort to contain the two groups.
 Noah Berger
 Police officers rode on the side of a vehicle as right-wing demonstrators and counterprotesters gathered in Portland, Ore., for an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally on Saturday. Authorities set up concrete barriers and closed streets in an effort to contain the two groups.
 Noah Berger
 TOP: Members of the Proud Boys and other right-wing demonstrators planted a flag in Tom McCall Waterfront Park during an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally in Portland, Ore., on Saturday.  ABOVE: Counterprotesters confronted the right-wing demonstrators at the rally. Police worked hard to keep the sides apart, but there were skirmishes throughout the day.
 The associated press
 TOP: Members of the Proud Boys and other right-wing demonstrators planted a flag in Tom McCall Waterfront Park during an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally in Portland, Ore., on Saturday.  ABOVE: Counterprotesters confronted the right-wing demonstrators at the rally. Police worked hard to keep the sides apart, but there were skirmishes throughout the day.
 The associated press
 A counter-protester confronts members of the Proud Boys and other right-wing demonstrators during an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally in Portland, Ore., on Saturday, Aug. 17, 2019. Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler said the situation was "potentially dangerous and volatile" but as of early afternoon most of the right-wing groups had left the area via a downtown bridge and police used officers on bikes and in riot gear to keep black clad, helmet and mask-wearing anti-fascist protesters ' known as antifa ' from following them. (AP Photo/Noah Berger)
 Noah Berger
 A counter-protester confronts members of the Proud Boys and other right-wing demonstrators during an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally in Portland, Ore., on Saturday, Aug. 17, 2019. Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler said the situation was "potentially dangerous and volatile" but as of early afternoon most of the right-wing groups had left the area via a downtown bridge and police used officers on bikes and in riot gear to keep black clad, helmet and mask-wearing anti-fascist protesters ' known as antifa ' from following them. (AP Photo/Noah Berger)
 Noah Berger
 The Associated Press contributed information to this report.

Graphic

 
A leftist demonstrator holds a sign of Heather Heyer, who was killed in 2017 while protesting the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Va., as people gather in Portland, Ore., in anticipation of protests on Saturday, Aug. 17, 2019. Far-right groups demanding that "anti-fascists" be labeled domestic terrorists are expected to clash with counterprotesters on Saturday, the latest in a series of vocal and at times violent political demonstrations in the city. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times) RUTH FREMSON A leftist demonstrator holds a sign of Heather Heyer, who was killed in 2017 while protesting the white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Va., as people gather in Portland, Ore., in anticipation of protests on Saturday, Aug. 17, 2019. Far-right groups demanding that "anti-fascists" be labeled domestic terrorists are expected to clash with counterprotesters on Saturday, the latest in a series of vocal and at times violent political demonstrations in the city. (Ruth Fremson/The New York Times) RUTH FREMSON Police officers rode on the side of a vehicle as right-wing demonstrators and counterprotesters gathered in Portland, Ore., for an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally on Saturday. Authorities set up concrete barriers and closed streets in an effort to contain the two groups. Noah Berger Police officers rode on the side of a vehicle as right-wing demonstrators and counterprotesters gathered in Portland, Ore., for an "End Domestic Terrorism" rally on Saturday. Authorities set up concrete barriers and closed streets in an effort to contain the two groups. Noah Berger TOP: Members of the Proud Boys and other right-wing demonstrators planted a flag in Tom McCall Waterfront Park during an "E

Load-Date: August 18, 2019


End of Document