Port controversy brings to light intolerance toward Arab world
University Wire
March 17, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 The Heights via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 662 words
Byline: By Chris Maroshegyi, The Heights; SOURCE: Boston College
Dateline: CHESTNUT HILL, Mass. 
Body


In the recent firestorm over the sale of six American ports to Dubai Ports World (DPW), it has become evident that the American public still has hints of xenophobia, the likes of which haven't been seen since the Dark Ages. In a stunning feat of decision making through utter ignorance on the part of the American public, Congress has forced DPW to abandon its North American ports.
Almost three-quarters of Americans say they are against an Arab company, DPW, purchasing six major ports from British-based P&O. Yet when asked about the merits of the deal, a majority says they are vehemently against DPW owning American ports simply because they are Arabs and they "heard" they had ties to terrorism.
After reading editorial after editorial and listening to countless politicians address the issue, I am set aback by this superficial argument. I'm ashamed by the public's reaction. I'm not ashamed for people not being informed; it's a way of life, and I'll admit, I'm not informed as much as I would like to be on some issues. Rather, I'm ashamed at the jump to conclusions that everybody has made based on little or no information.
Upon further insight, one will find that the United Arab Emirates is in fact our strongest ally in the Middle East, especially in the war against terrorism. The UAE services more military personal and equipment than any other country in the world, serving as a pit stop for many of our war ships in the region.
Furthermore, the UAE is the most moderate country in the Middle East, with a booming economy and tourist attractions rivaling the best in the world. The UAE is an economic and social safe-heaven in the Middle East, with almost three-fourths of the population being foreign born.
Yes, it's true that two terrorists from the UAE were among the hijackers on Sept. 11. Yes, it's true that terrorists used banks in the UAE to store their money. This, however, has absolutely no indication on the stance of the government or the majority of the public. With their growing dependence on tourism and their desire to build stronger relations with the United States, the UAE has long had a tough stance on terrorism. In a recently published interview, a former high level Al-Qaeda member stated that the UAE was considered an enemy of Al-Qaeda because of its strong support of the United States in the war against terror.
In addition to their claims of terrorism, opponents argue that selling our ports to a foreign company is like outsourcing our security. This couldn't be further from the truth. While DPW would be the owners of the ports, they have nothing to do with the security of the port. The Coast Guard and the Customs and Border Control Agency are fully responsible for the screening of all ships and containers coming into the ports. The owners simply manage the facilities, renting out facilities to different companies. All this argument does is serve as a useless sound bite to stir the emotions of the American public, especially because American ports have been owned by foreign companies for decades without scrutiny.
Serving as further proof that these security concerns are superficial, a UAE-based company, which owns Inchcape Shipping Services (ISS), has been providing services for the Navy and other clients throughout the major ports in the United States for many years. The deal was similar to the one proposed by DPW and has never had any security glitches or negative feedback from any government official.
What is apparent from this entire debate is that America is going down a road of global ethnic profiling that is eerily similar to the profiling of communists during the Cold War.
Arabs are the new target, and the mere mention of their name raises grandeurs of Sept. 11 and a notion that all Arabs are a risk to our security. It is ironic that our country, a beacon of tolerance and pluralism, is going down the same road of intolerance that it has accused so many countries of.
(C) 2006 The Heights via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 17, 2006


End of Document