PORT SECURITY LOOPHOLES HURT ANTI-TERRORISM EFFORTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 29, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 702 words
Byline: Eric Lipton, The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Department of Homeland Security's effort to extend its anti-terrorism campaign overseas by enlisting help from importers and foreign ports has been so flawed that the program may have made it easier at times to smuggle unconventional weapons into the United States, congressional officials say.
 Homeland Security has reduced inspections in the United States of cargo coming from 36 foreign ports and 5,000 importers that were certified under its antiterrorism initiatives. But the department has failed to confirm whether most of those importers have tightened security or whether thousands of high-risk containers headed to the United States were inspected at ports overseas, agency records show.
 "We have folks here who have the right intentions," said Sen. Norm Coleman, R-Minn., chairman of an investigative panel that held an oversight hearing on the programs Thursday. "But rather than making it harder for folks with evil intentions to do harm to this country, we have in place a system that creates the potential for greater vulnerability."
The port and importer programs, which offer incentives to those who sign on to Homeland Security initiatives, are intended to help block threats overseas so they cannot reach U.S. shores, government officials say. But Kristi M. Clemens, assistant commissioner at Customs and Border Protection -- the division of Homeland Security that set up these efforts -- said the agency realized that the two programs had some problems.
 "We have had to make adjustments to further strengthen the program," she said. "The criticisms are fine, some of them have been helpful."
 But Clemens rejected the suggestion that the programs' weaknesses had compromised national security. "We are still in a better position with the programs than we were without it," she said. Customs officials have long recognized that the 9 million ship containers arriving in the United States each year pose a security risk. In a speech in January, Robert C. Bonner, commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, called the containers "the potential Trojan horse of the 21st century."
 "A 40-foot container loaded with ammonium nitrate would create a huge blast 10 to 20 times that of the Oklahoma City bombing," he said. "But the sum of all fears is a 'nuke-in-a-box.'"
 Soon after the September 2001 terrorist attacks, Customs demanded that 24 hours before a sea shipment leaves a foreign country, carriers must electronically deliver details on any cargo headed to the United States or the shipment can automatically be blocked. A special computerized targeting center in the United States screens all these reports, looking for any anomalies that might provide a hint that a container holds dangerous goods. Last month, importers enrolled in the Customs incentives program -- known as the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism -- were automatically designated as a lower risk. Containers shipped by them are inspected once every 306 times, instead of once every 47 times, Customs officials said, permitting faster movement of goods to warehouses owned by Wal-Mart, Home Depot, Lowe's and other companies.
 Clemens and Todd Owen, director of the importers' program, acknowledged that so many businesses enrolled that the agency granted thousands of the preferential security clearances without determining whether the companies had improved security measures. About 9,000 applications from importers have been submitted so far. But of the 5,000 that have been accepted, Customs officials have only verified that 597 companies were taking the required measures. Those include such steps as putting up fencing around manufacturing plants and watching over loaded containers as they move from the factory to the ship, Owen said.
 The foreign ports program, called the Container Security Initiative, has less severe but still troubling weaknesses, members of Congress and shipping experts say. Ports enrolled in the program must agree to set up scanning equipment that can look inside containers to see whether any suspicious items might be hidden in loads that the targeting center deems "high risk." In return, cargo from those ports are moved more quickly once they land in the United States.

Load-Date: June 1, 2005


End of Document