Possible TRIA sunset a wild card in renewal season; Insurance companies preparing for world without government backstop
Business Insurance
January 10, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 14
Length: 753 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


A cloud is hanging over an otherwise buyer-friendly renewal season-and it's not likely to go away any time soon.
Darkening the January renewal season is the cloud of uncertainty over the future of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act. The 2002 law, which provides a federal backstop for insurers in the event of future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is scheduled to expire at the end of the year. Efforts to extend TRIA through the end of 2007 thus far have failed, leaving the issue for the new Congress.
In light of the failure to renew TRIA, insurers have begun planning for a world without the backstop. Several say they plan to offer limited, non-TRIA-backed coverage if the law sunsets. They warn, though, that prices for that coverage will be much higher than for TRIA-backed policies.
''It's blue skies, sunny, but there's a storm cloud out there of TRIA, the possibility of the nonrenewal of TRIA,'' said Gary Marchitello, managing director-national property syndication for Aon Corp.'s Aon Risk Services unit in New York. ''That would have a pretty devastating impact on the supply of terrorism capacity and, obviously, the corresponding escalation in prices that would have to be paid for terrorism insurance in the private market.''
''This is the one wild card for the 2005 renewal season,'' said Alexandra Glickman, area vice chairman and managing director of the real estate and hospitality services division of Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. in Glendale, Calif. ''The only uniformity is no uniformity'' regarding how insurers are now treating terrorism coverage and how they will treat it, she said.
''We're all concerned, because nobody wants to be in technical default of loan (due to a lack of required terrorism coverage), nor does anyone want to have an additional premium come due if you have to replace coverage with stand-alone,'' she said, in reference to non-TRIA backed terrorism policies.
''Do you buy a stand-alone policy up front, which typically have lower limits?'' she asked.
The uncertainty over TRIA's future ''certainly made it more interesting'' during the year- end renewal season, said Randy Schreitmueller, vp at Johnston, R.I.-based Factory Mutual Insurance Co., which does business as FM Global.
''Carriers are in the position of preparing for a sunset that may never come,'' he said. As a result, ''FM Global has developed a provisional set of terrorism conditions that we're beginning to communicate to the market.'' Essentially, if TRIA expires, FM Global will revert to sublimits terrorism coverage, he said.
Boston-based Liberty Mutual Group Inc. is also preparing for the possibility that TRIA will not be extended, said Tim Rose, president of Liberty Mutual Property. ''We have a 'willing offer' on the table, we're offering TRIA and offering coverage beyond with some qualifications.''
Renewals are ''time-consuming, because the underwriters have to inform their customers of the possibility that TRIA won't be'' extended, said Tom Kaiser, president of the property, energy and marine division of Arch Insurance Group in New York.
''A lot of companies, including Arch, are thinking about developing a product to respond to the needs that customers have for terrorism cover. That is at sort of a 'go/no-go' position until we know definitely what the government is going to do,'' he said.
''ACE supports extension of TRIA,'' said John Gallagher, senior vp-global property for ACE USA in Philadelphia, a unit of ACE Ltd. ''The real impact of nonextension has not been experienced yet. We are getting feedback from customers that coverage will not be available, and ACE is preparing for that by establishing limited terrorism capacity, however, private insurance will not provide the adequate capacity that TRIA represents,'' he said.
As the year progresses, pressures will build on carriers to react, said Mr. Rose.
Aon's Mr. Marchitello noted that Congress might not move quickly on the issue until the Treasury Department issues its report on TRIA's impact on the marketplace. Treasury is still gathering information and does not have to issue the report until June 30.
''Even before Congress begins debate on it, we're going to be six months into '05,'' he said. With every renewal after Jan. 1, most underwriters will be putting a sunset clause on TRIA-provided terrorism coverage. With the federal backstop gone, we could see a doubling or tripling of terrorism prices,'' said Mr. Marchitello.
''I think all roads lead to terrorism and the question of whether TRIA is renewed or not,'' he said.

Load-Date: January 12, 2005


End of Document