Possible expiration of TRIA raises concerns about economic impact
Business Insurance
October 17, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 669 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Failure to have some sort of government terrorism insurance backstop in place if the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act expires will have a negative impact on the U.S. economy.
Such was the common thread of concern among private-sector participants at the National Symposium on Terrorism Risk Insurance, held earlier this month on Capitol Hill. In fact, one prominent reinsurance company executive said the program should not only be extended but significantly expanded as well.
TRIA, which created a federal financial backstop for insurers facing losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire Dec. 31.
``From our perspective, TRIA has worked,'' said Jacques DuBois, president and chief executive officer of Armonk, N.Y.-based Swiss Re America Holding Corp. ``If TRIA is not renewed, $100 billion of backstop reinsurance disappears.''
Mr. DuBois said TRIA also should be expanded to cover both group life insurance and losses stemming from domestic terrorism. ``TRIA protection should not depend on passports,'' he said.
The Bush administration, though, opposes the reauthorization of TRIA unless it is significantly scaled back. Neither chamber of Congress has yet to move on legislation that would extend the government backstop in either its current or any diminished form.
If there is no backstop, the economy could pay a considerable price, predicted several participants in a panel discussion at the symposium.
TRIA needs to be viewed within its role in maintaining the country's economic resilience, said Art Raschbaum, general director-corporate risk management for Detroit-based General Motors Corp. and senior vp and director of GMAC Insurance Holdings Inc. Mr. Raschbaum said he remains ``highly skeptical'' of the amount of private capital that could be raised to cover terrorism risk. Without an extension or replacement of the TRIA program, ``the economy will suffer,'' he said.
``The reinsurance market is one that is risk-averse'' when it comes to terrorism, said Robert V. Hatcher III, executive vp of Willis Re Inc. in Philadelphia. That risk aversion will probably be magnified by the impact of Hurricane Katrina, Mr. Hatcher said. ``I do not believe, in the wake of Katrina, the reinsurance marketplace will step up,'' he said.
There currently exists about $169 billion in commercial insurance capital for all risks, said Brian Melas, senior vp-commercial markets and manager-commercial markets administration for Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. in Boston. ``A significant terrorist event would exhaust'' a significant portion of that capital, Mr. Melas said.
``We think the industry needs to stand up and assume more risk,'' but insurers would need more capital to do so, he said.
Anyone interested in the extension of TRIA needs to talk to political leaders, said Peter Lowy, CEO of Westfield Corp. Inc. in Los Angeles. Mr. Lowy said the insurance industry would have a ``major liquidity'' problem if both a hurricane similar to Katrina and a major terrorist attack were to occur within a short time period.
Mr. Lowy said Congress and the president should convene a blue-ribbon commission to examine long-term solutions to the provision of terrorism insurance. As an executive with a multinational corporation, he stressed his belief that the issue of a backstop is one of global competitiveness.
``If TRIA is not renewed,'' corporations may well consider the lack of a government terrorism insurance financial backstop when deciding where to locate facilities, perhaps to the detriment of the United States, he said.
The Oct. 7 symposium on terrorism insurance was sponsored by the RAND Center for Terrorism Risk Management Policy in Santa Monica, Calif.; the Center for Risk & Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles; the Wharton Risk Management & Decision Processes Center at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia; the Communications Institute of Pasadena, Calif.; and the Washington-based Congressional Quarterly.

Load-Date: October 21, 2005


End of Document