POST-9/11 IS RIGHT FOCUS FOR CAMPAIGN
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 25, 2004 Thursday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14
Length: 604 words
Body


UNTIL RICHARD CLARKE CAME ALONG, NON- partisan historians seemed likely to conclude that the Bill Clinton and George W. Bush administrations were about equally vulnerable to criticism on their pre-9/11 anti-terrorist actions. After all, many people insist that the Clinton administration's responses to various terrorist attacks were pathetic, and that the administration's obsessive avoidance of combat fatalities in Somalia, Bosnia and Kosovo delivered a message of American weakness to terrorists.
Meanwhile, though, there is the matter of the American destroyer the USS Cole. Al-Qaida's responsibility for the attack that killed 17 Americans became clear in the first months of the Bush administration, and the president did nothing. Indeed, the administration seemed to be moving away from terrorism as a concern. Attorney General John Ashcroft made up a list of the Justice Department's priorities, and the fight against terrorism wasn't there; indeed, he proposed a cut in funding.
Then - the nonpartisan analysis seemed likely to go - 9/11 happened, and everything changed, and would have changed no matter who was president.
This analysis has been strengthened in some ways by testimony this week before the national commission investigating 9/11. For example, officials of both administrations have argued compellingly that before 9/11 any sort of war against Afghanistan would have been out of the question. Americans were on guard against the possibility of a president inventing an international threat to serve his own interests. A movie - Wag the Dog - was made about that possibility.
And Congress was generally skeptical of all wars. And certainly no international coalition could have been built.
But now comes along Mr. Clarke, who served in both administrations as chief anti-terrorism official. He draws a clear distinction between the two, saying the Clinton White House was focused on terrorism as an "extra- ordinarily high priority," but the Bush administration treated terrorism as "not an urgent issue."
Indeed, Mr. Clarke insists that even after 9/11 the president was so focused on Iraq - which had no role in 9/11 - as to undermine anti-terrorism experts.
Mr. Clarke is making no cheap attempt to shift responsibility from himself. That became clear when he choked up as he apologized for the failure of the government to prevent the calamity.
Still, inevitably, the Bush administration has set out to discredit him. Some of the efforts have been strange. Vice President Dick Cheney said that maybe the problem was that Mr. Clarke was "out of the loop" during the Bush presidency. The chief anti-terrorism guy?
The administration has a right to fight back without being accused of trying to destroy the man. The whole truth will come out slowly, not in the first days after his charge, not in the heat of a political campaign.
Surely, though, partisan Republicans should consider exercising restraint in blaming everything on Bill Clinton. Even before Mr. Clarke came along, that complaint was threadbare.
Meanwhile, the Democrats would be well advised not to rely on the Clarke case too much. The main thing he says that is relevant to the campaign is not about the pre-9/11 era. To see the views held in that era as relevant now is like asking during World War II who was an isolationist before Pearl Harbor. Things have changed so much that the old positions are irrelevant.
Mr. Clarke's most relevant input is about the post-9/11 era and the Bush administration's focus on Iraq. But the existence of that focus is hardly debatable. What is debatable is the wisdom. That's where the campaign should come in.

Load-Date: March 26, 2004


End of Document