Postal employers' response to mail terrorism falls short
USA TODAY
October 18, 2001, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 576 words
Body

I read with great concern USA TODAY's article about the way the U.S. Postal Service is handling the anthrax dilemma facing our country.
As an employee for a mail processing and distribution center for the U.S. Postal Service, I am angered by the service's response ("Postal Service takes precautions," News, Tuesday).
From personal experience, I don't believe the Postal Service has taken enough measures to protect its employees or the public it serves:
 * Saturday, postal employees at my job were called into a meeting primarily to give us some general information about anthrax. Unfortunately, this meeting was the only action taken by my employers in the name of safety.
* One of my fellow employees asked what the safety committee's position was on employees' wearing gloves while working, since in the past this has been considered a safety violation. We were told that wearing gloves is still considered a safety hazard, despite current events.
Moreover, we were informed that if we were injured while wearing gloves, the Postal Service would take no responsibility.
 * U.S. postal facilities continue to need added security. Sadly, with more than 2,000 persons employed at my work site, I have yet to see a security person in the 8 years I've been employed.
I'm concerned that the Postal Service has no measures in place to realistically handle a biohazard such as anthrax.
Mary A. Flanagan
Grapevine, Texas
Anthrax or not, it's terrorism
Terrorism by any other name is still terrorism.
Why all of the repeated questions and sidestepping of answers about whether the anthrax incidents and scares are acts of terrorism? Most of us know the answer because of the uncertainty and anxiety we feel.
U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson practically had to have the answer pried from him Sunday. He first said he didn't know. Then he finally said the incidents were acts of bioterrorism. It's really quite simple. Anthrax does not occur naturally in envelopes, on letters or in mailrooms.
Whether these anthrax incidents can be definitively linked to the events of Sept. 11 or not, they have been orchestrated by terrorists.
Even the powders that test negative are being sent by people trying to terrorize U.S. citizens. After all, the definition of a terrorist is someone who perpetuates fear with the systematic use of terror tactics. Rare and deadly bacteria sent to innocent citizens qualifies, as does the threat of such.
From the standpoint of the war we are waging in Afghanistan, it does matter whether the potential murderers and fearmongers are linked to al-Qa'eda or the Taliban, or whether they are homegrown terrorists or copycats.
Either way, all convicted terrorists should be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
Now is the time for intense and relentless detective work in this country, not just preventive measures and spin doctors. We have to find those who are terrorizing our nation and put an end to their acts.
Alex Taylor
Russell, Ohio
Media's reports don't help
It is too bad that the news media keep repeating all of the bad news and perpetuating terrorism fears.
The result is that terrorists are getting what they want: People have become afraid. We're looking at everything and everybody, wondering whether they're the enemy.
Unfortunately, the media have become the terrorists' friend -- a real helper. Come on, people. Wake up and try to help the country. Stop with all the "sky is falling" reporting.
J. Moyer
Orlando, Fla.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Robert Mecea, AP; Prevention: Officer Richard Hand, right, of the New York Police Department's Emergency Service Unit, tapes the mask of fellow officer Joe Toscano's biohazard suit at The Associated Press' mailroom Monday.

Load-Date: October 18, 2001


End of Document