Potential attackers may use tests of base security to make plans
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 26, 2018 Friday


Copyright 2018 Dayton Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 515 words
Byline: Will Huntington, 88TH AIR BASE WING PUBLIC AFFAIRS
Body


Eagle Eyes, the Air Force's anti-terrorism program is designed to bring the eyes and ears of all Airmen to bear on terrorism prevention by teaching about the typical activities that terrorists engage in to plan their attacks.
To help individuals identify potential threats, the program details seven main areas of interest that can be present in the lead up to a potential terrorist attack. Recognizing and reporting these areas serve to thwart terrorism.
 https://www.daytondailynews.com/news/gourds-fly-above-wright-patterson-nov/FY61zroXiv5tQBtf1gJ6gM/
 The areas of interest include surveillance, elicitation, tests of security, acquiring supplies, observing suspicious persons out-of-place, dry runs and deploying assets.
 The third item – tests of security – are any attempts to measure reaction times to security breaches or to penetrate physical security barriers or procedures to assess strengths and weaknesses.
 Understanding how quickly a security response actually happens or identifying a weakness in existing security measures gives terrorists a much better understanding of how to best exploit that knowledge in the quest to carry out a successful attack.
 An example could include an individual shaking the base perimeter fence, or even scaling the fence, to see how long it takes for Security Forces to respond. They would also be able to see the scope of the security in the number of vehicles or personnel responding.
 A would-be terrorist could then factor that information in to know where the best location might be to cross that boundary before being intercepted. They could also ensure that their own resources are sufficient to blunt any response. They are interested in finding out what our security capabilities actually are and how they can best overcome them.
 Base personnel can be of great assistance to Security Forces if, when they happen to observe such activities, they immediately report them. Within the context of the Air Force's mission, these markers can be a red flag and, when shared through the Eagles Eyes program, can provide the details needed to make the difference in preventing terrorist acts.
 Suspicious activities reported through the Eagle Eyes program are immediately shared with local law enforcement agencies, counterterrorism personnel and military commanders for rapid assessment and investigation.
 Eagle Eyes reporting information should be easily available at work centers
 The program provides a network of local, 24-hour phone numbers to call whenever a suspicious activity is observed. At Wright-Patt, personnel can report any and all suspicious activities by:
 * Calling on or off base: 257-EYES; 937-257-3937
 * Emailing: EagleEyes@us.af.mil
 The following numbers can also be utilized for any emergencies:
 * 88th Security Forces Law Enforcement Desk, 937-257-6516/6517
 * 88th WPAFB Fire Department, 937-257-3033
 * On-base emergency number (257-9111) from any installation telephone or 937-257-9111 from your cell phone.
 This Eagle Eyes contact information can be stored in the address book of a cellphone for quick retrieval when needed.

Graphic

 
Caption Suspicious activities reported through the Eagle Eyes program are immediately shared with local law enforcement agencies, counterterrorism personnel and military commanders for rapid assessment and investigation. (Metro News Service photo)

Load-Date: November 16, 2018


End of Document