Potential for food terrorism dominates New Orleans conference agenda
New Orleans CityBusiness (New Orleans, LA)
November 19, 2007


Copyright 2007 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 388 words
Byline: CityBusiness Staff Report
Body


Keeping the U.S. food supply safe was the main topic for speakers and panelists at a national conference in New Orleans.
Thee risks to the U.S. food system to bioterrorism, accidental contamination of food-borne pathogens, avian flu and natural disasters dominated discussion at the Food Distribution Research Society Conference Nov. 3-7.
Dr. Wes Harrison, LSU AgCenter agricultural economics professor and a conference organizer, said the food system is vulnerable to a variety of potential threats.
Col. John Hoffman, retired Army and now the senior research scholar with the National Center for Food Protection and Defense, said the greatest threat to the food supply right now is actually things that are not intentional, and these threats will continue.
An example is the recent recalls of contaminated meat and other food products. But the terrorism threat is definitely still there, he said.
Hoffman said there have been intentional food terrorist attacks. But in 1984, a cult in Oregon tainted salad bars with the toxic salmonella bacteria to influence a local election.
Dr. Mike Moody, assistant director for research and development with the National Center for Biomedical Research and Training and a professor in International Programs at the LSU AgCenter, discussed safeguarding the food supply.
"We teach classes across the nation to responders to disaster areas," Moody said, to first responders, community leaders, insurance company representatives, veterinarians, policemen and firemen.
Moody said 76 million cases of food-borne illness result in 325,000 hospitalizations and 5,000 deaths annually in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control.
New Orleans was the conference site because it is a major port for food products and home to many food-related businesses. Also, regional governmental agencies remain sensitive to planning and recovery for national emergencies post-Hurricane Katrina.
"Hurricane Katrina was a wakeup call as to the vulnerability of the system," Harrison said. "I wanted the conference here to address these issues because we've seen how bad things can be when you're not prepared. "
The research society is a nonprofit organization of university educators, researchers, food industry executives, food consultants and government analysts. The LSU AgCenter co-sponsored the event.

Load-Date: November 20, 2007


End of Document