POWER EMERGENCY PLANS FAULTED
The New York Times
May 17, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 340 words
Byline: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 16
Body


The nation's electric utility system is ''highly vulnerable'' to major disruption by terrorists or a wartime attack and the Government, despite an investigation after a blackout in New York in 1977, has failed to establish plans to deal with such emergencies, according to a study by the General Accounting Office.
The G.A.O., an investigative agency of Congress, asserted that in one unidentified region of the country an attack carried out easily on just eight substations could result in a widespread loss of power.
General Accounting Office study indicates nation's electric utility system is "highly vulnerable" to disruption by terrorists and wartime attack
Many major metropolitan areas in the region could be without power for days, the researchers said, and could experience rotating blackouts for more than a year. The key components of one substation could be knocked out with just a rifle, thereby leaving an important military installation without power.
Although the agency did not say it would be possible to defend electric installations against attack, it criticized efforts that have been made to cope with emergencies and to restore power.
''Federal plans and programs for managing electrical emergencies which may arise from war, sabotage or terrorism are inadequate or nonexistent,'' it asserted. ''Further, Federal guidance and coordination with respect to such electrical emergency preparedness is lacking.''
 
Priorities Are Suggested
Among its recommendations for better planning, the G.A.O. said the Department of Energy should establish priorities for different electricity users so that the most important customers such as military installations, industrial plants and hospitals could be the last to lose power or the first to have it restored in an emergency.  The agency also said the Energy Department should consider the need to stockpile key equipment so that such structures as substations and transmission towers could be replaced more quickly. A small substation normally takes three to six months to build, it said.


End of Document