Powell, in India, says battle is broad;
The secretary of state said the terrorism that his
host nation had suffered would not be overlooked.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 18, 2001 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A23
Length: 871 words
Byline: Michael Zielenziger and Juan Tamayo KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: NEW DELHI
Body


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell assured India yesterday that America's campaign against terrorism was not confined to Afghanistan and Osama bin Laden.
"The United States and India are united against terrorism, and that includes the terrorism that has been directed against India as well," Powell told reporters during a news conference with Indian External Affairs Minister Jaswant Singh.
Speaking after a day of meetings, Powell condemned a terrorist attack this month on the parliament of Kashmir, a region claimed by both India and Pakistan. The shootings and a suicide car-bombing killed at least 40 people.
In an effort to quell the rising tensions between the two nuclear-armed neighbors, Powell also pledged that America's renewed military alliance with archrival Pakistan would not derail its efforts to improve relations with the world's most populous democracy.
Powell's statements went a long way to calm anxious Indian officials concerned that new U.S. overtures to Pakistan meant that the Bush administration would lose interest in India, or that military supplies sent to Pakistan might end up being used on India's border. Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee accepted Powell's invitation to visit the White House on Nov. 9, a sign of the importance both nations are placing in the bilateral relationship.
Powell's three-day swing through the subcontinent drew calls from both governments for a peaceful settlement of the Kashmir conflict. But it apparently did little to allay mutual suspicions between India and Pakistan, bitter rivals since their twin births in 1947 when the British ended colonial rule in the region.
Keeping tensions in check
On Monday, the day Powell arrived in the Pakistani capital, Islamabad, Indian forces shelled parts of Kashmir controlled by Pakistan. There were more clashes Tuesday. Yesterday, the Pakistani government said it had spotted suspicious military deployments by India.
"The Pakistani armed forces reserve the right to respond or retaliate appropriately to any act of aggression by India," Lt. Gen. Rashid Qureshi, spokesman for President Pervez Musharraf, said yesterday. "One would hope that sense prevails."
Powell's trip was aimed at keeping tensions over Kashmir from exploding at a time when the United States badly needs both countries' support for military operations in Afghanistan.
A long battle for control over Kashmir has claimed an estimated 50,0000 Indian lives. Most of Kashmir is ruled by predominantly Hindu India, but its population is 80 percent Muslim. Muslim Kashmiris accuse India of human-rights violations, while India accuses Pakistan of arming and training separatist fighters.
'Shoulder to shoulder'
"We deplore terrorism wherever it exists, whether it's the kind of terrorism we saw on the 11th of September or the kind of terrorism we saw on the 1st of October in Srinigar," Powell said in New Delhi yesterday. India and the United States stand "shoulder to shoulder" against terrorism, he said.
Singh told reporters that the two countries "can work together" and that India viewed its relationship with Washington independent of whatever the United States might do to aid Pakistan.
Indian officials are convinced that the same brand of Muslim radicalism that orchestrated attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon is responsible for the campaign of violence designed to forcibly separate Kashmir from India. They have openly questioned whether America can be sincere about fighting terrorism while strengthening ties with Pakistan, which India believes sponsors terrorism.
Nevertheless, after decades of anti-U.S. hostility based on India's long history as a leader of the underdeveloped world, the Vajpayee government has bet considerable political capital that improving ties with Washington will reap it great benefits. India was one of the first nations to pledge help after the Sept. 11 attacks, offering to allow U.S. military aircraft to use Indian airfields.
Meanwhile, in Islamabad, U.N. officials painted the darkest picture yet of the humanitarian crisis in Pakistan's western neighbor, Afghanistan.
Afghan refugees arriving in the southwestern Pakistani border city of Quetta said that two villages east of Kandahar had been "totally destroyed," said Rupert Colville, spokesman for the U.N. refugee agency. Colville had no other details. Taliban officials alleged that a U.S. bomb hit a truck Tuesday near Kandahar, killing 20 civilians and wounding another 20.
The number of refugees arriving in Quetta has risen sharply, from about 1,000 to an estimated 8,000 per day this week, Colville said. The new arrivals' physical condition is "visibly deteriorated" compared with refugees last week, and they are reporting increased traffic on roads leading to Pakistan. The United Nations warns that as many as 1.5 million new refugees could arrive in Pakistan if the bombing continues. Several aid groups yesterday called for a halt in air strikes to allow truck convoys to deliver food before winter.
Taliban activities also were cited as a problem. World Food Program spokesman Khaled Mansour said Taliban gunmen seized two warehouses containing 7,000 tons of food, about half of the food stockpiled by the agency in Afghanistan.

Notes

At War With Terror

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document