Powell's travels show urgency of anti-terrorism effort
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 20, 2002, Sunday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P9A
Length: 712 words
Byline: George Gedda The Associated Press
Body


TOKYO - When Secretary of State Colin Powell took office a year ago, terrorism did not rank high on his priority list and barely merited a mention in his Senate confirmation hearings.
But terrorism and its residue have been a common thread during Powell's visits last week to Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal and now Japan, where he will attend an international conference on reconstruction assistance for Afghanistan set for Monday and Tuesday.
Since Sept. 11, terrorism is the theme around which U.S. foreign policy has been organized, playing much the same role that the Cold War played during the latter half of the 1990s.
On Thursday, Powell promised the leader of Afghanistan's interim government, Hamid Karzai, that the United States is not about to cast aside Afghanistan now that the Taliban militia has been forced from power and the al-Qaida terrorist organization has been dealt a severe blow.
Afghanistan "is emblazoned on the president's [Bush's] heart," Powell told Karzai during a visit to the new leader's office, according to a senior State Department official who attended the meeting.
The reason Afghanistan is special, the official said, is that left unchecked, terrorists could once again use the nation as a base of operation, much as they did during five years of dominance by the Taliban and al-Qaida.
And the Bush administration is making a maximum effort to encourage other donor governments to be generous in pledging assistance to Afghanistan at Monday's conference here.
Powell and his traveling party have been hush-hush about how much the United States plans to contribute. They say the American pledge may not be the greatest because of the billions of dollars spent since the U.S.-led military campaign began in October.
Previously, U.S. officials said the American contribution could be in the $ 400 million range.
A U.N. official has said donor countries attending the meeting could be asked to contribute more than $ 2 billion toward an estimated rebuilding cost of $ 15 billion over 10 years.
Upon taking office, the Bush administration was wary about nation-building campaigns in distant lands, but that thinking has been revised dramatically since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. It is now ready to contribute to a top-to-bottom reconstruction effort in Afghanistan - so long as Congress goes along.
During Powell's visits to Pakistan and India, he repeatedly stressed the need for the two countries to fight terrorism instead of each other.
The latest crisis between the two was precipitated by a Dec. 13 suicide bombing at the Indian Parliament, apparently by Pakistani-based Islamic radicals.
Since then, India has seen itself as a victim of terrorism in much the same way the United States has in the post-Sept. 11 period.
Indeed, some Indians believe the United States is pursuing a double standard. They point out that Washington showed no restraint after Sept. 11, waging an intense bombing campaign in Afghanistan, but is now telling India to open a dialogue with Pakistan.
Anthony Cordesman, of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, says the U.S. war on terrorism is not risk-free, noting that it can force the United States into regional quarrels "where one nation's terrorist is another nation's proxy."
But Powell appears to have retained the confidence of both sides in his nonstop efforts to avert another South Asian war. After his visits last week to Islamabad and New Delhi, Powell said he is very encouraged that the two countries want to work out their differences peacefully.
However, other countries are trying to use the aftermath of Sept. 11 to their advantage. Syria, for example, is citing those attacks to score points against Israel, comparing them to Israel's recent demolition of Palestinian homes. The Bush administration expressed outrage.
Terrorism was on Powell's mind when he visited Nepal on Friday. No secretary of state had ever visited the Himalayan country; Powell saw fit to drop by to show support for the government's struggle against Maoist insurgents.
But he issued a gentle reminder to Nepalese officials that good government will make the Maoists seem less attractive to young Nepalese.
Or as Powell colorfully put it, effective government policies "dry up the swamp that produces terrorism."

Load-Date: January 21, 2002


End of Document