Powell, Rice clash over detainees; Armed Services Committee votes to defy Bush on the treatment of terrorism suspects
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 15, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a5
Length: 400 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The battle between the White House and a group of powerful Republican senators over the treatment of terrorist suspects touched off warring letters from President Bush's two secretaries of state.
As the clash intensified, the GOP-led Senate Armed Services Committee voted Thursday to defy Bush and approve terror-detainee legislation he has vowed to block.
Republican Sen. John Warner, of Virginia, normally a Bush supporter, pushed the measure through his Armed Services Committee by a 15-9 vote, with Warner and three other GOP lawmakers joining Democrats.
But first, Colin Powell, who served during Bush's first term, delivered a stinging blow to the administration by siding with the senators in opposition to the president's plan to detain, interrogate and prosecute terror suspects.
All but rubbing in Powell's previous post as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Bush's father, the first President Bush, the letterhead identified its writer as "Gen. Colin L. Powell, USA (Retired)."
"The world is beginning to doubt the moral basis of our fight against terrorism," Powell wrote.
Powell said Bush's bill, by redefining the kind of treatment the Geneva Conventions allow, "would add to those doubts. Furthermore, it would put our own troops at risk."
The White House quickly shot back with its own expert: The current secretary of state, Condoleezza Rice. Rice wrote that narrowing the standards for detainee treatment as Bush has proposed "would add meaningful definition and clarification to vague terms in the treaties."
In case that wasn't enough, White House spokesman Tony Snow said Powell was "confused" about the White House plan. Later, Snow said he probably shouldn't have used that word.
"I know that Colin Powell wants to beat the terrorists, too," he said.
The president's measure would go further than a Senate package in allowing classified evidence to be withheld from defendants in terror trials, using coerced testimony and protecting U.S. interrogators against prosecution for using methods that may violate the Geneva Conventions.
The conflicting letters of Powell and Rice underscored the high stakes in the campaign-season brawl among Republicans over how terror-war suspects should be interrogated and tried. With control of Congress at stake in the November elections, the administration wants voters to believe it has a steady hand in shaping the nation's security policies.

Load-Date: September 15, 2006


End of Document