Powell throws down gauntlet on Facebook's Libra project
American Banker
July 11, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 SourceMedia, Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: Vol. 184; No. 132
Length: 663 words
Byline: John Heltman
Body


WASHINGTON - Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell on Wednesday cast severe doubt on Facebook's readiness to launch its own cryptocurrency and on regulators' willingness to allow the project to go forward.
"I don't think that the project can go forward," Powell said in testimony to the House Financial Services Committee. "I just think it cannot go forward without there being broad satisfaction with the way the company has addressed money laundering - all of those things - data protection, consumer privacy. All of those things will need to be addressed very thoroughly and carefully, and again, in a deliberate process that will not be a sprint to implementation."
Powell said that the Fed met with Facebook representatives to discuss the company's plans to launch Libra, a cryptocurrency and financial infrastructure network that the companysayscould potentially reach the 1.7 billion people worldwide without access to traditional banking services.
"We do support responsible innovation as long as the risk are appropriately identified and managed," Powell said. "While the project's sponsors hold up the possibility of public benefits, including improved financial access for consumers, Libra raises many serious concerns."
Those concerns, he said, include potential for Libra to bypass anti-money-laundering and anti-terrorism controls in place in the traditional banking sector, as well as privacy concerns associated with having a social media company sponsoring a cryptocurrency. He said the Fed has a working group to focus on these challenges, as does the Financial Stability Oversight Council and other central banks.
"These concerns should be addressed, and that's why at the Fed we've set up a working group to focus on this set of issues," Powell said. "We're coordinating with central banks around the world to look into this. And I'll just add that our process for addressing these concerns, we think, should be a patient, careful one, and not a sprint to implementation."
Powell also said that, should Libra ultimately be launched, it could potentially pose a systemic risk by virtue of its potential global reach. Facebook currently has 2.4 billion users around the world.
"Facebook has a couple billion plus users, so for the first time there is the possibility of a very broad adoption, and if there were problems there associated with money laundering, terrorism financing, any of the things that we're all focused on - including the company - they would immediately rise to systemically important levels, just because of the mere size of the Facebook network," Powell said.
Powell's remarks come amid heightened scrutiny from lawmakers and regulators over Facebook's cryptocurrency designs. The Senate Banking Committee and House Financial Services Committee have eachscheduled hearingsnext week on Libra, and several lawmakers have been critical of the company's plans. Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, said Wednesday that Facebook should not be allowed to expand its business to include payments processing.
"We cannot allow giant companies to assert their power over critical public infrastructure," Brown said in a letter dated Wednesday addressed to Powell. "The largest banks and the largest tech companies do not act in the interest of working Americans, but in the interest of themselves and their investors. The Fed must take a proactive role to ensure that the payments system remains accountable to the public."
Brown also called on the Fed to quickly offer a faster payments system as an alternative to real-time payments networks offered by large banks, in light of Facebook's plans to create its own cryptocurrency.
"The Fed must preserve its critical role in the payments system by quickly providing an alternative for smaller institutions and consumers so that they are not left behind, priced out of, or disadvantaged by a system created by and for the largest financial institutions," Brown wrote in the letter.
Neil Haggerty contributed to this article.

http://www.americanbanker.com/news/powell-throws-down-gauntlet-on-facebooks-libra-project

Load-Date: July 10, 2019


End of Document