POWELL CALLS ON PALESTINIANS TO STOP TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
March 30, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a6
Length: 475 words
Byline: GEORGE GEDDA, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Secretary of State Colin Powell sought Friday to salvage U.S. peace efforts in the Mideast, delivering a stern message to Yasser Arafat to curtail terrorism while urging Israel not to harm the Palestinian leader.
U.S. envoy Anthony Zinni remained in the region to press for a cease-fire.
Powell urged Israelis storming Arafat's West Bank compound to use restraint but defended their right to retaliate for recent suicide bombings that killed 30 in three days. The secretary of state blamed the attacks for scuttling the peace process.
"Let's be clear about what brought it all to a halt: terrorism," he said.
In a public appearance and a 30-minute call with Arafat, Powell delivered a pointed message.
He said despair is not the answer to the seemingly unending episodes of violence: "Although things look dark now, we must have hope, and we must continue to work and work hard."
Powell spent much of Friday on the telephone, conferring with Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, Arafat, Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and European Union foreign policy chief Javier Solana.
There also were high-level talks within the administration. President Bush talked Friday with his top national security advisers, including Powell, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, national security adviser Condoleezza Rice and CIA Director George Tenet.
Powell said Sharon assured him over the telephone that Israeli retaliation against Arafat "would not include bringing any harm" to him.
Just three days earlier, Sharon expressed regret that he had promised Bush previously "not to physically harm Arafat."
Powell noted that the escalating violence had come against a background of "guarded optimism."
He said this was based, in part, in the near-unanimous approval recently by the U.N. Security Council of a resolution calling for a state for the Palestinian people and the "bold vision" of a Saudi Arabian land-for-peace blueprint for a durable peace in the Middle East.
He also noted that Israel and the Palestinians welcomed Zinni's renewed efforts to achieve a cease-fire.
But he said these hopes for progress have been eradicated for the time being by terror.
Terrorism, he said, "has caused this crisis to come upon us, not the absence of a political way forward, but terrorism in its rawest form."
Powell urged both Sharon and Arafat to show leadership appropriate to the challenge.
"While we understand the Israeli government need to respond to these acts of terror and the right of the Israeli government to decide what actions best serve the interests of the Israeli people, we call on Prime Minister Sharon and his government to carefully consider the consequences of those actions," Powell said.
As for Arafat, Powell said, "His leadership is now even more central to trying to find a way out of this tragic situation."

Load-Date: March 31, 2002


End of Document