PRACTICAL TRAVELER;
Coverage for Trip Cancellation or Medical Crises
The New York Times
October 14, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 5; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk
Length: 1433 words
Byline: By Betsy Wade
Body


World uncertainties are causing travelers to seek ways to avoid or reduce their losses if a trip is canceled, or even if the travelers themselves decide that a plan no longer sounds safe or like fun. This coverage is widely available in addition to the more important parts of travel insurance, which older people in particular should have: for medical protection, theft and other contingencies.
Insurance packages for travel are not so complex as liability policies, but they have enough fine print to rule out many circumstances you might expect them to cover; insurers do not leave themselves open for a deluge of claims. If you want travel coverage, first call your own insurance broker and ask whether your homeowner's or apartment dweller's policy will cover, say, the theft of jewelry or clothes, or other losses. Then look closely at the range of coverage and buy only what you need. The possibility of a death in the family or an accident is the basic reason consumers buy trip-cancellation policies.
Those with an eye on the Middle East should know that under trip-cancellation coverage, there are as many provisions as there are companies. Coverage against terrorism is an example; most companies do not list a terrorist act in a destination city as a ''covered reason'' for canceling a trip there. The brochure for one company that does, Access America International, says a ''terrorist incident in a foreign city to which you are scheduled to arrive within 30 days following the incident'' is a reimbursable reason for cancellation. But under ''general exclusions,'' the company will not insure travel to Afghanistan, El Salvador, Iran, Iraq, Cambodia, Laos, Lebanon, Libya, Nicaragua, North Korea, South Yemen, Vietnam ''and such other countries'' as it may determine to be unsafe.
Under its terrorism coverage, Access America said it paid benefits to policyholders who canceled trips to Frankfurt or London in the 30 days after Pan Am Flight 103 was bombed over Lockerbie, Scotland. A company spokesman said she did not know how many people were paid. Spokesmen for other companies shrank from discussing a hypothetical claim in such a case. One said rhetorically, ''Well, would you include Scotland?''
The packages of Travel Assistance International and WorldCare, both underwritten by the Transamerica companies, cover for cancellation in the event of terrorism in places where terrorism is not common. The WorldCare policy will cover a ''major'' terrorist incident or outbreak of disease in a place where terrorism or the disease was not considered a threat in the previous 12 months. The Travel Assistance policy does not add this limitation. But both companies exclude 60 countries from this coverage. This list generally matches the index of places for which the State Department has advisories in effect - be they warnings or merely cautions. However, the Transamerica list includes 13 places for which there are no advisories now in effect and omits 13 for which there are. Ask for a current list of exempt countries before buying coverage.
Insurers define differently what they are going to cover, and the inclusion of a particular type of event that leads to the cancellation of a trip does not seem to affect the price. So, for example, Access America's policies, which do cover terrorism, are in line with companies that do not.
Only one policy, Travel Guard Gold, insures you against loss of a deposit if you change your mind about taking a trip for any reason, absent any listed emergency. But the maximum benefit is only half of the lost deposit up to $400 a person.
 
Natural Disasters
Another area where trip cancellation coverage varies is in the benefits to be paid if the policyholder's primary residence is damaged before a trip - say by a flood - causing the trip to be canceled. The American Express Travel Protection Plan, which comes in different editions depending on the state, also covers cancellations caused by a ''weather-related emergency'' (not a fire) that damages the house. American Express policies for most states cover cancellations for damage to the home caused by ''natural disasters.'' But policies for New York, California, Florida and Maine do not include this, meaning that Californians whose house was damaged by an earthquake would not get coverage for cancellation of their trips. Becoming Ill on a Trip A more pressing concern is safeguarding yourself if you fall ill or are injured and need to be hospitalized, removed to another place or brought home. In such a case, financial losses can be great. If you are trekking in Nepal, getting you out could be dangerous and expensive, so you should look for the best evacuation provisions you can find. If you break your hip skiing in Europe and need first-class seats home because you need to travel lying down, then insurance is worthwhile, though not as critical.
If you are older or in uncertain health, insure yourself accordingly, and buy the trip-cancellation portion of travel insurance, which normally includes interruption of a trip after it begins.
If you have some chronic disorder - ''pre-existing condition'' - that is kept under control with medicine, be sure to check the terms of coverage. As a sample, Travel Assure of Mutual of Omaha disallows coverage for conditions for which medical attention was received in the previous 60 days; HealthCare Abroad specifies 180 days. Other policies allow more recent treatment if the condition is under control.
You can also buy insurance to pay the extra charges if a traveling companion is taken ill and you must pay extra to occupy a room alone.
Another important area of coverage to consider is the issue of operator failure if you are taking a tour or have booked an airline seat. If a policy covers for ''bankruptcy'' of the tour operator or airline, it will not pay unless that legal step is taken, and it is not always taken. In last year's Hemphill Harris case, for example, the company did not declare bankruptcy but simply defaulted on hotel payments, leaving travelers stranded in the Far East. Look for a policy that mentions default, cessation of operations or similar language that means, essentially, your tour operator has left you high and dry. If you buy your insurance directly from the tour operator, it will not cover for the default of that company.
Travel insurance is sold by travel agents. Although they do not sell other sorts of insurance, most states require that they be licensed to sell this kind. Ask for what you want. The agent gets a 35 percent commission, quite high, on the premiums, so there is no need to be timid.
The cost will depend on the length of the trip, the number of travelers and the extent of the coverage. For example, Mutual of Omaha's Travel Assure, for $213, covers a family for a trip of 22 days anywhere in the world that includes a top trip-cancellation benefit of $2,000, medical accident insurance of $10,000 and medical-evacuation coverage of $25,000. Access America, for $215, covers a family for 23 days with a top trip-cancellation benefit of $2,000, medical insurance of $20,000 and unlimited medical transportation. Here are some established companies in the field: Access America International and Access America North America, 600 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10163; 800-284-8300. A subsidiary of two Blue Cross-Blue Shield organizations. The underwriter is BCS Insurance.
American Express Travel Protection Plan, 1650 Los Gamos Drive, San Rafael, Calif. 94903; 800-231-1133. The underwriter is Amex Assurance Company.
Carefree Travel Insurance, Arm Coverage, Box 310, 120 Mineola Boulevard, Mineola, N.Y. 11501; 800-323-3149. The underwriter is the Hartford Company.
HealthCare Abroad/HealthCare Global, Wallach & Company, 243 Church Street N.W., Suite 100-D, Vienna, Va. 22180; 800-237-6615. The underwriter is Switzerland Insurance Company U.K.
Travel Assistance International, Europ Assistance Worldwide Services, 1133 15th Street N.W., Suite 400, Washington, D.C. 20005; 800-821-2828; underwriting by Transamerica Life Companies.
Travel Assure of Tele-Trip Company, Box 31685, 3201 North Farnam Street, Omaha, Neb. 68131; 800-228-9792. The underwriter is Omaha Property and Casualty Insurance Company.
Travel Guard and Travel Guard Gold, 1100 Center Point Drive, Stevens Point, Wis. 54481. The underwriter is Transamerica companies.
Travel Insurance Pak, Travelers Companies, 1 Tower Square, Hartford, Conn. 06183; 800-243-3174. Travelers does its own underwriting.
WorldCare, 1150 South Olive Street, Los Angeles, Calif. 90015; 800-666-4993. Underwriting by Transamerica companies.

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document