PRE-NOV. TERRORISM IN U.S. IS FEARED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 16, 2004 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 703 words
Byline: ANNE E. KORNBLUT AND BRYAN BENDER, THE BOSTON GLOBE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Even before the Madrid bombings, U.S. intelligence officials say they were picking up "chatter" among suspected al-Qaida members and their affiliates about the timing of this year's U.S.  presidential election, reinforcing suspicions that terrorist groups are factoring domestic politics into their calculations of how best to undermine the United States and its allies.
 As Spain ushered in a new governing party after the deadly bombings upended the elections there, U.S. intelligence analysts and political strategists said they have been forced to consider anew the possibility of an attack in the United States sometime in the next seven months -- one of several incalculable elements looming over the general campaign.
 "Al-Qaida would love to do something close to the election, an 'October surprise,' " former CIA terrorism chief Vince Cannistraro said. "Al-Qaida thinks strategically. Are they considering what effect this would have on our political system? Yes."
U.S. counterterrorism officials cite a steady flow of intelligence pointing to al-Qaida's desire to mount attacks that will have the most political impact possible. They declined to provide specifics, citing security concerns, but said recent intelligence suggests that the terrorist group hopes to exploit the election cycles of the United States and other countries in an effort to peel away popular support for the war on terrorism.
 The issue of homeland security is already inextricably linked to the presidential race, and the Madrid bombings added fresh material to the debate. Yesterday, Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, and Vice President Dick Cheney incorporated the events in Madrid into their political speeches.
 Kerry cited the recent events in Spain as evidence that "real action is what we need" in the United States, rather than the Bush administration approach, which has been "big on bluster and short on action."
 Cheney, meanwhile, said the train bombing "once again reveals the brutality of our enemy and once again shows that the fight against terrorism is the responsibility of all free nations. … The terrorists are testing the unity and the resolve of the civilized world, and we must rise to that task."
 But the political fallout from an actual attack on U.S. soil between now and Election Day is one of the greatest unknowns in the race; depending on the timing and scale of an attack, the nation could either embrace the incumbent out of defiance or pick a new leader out of rage that the country had not been better protected.
 Speaking of the Spanish election result Sunday, Dr. Jerrold Post, a former CIA profiler who directs the political psychology program at George Washington University in Washington, said, "That's an amazing impact of a terrorist event, to change the party in power."
 "The implications of this are fairly staggering," agreed political psychologist Stanley Renshon of City University of New York. "This is the first time that a terrorist act has influenced a democratic election. This is a gigantic, loud wake-up call. There's no one they'd like to have out of office more than George W. Bush."
 The upcoming national elections in the United States do not present the same kind of political target as Spain, experts said. They noted that an overwhelming majority of Spaniards opposed the government's unflinching support for the Bush administration in the war in Iraq. Al-Qaida followers and sympathizers, aware of the popular opposition, warned last October that Spain would be punished for its role in Iraq, where 1,300 soldiers are deployed.
 In the United States, predicting the potential impact of a terrorist attack before the November election is more complicated, according to analysts, depending on the how Bush and Kerry are perceived by the electorate at the time.
 While most experts agreed that the chances of a sizable attack in this country are reduced somewhat by the extensive protections erected since Sept. 11 -- and also presumed that the U.S. electorate would not necessarily respond to an attack at the polls -- members of both parties said the national mood could easily shift in either direction if another major attack occurred.

Notes

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Load-Date: March 17, 2004


End of Document