Pre-Recess Votes Expected on Terror Bill, Student Loans
American Banker
August 1, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 SourceMedia LLC d/b/a Arizent. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 3; Vol. 172; No. 147
Length: 699 words
Byline: Stacy Kaper
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Lawmakers are aiming to move forward this week on a handful of financial services bills, including an extension of the terrorism risk insurance program and an overhaul of private student loans, before adjourning for a monthlong recess.
The House Financial Services Committee is expected to vote today on a bill from Chairman Barney Frank, D-Mass., that would extend the terrorism insurance program, scheduled to expire at yearend, for another 10 years.
The program, created as a temporary backstop after the Sept. 11 attacks, also would be expanded to cover group life insurance and attacks sponsored by both foreign and domestic groups. Coverage would be available for nuclear, biological, chemical, and radiological attacks.
The banking industry generally has endorsed extending the program as a way to protect loans for properties that require terrorism risk coverage.
Martin DePoy, the steering committee coordinator of the Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism, which represents 80 business groups, including the American Bankers Association, the American Bankers Insurance Association, and the Mortgage Bankers Association, said a long extension of the program is necessary to ensure stability in the market.
"The way we've been doing it for the last few years is to have a couple years of the program, and then we have this awkward moment of a fast-approaching possible termination of the program," he said. "It's rather disruptive to the marketplace. It's time for the government to recognize that this is a long-term problem that needs a long-term solution."
Mr. DePoy expects the bill to pass with strong bipartisan support, despite objections from the Bush administration.
Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson wrote in a letter last week to Rep. Frank and Rep. Spencer Bachus of Alabama, the lead Republican on the House Financial Services Committee, that the administration believes the program should be phased out.
"We do not support efforts to expand the federal government's role in terrorism reinsurance," Mr. Paulson wrote. "Instead of scaling back the federal backstop, the legislation unnecessarily expands the program by including group life insurance and by adding domestic terrorism coverage."
The Senate Banking Committee also had eyed terrorism risk insurance reform for a possible vote today, but it had to push back consideration of that bill as well as efforts to reform the Federal Housing Administration and the National Flood Insurance Program until after the recess.
Today the Senate panel plans to take up four bills, including one sponsored by Chairman Chris Dodd, D-Conn., to create new disclosure rules for private student loans and clean up the relationships between private lenders and colleges.
The bill was scaled back from a previous discussion draft to achieve the support of Sen. Richard Shelby of Alabama, the committee's top Republican, and to take into account concerns raised by the banking industry that the bill would create too many expensive and unnecessary requirements.
Despite those changes, industry representatives said privately that lenders still had concerns over new disclosure requirements and new standards requiring a cooling-off period, which could delay the release of a loan by 30 days while the borrower decided whether to accept the offer.
Other provisions lenders perceived as more onerous, including those that would prevent lenders from considering a college's default or graduation rate when underwriting loans, have been removed from the final version of the bill.
Joe Belew, the president of the Consumer Bankers Association, said he hoped the final version would not result in onerous restrictions that dampen lenders' interest in offering private student loans, which typically come into play once a student has exhausted cheaper federal options.
"We are very much supportive of reforms, but we hope they will be workable, and that they'll work for students and families, but there is a lot up in the air," Mr. Belew said. "The main thing is you don't want to jam up the system, so that the college doesn't get the disbursement in time for the student to go to class."
http://www.americanbanker.com/            http://www.sourcemedia.com/

Load-Date: July 31, 2007


End of Document