PRECAUTIONS CAN'T STOP NEXT MCVEIGH
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 18, 1998, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 469 words
Byline: MICHAEL HEDGES, SCRIPPS HOWARD NEWS SERVICE
Body


He's out there. Angry, deranged, beyond moral considerations, probably alone or acting within a small cell of true believers, the next Timothy McVeigh travels among us, domestic terrorism experts said.
Three years after the April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building in Oklahoma City, much has been done to prevent a similar catastrophe, from rethinking how potential target buildings are constructed to beefing up federal domestic anti-terrorism capabilities.
But, as B.J. Zapor, a spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said, ''It would be illogical to think that the threat is gone.  . . . It will always exist.''
And the threat often takes the face of a determined individual. ''As with gangs or narcotic traffickers, a larger group has a much greater chance of being exposed,'' said Zapor. ''It is the person acting alone who is the hardest to detect.''
That is not to say federal authorities are conceding the game to potential terrorists.
''Our analytical capabilities are much more robust than at the time of the Oklahoma City bombing,'' said Bob Blitzer, FBI section chief for the domestic terrorism/counterterrorism planning section.
''At that time, we had one small cell of 20 analysts working at the Washington headquarters. Now, we have 50 here, and 50 more in the field,'' Blitzer said.
Between 900 and 1,000 federal domestic terrorism investigations are now under way, experts said. That is nearly 10 times the number ongoing at the time of the Oklahoma City bombing.
Law enforcement officials said there is also more coordination in regional joint agency task forces, which can include officers from the ATF, the FBI, the Secret Service, Bureau of Prisons and others. Even the CIA is involved in supplying some counterterrorism intelligence.
The number of interagency groups sifting through tips for a possible lead on the next Timothy McVeigh has grown from 12 at the time of the Murrah blast to 216, Blitzer said.
That increased capacity may be needed heading into the millennium, a time when, as one federal law enforcement agent said, ''we're going to be hearing from a lot of people with crazy ideas.''
The ATF is focusing on working with the explosives industry to identify people looking for the power of mass destruction who don't have a good reason to have it, said Zapor.
The agency also has beefed up its National Response Teams which go to the scene of explosions to gather evidence.
Federal agents said to ferret out a potential terrorist before he or she can act requires a patient sifting of lots of extraneous data, developing good informants within the groups and making the right call as to when a suspicious person or activity warrants opening an investigation.
As Blitzer said, ''It's a free country, and somebody just talking big doesn't mean anything.''

Load-Date: April 23, 1998


End of Document