PRELIMINARY ISRAELI STUDY INDICATES NO TERRORISM IN BUILDING COLLAPSE
The New York Times
November 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 450 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: TEL AVIV, Nov. 14
Body


The collapse of Israel's military headquarters building in southern Lebanon last week was not the result of a terrorist attack, according to the preliminary results of an inquiry that were disclosed today.
The collapse of the building on the outskirts of Tyre killed 75 Israelis and 14 Arabs. The Israeli military command at first attributed it to terrorists. An official statement said the sevenstory structure was demolished by the explosion of a car bomb.
TEL AVIV, Nov. 14 - The collapse of Israel's military headquarters building in southern Lebanon last week was not the result of a terrorist attack, according to the preliminary results of an inquiry that were disclosed today.
But the army radio said the Chief of Staff, Lieut. Gen. Rafael Eytan, told the Cabinet today that the incident had apparently not been the result of sabotage.
The Israeli radio said that Maj. Gen. Meir Zorea, head of the investigating team, told the Cabinet that there were ''reasonable prospects'' that Arab terrorists had not been involved. He said the panel would have a final report in a few days.
A participant in the meeting, Minister of Energy Yitzhak Modai, told the radio: ''Experts established beyond any doubt that it was not sabotage activity. It looks like an accident.''
The Cabinet meeting was designated a session of the Parliamentary Foreign Affairs and Security Committee, making it a criminal offense to reveal what was said.
 
Contrary View Expressed
An unidentified senior military official, however, reacted angrily to Mr. Modai's statement and told the radio it was incredible that a Cabinet minister should so misconstrue what he heard. He said there was not sufficient evidence for a categorical finding and nothing could be ruled out.
The interim impressions were based on findings from a search through the rubble. Rescue operations ended late Saturday afternoon.  Rescuers saved 28 Israelis and 28 Arabs, all of whom were hospitalized. They included 3 Israelis who had been trapped under the rubble for at least 24 hours.
Israeli reporters at the site said experts dismissed the sabotage theory because they had found no bomb fragments, vehicles near the building had not been hit by shrapnel, windows of neighboring buildings were intact and survivors said they did not recall a big explosion.
The most widely held belief is that an explosion from an escape of cooking gas brought down the building. Israeli engineers said the building, completed in 1975, was poorly built. One engineer said there was an imbalance between the weight of the floor and the walls because of a lavish use of iron and insufficient concrete. He said a small explosion could have brought one floor down on top of another.


End of Document