PREPAREDNESS FOR BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM SPOTTY;
 EMERGENCY CREWS ARE LEARNING ABOUT CHEMICAL THREATS, BUT MORE TRAINING AND EQUIPMENT ARE NEEDED.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
February 21, 1999, Sunday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: MAINE/NEW ENGLAND,
Length: 883 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: CONCORD, N.H.
Body


Manchester firefighters were taking a class in how to deal with biological and chemical terrorism when the call came in -- Planned Parenthood had gotten a letter claiming to contain deadly anthrax bacteria.
Several firefighters -- a fire engine team and a hazardous materials team -- responded to the call Thursday, carrying the printed instructions for handling anthrax they had received in class, said Manchester Fire Chief Joseph Kane.
They donned protective suits and breathing apparatus, went into the clinic, sealed the letter and white powder it contained in evidence bags, and whisked them away to state and FBI labs for testing, authorities said.
"They were able to actually take the instructions and bounce right from the class to the scene," Kane said Friday. "They had all the information with them, so they knew exactly what the procedures were to follow in this case."
The Manchester clinic was closed Friday. No one had been arrested, the FBI said.
Packages containing anthrax threats were reported Thursday at women's health clinics in Manchester, Milwaukee, Cincinnati, Washington, D.C., and Rapid City, S.D. The FBI also was investigating suspicious packages received, but not opened, at Planned Parenthood centers in Sioux Falls, S.D., and Burlington, Vt., on Thursday, and in St. Johnsbury, Vt., on Friday.
Authorities believe the latest anthrax scares are hoaxes, like dozens of others around the country in the past few months. Although laboratory tests were incomplete Friday, the threat letter received in Manchester and the powder inside it appeared to be an amateurish deception.
But had the threat been real, New Hampshire's various emergency agencies might not have been equipped to handle it, authorities and experts say.
"New Hampshire really isn't prepared right now," said Stephen Tomajczyk, a terrorism expert and author.
The Planned Parenthood threat "is like a slap across the face. We need to take it seriously, because it can happen here," he said.
The state Fire Academy offers a two-day class in how to recognize and respond to terrorism. More than 300 people -- including the Manchester firefighters -- have taken the course, which is aimed primarily at "first responders," such as firefighters, police and emergency medical technicians, said academy Capt. Charles Roffo.
Another 300 people have taken shorter classes aimed at government officials, business people, local emergency management coordinators and school officials, he said.
But many holes remain in the state's emergency preparedness, officials concede.
For example, ambulance crews and police are not equipped with protective suits or breathing gear that could protect them from nerve gas or airborne biological agents like anthrax, said Martin Singer, chief of emergency medical services for the state.
If emergency medical technicians or police respond to a terrorism scene without protection, they could become the second round of victims, he said. Many are not trained yet to tell when they are dealing with terrorism instead of an accident, fire or medical crisis.
"We are the yellow canaries in this scenario," Singer said. "We tend to rush in when other people rush out."
Emergency medical crews also don't have enough antidotes for chemical poisons, such as the stimulant atropine, which increases the heart rate in people poisoned by nerve gas.
"In Israel, the civilian population carried emergency kits during the Gulf War," he said. "We don't carry nearly enough (atropine) even for one person, let alone a massive exposure . . . so how can we even protect ourselves?"
Likewise, if individuals exposed to biological or chemical agents show up at hospital emergency rooms without being decontaminated, doctors, nurses and other patients all are at risk of exposure, Singer said.
Hazardous materials teams and fire crews have protective gear and the training to recognize and deal with chemical agents, said Jim Van Dongen, spokesman for the state Office of Emergency Management. But they are not well-trained to deal with biological weapons, he said.
On the other hand, the state public health laboratory is well-trained to recognize disease organisms, but needs better equipment and training to test for chemical agents, said laboratory chief Veronica Malmberg.
The state also might not have sufficient supplies of antibiotics to deal with an act of mass bio-terrorism, and vaccines aren't readily available for emergency personnel, she said.
Hospital workers, too, need better training in recognizing symptoms of diseases such as anthrax and the bubonic plague, she said.
State epidemiologist Dr. Jesse Greenblatt said a foreign government is more likely than a domestic group to commit large-scale bio-terrorism.
"To produce anthrax in a way that it could be used as a weapon would take a fairly high level of skill and it would be a threat to the person who made it," he said.
The only incident of biological terrorism in the United States took place in Oregon in the 1980s, he said. Devotees of the "guru" Rajneesh sprayed salad bars in Antelope, Ore., restaurants with salmonella bacteria, which is commonly found in uncooked poultry. They succeeded in sickening a large number of Antelope residents, causing them to miss a crucial vote so the devotees were able to gain control of town affairs, he said.

Load-Date: July 28, 1999


End of Document