Preparing for terror
University Wire
January 3, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 The Johns Hopkins News-Letter via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 883 words
Byline: By Jonathan Snow, The Johns Hopkins News-Letter
Dateline: Baltimore
Body


Listening to the headlines these days can be a depressing activity. The news is filled on a daily basis with stories of terror attacks, near-misses and missed opportunities by law enforcement that may have prevented the deaths of innocent civilians. America, luckily, has remained a relatively safe place to live, with few terrorist attacks taking place within our own borders. Because of this, we are still able to ignore the majority of terrorist activities and to assume that these attacks overseas will not affect our daily lives.
Nothing could be more dangerous than this apathy.
Johns Hopkins U.
Terrorism thrives on our self-serving tendencies. Terrorists have come to understand that they can continue to make gains through the use of terrorism, so long as the world community remains divided on how to deal with this threat. If terrorist attacks don't directly impact Americans, we are more likely to look at the "underlying causes" and to fault the country against which the terrorist is acting, instead of insisting that only the terrorists themselves can be held responsible for their actions.
We have a responsibility as Americans, as university students and as citizens of the world to educate ourselves about the threat that terrorism posses to democratic societies and to investigate what role we can play in helping to thwart this threat.
As the memories of Sept. 11 begin to fade, we are all faced with the challenge of keeping up the willingness we had a year ago to make personal sacrifices in the name of the greater good. Our original vitality has turned into annoyance at the time it takes to pass through airport security, or the inability to avoid debates about the role of terror in the Israeli/Palestinian conflict.
This frustration is understandable. It is often difficult to keep up momentum in a fight that seems to have no end.
But this frustration must not be allowed to turn into indifference. Each of us can help in the fight against terror, and we can begin right here on campus.
University campuses are ideal places for the types of discussions and debates that are pivotal to this war on terror. Terrorism is intrinsically a threat that requires us to "think outside of the box." Terrorists use our greatest strengths (free press, open society, civil liberties, democracy) against us by exploiting the weaknesses these elements can cause in responding to their threat. Fighting terrorism requires new thinking and requires each of us to avoid our knee-jerk responses to the world around us.
That brings us back to the question of the role each of us can play in this fight. We can each help by educating ourselves about the various backgrounds and cultures present at Johns Hopkins, by taking part in discussions about the nature of terrorism and how to fight it, and by taking pause and really thinking before instinctively responding to the words or actions of others.
Each of these steps can help build the foundation upon which a strong anti-terror campaign can be built.
By educating ourselves about various backgrounds and cultures, we can close the gaps that divide us, and deny the terrorists the ability to divide and conquer.
By debating the nature of terrorism and the effectiveness of various anti-terror policies we are able to better grasp the intricacies of the terrorist threat and begin the type of critical thinking that will allow us to effectively combat this threat. This is perhaps the most crucial, and difficult, of all of the steps because it requires each of us to abandon the traditional logic that we have become accustomed to and to rethink the fundamental bases of our society. We must debate the role of torture, assassination, "collective punishment" and non-traditional weapons in this new war. Our initial instincts on many of these issues may prove to be right, but without a thorough discussion of the role that these elements play in a changing world, we might end up allowing the law, and not the spirit on which our laws are based, to aid the terrorists in bringing down our society.
Noted civil liberties attorney Alan Dershowitz has begun to outline a good starting point for many of these debates in his latest book, "Why Terrorism Works." While his conclusions may or may not prove to be acceptable to the greater American public, the methods he uses in his reasoning could certainly be a lesson for everyone. If such a noted civil libertarian can argue that torture is sometimes warranted, it behooves all of us to question the relevance of our fundamental beliefs and forgotten the reasoning upon which they are based.
Fighting terrorism requires patience, strength and ingenuity. Only through constant discussions about the difficult issues can we properly curtail this threat, while ensuring that we do not loose the fundamental nature of our society. We can begin this debate right here on campus, in classrooms, religious settings, and through extracurricular groups like the new Hopkins anti-terror group, Persuing Realistic Options to Effectively Combat Terror (PROTECT).
Terrorism will require us to make difficult choices as a society. Only by preparing here and now for these questions, can we hope to play a critical role in these upcoming debates.
(C) 2002 The Johns Hopkins News-Letter via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 3, 2003


End of Document