Prepare for domestic terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
March 7, 1999, Sunday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: VIEWPOINT;
Length: 402 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


Anthrax scares are to the '90s what bomb threats were 10 or 15 years ago. A wave of hoaxes have swept the United States of late, with at least two occurring recently in Salt Lake City.
Understandably, some may argue against dignifying these hoaxes with publicity, but it is apparent such scares cannot be completely ignored. The repeated cry of "wolf" is an annoying and distracting irritant, but it does not diminish the fact the actual beast could show up somewhere. Americans had best be prepared in case that happens.
Unfortunately, no foolproof inoculation exists against germ or biological warfare. Fortunately, threats to date have been phony, and responses by emergency personnel and law enforcement have been measured and professional.
In the latest local incident, people who were exposed to the fake problem package were immediately treated for possible exposure by medical personnel in a decontamination tent. They were then taken by ambulance for follow-up tests. The area where the package was found was quickly sealed off to prevent contact with others. Law-enforcement personnel responded quickly, as they must to every such spoof in spite of the disruptive effects. The potential for catastrophe is simply too great for desensitization.
Obviously, the most effective antidote to real or imagined attacks is thorough, but not hysterical, preparation and diligent police work. The FBI has committed to investigating each anthrax incident and will eventually bring the perpetrators to justice. When they do, there should be no leniency in punishing those who spread fear and create havoc at significant personal and professional costs.
The growing awareness of the threat of this type of domestic terrorism locally and nationally -- and what must be done to prevent it -- is good. But it has underscored general lack of preparation in some areas.
Not long ago, Congress received a grave appraisal from Attorney General Janet Reno and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright that the United States continues to be vulnerable to terrorist acts at home and abroad. Bioterrorism experts from Johns Hopkins University emphasized at the same time that to remain unprepared is to invite disaster.
Those warnings, coupled with recent scares close to home and across the country, should be sufficient to spur preventive measures that could thwart perverse attempts to cause death and destruction through devious means.

Load-Date: March 7, 1999


End of Document