President Joins in G.O.P. Attacks on Democrats About Terrorism
The New York Times
August 17, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 406 words
Byline: By JIM RUTENBERG
Dateline: LANCASTER, Pa., Aug. 16 
Body


In a campaign swing here, President Bush on Wednesday picked up his party's attack against Democrats for having what the Republicans have called the wrong approach to the fight against terrorism. But his was a kinder, gentler approach than the one used by Vice President Dick Cheney and others in recent days.
  Referring to the war in Iraq, Mr. Bush said: ''There's some good people in our country who believe we should cut and run. They're not bad people when they say that, they're decent people.''
But he added, ''I just happen to believe they're wrong, and they're wrong for this reason: this would be a defeat for the United States in a key battleground in the global war on terror.''
  Mr. Bush was speaking at a fund-raising event for the former football star Lynn Swann, the Republican trying to unseat Gov. Edward G. Rendell. It was Mr. Bush's first public political address since news broke last week that the British had disrupted a major terrorism plot.
  The White House and the Republican Party had pounced on that news, along with the defeat of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman in the Connecticut Democratic primary by an antiwar candidate, Ned Lamont, to paint the Democrats as weak on national security. Mr. Cheney had gone so far as to imply that the defeat of Mr. Lieberman, a strong backer of the war, would embolden ''Al Qaeda types.''
  Mr. Bush did not specifically mention the Democrats in his address. 
  Referring to the disruption of the plot in Britain, he said, ''And so we've got to use new tactics, new efforts, new assets to protect ourselves against an enemy that will strike us at any moment.''
  Mr. Bush denounced those who have called for a law enforcement approach to fighting terrorism.
  ''Some people say, Well, this may be a law enforcement matter,'' he said. ''No, these are people that are politically driven. They want to impose their vision on other people. That's what they're trying to do. And the United States of America must never retreat and let them have their way.'' 
  There was no mistaking the president's target when he said success in Iraq was crucial in the fight against terrorism, adding, to loud applause: ''They want us to leave. They want us to cut and run.''
  Phil Singer, a spokesman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, responded by saying, ''Misstating the Democrats' position on Iraq doesn't change the fact that the White House's Iraq policy has been a tragic failure.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: President Bush toured the Harley-Davidson plant yesterday in York, Pa., and sampled the merchandise. Mr. Bush spoke in Lancaster. (Photo by Evan Vucci/Associated Press)

Load-Date: August 17, 2006


End of Document