PRESIDENT DEFENDS MOVES MADE BEFORE AND AFTER IRAQ WAR/ IN WEEKLY ADDRESS, HE EMPHASIZES LEADERSHIP IN WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 22, 2004 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 278 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President George W. Bush on Saturday defended his decision to go to war in Iraq and his administration's postwar efforts to bring democracy to that country.
The president's remarks in his weekly radio address marked the second time in a week that he had emphasized his leadership on the war on terrorism, with Iraq cited as the chief example.
The address reprised a speech he gave earlier last week during a hastily arranged appearance at an Army base in Louisiana.
Bush on Saturday said his administration, along with lawmakers in Congress and the U.N. Security Council, "saw a threat. All of us knew Saddam Hussein's history."
Bush's political advisers see national security as one of the president's key advantages in his re-election effort to a second term this fall.
Bush cited Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian blamed for a series of devastating car bombs that U.S. officials say were aimed at fomenting civil war in Iraq, as the reason Iraq is "the central front in our war on terror."
"I will not relent until the terrorist threat to America is removed," Bush said.
Democrats have questioned Bush's Vietnam-era service in the Texas Air National Guard - how he managed to get in and whether he fulfilled his obligations - to contrast Bush with the combat-decorated record of Sen. John Kerry, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Democrats also have pointed to U.S. weapons inspectors' failure to find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, a criticism of Bush's allegations that Saddam's government possessed them - Bush's main rationale for war. Former chief weapons inspector David Kay said recently that he had concluded Iraq had no such weapons.

Load-Date: February 22, 2004


End of Document