President stands firm on terrorist questioning
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 6, 2007, Saturday


Copyright 2007 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P11A
Length: 292 words
Byline: Jennifer Loven, The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - President Bush volunteered an unapologetic defense Friday of his administration's harsh interrogations of terrorism suspects, saying they are lawful, helpful and won't stop.
Amid fresh skepticism that U.S. interrogators might go too far when trying to pry information from terrorism suspects, Bush said: "The American people expect their government to take action to protect them from further attack. And that's exactly what this government is doing. And that's exactly what we'll continue to do."
For decades, the United States had two paths for questioning suspects: the U.S. justice system and the military's Army Field Manual. However, after the 9/11 attacks, Washington quietly created the CIA's terrorist interrogation program, and it has become one of the administration's most sensitive and debated activities.
The White House regards it as one of its most successful tools in the war against terrorists. They say it has been consistent with U.S. and international law all along.
Critics, however, say the program leaves a stain on the United States' image around the world and could place Americans captured overseas in greater danger of being tortured. They fear administration interpretations of law have established loopholes allowing for treatment almost indistinguishable from torture.
"Congress has a constitutional responsibility to determine whether the program is the best means for obtaining reliable information, whether it is fully supported by the law, and whether it is in the best interest of the United States," said Sen. Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va.
The complicated, somewhat subjective debate over whether some interrogation techniques used at locations around the world constitute torture had seemed to be put largely to rest.

Load-Date: October 8, 2007


End of Document