President Steps Up War on New Terrorism
The New York Times
January 23, 1999, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk ; Column 4; 
Length: 1125 words
Byline: By JOHN M. BRODER 

By JOHN M. BRODER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22
Body


President Clinton proposed steps today to defend against unconventional terrorist warfare, including creation of 25 urban medical emergency teams to respond to germ weapons attacks and the training of a new Cyber Corps of computer specialists to detect and defeat intrusions into critical civilian and military computer networks.
In an address at the National Academy of Sciences, Mr. Clinton sought to muster public support for a large increase in Federal spending to combat exotic threats. He said that terrorists with computer skills and access to chemical and biological agents had extended the field of battle from physical space to cyberspace and from land, sea and air to the human body.
The President's proposals stand a good chance of passage on Capitol Hill, where Republican lawmakers have been pressing for several years to strengthen Federal counterterrorism programs.
Mr. Clinton said that the Department of Health and Human Services was being enlisted in the battle against domestic terrorism, expanding its disease-fighting role into a national security mission. The agency will be charged with developing and stockpiling vaccines and treatments against chemical and germ weapons and with mobilizing public health agencies to respond to any suspected attack of infectious agents.
The President's actions are a significant expansion of Federal involvement in efforts to respond to threats that officials say are quickly moving from the realm of science fiction to reality. Mr. Clinton said that defenses against unconventional threats had failed to keep pace with the speed of development of new kinds of weapons of terror, weapons that can be developed in a clandestine laboratory and transported in a briefcase or sent through the mail.
Mr. Clinton also warned that a talented hacker with a desktop computer and a modem could now threaten the nation's military, banking, communications, power, transportation and water networks.
"All of you know the fight against terrorism is far from over, and now terrorists seek new tools of destruction," Mr. Clinton told Government officials and scientists today. "The enemies of peace realize they cannot defeat us with traditional military means, so they are working on two new forms of assault which you've heard about today: cyberattacks on our critical computer systems, and attacks with weapons of mass destruction -- chemical, biological, potentially even nuclear weapons."
Mr. Clinton sought to increase awareness of emerging threats without raising undue alarm about events that have yet to materialize on American soil. He said the Government would assure civil liberties even as it organized its military, intelligence, criminal justice and public health agencies to respond to the threat of biological or computer terrorism.
"This is not a cause for panic," Mr. Clinton said today. "It is essential that we do not undermine liberty in the name of liberty. We can prevail over terrorism by drawing on the very best in our free society: the skill and courage of our troops, the genius of our scientists and engineers, the strength of our factory workers, the determination and talents of our public servants, the vision of leaders in every vital sector."
Mr. Clinton's plan devotes $2.8 billion to prepare for attacks with exotic weapons and to combat computer warfare threats.
Over the last two years, the Administration has almost doubled the money devoted to protecting Americans against attacks with unconventional weapons. The President's 2000 budget proposal allocates $1.4 billion.
Included in the total are $683 million to train emergency workers in American cities to cope with a chemical attack or an outbreak of bioterrorism; $206 million to protect Government sites; $381 million for research on pathogens, development of vaccines and therapies, technology to detect and diagnose rare illnesses, and decontamination.
The White House is also requesting $87 million, a 23 percent increase over current spending, to improve the nation's public health surveillance system to better detect the outbreak of an epidemic and determine if it is an act of nature or of deliberate terror.
The proposal also includes $52 million to continue to build a national stockpile of specialized medicines to protect civilians against attack by germ agents like anthrax, smallpox or pneumonic plague. The Administration is also seeking to triple spending, to $24 million, to create 25 new urban medical response teams in major American cities. Only four cities -- Miami, Denver, Washington, and Charlotte, N.C. -- have teams prepared to respond to a biological or chemical weapons emergency.
"We're all here talking about a kind of scenario that we hope that our citizens never have to confront, but the point is to be prepared," said Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, who appeared with Mr. Clinton today. "This is the first time in American history in which the public health system has been integrated directly into the national security system."
The other half of the President's proposal is an intensified effort to protect the nation's critical, computer-based infrastructure -- from power grids to firefighting networks. Such defenses have seen a 40 percent spending increase in the last two years, from slightly less than $1 billion in 1998 to the more than $1.46 billion being sought for fiscal year 2000.
Much of that money will go to the Pentagon for development of systems that detect unauthorized intrusion into sensitive computer networks. The Administration also proposes to spend $500 million for research on preventing efforts by computer hackers to disrupt and damage Government and private information networks.
The Administration budget proposal also includes money to create a "Cyber Corps," a cadre of computer security experts who can respond to a computer crisis. The White House said it would spend several million dollars next year to begin to design a program to train and recruit computer science students as a counter-hacker squad.
While these numbers appear small given the Government's huge budget, Administration officials noted today that the money will significantly accelerate research on biological weapons agents and the means to treat them.
Representative Curt Weldon, Republican of Pennsylvania, said he was pleased that Mr. Clinton was devoting attention and money to a problem he has sought to publicize for years.
"Congress has been been the one to take the initiative on the issue, while the Clinton Administration has largely ignored these threats," said Mr. Weldon, chairman of the research and development subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee. "It's good to see that the President has finally come around; better late than never."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 23, 1999


End of Document