PRESIDENT EXPECTED TO ATTEND ANTI-TERRORISM TALKS IN EGYPT
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
March 08, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P9A
Length: 484 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - President Clinton is expected to go to Egypt next week
to meet with other world leaders on countering terrorism and encouraging
support for the Middle East peace process, which is in danger after four
bombing attacks in Israel.
Clinton likely will visit Israel, as well, perhaps for an overnight
stay, officials said Thursday.
The White House withheld formal announcement of Clinton's trip pending
last-minute talks with Egypt and other nations. White House press
secretary Mike McCurry indicated that final word would come Friday.
"It will be a very significant gathering," McCurry said.
The conference, co-hosted by the United States and Egypt, would be held
at Sharm el-Sheik, a resort on the tip of the Sinai desert along the Red
Sea. Secretary of State Warren Christopher would stay in the region to
tour a number of countries to show support for the process, the
officials said.
"We are in the final stages of discussions with the government of Egypt
and with others in the international community that could very well lead
to a gathering of leaders and other representatives of governments next
Wednesday in Egypt," McCurry said late Thursday.
"The president is also considering a stop in Israel," he said.
McCurry "a great deal of diplomacy" was under way to make sure that any
summit would lead to a productive outcome that underscores support for
the peace process and addresses the terrorist attacks in Israel.
A visit by Clinton would be a boost for Israeli Prime Minister Shimon
Peres, whose Labor party is struggling to hold on to power in May 29
elections. It also would showcase Clinton's credentials as a world
leader in a presidential election year.
Israel, the Palestinians, Egypt, Jordan, Russia, the European Union, and
some Gulf states and North African countries will participate in the
conference next Wednesday, Israel radio said. It said Peres suggested
the summit.
"There's considerable interest in the idea and a number of people [are]
claiming parentage of the idea, which is a good thing," McCurry said.
Since Feb. 25, a campaign of suicide bombings by Islamic radicals has
killed 61 people in Israel, undermining support for the peace process
with Palestinians.
Repeating a question heard throughout Israel, McCurry said, "In exchange
for lending more self-governing authority to the Palestinians in the
territories, will there be a measure of greater security for the people
of Israel?"
He said there is "enormous concern" over whether peace accords have been
good for Israel.
McCurry said it would be reassuring to the people of Israel to hear
expressions of support from world leaders. The United States hopes that
any summit would have broad participation with a wide section of
leaders, McCurry said.
Asked if Clinton believes an anti-terrorism summit would be useful, his
spokesman said, "Properly structured, correctly defined and aimed at
useful outcomes, I think he feels it would be a useful idea."

Load-Date: March 8, 1996


End of Document