PRESIDENT FOCUSES ON ANTI-TERRORISM CAMPAIGN IN U.N.
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 21, 1998, Monday


Copyright 1998 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a3
Length: 382 words
Byline: SONYA ROSS, Associated Press writer
Body


UNITED NATIONS -- President Clinton today called anew for a united international front to combat terrorists and their new, high-tech ability to kill and maim.
"This is a threat to all humankind," he said.
Clinton went before the 53rd session of the U.N. General Assembly to press his case that the fight against terrorism remains a top priority on the world's agenda.
It is a subject he has addressed previously -- before the same audience -- but this time the president was arguing that technological advances now allow no nation the luxury of battling terrorism in its own way.
"The new technologies of terror … raise chilling prospects of vulnerability to chemical, biological and other kinds of attacks, bringing each of us into the category of possible victim," Clinton said.
The White House hoped the image of the president in an international leadership role would counter that of a testy Clinton as grand jury witness in video footage also playing today before an American public both curious and reluctant to see it.
During his speech Clinton seemed exhausted. His eyes were puffy, he appeared tired and his voice lacked energy.
Clinton said the United States is acutely aware of terrorism, from the recent bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania to the bombings of a Pan Am jet in 1988, the World Trade Center in 1994 and a federal building in Oklahoma City in 1996. Those actions, he said, reflect a trend seen around the world, from Sri Lanka to Kashmir and Egypt.
Clinton sought to defuse a perception of Islamic cultures as fomenting terrorism, promising that the United States "will remain on a course of friendship and respect for the Muslim world."
"Some may have the world believe that almighty God himself, the merciful, grants a license to kill. But that is not our understanding of Islam," Clinton said. "There is no inherent clash between Islam and America. Americans respect and honor Islam."
The president said all nations have an obligation to refuse harbor to terrorists, to decline support for terrorist activities and to confront the reality that terrorists will seek to use weapons of mass destruction. He urged that they sign a global anti-terror convention, promote stronger laws domestically against terrorism and raise international standards for airport security.

Load-Date: September 21, 1998


End of Document