Press Balks at Security Plan for World Cup
The New York Times
May 11, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 16;  Column 4;  National Desk ; Column 4; 
Length: 992 words
Byline: By WILLIAM GLABERSON 

By WILLIAM GLABERSON 
Body


A dispute over an unusual demand for security checks of reporters who want to cover the coming soccer World Cup matches is threatening to disrupt news coverage of the international sports event.
Citing a need to deter terrorism, the organizing committee of the soccer championship is requiring reporters seeking press credentials to sign waivers authorizing law-enforcement agencies to provide any information they may have about the reporters.
The agencies would alert the committee to any derogatory information, and the committee, World Cup U.S.A. 1994 Inc., would decide whether to issue credentials.
The championship, which is being held in the United States for the first time, is to begin on June 17, and 52 matches are scheduled in nine cities from coast to coast. The monthlong event is expected to draw some 3.6 million spectators from around the world.
No background checks are planned for ticket buyers, the committee has said. But it notes that reporters will have far greater access than will ticket buyers to areas where dignitaries will be watching the games.
 
'Matter of Principle'
 Some large news organizations, including The New York Times and The Associated Press, have protested the required waivers and said that their reporters will not sign the committee's forms authorizing the background checks.
"This is a matter of principle to us," Terry Taylor, sports editor of The A.P., said yesterday. "A reporter should not be obligated to waive constitutional rights to privacy in order to cover an event."
Lawyers for news organizations said the committee's demand that reporters sign waivers authorizing release of information about them by law-enforcement agencies was unprecedented in American sports journalism and might be a violation of laws prohibiting discrimination. They also said the requirement could threaten reporters' access to other events if it became a precedent.
Reviews by the Federal Bureau of Investigation are routinely conducted to give reporters access to the White House. But the organizers of most public events, from international summit meetings to sports contests, do not require special screening.
In a letter to the soccer committee last month, George Freeman, an assistant general counsel of The New York Times Company, said reporters for the newspaper and others throughout the country "are not hooligans and need not be the subject of such outrageous investigations by your organization."
In a letter to The Times on May 2, Alan I. Rothenberg, chairman of the World Cup organizing committee, said the criminal-records reviews were being conducted for security reasons on everyone working at the matches, including team members, concessionaires, stadium workers and volunteers. Mr. Rothenberg noted that many heads of state were expected to attend the games.
"Only the media has balked," Mr. Rothenberg said in the letter. "While it would be nice to think that no one would use a media accreditation as a means of access in order to commit a terrorist act, tragically, that is something that we cannot afford to assume."
A spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Washington, John H. Kundts, said yesterday that the bureau was "conducting a screening process" on about 55,000 people who have applied for credentials to work at the matches, including team members and members of the committee's staff. Mr. Kundts said this was "general preparation" to try to avoid terrorism or other criminal activities.
F.B.I. officials have not said there were any specific threats by terrorist groups related to the World Cup matches, but after the World Trade Center bombing in February 1993, law-enforcement officials have expressed heightened concern about security and the possibility of terrorism, especially at events attracting people from overseas.
James E. Trecker, a senior vice president of World Cup USA 1994, said that in addition to The Times and The Associated Press the committee had received letters of protest from USA Today, The Boston Globe, Newsday, The Seattle Times, The Trenton Times and The Newark Star-Ledger.
Some sports editors said they were confident that the World Cup committee would reconsider. They said they doubted that they would have to face the question of whether to omit coverage because their reporters lack credentials.
But others said that if the committee did not relent, a confrontation could occur. "We would have to review, at the highest levels, whether we would commit to covering an event under those conditions," said Margaret Holt, the sports editor of The Chicago Tribune.
Mr. Trecker said that many of the 7,000 reporters who are expected to cover the matches had submitted applications seeking credentials and had signed the accompanying waiver. It gives law-enforcement officials the authority to provide "criminal history and criminal investigative records" about reporters.
 
Declining a Protest
 The Los Angeles Times is one large newspaper that is not protesting. The sports editor, Bill Dwyre, said he considered the issue and then decided to allow his reporters to apply for credentials. More typical applications for press credentials provide such data as date of birth and Social Security number, and he said that information alone would give any organization enough data to review criminal records even without the permission being sought by the World Cup committee.
In his letter explaining the requirement, Mr. Rothenberg noted that six terrorists were prevented from entering the United States for the 1984 Summer Olympics. They were traveling, he noted, under the guise of being members of the Libyan news media.
Mr. Rothenberg said the six were discovered because of clearance procedures adopted by the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee.
But journalists and others familiar with coverage of the Olympics said they could not recall any requirement that American reporters authorize review of their records to obtain credentials for Olympics coverage.

Load-Date: May 11, 1994


End of Document