President signs bill to fight terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 25, 1996, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; IN BRIEF; Pg. 3A
Length: 534 words
Body


Survivors of the bombings in Oklahoma City and the World Trade Center - some  of them wiping away tears - watched President Clinton sign a bill Wednesday  providing new tools and tougher penalties for the war against terrorism.
At a ceremony on the South Lawn, Clinton told the bombing survivors and the  families of victims of 11 other terrorist attacks, "We renew our fight  against those who seek to terrorize us, in your names.
"We send a loud, clear message today all over the world, in your names:  America will never surrender to terror."
Compiled from Times WiresIN BRIEF
In a presidential election year, it was an opportunity for a warm display  of bipartisanship on a sunny spring day. It brought Clinton together on the  same stage with his GOP presidential rival, Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole.
In all, nearly two dozen members of Congress joined the president. Dole  stood behind the president as the bill was signed, and the two leaders shook  hands afterward.
More than a year in the making, the bill expands the government's power to  exclude suspected foreign terrorists from the United States.
Authorities say it also will make it easier for police to trace bombs to  the criminals who made them, by requiring chemical markers in some explosive  materials. 
 
Whitewater panel meets 
 
    The Senate Whitewater Committee, opening the last phase of its  investigation, sought Wednesday to establish whether President Clinton used  his influence as Arkansas governor to benefit a partner in the Whitewater land  deal.
The committee, which was in limbo for seven weeks during a Senate deadlock  on an extension of its mandate, has until mid-June to wind up its  investigation, in which it has so far questioned more than 120 witnesses.
The remaining hearings could occupy 45 days. They will focus on events in  Arkansas where then-Gov. Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, were  partners with James and Susan McDougal, owners of the Madison Guaranty savings  and loan institution, in the money-losing Whitewater land development project.
The committee hearing Wednesday focused on state leases of Little Rock  property owned by a McDougal real estate firm, including a previously  publicized 1987 memo citing a charge that the leases were made in exchange for  a contribution to Clinton's campaign.
Wooten Epes, former head of the Arkansas Housing Development Finance  Authority, told the committee he opposed a proposed lease of one property for  his agency because agency employees were concerned about security.
But former state building services leasing administrator Helen Herr  testified that her boss, Paul Mallard, told her the objections were not valid  and "the governor's office wants us to lease this space and that's the way  it's going to be."  Iranian arms inquiry 
 
   House Speaker Newt Gingrich established a special panel Wednesday to  investigate the Clinton administration's role in allowing Iranian arms to flow  to Bosnia.
Asserting that President Clinton might have helped Iran gain a foothold in  Europe, Gingrich set up an eight-member panel - five Republicans, three  Democrats - to examine the 1994 arms shipments that went through despite an  international arms embargo. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, Associated Press; Sen. Bob Dole, R-Kan., and Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., stand behind President Bill Clinton after he signed anti-terrorism legislation Wednesday.

Load-Date: April 25, 1996


End of Document