Presidents' day; Kudos for Lincoln and Reagan at GOP dinner in Elizabethtown
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
February 24, 2008 Sunday


Copyright 2008 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.   All Rights Reserved  
Section: B; Pg. 7
Length: 601 words
Byline: Dennis Larison
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Republicans have their work cut out for them, Congressman Joe Pitts, R-16 District, told about 80 people attending Saturday night's Lincoln Day Dinner at Elizabethtown College.
The party faced a tsunami in the last election, he said, losing 30 members in the U.S. House.
"We went from 15 up to 15 down,'' Pitts said. "Our job now is to pick up 15 seats.'' Pitts excoriated House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the Democratic majority for lowering the country's guard against terrorism by allowing the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act to expire, which he said will make it more difficult for the government to eavesdrop on terrorist conversations.
"The fight against extreme terrorism is the defining conflict of our generation,'' Pitts said, recounting the progress he had observed in the war against terrorism during his visit last year to Iraq.
Pitts also emphasized the importance of the coming presidential election, with the next president expected to appoint between two and five members to the U.S. Supreme Court.
"What happens in November is going to decide the kind of government we have for years to come,'' Pitts said. "We need to roll up our sleeves and do everything we can to help.''
State Rep. Dave Hickernell, R-98th, echoed Pitts comments, but with a focus on the state level.
"We're only one seat in the minority, but that means everything,'' Hickernell said. Republicans have a shot at getting that seat back, he said, "but a lot depends on what happens at the top of the ticket.'' Hickernell took special exception to Gov. Ed Rendell's budget proposal.
Rendell introduced his latest budget proposal to the General Assembly as a "moderate'' budget, Hickernell said, but then disclosed that it included an increase in spending of $1.13 billion, paid for with $230 million in new taxes and $4.37 billion in new borrowing.
"I think we're in for a long summer," Hickernell said. "We've got to stand up as Republicans and try to keep this under control.''
Numerous other Republican elected officials were at the dinner, including state Sen. Mike Folmer, 48th District, who gave the keynote address; Rep. Tom Creighton, 37th District; county Commissioners Dennis Stuckey and Scott Martin; county Treasurer Craig Ebersole; District Attorney Craig Stedman; Clerk of Courts Ryan Aument; and Prothonotary Randall Wenger.
Folmer talked about how some Republican organizations have renamed their Lincoln Day dinners for President Reagan, and he drew parallels between the two presidents' lives and legacies.
Both were born in February into families of modest means, he said. Both served as captains in the Army. Both used self-deprecating humor in getting their messages across to the public. And both set the nation on paths to new levels of greatness.
Lincoln, the first Republican president, took office as the country was breaking apart and presided over the bloodiest war in the nation's history as he persevered in preserving the union.
Reagan took office in a time of great economic malaise characterized by high levels of both inflation and unemployment, or stagflation. Economists had even devised a new way of measuring it, he said, which they called the "misery index.'' It was a time when it looked as if the country had lost its initiative in the world and communism was taking over.
Reagan rolled up his sleeves and went to work, Folmer said. He cut taxes and "released America's entrepreneural spirit." He "rearmed the Western alliance as a moral force ... [and] won the cold war without a shot being fired.'' Thanks to Lincoln and Reagan, Folmer said, "We're still the greatest nation in the world.''

Load-Date: February 25, 2008


End of Document