Pressure mounts to quell Sikh terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 4, 1988, Monday


Copyright 1988 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 7
Length: 614 words
Byline: Sheila Tefft, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: New Delhi
Highlight: Gandhi expected to clamp state of emergency on Punjab if peace bid fails
Body


Spiraling violence in Punjab State is pushing Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi to take a tougher stand against Sikh separatists.
Police said last week's terrorist attacks, which left more than 100 people dead, were the bloodiest in the militants' five-year fight for independence.
If the killings continue, Mr. Gandhi is expected to clamp a state of emergency on the fertile, strategic state which lies along the sensitive Pakistan border.
Two weeks ago, Gandhi pushed a constitutional amendment through the Indian Parliament. The amendment enables the Prime Minister to suspend civil rights, give the courts and police special powers, and possibly call in the Army.
''Violence is being stepped up every day,'' says Inder Malhotra, a New Delhi newspaper commentator. ''But it seems the government will wait a while longer to see how the situation plays out.''
Gandhi is holding off, say Mr. Malhotra and other Indian journalists, to give his peace initiative more time. The Prime Minister ordered the release from prison of 45 Sikhs with close links to the militants. They included Jasbir Singh Rode, who favors the creation of the Sikh homeland called Khalistan and was named chief priest at the Golden Temple, a powerful political and religious post among Sikhs.
Gandhi hopes Mr. Rode, a relative of militant Sikh leader Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, who died in the Indian Army attack on the Golden Temple in 1984, can persuade the extremists to drop their demand for a separate state.
The government has delayed emergency measures because of outcries from opposition politicians. Although the measures would be limited to Punjab, they have raised fears of the 1975 crackdown by Gandhi's mother, the late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.
The amendment ''has put the clock back to 1975, and by starting with Punjab (it) sets a dangerous precedent,'' says Soli Sorabjee, a legal expert in New Delhi.
''The battle in Punjab cannot be won only by induction of more paramilitary or military personnel, but mainly by winning over the people.''
However, that appears to be an uphill task, Malhotra says. While many Sikhs do not favor a separate homeland, they are embittered by the government's refusal to punish the instigators of the anti-Sikh rioting after Indira Gandhi's 1984 assassination by two Sikh bodyguards.
Nor will Rode, the chief priest, easily rein in the Sikh militants despite his extremist credentials. The militant groups are divided by personal rivalries, and some Sikh militants have launched a reign of terror against other Sikhs.
This year, nearly 700 people have died in Punjab, more than half of them Sikhs whom extremists had accused of cooperating with authorities. The violence has split the Sikh community and brought a pledge from an influential religious committee that ''stern action'' would be taken to stop attacks on innocent Sikhs.
Sikhs constitute only two percent of India's 780 million people, but most Sikhs live in Punjab.
Many commentators predict the Prime Minister will impose emergency powers in Punjab before May, when central government rule in the state expires. Central control cannot not be extended without emergency measures.
Gandhi has ordered new ''stringent measures'' to boost security along the Pakistani border. India contends Pakistan is masterminding the Sikh insurgency and is providing sophisticated weapons to the militants.
Recently, the militants launched rocket attacks against security forces camps in the state, and Gandhi appears worried about the wide use of Soviet and Chinese weapons by the extremists.
Without naming Pakistan, Gandhi noted ''a substantial increase in high quality weapons. It's obvious where such weapons are coming from.''

Graphic

 
Picture, Militant Sikhs block highway to prevent food passage last August: violence has split the Sikh community, AP


End of Document