President praises Pakistan troops; Musharraf tells Bush that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the core terrorism issue
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 5, 2004 Sunday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a4
Length: 386 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush on Saturday defended Pakistan's cooperation in the hunt for Osama bin Laden despite the inability of U.S. and Pakistani troops to find the al-Qaida leader who, Bush once declared, was wanted dead or alive.
The trail has gone cold in the more than three years since U.S. forces toppled the Taliban, bin Laden's patrons in Afghanistan, after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Bin Laden, who masterminded the strikes, is believed to be hiding in the wild mountainous region along the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The Oval Office meeting between Bush and President Pervez Musharraf came just days after Pakistan's army said it was pulling out of one important area along the border. Still, Bush had nothing but praise for Pakistan and Musharraf as critical to the search and the overall fight against terrorism.
"His army has been incredibly active and very brave in southern Waziristan flushing out an enemy that had thought they had found safe haven," Bush said.
U.S. officials have praised Islamabad for its operations around Wana, the main town of the lawless and fiercely autonomous Waziristan region. Heavy resistance this year led to speculation that a high-profile fugitive - possible bin Laden's deputy Ayman al-Zawahri - was cornered.
"His army has suffered casualties and for that we want to thank their loved ones for the sacrifice that their family has made," Bush said.
Musharraf came to the White House with a committed belief that resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is essential to combating terrorism. At Bush's side, Musharraf said the dispute was "the most important issue … in the interest of peace in the whole world."
Musharraf succeeded in securing a strong commitment from Bush that the United States would take a more active role in the Mideast.
"I told him this would be a priority of my administration," Bush said.
Afterward, Musharraf told reporters that Bush had agreed that settling the Middle East conflict "is the core issue, the core at fighting terrorism." A senior Bush administration official, however, said Bush did not go that far.
Pakistani commanders now say they do not believe any of al-Qaida's leaders are in the region and said they saw no sign of bin Laden.
Last month, Pakistan's army announced it was withdrawing hundreds of troops from South Waziristan.

Load-Date: December 5, 2004


End of Document