President shifts focus of education summit;
Bush discussed Iraq and terrorism more than
No Child Left Behind in his Valley Forge appearance.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 23, 2004 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL NEWS PHILADELPHIA & ITS SUBURBS; Pg. B03
Length: 694 words
Byline: Dale Mezzacappa INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


On a day when President Bush came to the region to talk about education, more than 3,900 house parties were scheduled around the country in an effort to increase the issue's prominence in the campaign.
But Bush focused on terrorism and Iraq in a Valley Forge Convention Center appearance billed as a forum on education.
"Congress and the President are breaking their promises on support for the schools. The only way to turn it around . . . is to get citizens engaged in the national debate on education," said Bob Borosage, codirector of the Campaign for America's Future, a liberal research and advocacy group that helped organize the house parties.
More than a dozen were scheduled in the Philadelphia area, according to the group's Web site. One of two parties visited by an Inquirer reporter, in Camden, had apparently been canceled. The other, in Cheltenham, was sparsely attended.
Some of the groups behind the house parties, including the National Education Association and the NAACP, have been critical of No Child Left Behind, Bush's signature education initiative, particularly in its implementation and amount of funding.
Maria-Odelia Romeu of Elkins Park signed up to host a house party because she felt the issue was being buried in the presidential campaign.
Her house party attracted one other person besides her husband. They watched an eight-minute video that criticized No Child Left Behind, saying it put too many demands on teachers while not giving them enough resources.
"I think No Child Left Behind is abominable because there isn't adequate funding," Romeu said. "Teachers are being held accountable for kids who don't have intact families, who aren't adequately nourished, and are in overcrowded classrooms." A fourth grade teacher at William Penn Charter school, a private Quaker school in Philadelphia, she has 11 children in her class.
The President spent about one-fourth of his speech yesterday on education, declaring that No Child Left Behind has been a success.
"More African American fourth graders are achieving. More and more Hispanic children are learning to read and write," he said.
With a goal for every child to reach academic proficiency by 2014, the law requires schools to make academic progress each year or face sanctions. And it mandates that each classroom have a "highly qualified" teacher by next year.
Whether the federal aid has increased enough to help schools meet all the new requirements under the law is a major point of contention that now divides the bipartisan coalition that put it together.
Bush said he had increased federal funding of Title I, the program aimed at disadvantaged students, by 50 percent since taking office. Democrats, including Sen. John Kerry, argue that the funding is $9.2 billion below what Congress appropriated, including $208 million in Pennsylvania.
Among the guests on the stage with Bush was Sharen Finziner, principal of F.S. Edmunds school in Mount Airy. Finziner said that in her school, predominantly low-income and African American, students have made good progress in reading and math over the last two years.
"We are fully supportive of No Child Left Behind," she said. "It's made a difference."
Also yesterday, the Education Trust, a Washington-based nonpartisan advocacy group, and the Alliance of Black Educators released a report saying that No Child Left Behind had increased student achievement in many states. According to its report, Pennsylvania is among the states that have seen overall achievement rise and the gap between white and minority children narrow.
"We think it's a good thing that people are focusing on education and trying to make it a big part of the campaign," said Fredreka Schouten, senior associate at the Education Trust. "The focus of the house parties is more money, and we agree schools can use more money, but we're worried that they will turn into NCLB-bashing parties. But based on what we've seen of the data so far, the signs are encouraging. It's too soon to talk about dismantling NCLB."
Contact Dale Mezzacappa at 215-854-5112 or dmezzacappa@phillynews.com.  
Inquirer staff writers Suzette Parmley and Tina Moore contributed to this article.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
TOM GRALISH, Inquirer Staff Photographer
President Bush poses with students from Russell Byers Charter School after his appearance yesterday at Valley Forge Convention Center. At left is Laurada Byers, the founder of the school. Though the summit was promoted as an education forum, Bush focused more on terrorism and the war in Iraq.

Load-Date: August 31, 2005


End of Document