President harks back to 9/11 to boost his poll numbers
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 30, 2005 Thursday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 10A; Newspaper
Length: 1077 words
Series: YOUR LETTERS
Body


Some time back, President Bush acknowledged that there were no ties between 9/11 and Saddam Hussein. Now with plummeting poll numbers for his job approval and for the Iraq war, he's pulling out all the stops.
He's trying to deceive the American people into supporting his unjust, unnecessary war. There were no weapons of mass destruction, no ties to 9/11 for Iraq. In a roundabout way, he's linking the terrorism (insurgency) in Iraq with the terrorism that caused the 9/11 attacks. His most popular ratings came with 9/11, and he wants to enhance his poll numbers now by the connection with 9/11.
The American people and the rest of the world realize that there was very little terrorism in Iraq until we invaded the country. Now it has become the No. 1 front for terrorism and terrorism training. People there have a problem finding clean water and don't have sufficient electricity for the country. In many ways the Iraqi people were better off before we ever got involved with them.
 
Larry Dunn, Orange Park
 
America should not let up
Thank God we have a president who has the understanding and courage to act on what he is responsible to do, not just on what the current polls say. The job in Iraq will take as long as it takes. The Islamic killers won't let up, and neither should we. There is only one choice here, and that is to stay the course and get it done.
With our upcoming Independence Day celebrations, now is the chance for those who disagree to return to the roots of what this nation stands for and perhaps join the Iraqi people in celebrating their own independence.
 
Becky Lannon, Tallahassee
 
Draw aside the curtain
The president's performance at Fort Bragg stretches disbelief to another level.
Top secret documents authenticated by the British government show that Iraq had nothing to do with 9/11. They reveal a president who knew that the intelligence was correct in that assessment, but who decided to go to war in Iraq anyway. And this is the same president who continues to evoke 9/11 to rally support for the war on Iraq?
I can't help but picture the Great and Powerful Oz who turned out to be an old coot behind a mask. Where's Toto when we need someone to pull the curtain?
 
Patsy Shafchuk, New Port Richey
 
A nation in distress
It's amazing how the president of the greatest country on earth can embarrass himself on prime time TV. He had an opportunity to come clean with the American people, but chose to continue to link the tragedy of Sept. 11 with the invasion of Iraq - even though he himself has said that no link existed. Several former members of his administration have come forward to say that invading Iraq was at the top of his agenda from Day 1. These include former Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill and counterterrorism czar Richard Clarke, among others.
This is also clear from the top secret minutes of the British Cabinet, known as the Downing Street memo, and several other leaked, highly classified documents. Some soldiers and U.N. inspectors have also said that the air war, and "softening up" of Iraq began six months before Bush went to Congress for authorization.
I'm going to take the president's advice and fly my flag on the Fourth of July. Except that I'm going to fly it upside down, the international signal of distress. And we're going to continue to be in distress as long as these people are in charge.
 
Rick Chapman, Holiday
 
We will stand victorious
I am writing to defend America's war to eradicate global terrorism and to show my continued support of our brave military men and women who are continually challenging the forces of radical Islam.
I would like to challenge the worldwide movement of people who continue to undermine the Iraqi war effort. These are the same people whose angry voices also promoted a parade of misguided assumptions indicating that President Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair, along with Congress, fabricated the reasons for an unnecessary war based specifically on weapons of mass destruction. I feel that nothing is further from the truth.
Americans do not seek to impose their will on others. We don't covet the world's resources and territories. We send humanitarian aid for the oppressed people of the world. It is important to remember, as in the past, that America will defeat this current enemy. Like any war, there will be temporary setbacks, but we will again stand victorious over this current enemy.
 
Joan Atkins, Palm Harbor
 
We're on a frightening course
Fighting "over there" so they don't "come here" is a weak argument that no longer works. Fear of future terrorism in America will not gain support for the war in Iraq. We are not afraid. By occupying Iraq and using that country as a front in the war on terror, we have created a much greater hostile environment than existed prior to 9/11. Staying the course is what I fear.
I intend to join my fellow Americans on Sept. 24 as a show of unity and to demand we bring our troops home now! Go to  http://www.teensforpeace.org  for information.
 
Lizz Greenberg, Tampa
 
A most arrogant administration
With absolutely no connection to the twin towers tragedy, and no threat to the United States, an American president, who had never experienced the ravages of war himself, ordered the invasion of Iraq.
Every day young Americans are dying, not defending their country, but simply carrying out the wishes of the most arrogant administration that our country has ever had to suffer. The audacity of President Bush to land on the deck of an aircraft carrier months and months ago, and announce MISSION ACCOMPLISHED.
Now without the courage to raise the money to finance their war, this administration has simply chosen to defer the costs to future generations. Lots of us like this idea.
Oh, well, we've got more important things to think about. Let's all go out today and buy new magnetic ribbons for our SUVs before we go to the beach, the mall, the party, the ballgame or even to church.
 
Gerald Ramsberger, St. Petersburg
 
Sacrifice and hardship?
During hearings last week in Washington concerning the war in Iraq, Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John Warner, R-Virginia, praised President Bush for "steady and unflinching resolve" and added, "Our great nation has an enormous capacity for sacrifice and hardship when we understand the cause is just."
I guess it all depends on who is doing the sacrificing and suffering the hardship. I don't imagine Bush, Cheney or Warner are doing much of either.
 
Joe Sutsko, Dunedin

Load-Date: June 30, 2005


End of Document