President, past divide on terror After Obama repeats plea to shutter Guantanamo, Cheney defends 'enhanced interrogation' of detainees.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 22, 2009 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 765 words
Byline: By DAVID STOUT and BRIAN KNOWLTON New York Times McClatchy News Service, CNN and The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Dateline: 0 
Body


WASHINGTON - President Barack Obama delivered an impassioned defense of his administration's anti-terrorism policies on Thursday, reiterating his determination to close the prison at the Guantanamo Bay naval base in Cuba in the face of growing congressional pressure and declaring that America will remain strong if it stands by its basic precepts.
Only minutes after Obama finished speaking, former Vice President Dick Cheney offered a far different perspective, defending the anti-terrorism policies of the Bush administration, asserting that the country had never lost "its moral bearings" and criticizing some of Obama's approaches.
Taken together, the speeches of Obama and the former vice president outlined a fundamental debate over the proper balance between personal liberties and national security in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorism attacks.
Sen. Russell D. Feingold, D-Wis., said the speeches of Obama and Cheney "offered a stark and revealing contrast."
Both speeches came in a week in which Congress has been wrestling with detention issues. The Senate by a lopsided vote of 90-6 rebuffed the president over financing for closing the detention center. Republicans and Democrats alike argued that the White House had yet to outline a realistic plan for what to do with the remaining detainees after the center is closed.
Cheney's stand on Guantanamo has contributed to a resurgence in popularity. In a poll by CNN released on Wednesday, 37 percent now have a favorable opinion of Cheney, 8 points above his rating at the end of the Bush administration. However, 55 percent still have an unfavorable opinion of him.
The president said that what has gone on at Guantanamo for the last seven years has demonstrated an unjust, haphazard "ad hoc approach" that has undermined rather than strengthened America's safety, and that moving its most dangerous inmates to the United States is both practical and in keeping with the country's cherished ideals.
Moreover, he said that transferring some Guantanamo detainees to highly secure prisons in the United States would in no way endanger national security.
Speaking at the National Archives, which houses the Constitution and other documents embodying America's system of government and justice, the president promised to work with Congress to develop a safe and fair system for dealing with a particularly thorny problem: what to do with those Guantanamo detainees who, for one reason or another, cannot be prosecuted in civilian or military courts, "yet who pose a clear danger to the American people" and therefore cannot simply be released.
"I want to be honest: this is the toughest issue we will face," the president said, pledging to help devise "clear, defensible and lawful standards for those who fall in this category," such as former Taliban commanders, al-Qaida-trained explosives experts and acolytes of Osama bin Laden.
Shortly after Obama finished his speech, television networks cut away to Cheney's speech, titled "Keeping America Safe," delivered to the American Enterprise Institute.
Cheney gave Obama some credit for "wise decisions," notably in some of the steps he has taken in Afghanistan and in reversing his plan to release photographs of detainee abuse. But Cheney was vigorous in his defense of the "enhanced interrogation" of detainees that the Obama administration has denounced, saying that skilled and trained CIA agents had gained invaluable intelligence using methods ruled legal by administration lawyers, that had saved lives.
Cheney criticized Obama's decision to release documents detailing the Bush administration debate on what interrogation techniques could legally be employed. Releasing the memos, Cheney said, "was flatly contrary to the national security interest of the United States," undercutting anti-terrorism efforts by U.S. allies worldwide, and leaving CIA agents unsure of high-level backing "when the going gets tough."
"In the fight against terrorism," he said, "there is no middle ground, and half-measures keep you half-exposed. You cannot keep just some nuclear-armed terrorists out of the United States, you must keep every nuclear-armed terrorist out of the United States."
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., stood by the Senate's 90-6 vote a day earlier to block the $80 million that the president has requested to close Guantanamo. Reid suggested that the speech wouldn't immediately change congressional Democrats' strategy, but that as the president provides details about how the detainees will be handled, expected in July, lawmakers could be more receptive to his plan.

Graphic

 
 President Barack Obama speaks Thursday at the National Archives about his desire to close the Guantanamo Bay detention center. Photos by Getty Images  Former Vice President Dick Cheney speaks at the American Enterprise Institute on Thursday in defense of Bush administration policies. 

Load-Date: May 23, 2009


End of Document