President Vows 'No Retreat' in America's War on Terrorism
New York Sun (Archive)
August 27, 2003 Wednesday


Copyright 2003 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 4
Length: 365 words
Byline: By DEB RIECHMANN
Body


ST. LOUIS - On a day when the post-war American death toll climbed past the number killed in major combat, President Bush pledged "no retreat" in the war on terrorism and defended his actions in Iraq amid calls for more international help.
"We're on the offensive against terror, and we will stay on the offensive against terror," Mr. Bush told about 6,000 people yesterday in a graying audience at the American Legion's 85th national conference.
"We've adopted a new strategy for a new kind of war: We will not wait for known enemies to strike us again. We will strike them … before they hit more of our cities and kill more of our citizens."
Mr. Bush faces tenuous situations on several fronts.
In Afghanistan, American-led troops are meeting with increasingly well-organized Taliban fighters. Rising violence between the Israelis and Palestinians has rocked the American-brokered road map for peace. In Iraq, reconstruction work has been dealt a major setback by the bombing of the U.N. headquarters in Baghdad, and coalition forces still face persistent resistance from Saddam Hussein loyalists.
A grim milestone was reached yesterday when the American death toll in post-war Iraq surpassed the number killed during major combat. When Mr. Bush declared aboard the USS Abraham Lincoln on May 1 that major combat operations had ended, the death toll was 138. Since then, 140 have died, including two yesterday.
Although no weapons of mass destruction have been found and some analysts point to loose links between Saddam and Al Qaeda, Mr. Bush insisted that America was right to invade Iraq. He said American-led forces removed a brutal dictatorship that built, possessed, and used weapons of mass destruction, sponsored terror, and persecuted its people.
While the president was in St. Louis, L. Paul Bremer, the top American official in Iraq, was at the White House talking about the situation in Iraq with Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice.
He cited progress in Iraq: More than 8,200 tons of ammunition seized since May 1 and 42 of the 55 most-wanted Iraqi leaders captured or killed. "The more progress we make in Iraq, the more desperate the terrorists will become," he said.

Load-Date: September 4, 2003


End of Document