President dedicates justice building to Robert F. Kennedy ; Former attorney general: Daughter criticizes more police powers to fight terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 21, 2001 Wednesday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 571 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


President Bush named the Justice Department headquarters after former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in a ceremony Tuesday attended by a phalanx of Kennedys, including a daughter of RFK who earlier in the day sharply criticized the Bush administration.
Kerry Kennedy Cuomo said her father would not have approved of the administration's efforts to give broad new powers for police and prosecutors to fight terrorism because they undermine civil liberties.
"My daughter, Cara, is here today," Cuomo said at a ceremony honoring Darci Frigo, a Brazilian lawyer and land reform advocate who won this year's Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award. "Cara, if anyone tries to tell you this is the type of justice your grandpa would embrace, don't you believe it."
Critics have said Kennedy was willing to restrict civil liberties in certain instances. For example, he authorized FBI wiretaps on Martin Luther King Jr., whom FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover thought was a communist.
Bush did not mention Cuomo's comments at the dedication ceremony for Kennedy, who would have turned 76 on Tuesday. The president praised RFK's war on organized crime and support for civil rights.
"From this day, his birthday, everyone who enters this building or passes by will think of Robert F. Kennedy and what he still means to this country," said Bush, who was joined on stage by Attorney General John Ashcroft and former Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy, one of RFK's 11 children.
He didn't refer to his own war on terrorism, except to say the country was going through "a time of incredible testing, and as we do, we admire even more the spirit of Robert Kennedy."
Civil libertarians have criticized some of the efforts by the Bush administration to prosecute terrorists. Among them: keeping secret the identities and status of those detained in the Sept. 11 investigation; new rules allowing the monitoring of communications between some detainees and their lawyers; and Bush's decision to try by military tribunals foreigners charged with acts of terror, a move even supporters acknowledge would mean fewer rights for the accused.
Cuomo attended the dedication with her mother, Ethel Kennedy; uncle, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy; and other siblings and relatives. She did not speak.
Earlier in the day, while referring to the Bush administration's tactics, she said her father "was determined to use the law to bring criminals who threatened our country to justice. But that eagerness was always tempered by his commitment to protecting civil liberties even when it meant letting the accused … go free."
Ashcroft sidestepped a question about Cuomo's remarks.
"She may have said that," he said on CNN after the dedication. "We simply are not going to tolerate terrorists coming to this country to kill thousands of innocent Americans. … We're going to use every tool in the American judicial system and justice system to protect innocent lives in the United States of America, and this president needs to have those tools."
Kennedy was named attorney general by his brother, President John F. Kennedy, and served from 1961-64. He later was elected to the Senate from New York and was assassinated in Los Angeles while running for president in 1968.
Cuomo is an author and founder of the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Human Rights. She is married to former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat who is seeking his party's nomination for New York governor.

Graphic

 
Kerry Kennedy Cuomo, daughter of the late Robert F. Kennedy, speaks at the 2001 Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award ceremony in Washington Tuesday. Cuomo criticized the new powers given to police and prosecutors in fighting terrorism.

Load-Date: November 21, 2001


End of Document