PRESIDENT HINTS HE'LL HIT OTHERS LINKED TO TERROR
The New York Times
April 24, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 1479 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 23
Body


President Reagan said today that he would not rule out military retaliation against Syria and Iran if they were linked to terrorist acts.
At the same time, Mr. Reagan reaffirmed his readiness to ''act again'' against Libya if evidence linked it to new terrorist attacks on Americans.
Meanwhile, military experts who have reviewed Pentagon reports said the Air Force planes that attacked the Bab el-Azziziya military barracks in Tripoli, Libya, on April 15 failed to hit two buildings that serve as the quarters for Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's elite guard. [Page A7.] 'Irrefutable Evidence'
In an interview with columnists to preview the economic meeting of key industrial democracies in Tokyo next month, Mr. Reagan said the decision to bomb Libya last week resulted from ''irrefutable evidence.''
Asked if a situation arose in which the United States had evidence of the same certitude about the involvement of Syria and Iran, Mr. Reagan said he would also order military action.
Earlier, in a speech before the United States Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Reagan warned Libya that although terrorism ''must be dealt with forcefully and collectively,'' the United States ''will never watch passively as our innocent citizens are murdered by those would would do our country harm.''
''By nature, we prefer to solve problems peacefully,'' he said. ''But as we proved last week, no one can kill Americans and brag about it. No one. We bear the people of Libya no ill will, but if their Government continues its campaign of terror against Americans, we will act again.''
 
No 'Exclusive Target'
Mr. Reagan made the comments about Syria and Iran when asked if Libya was to be the ''exclusive target'' of American military response to terrorism or whether similar means would be employed against such nations as Syria or Iran if there was evidence linking them to terrorism.
''I think state-supported terrorism -we must have the same policy,'' Mr. Reagan responded.
The President, making a distinction between Libya and the other two countries, said, ''It is much more difficult to trace the source of terrorism sponsored by others than it is with Libya.''
But he added: ''But yes, if we - if there's evidence and we can directly -that we can have the irrefutable evidence that we've had with him, why, yes, I think we should do that. State-supported terrorism is a form of warfare, and you just can't sit by and let somebody else declare war on you and pretend that you're still at peace.''
Mr. Reagan, when asked directly if he meant Syria or Iran, said, ''Yes, if we had that kind of evidence.''
Both Iran and Syria are included on a United States list of countries engaging in state-supported terrorism. But Administration officials have said there is no evidence linking either country to the terrorist attacks that Washington has tied to Libya.
 
Trying to Underscore Policy
A senior White House official said that Mr. Reagan was trying to underscore his policy for using military force to retaliate against terrorists and that the decision to attack Libya had come only after economic and political measures had proved unsuccessful in deterring of the Libyan leader, Colonel Qaddafi, in terrorist actions against Americans.
Administration officials said the speech to the Chamber of Commerce was delivered in the hope of setting the stage for the Tokyo economic meeting, which Mr. Reagan said would underscore that ''the winds of freedom'' are blowing economically and politically across the globe. The President said terrorism would ''undoubtedly be a topic of discussion.''
 
Drawing a Distinction
Seeking to broaden the Administration's effort among Western allies to isolate Colonel Qaddafi, Mr. Reagan told the audience of several thousand that the issue of combating terrorism was not a conflict between Western democracies and Arab nations. Although Arab countries in general condemned the United States air strike, Mr. Reagan drew a distinction between what he called a ''tiny minority'' and Arab nations at large.
''And let no one mistake this for a conflict between Western democracies and the Arab world,'' the President said. ''Those who condone making war by cowardly attacks on unarmed third parties, including women and children, are but a tiny minority.''
Mr. Reagan added that ''Arab nations themselves have been forced to endure savage terrorist attacks from this minority.''
''We hope and pray the Arab world will join us to eliminate this scourge on civilization,'' he said.
Mr. Reagan's comment apparently represented a refinement of statements made at a nationally broadcast news conference two weeks ago in which he said the Libyan leader had the goal of a ''Moslem fundamental revolution.'' The comment had caused some concern within the Administration among officials who said they believed he was linking Colonel Qaddafi to broader and more moderate elements among Moslems who do not engage in terrorism.
 
Says Qaddafi Is 'Hypocritical'
In the speech today, Mr. Reagan portrayed the Libyan leader as isolated from the Arab world at large by suggesting that Colonel Qaddafi was engaging in hypocrisy by calling for a united Arab, and by extension Moslem, condemnation of the United States while failing to condemn the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan.
''I might add that Colonel Qaddafi's expectation of unquestioned support from the Islamic world strikes me as hypocritical,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''Nowhere is the slaughter of Moslem people greater than in Afghanistan. Yet, Colonel Qaddafi allies himself with those perpetrating this crime on Islam and all mankind.''
Before the speech, a senior Administration official played down the likelihood that the leaders at the Tokyo meeting would issue a joint statement on terrorism. But he indicated that such cooperative steps as intelligence sharing would likely be discussed.
''There has been I think right now a very widespread, firm conviction that Libya is a responsible party for terrorism,'' the official said. ''Nobody argues that point at all.''
 
Reagan to Leave Friday
Mr. Reagan is scheduled to leave Friday en route to Japan. He is scheduled to stop in Los Angles, Honolulu and Bali before arriving in Tokyo. While in Indonesia, he is to meet with the Foreign Ministers of Association of South East Asian Nations, which he suggested today was an example of the 12-day trip's overall theme of freedom aiding economic progress.
In making that point, the President cited the recent upheaval in the Philippines, saying that ''a major cause of the discontent'' was that much of the country's business and trade was not opened to all citizens. In addition, he contrasted the relative prosperity among the members of Asean with the poor economic health of Communist countries in the region, singling out Vietnam.
''Of course, those countries forced to endure centralized Communist planning face the prospects of continued stagnation,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''This, while much of the Pacific marches into an exciting new age of enterprise and commerce.''
 
'In Glorious Defiance'
Mr. Reagan said the Tokyo meeting also ''stands in glorious defiance of the totalitarian theory that sovereign democratic societies are too independent'' to cooperate economically.
Administration officials have said the annual economic meeting is occurring at what Mr. Reagan termed today a time of a ''dramatic opportunity'' for industrial democracies as a result of the economic upsurge in the American economy and the decline in world oil prices.
Sounding upbeat, the President said, ''In future years, I think we may look back on the period we are going through as the vernal equinox of the human spirit, that moment in history when the light finally exceeded the darkness.''
The President, however, signaled that the participants in Tokyo could face disagreements on the trade front, which Administration officials have said pose a potentially troublesome area. Mr. Reagan said that although he would reinforce the United States intention to keep ''moving forward, aggressively and vigorously, to keep the markets of the world open,'' he would also stress a need for American interests to be ''treated fairly.'' ----Warning on Revenge WASHINGTON, April 23 (UPI) - Secretary of State George P. Shultz has warned that Colonel Qaddafi may seek revenge ''on a very personal level'' for the American bombing of Libya, possibly by attacking members of President Reagan's immediate family, ABC News reported tonight.
ABC News said it had learned that Mr. Shultz, ''in a confidential assessment earlier this week,'' said Colonel Qaddafi was more dangerous now than before the attack.
The report quoted Mr. Shultz as saying, ''Qaddafi may well seek revenge on a very personal level, which could mean that in retaliation for injuring Qaddafi's sons and allegedly killing his adopted daughter, the Libyan leader may go after members of President Reagan's immediate family.''


End of Document