President hails 'fundamental shift' in nuclear security efforts; 35 nations agree to adopt laws to thwart terrorists
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 26, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 24
Length: 270 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: THE HAGUE, Netherlands 
Highlight: Obama hails 'fundamental shift' on nuclear security as 35 countries to adopt guidelines
Body


 - President Barack Obama hailed a fundamental shift in international efforts to fight nuclear terrorism as 35 countries pledged Tuesday to turn guidelines on nuclear security into national laws.
At the close of a two-day summit, the group also agreed to open up their security procedures to independent review, a further step toward creating an international legal framework to thwart nuclear terrorism.
The move is a joint initiative sponsored by host country the Netherlands, along with past summit hosts the United States and South Korea.
I believe this is essential to the security of the entire world, Obama said at a press conference wrapping up the summit.
He said more needs to be done: Given the catastrophic consequences of even a single attack, we cannot be complacent.
All 53 countries that participated in the Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague agreed Tuesday to keep looking for ways to ensure that nuclear material doesn't fall into the hands of terrorists.
But the pledge to adopt nuclear guidelines into law and undergo external checks was endorsed by just 35 nations, including France, Britain, Canada, Japan, Israel. Notably absent from that agreement were Russia, China, India and Pakistan. North Korea and Iran didn't even attend.
We need to get the rest of the summit members to sign up to it, especially Russia, and we need to find a way to make this into permanent international law, said Miles Pomper of the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies.
Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte said the number who signed up was beyond his expectations and he expects more nations to sign up in coming days.

Load-Date: March 26, 2014


End of Document