President Adds His Voice to Warnings About Terrorism
The New York Times
December 23, 1999, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 824 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON 

By DAVID JOHNSTON 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22
Body


President Clinton warned Americans today to be watchful about terrorism during the coming holidays, as other senior administration officials also urged caution but said there was no specific information that any extremist group had planned an attack in the United States.
"We're taking extraordinary efforts in the government to act based on the incident out in the Pacific Northwest," Mr. Clinton said, referring to the arrest last week of Ahmed Ressam, an Algerian who was arraigned today in Seattle.
Mr. Ressam is accused of trying to enter Washington State from Canada in a car carrying explosive chemicals and timing devices.
The president's remarks culminated several days in which government agencies have issued an unusual number of alerts, warnings and security advisories that, taken together, reflect a level of anxiety over potential terrorist acts that has peaked higher than at any other time in recent history.
Law-enforcement officials said the warnings were based in part on intelligence assessments that the arrest of Mr. Ressam might not be an isolated event, but indicative of a wider effort by terrorists to enter the United States to attack Americans.
In part, those fears stem from past threats against Americans by Osama Bin Laden, who was indicted in the bombings on Aug. 7, 1998, of United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 220 people. He is believed to be in Afghanistan.
But while the officials said that recent threats were genuine, as in the case of the arrests in Jordan of suspects believed to be connected to Mr. Bin Laden's network, they acknowledged that the warnings were also an effort to avoid possible criticism.
State Department officials were stung by the accusations of some lawmakers who said the agency's security personnel were inattentive to advance warnings of the bombings in East Africa.
But such warnings can sometimes be extremely difficult to interpret, the officials said. Domestic and overseas counterterrorism agencies do not publicize it, but they receive several threats each week against a variety of government and private targets. Very few are legitimate, but in light of past terrorist acts, all are examined.
Beyond that, the officials said, the high state of alert recently announced by government agencies is somewhat illusory. Many agencies already stepped up security arrangements in anticipation of possible computer problems in connection with the year 2000.
Today, Eric H. Holder Jr., the deputy attorney general, asked Americans to be vigilant for anything or anyone that looked suspicious, particularly at the sites of large holiday or millennium events that might attract large crowds.
At a Justice Department news conference, Mr. Holder said, "We're doing everything in our power to prevent any attacks from occurring and to bring to justice those people responsible for planning any such attacks."
The warning from the Justice Department came in the wake of a State Department alert issued on Wednesday evening when the agency said, for the second time in 11 days, that the government believed that terrorists might be planning attacks against private citizens and officials around the New Year. The warning focused on Jordan, where the authorities recently arrested 13 terrorist suspects.
The State Department warning followed an alert issued earlier in the day by the Federal Aviation Administration that said travelers at American airports should expect tightened security precautions, including stricter enforcement of parking regulations.
As the enhanced security precautions took hold, the State Department's deputy spokesman, James B. Foley, said that an American had been detained by United States Customs officials in the Bahamas as he was about to board a flight to Miami en route to Oklahoma City.
Mr. Foley said the suspect, who was not identified, was found to be carrying wires, magnet coils, a putty-like substance, batteries and circuit boards. After trying to flee an immigration preclearance area, the man was arrested. He told the authorities that he was an inventor, officials said.
Mr. Foley said the arrest interrupted routine operations at the American Embassy in the Bahamas while security personnel searched the premises, but nothing suspicious was found. Later, the suspect was transferred to Nassau for questioning by the federal authorities
But Mr. Foley followed Mr. Clinton's lead in trying to temper the warnings with a calming tone.
"Panic is not in our vocabulary," Mr. Foley said, calling the warnings "a cautionary light, not a red light."
President Clinton, in his remarks today as he visited a soup kitchen in Washington, said: "For the citizens, I would say they ought to go about their holidays and enjoy themselves and make the most of it. But I would ask them to just be aware of their circumstances and, if they see anything suspicious, to report it immediately, and meanwhile to know that we are doing everything we possibly can."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Officer Dean Pigott of the Detroit Metropolitan Airport police and an explosives-sniffing German shepherd checked unclaimed baggage yesterday at the airport in Romulus, Mich., which is near the Canadian border. (Agence France-Presse)
      

Load-Date: December 23, 1999


End of Document