PREZ: WE'RE GOING ALL OUT VS. TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
April 24, 1995 Monday PM EDITION


Copyright 1995 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 04
Length: 543 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: OKLAHOMA CITY
Body


As President Clinton was leading an anguished nation in prayer yesterday for victims of the federal office building bombing, the White House proposed a series of broad steps to give the government new powers to fight terrorism.
"We have got to take steps aggressively to shut it down," Clinton said in an interview with CBS' "60 Minutes." "I'm going to do everything in my power to do just that."
Clinton directed his administration to replace the office building devastated by last Wednesday's blast and appointed Attorney General Janet Reno to oversee a 60-day high-level review of the vulnerability of federal buildings. More than 8,000 such structures exist in the country.
Among the steps announced by the White House:
* Legislation to establish a Domestic Counterterrorism Center to be headed by the FBI; creation of a special fund to be used for infiltrating suspected terrorist organizations and other means of combating terrorism.
* Legislation to give the FBI increased authority to comb through hotel and motel registers and to search phone logs, and greater access to credit-card records.
* A lobbying effort for passage of the administration's Omnibus Counterterrorism Act, which would give the government more power to fight terrorism and greater authority to protect the confidentiality of sources in official proceedings. This provision has been criticized by civil-liberties groups.
"I don't think we have to give up our liberties, but I do think we have to have more discipline and we have to be willing to see serious threats to our liberties properly investigated," Clinton told "60 Minutes."
He repeated his belief that the bombers should be brought to justice and executed. "If this is not a crime for which capital punishment is called, I don't know what is," Clinton said.
Clinton also denounced paramilitary groups and those who glorified the Branch Davidian cult members who died in a bloody standoff with federal agents two years ago.
"Those people murdered a bunch of innocent law-enforcement officials who worked for the federal government," Clinton said.
At the prayer service, Clinton and others wore multicolored ribbons made up of white, yellow, purple and blue strands. The white stood for the dead, the yellow for the missing, the purple for children and the blue for the state of Oklahoma.
Clinton did not visit the explosion site, although his motorcade traveled close enough to downtown that cranes at the site could be seen. Aides said the president did not want to disrupt the cleanup and rescue missions.
Before the service, Clinton was briefed while Air Force One remained on the tarmac by James Lee Witt, director of the Federal Emergency Management Administration.
Witt showed Clinton large blowup photographs of the building and the rescue operation, pointing out how the bomb had ripped the face off the nine-story building.
Witt told Clinton that members of the search and rescue mission were going through the ghastly rubble "piece by piece."
Before leaving the White House, Clinton and his wife planted a dogwood tree on the South Lawn of the White House in memory of the dead, the injured and the missing. The idea was suggested to him the day before by 6-year-old Allyson Mawn, one of the participants in his radio address.

Notes

DAY OF MOURNING

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document