Pricing Still an Issue in Terrorism Policies
The American Banker
June 10, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 American Banker, Inc.
Section: INSURANCE PRODUCTS; Pg. 13
Length: 457 words
Byline: BY DAVID REICH-HALE
Body


The insurance industry may have obtained a version of the legislation it so desperately wanted when the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 was enacted, but the price of terrorism insurance remains unreasonable in some parts of the country, according to Moody's Investors Service.
"The question is, 'can you get it at a price that you can swallow?', and the answer to that is, 'it depends,' " said James Bartie, a vice president and senior analyst in the Moody's property/casualty and reinsurance group in New York. "If you are talking about the Empire State Building, it's tough.
"Also, if you're with an insurer that has a high concentration of business in your area, the price is going to be high because of the risk they already have there," Mr. Bartie said.
And Ted Collins, a managing director for property/casualty and reinsurance at Moody's, said, "It's a challenge to figure out what the right price should be. You don't know the probability" of a terrorist attack.
Pricing, Mr. Bartie said, is insurers' underwriting tool since they cannot do actuarial work on terrorism, which is much less ordinary than death or auto accidents.
Michael Barry, the managing director of insurance at the ratings agency Fitch Inc. in New York, said another reason for the coverage's expense is that companies in high-risk areas are the most likely to be buying it.
"At the end of the day, the people in the trophy properties in high-profile cities are taking the product, and the rest are not," he said.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act puts insurers on the hook this year for 7% of any claims in business lines named in the law. Next year, insurers will be responsible for 10%, and in 2005, for 15%, Mr. Bartie said.
The legislation generally satisfied the industry, said Ramani Ayer, the chairman and chief executive of Hartford Financial Services Inc. in Hartford, Conn.
"At the end of the day, we got a decent bill," Mr. Ayer said in an interview last week. "We are still taking on a significant amount of risk, but the bill provides a backstop." The law did not affect insurers' ability to cover biological, nuclear, or chemical weapons attacks. These were not insured before and are not now.
Only the government has enough money to cover that kind of attack, said M.R. Greenberg, the chairman of the largest U.S. insurer, American International Group, at a Standard & Poor's conference last week.
Insurers are not expected to cover nuclear, biological, or chemical attacks, Mr. Bartie said. "From a solvency standpoint, I can't see that happening," he said. "But they do have to offer terrorism insurance in general. That's part of this law." ?
 
Copyright 2003 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved. http://www.thomsonmedia.com http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Bartie

Load-Date: June 9, 2003


End of Document