Prince Louis makes rare outing with Prince William and Kate Middleton
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 24, 2018 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: CULTURE; Pg. 1
Length: 302 words
Byline: Julia Gonzales
Body


The mom of three stunned in a light blue Alexander McQueen gown, which happened to be a very similar hue to the dress her sister-in-law Meghan Markle donned last night at a state dinner in Fiji. It was originally designed forQueen Mary and was eventually passed down to Queen Elizabeth, who often loaned it to Princess Diana. For the occasion, Queen Maxima dressed to impress wearing a striking blue gown with sheer sleeves and a floor-length skirt.
The Duchess has worn the Lover's Knot tiara on multiple occasions to other royal functions. The luxurious tiara is made up of the Queen Mother's dismantled Some Ladies of England tiara, pearls from the Girls of Great Britain and Ireland tiara as well as pearls from her favourite brooches.
It was a historic occasion for the British royal family as the Dutch monarch has not made a state visit to the United Kingdom in nearly four decades. Prince Charles, the Prince of Wales and Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall were also on hand for the banquet for 150 guests.
Australia's PM apologises for institutional child abuse
Morrison said he would establish a national museum to raise awareness of the impacts of child sexual abuse. The report warned that children were still being sexually assaulted.
The couple were travelling from their country residence, Anmer Hall in Norfolk, back to London to attendthe Queen's State Banquet being held for the Dutch Royals. The piece is originally from Queen Alexandra's collection - a gift from husband King Edward VII in honor of their 1863 wedding, according to From Her Majesty's Jewel Vault. The Dutch royals also visited the Houses of Parliament and enjoyed afternoon tea at Clarence House.
"Together we work to further peace and security across the globe, tackling threats from terrorism and cyber and promoting values of freedom".

Load-Date: October 24, 2018


End of Document