Prioritize our national security
Western Courier: Western Illinois University
March 28, 2018 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 460 words
Byline: Mark Tolliver
Body


Mark Tolliver, Courier Staff
March 28, 2018
Filed under Opinions Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare via Email Close Modal Window
Hang on for a minute...we're trying to find some more stories you might like.
Close Close Modal Window
Email This Story
Send email to this address
Enter Your Name
Add a comment here
Verification
Send Email Cancel
Drawing a definite line to determine what is more important between our privacy and national security is very debatable. Our privacy is being able to keep our internet and web access to ourselves without the government being able to infringe upon it.
Our national security is having adequate armed security that will keep this country safe; on the borders, in the air, in the water and on land.
In our present world, everything is online and we have access to any information at the tips of our fingers. When we are locked out of certain internet sites, we can go to the 'cloud' to retrieve that information. This current age of technology has also been the age of counter-terrorism.
These two ideas are very important and vital in determining what is more important. Both our privacy and national security is very important and we need both, but our national security as a country is the most important. Privacy is important to keep your information to yourself and national security helps the nation keep its sanity in regards to safety.
Our national security and national armed forces are the most vital and should be kept important. National security lowers the risk of terrorism events like 9/11. As stated earlier, our privacy on the internet is already being stalked and looked upon by the government. When random scam callers, bill collectors and companies call to ask for money, it shows our information is being shared.
When we have data breaches in great big corporations like Target Inc, we as citizens of this country should see that our right of privacy is limited. Due to our government already infringing upon our privacy rights, we need to boost up our national security.
The most important job of our government is to secure the general welfare of their citizens. Security is a common good that's promised to all Americans and it must outweigh any personal concerns about privacy. Under our national security, we have and need surveillance, which is secretly watching private activities. In the new era of technology, security agents help monitor against terrorism.
Tighter security controls at airports and borders will help prevent attacks and losses of life. Such measures could include more intrusive scanning, body searches, watch lists, etc. In addition to their deterrence effect, they will enable officials to stop attacks as they are happening.
Therefore, we as a country need to focus on our national security.

Load-Date: March 28, 2018


End of Document