Privacy vs. security debate more urgent in wake of U.K. attack
The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 14, 2017 Wednesday
CITY-D Edition


Copyright 2017 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; P-com Opinion; Pg. A10
Length: 968 words
Byline: James Norrie
Body


This most recent serial terrorist attack in the United Kingdom leaves in its wake not only the loss of more innocent lives but our global social innocence too. Prime Minister Theresa May boldly proclaimed, "Enough is enough," and it is now time for the entire free world, and especially its various leaders, to act decisively and immediately in response to these events.
To this day, Americans defend against any intrusion into the cherished notion of "liberty and freedom" for all. But there can no longer be a naïve and innocent defense of this legal principal in a digital age when our enemies convert this strength into an exploitable weakness of monumental proportions. Terrorists enjoy a weapon of mass destruction of our own making.
Home grown terrorism is now a fact of life. Without the ability to recruit online, recruits would previously have left their home countries and journeyed to join illegal organizations abroad. It was a rare and a relatively easily detected event - and the damage done was usually inflicted far away from home and regrettably, less noticeable. That time in history has come and gone.
Today, geography is mostly irrelevant as propaganda is willfully spread and consumers of online narratives self-determine what they want to be true by deflecting inconvenient competing facts. Now, anyone can establish a "relative truth" for themselves in ignorance of society's collective values, reducing informed debate and discourse. In the United States, with its incessant talk of "fake news" and "alternative facts," we now risk abolishing any notion of an objective truth.
While philosophically nuanced, this development is our biggest long-term threat to individual liberty as we enable marginal groups to embrace this opportunity to divorce themselves from reality and give birth to religiously inspired domestic jihadists.
They hide first at home, in safe spaces protected from discovery by our commitment to their privacy while they form plans to wreak havoc on us, their fellow citizens. So our supposedly safe places are also compromised.
Given the urgency of this issue, it's time for a fundamental reckoning. It's time for our nation to have a most painful debate on the trade-off between individual privacy and collective national security. We cannot naively stick to historical legal precedents from an age when no one could foresee the technologies of today. While not ignoring the importance of our past, we must not be slaves to it either.
For instance, we must learn to accept that detecting and preventing home grown terrorism is impossible unless government is given new powers required to combat it. This may require new forms of mass surveillance and revised criminal codes related to temporary detention and arrest of suspected terrorists. Or perhaps we should enable online tracking of terrorist-leaning political groups and not invoke free-speech rules when others spew religiously inspired hate.
Even writing this makes me as anxious as anyone else about the potential for government abuse of these tools; yet I have first-hand knowledge of how potent properly structured domestic surveillance tools can be when hunting for those most likely to offend at home. Why not, under revised national security laws, try and detect domestic terrorists before they act instead of investigating them after-the-fact since we now know U.S. citizens are involved?
Finally, and as other world leaders have already hinted, why not invoke mass regulation of the internet globally? For instance, tying all online activity to a national online identify scheme that does not, quite simply, allow anyone to hide or escape responsibility for what they do online? And eliminating encryption tools that mostly allow criminals and terrorists to hide from us - why does a law-abiding citizen need to hide and shield legitimate activity from detection?
This draconian trade-off would enhance collective national security but that may not be worth it to some. I accept that notion, But my real point is that we must debate this actively as a civil society.
In so doing, we must also revisit questions of national security through a religious lens. The origins of the mounting global terrorist attacks are rooted in a blasphemous reinterpretation of a notable world religion. Islam itself does not incite terrorism. And I personally know many moderate Muslims who abhor the perversion of their beliefs to justify such horrific acts against humanity. But the fact remains that these organizations thrive by exploiting our continued religious tolerance and protections of free speech as a cloak for dastardly acts of deadly terrorism. They thrive on public attention to an evil cause that must be silenced.
So we must revisit how to separate detecting the inappropriate inclusion of religious tenets into criminal acts of terrorism to ensure they do not interfere with the enjoyment of the civil liberties of others. This is a crucial balance to achieve while there is still time to get it right.
Theresa May is right: Enough is enough. We no longer live in an innocent world where safe nations reign supreme. The Internet has created a global village where all that is right in the world can be upset by those few willing to commit any wrong no matter the consequences of the atrocities they incite. We must duly respond.
This is no longer a kinder, gentler world in need of citizen protections from their own government. Instead, we live in a dangerous world where we must enable governments to protect us and all that we stand for - and we must do it soon.
James Norrie is the dean of the Graham School of Business and Chloe Eichelberger chair for business education at York College of Pennsylvania. He teaches courses in cybersecurity, information privacy, and technology law and policy. jnorrie@ycp.edu

Load-Date: June 14, 2017


End of Document