Private insurers urged to develop terror capacity; RIMS on the Hill
Business Insurance
June 16, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 6
Length: 337 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The Bush administration believes that terrorism is a manageable risk that the private insurance sector can cover, according to the official overseeing implementation of the federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act.
And, warned Assistant Treasury Secretary Wayne A. Abernathy, ''I don't think people should be sanguine about the ability to reauthorize'' the federal government's backstop program for coverage for catastrophic terrorism losses. He told an audience of risk managers to bear in mind that it took Congress more than a year after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to enact TRIA in the first place.
Speaking at the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.'s RIMS on the Hill event last week in Washington, Mr. Abernathy said he hopes that adequate private capacity is in place by the end of 2005, when the TRIA program is slated to expire. He noted that he has ''faith'' that the program's current structure will encourage the development of that capacity.
Under TRIA, the federal government and private insurers would share the costs of future catastrophic attacks, with insurers' share of the exposure increasing as the program continued. The project's aim was to give the industry time to build up capacity.
Mr. Abernathy rebutted the notion that terrorism risk cannot be insured.
''We continually hear from a number of sources'' that terrorism risk is unmanageable, said Mr. Abernathy.
Terrorists aim to use very limited resources in an attack that causes the greatest number of people to feel threatened, he said, stressing his belief that such risks are insurable.
He suggested that insurers form their own pools to deal with such exposures. Even high-risk ''trophy properties'' should be able to be insured, he said. Terrorists would not be able to hit all of those properties at the same time, said Mr. Abernathy.
He said he had ''great confidence'' that new risk-bearing mechanisms could be developed to meet the terrorism exposure. For the time being, ''the capacity's being built, it's not there yet,'' he said.

Load-Date: June 18, 2003


End of Document