Private support could keep anti-terrorism institute running
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 15, 2003 Saturday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 610 words
Byline: Taryn Brodwater Staff writer
Body


The Fort Sherman Institute lost funding from North Idaho College, but the
 anti-terrorism school may still be in business.
 Businessman Jim Elder is leading an effort to find private backing for the
 Post Falls school.
 Elder said he and other supporters met Thursday with representatives of
 Florida-based New Tribes Missions, an evangelical Christian organization whose
 missionaries get training from the institute to survive hostage situations.
''They're willing to underwrite a large portion of the monthly costs with
 their training contracts," Elder said.
 Elder said he also received encouraging news from NIC: The college is
 considering leasing equipment to any investors who step forward to help the
 institute stay in business.
 ''That was a positive move," Elder said. ''It was an effort by the college
 to embrace whatever might become of FSI."
 College trustees voted 4-1 last month to close the institute. Since it
 opened in fall 2001, NIC spent more than $700,000 from its general and reserve
 funds to keep the institute afloat.
 The institute was pitched as a money-making venture for the college, with
 prospects of bringing millions of dollars to NIC.
 In fiscal year 2003, the institute had $76,000 in revenue. From July of
 this year through Nov. 3, the institute reported $84,000 income.
 Post Falls Mayor Clay Larkin said he's confident that given time and
 financial support, the institute could be a boon to the local economy.
 With just average enrollment over the course of a year, Larkin said, the
 anti-terrorism school could bring a half-million dollars or more into Kootenai
 County. When some of New Tribes missionaries recently were trained, Larkin
 said, they spent more than $20,000 at area businesses.
 Elder listed U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, local legislators and
 businessmen as other supporters of the institute.
 ''It's got merit. I think it's got a patriotic dimension," Elder said.
 ''It's important to our country. And it's a challenge. I like challenges."
 Larkin is concerned that NIC might want a share of any future profits from
 the institute. That's only right, NIC Trustee Judy Meyer said Friday.
 ''We cannot continue to invest, but that doesn't mean we let go of the
 several hundred thousand dollars without trying to quantify that investment,"
 she said.
 NIC President Michael Burke is expected to provide trustees with an update
 on the institute when the board meets Wednesday. Although trustees voted to
 cut the college's ties to Fort Sherman last month, they established a 30-day
 ''grace period" so the institute could meet obligations to provide training
 under existing contracts.
 Robert Ketchum, head of NIC's Workforce Training Center and supervisor of
 the Fort Sherman Institute, said he was asked to identify institute assets
 that could be used in other departments of the college.
 That effort was put on hold Friday. Burke said NIC will consider renting
 those assets - about $110,000 worth of everything from computers to wool
 blankets - to private backers.
 Those assets include:
 Thousands of dollars of camera and video production equipment.
 A $749 hand-held computer purchased for Director David Dose, with a $100
 foldable keyboard and $199 worth of additional software.
 Five pieces of artwork ranging in value from $66 to $351.
 A U.S. flag and state flag that cost the college $418.40 apiece.
 Security equipment, including 17 TV/VCR combos that cost $120 to $150
 apiece.
 The college hasn't placed a monetary value on the anti-terrorism and
 hostage survival curriculum developed at NIC expense.
 According to contracts between the institute and the consultants who helped
 develop the curriculum, it is joint property.

Notes

Taryn Brodwater can be reached at (208) 765-7121 or by email at tarynb@spokesman.com.  

Load-Date: November 19, 2003


End of Document