Pro-Palestinian Professor's Return to Court Puts Anti-Terror Effort Back on Trial
The Forward
July 18, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. 5
Length: 858 words
Body


A Florida professor acquitted in  a major terrorism-financing case  two years ago is back in court and  may face a prolonged jail term if  convicted.
Pro-Palestinian activist Sami Al-Arian stands accused of criminal  contempt of court for refusing  to testify to a grand jury about a  Virginia-based Islamic think tank's  possible links to terrorism. His trial  is scheduled to begin in August.
The new charges against Al-Arian  have refocused attention on the difficulty  that the Justice Department  has faced in winning convictions  over the years in post-September  11 terrorism-related trials. Most  observers saw the government's  inability in 2006 to convince a jury  of the Florida professor's guilt as  a major setback, and Al-Arian's  recent reappearance in court has  rekindled fierce accusations of hidden  agendas against both the professor  and the government.
Al-Arian rose to prominence  among pro-Palestinian Americans  in the early 1990s, when he  became head of World Islamic  Study Enterprise, a Florida think  tank. In the 2006 case against Al-Arian, the government alleged that  the think tank served as a front for  the American arm of Palestinian  Islamic Jihad, which was designated  by the State Department in  1995 as a terrorist group.
In 2003, Al-Arian was indicted on  17 charges relating to his alleged  activity as the American head of  Palestinian Islamic Jihad. The  indictment described his alleged  fundraising and coordination  efforts for the terrorist group, as  well as communications, both by  phone and by e-mail, in which the  former computer science professor  allegedly praised terrorist attacks  carried out by the group in Israel.
During Al-Arian's six-month-long  trial in 2006, the government flew  in terrorism victims, eyewitnesses  and experts in what was supposed  to be Washington's biggest showdown  against American-based supporters  of terrorism. But a hung jury  acquitted Al-Arian on eight charges  and could not reach a verdict on  nine others, dealing the government  a highly public defeat.
In order to avoid a retrial, the  government and the defendant's  lawyers agreed on a plea bargain  in 2006, in which Al-Arian admitted  to one conspiracy charge and  began serving a 57-month prison  sentence. Under the terms of the  agreement, the Kuwaiti-born professor  will be deported after he is  released.
The reappearance of Al-Arian in  court this past month concerns a  legal dispute over whether he can  be compelled, under the terms of a  plea bargain, to appear in front of  a grand jury investigating another  terrorism-related case.
The government has called on  the Florida professor to testify in  a case against the International  Institute of Islamic Thought, a  Virginia-based think tank that the  government alleges was used to  raise money for terrorist groups.  The prosecution has offered Al-Arian immunity from self-incrimination  and ensured him that the  testimony would not be used  against him, but so far the former  professor has refused to testify,  arguing that an oral agreement he  made with the government permits  him to choose not to provide  further testimonies. Al-Arian's  refusal persisted even after a federal  appeals court in Atlanta ruled  that the government had a right to  compel him to testify.
After calling on Al-Arian to testify  three times over the course of  two years, the government decided  to charge him with criminal  contempt of court. Al-Arian was  arraigned at the U. S. District Court  in Alexandria, Va., on June 30 and  entered a plea of not guilty. His  trial is scheduled for August 13.
The government's new charge  against Al-Arian was met with  accusations that the prosecution  had an agenda beyond compelling  the professor to testify.
Contempt of court is a legitimate  tactic to squeeze information from  someone who had a minor role in  the alleged crime, said Clifford  Fishman, a law professor at  Catholic University in Washington.  But it is also used sometimes as a  back door to impose punishment  when they cannot prove the case  against a defendant, and that use  isn't kosher.
Al-Arian's refusal to testify also  faced critical treatment. According  to the Investigative Project on  Terrorism, a not-for-profit organization  that monitors radical Islamic  groups, Al-Arian is staying silent in  an effort to cover up other alleged  terrorism-related activities.
I think his motivation is not to  tell the truth about the depth of his  support for other tentacles of the  operation he is involved in, said  Michael Fechter, a researcher at the  Investigative Project on Terrorism  who, when he was a reporter for  The Tampa Tribune, covered Al-Arian's 2006 trial.
While Al-Arian's earlier lega  proceedings took more than three  years to complete, Judge Leonie  Brinkema, who is presiding over the  professor's pending case, said she  expected the trial to last no more  than one day. There is no maximum  penalty for criminal contemp  charges, and the sentence can be  lengthened on the basis of what is  known as terrorist enhancement,  which allows courts to impose  tougher sentences in cases involving  terrorist activity.

Graphic

 
IMAGE: getyTrial:Sami Al-Arian is accused of criminal contempt of court forrefusing to testify about a group with possible links to terrorism.; images

Load-Date: July 13, 2008


End of Document