Probe: U.S. grills suspects in Ethiopia; CIA, FBI reportedly hold interrogations at secret locations in a country that is notorious for torture
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 4, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. c6
Length: 536 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya 
Body


CIA and FBI agents hunting for al-Qaida militants in the Horn of Africa have been interrogating terrorism suspects from 19 countries held at secret prisons in Ethiopia, which is notorious for torture and abuse, according to an investigation by The Associated Press.
Human-rights groups, lawyers and several Western diplomats assert hundreds of prisoners, who include women and chil-dren, have been transferred secretly and illegally in recent months from Kenya and Somalia to Ethiopia, where they are kept without charge or access to lawyers and families.
The detainees include at least one U.S. citizen and others from Can-ada, Sweden and France, according to a list compiled by a Kenyan Muslim-rights group and flight manifests obtained by AP.
Some were swept up by Ethiopian troops that drove a radical Islamist government out of neighboring Somalia late last year. Others have been deported from Kenya, where many Somalis have fled the continuing violence in their homeland.
Ethiopia, which denies holding secret prisoners, is a country with a long history of human-rights abuses. In recent years, it has also been a key U.S. ally in the fight against al-Qaida, which has been trying to sink roots among Muslims in the Horn of Africa.
U.S. government officials contacted by AP acknowledged questioning prisoners in Ethiopia. But they said American agents were following the law and were fully justified in their actions because they are investigating past attacks and current threats of terrorism.
The prisoners were never in American custody, said an FBI spokesman, Richard Kolko, who denied the agency would support or be party to illegal arrests. He said U.S. agents were allowed limited access by governments in the Horn of Africa to question prisoners as part of the FBI's counter-terrorism work.
Western security officials, who insisted on anonymity because the issue related to security matters, told AP that among those held were well-known suspects with strong links to al-Qaida.
But some U.S. allies have expressed consternation at the transfers to the prisons. One Western diplomat in Nairobi, who agreed to speak to AP only if not quoted to avoid angering U.S. officials, said he sees the United States as playing a guiding role in the operation.
John Sifton, a Human Rights Watch expert on counter-terrorism, said the United States has acted as "ringleader" in what he labeled a "decentralized, outsourced Guantanamo."
Details of the arrests, transfers and interrogations slowly emerged as AP and human- rights groups investigated the disappearances, diplomats tracked their missing citizens and the first detainees to be released told their stories.
One human-rights investigator, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the person was not authorized to speak to the media, said Ethiopia had secret jails at three locations: Addis Ababa, the capital; an Ethiopian air base 37 miles east of the capital; and the desert close to the Somali border.
More than 100 of the detainees were arrested in Kenya in January, after almost all of them fled Somalia because of the intervention by Ethio-pian troops accompanied by U.S. special forces advisers, according to Kenyan police reports and U.S. military officials.

Load-Date: April 12, 2007


End of Document