PROCEDURAL ISSUE DELAYS TRIAL OF ZIMBABWE MINISTER
The New York Times
November 4, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 701 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: SALISBURY, Zimbabwe, Nov. 3
Body


The murder trial of a senior Cabinet minister was delayed today by an appeal to the High Court over whether the minister, Edgar Z. Tekere, was protected by a law intended to give members of the defunct white minority regime license to suppress terrorism.
Known as the Indemnity and Compensation Act, the law was enacted in 1975 to protect Cabinet ministers and other officials in the Government of Ian D. Smith from criminal and civil charges based on actions they took to counter guerrilla organizations. The leaders of those movements became the Government of an independent Zimbabwe in April.
Three months later, Mr. Tekere, the Minister for Manpower Planning and secretary general of the governing African National Union, was charged with the murder of a white farmer, Gerald Adams. Whites here and many foreign commentators have said that prosecution of the minister would be a test of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe's readiness and ability to uphold legal standards.
Murder trial of Zimbabwe Cabinet minister Edgar Tekere is delayed by procedural issue
The extent to which those legal standards had been blurred under the Smith regime was a factor that was generally overlooked until last week when Mr. Tekere's British lawyer, Louis Blom-Cooper, indicated in a preliminary hearing that he intended to challenge the jurisdiction of the court on the basis of the Indemnity Act.
 
Tekere Appears in Court
Under the law, if a cabinet minister can show that the actions were taken in ''good faith'' to counter terrorism, then the nature of those actions and their consequences are beyond the jurisdiction of a court of law.
Mr. Tekere was in the High Court this morning for what was supposed to be the start of his trial. He was surrounded by his seven codefendants, most of whom appeared to be in their early 20's.
The minister spent two weeks in jail in August and then was freed on bail and a personal guarantee from Mr. Mugabe that he would appear for trial. He has remained a member of the Cabinet but has been generally absent from public life.
Today's developments turned on a procedural issue: whether Mr.  Tekere's ''good faith'' in the events leading to the Adams shooting had to be tested before the case went to trial or was a matter to be settled in the trial itself.
 
The Act Has Not Been Repealed
Since the Indemnity Act has not been repealed by Parliament there was no basis for an argument that the war was over and, therefore, that the law could not be used in Mr. Tekere's defense. At least the prosecutor did not attempt to make such an argument.
Instead, for a half-hour, two bewigged white men, Mr. Blom-Cooper and the South African-born judge, John Pittman, fenced over the procedural issue. The Englishman's forensic skills, numerous citations of British precedent and elaborate courtroom courtesy appeared only to make the judge testier and more determined to get the trial under way.
''Words could not be clearer,'' the lawyer declared, citing the passage in the law that bars criminal proceedings against a minister who has acted in good faith. Judge Pittman was just as categorical in his language when, obviously irritated, he finally pronounced his ruling. ''I consider that there is no substance whatsoever in this application,'' he said, ''and it is now dismissed.''
But the state prosecutor, Christopher Glaum, had already accepted Mr. Blom-Cooper's argument that the good faith question had to be settled before the actual trial could begin. So this afternoon the two lawyers carried an appeal to the Appellate Division of the High Court, which listened to 90 minutes of argument and then reserved judgment until tomorrow.
 
Tekere Feared Assassination
The argument Mr. Blom-Cooper plans to make for Mr. Tekere after the procedural question has been resolved has been foreshadowed in preliminary court documents. In simplest terms, it is that Mr. Tekere honestly believed himself to be the target of an assassination plot by followers of Joshua Nkomo, the Home Minister who leads a rival movement, and that Mr. Adams stumbled upon a shoot-out that did not concern him.
Whether Mr. Tekere's actions were ''sensible,'' the lawyer argued today, was an irrelevant question if he acted in good faith.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Edgar Z. Tekere


End of Document