Professor: U.S. must understand enemy in war on terrorism; 'Living in Safety': Panel addresses key issues relating to life after the Sept. 11 attacks
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 26, 2001 Friday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a1
Length: 431 words
Byline: KYLIE GREENE
Body


Chris Budzisz told community members Thursday night that the United States must try to understand who our enemy is in the war against terrorism.
Budzisz, a professor of political science at Loras College, was one of eight panelists at a forum titled "Living in Safety … Not in Fear: Our Community's Response to Terrorism" in the Dubuque Senior High School auditorium. Other panelists included representatives from the Department of Health, the Telegraph Herald, Dubuque Community Schools, law enforcement, emergency-management services, the American Red Cross and the Gannon Center for Community Mental Health. About 40 people attended the event, which was sponsored by Northeast Iowa Community College.
The forum was an opportunity for the representatives to address safety measures and answer questions from the community in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
Budzisz was asked to speak on the Muslim/Islam perspective. Budzisz said he had some reservations when asked to be a part of the forum, since he is not a Muslim. However, he felt it was necessary to educate others about the political, social and economic conditions in the Arab world.
"I don't think we should rationalize the events, but we should and must try to understand who we're dealing with, what we're dealing with," he said.
According to Budzisz, there is a lack of understanding of the Islamic religion. Islam, like Judaism and Christianity, is a monotheistic religion.
"The same God Islamic people pray to five times a day is the same God of Jesus and Moses," he said. The main difference is that Muslims believe Jesus is only a prophet and not the son of God, he added.
While there is nothing in the Quran, the holy book of Islam, that instructs people to hurt innocent people, Budzisz said some have used religion to back up what was done on Sept. 11.
The professor said many people have asked him why Arabs hate Americans. Although he said that is not the case, he added that "there is some serious anti-American sentiment in certain areas."
This attitude stems from a number of things, including the conflict between Palestine and Israel. Many Arabs believe the United States is favoring Israel too much, Budzisz said. Afghanistan also is a very poor country, which makes for a breeding ground for hatred. Unfortunately, America is a good target for that hate, according to Budzisz.
When dealing with terrorism, he said the United States should not just focus on military action as an option.
"Be very mindful of the political and economic conditions that are in that part of the world," Budzisz told the crowd.

Graphic

 
Chris Budzisz, a Loras College professor, speaks during a forum about responding to terrorism at Dubuque Senior High School Thursday. Seated (from left) are John Woodin, Terry Lambert and Tom Berger.

Load-Date: October 26, 2001


End of Document