Program at Point Park produces next generation of terror fighters
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
February 19, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 554 words
Byline: Jason Cato
Body


Inside a dimly lit room of a Downtown high-rise, about two dozen people work at a bank of computers, diagramming any known person and event connected to the target of an investigation. 
Others identify homegrown and foreign terrorist organizations and assess the risks they pose to the United States. Some work on a plan to detect and respond to a dirty bomb. 
This is not a U.S. government operation. It's run by Point Park University, which is laying the foundations for the next generation of special agents and intelligence analysts who soon might join the war against terrorism. 
"We're slowly becoming recognized in the intelligence community as a premier program," said Gregory Rogers, director of the university's Intelligence and National Security program. 
The university started the program two years ago and is a member of the International Association of Intelligence Education. Similar programs exist at schools across the country, from Florida International University in Miami to the University of Washington in Seattle. 
"Programs like Point Park's have significant advantages to the analytical professions," said Christopher Bruce, president of the International Association of Crime Analysts. "Historically, most of the training that a crime analyst or criminal intelligence analyst receives is either on the job or through professional associations." 
Much of the coursework at Point Park is directed by former federal investigators -- most of whom worked in government jobs when national security took on a different meaning after Sept. 11, 2001. Rogers was a federal customs agent for 34 years. Also on staff is Kenneth McCabe, former head of the Pittsburgh FBI office. 
"He's gone out and recruited people who did the job," said McCabe, who brought in three recently retired FBI terrorism investigators. "We're not doing this in the blind. We have contacts in the intelligence community." 
The program offers undergraduate and postgraduate tracks, to ready students for careers in intelligence or national security. It includes teaching students how to collect, analyze and report intelligence data, and how the information they gather might be used. 
Graduates might land jobs with any of the 16 government intelligence agencies, Rogers said. But job possibilities extend beyond the government and the war on terrorism. Options exist for intelligence analysts in the military, local law enforcement and the business world. 
Specialized programs such as this allow agencies to hire recent graduates who know what they're doing, although finding jobs in the intelligence field might be tough, Bruce said. 
Heather Shoop, 21, of Springdale, hopes to find a job when she graduates in spring. She prefers a federal agency, but also applied for civilian jobs with the military and in the private sector. 
"I eventually want to be a crime analyst," said Shoop, who switched from a criminal justice major to the intelligence program when it became available. "I knew that would get me where I want to be. I believe the courses we're taking will put us above other applicants." 
Although out of the field and in the classroom, Rogers said he and other teachers remain on the offensive against terrorism. 
"We're adding to the future generation," he said. "We're still contributing to make our country safer. Plus, it's fun." 

Load-Date: February 19, 2007


End of Document