Progress in war on terrorism is hard to gauge
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 13, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 1494 words
Byline: Richard Whittle and Michelle Mittelstadt The Dallas Morning News
Body


WASHINGTON - A year after the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks, the largest criminal probe in FBI history and a military campaign in Afghanistan costing billions, gauging progress in the war against terrorism remains difficult.
The U.S.-led military campaign routed the al-Qaida terrorist network and its Taliban backers in Afghanistan, making way for a government eager to help the United States consolidate its gains against the terrorists.
But U.S. officials remain uncertain if al-Qaida mastermind Osama bin Laden is alive or dead. And while al-Qaida clearly has been damaged, government officials and private analysts warn the organization could reconstitute itself - and retains the ability to launch more attacks.
Terrorism enemy compared to an iceberg
One way to think about the enemy in the war on terrorism "is like an iceberg," says Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld.
"There's a certain amount of it above the surface of the water, and then there's a great deal going on that's below the surface," he muses. "There's an awful lot we don't see."
That makes measuring progress in this war more difficult than in a conventional conflict, where battle lines visibly ebb and flow.
Rumsfeld and many other analysts are sure the United States is winning a counterterrorism campaign that involves an unusual marriage of military, intelligence and law enforcement forces. But they warn the battle with al-Qaida and affiliated Islamist terrorist groups is far from over.
"Our enemies, without question, are sharpening their swords," Rumsfeld said recently. "They are plotting even greater destruction, let there be no doubt."
The military rout of the Taliban and al-Qaida in Afghanistan offers the most visible evidence the United States is prevailing, Rumsfeld and others say.
"I think we're winning," said Richard Perle, chairman of the Pentagon's Defense Policy Board. "We're certainly not losing."
The Afghan campaign clearly dealt al-Qaida a major blow, eradicating the group's training camps and preventing bin Laden's followers from using Afghanistan as a free base of operations.
The attacks killed hundreds of al-Qaida foot soldiers and left some of the group's key leaders dead or captured. Al-Qaida military commander Mohammed Atef was killed in a U.S. airstrike in November. A chief bin Laden lieutenant, Abu Zubaydah, was captured in Pakistan and has been providing information to interrogators.
Saudi fugitive Osama bin Laden may or may not be alive, U.S. officials concede, but he and his leadership are at least on the run.
Thousands of al-Qaida operatives and their Taliban backers have been captured. Nearly 600 are being held and interrogated at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by intelligence and law enforcement officers and FBI profilers.
Hundreds more "may still be in Afghanistan, and they may be in the region, but they're not able to mass, train, recruit and organize with impunity," said retired Army Gen. Wesley Clark, who commanded NATO's 1999 air campaign against Serbia. "Now they're under pressure, they're moving, they're on the run."
Law enforcement works with military campaign
Operating in tandem with the military campaign, law enforcement agencies around the world have smashed al-Qaida cells, arrested hundreds of operatives, thwarted attacks and tried to shut down the terrorists' flow of funds. To date, the United States and its allies have frozen more than $ 112 million identified as terrorist assets.
Reflecting the melding between military and law enforcement efforts, documents and computers seized by troops in Afghanistan provided leads for "some very aggressive police work around the world," noted retired Adm. Bobby Inman of Austin, former director of the National Security Agency and ex-deputy director of the CIA.
"Clearly there have been successes in wrapping up al-Qaida cells, heading off probable attacks in Singapore, Spain, Italy, France, Germany, the United Kingdom," Inman said.
The disrupted plots include an effort to destroy the U.S. Embassy in Paris and a terrorist operation in Singapore that targeted the embassies of the United States, Israel, Britain and Australia last December. In June, Moroccan officials said they had broken up an al-Qaeda cell that was targeting NATO warships in the Strait of Gibraltar. Other plots still unknown to the public also have been thwarted, senior U.S. counterterrorism officials say.
For all that, another way to think about terrorism is like a cancer, and while the initial "surgery" - the Afghan campaign - may have removed the most threatening "tumor," no one can clearly diagnose just how far the cancer has spread or where it might manifest itself again.
Al-Qaida operatives are believed to have "burrowed into some 60 countries," said Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, so the job is more complicated than making war against another sovereign state.
Administration concerned about Iraq-terrorism link
"You don't take it down the way you might kill a poisonous snake, by chopping off the head," Wolfowitz said. "It's more like an infection in the body. You have to go after the pockets of infection all over the place."
Iraq is one place al-Qaida members have escaped to, Rumsfeld said. As part of the administration's campaign to remove Saddam Hussein, he and other officials also have said there is a danger that Iraq could give weapons of mass destruction to terrorists.
For that reason, said Defense Policy Board chairman Perle, "You can't even imagine claiming victory in the war on terrorism if Saddam is left in place."
Others contend an attack on Iraq could create more problems than it would solve.
"Saddam is not a main contributor to al-Qaida's activities at present," said Brookings Institution analyst Michael O'Hanlon. "And he might have incentives to provide these terrorists with weapons of mass destruction if he knows his neck is on the line."
O'Hanlon said that while the war on terrorism may have reduced al-Qaida's ability to commit acts of terrorism by roughly 50 percent, "The question is how well it can reconstitute. Can they do another 9/11 or not?"
Given that only 19 terrorists directly took part in the attacks on New York and Washington, "You can imagine a small group with fewer resources getting lucky," he said.
The Sept. 11 investigation - the largest criminal probe in the FBI's history - has failed to uncover a large network of accomplices to the hijackers.
U.S. authorities arrested more than 1,200 Middle Eastern and South Asian men, holding most on immigration infractions, but have charged only one person to date in connection with the attacks: Zacarias Moussaoui.
Federal law enforcement officials say the lack of U.S. conspirators says more about the highly compartmentalized al-Qaida plot than it does about an inability by authorities to detect them. The Sept. 11 plot was hatched in Afghanistan and organized largely in Germany, Attorney General John Ashcroft and others have said.
Counterterrorism experts also say al-Qaida doesn't need bin Laden to continue its mission.
The reality that al-Qaida would survive, possibly even thrive, even without its infamous founder is one reason FBI, CIA and other officials say their focus is on the handful of high-level operatives who could assume the bin Laden mantle.
"We're after all of them," said Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Al-Qaida's failure to pull off another major attack since Sept. 11 is no guarantee there won't be another, said Inman, the former intelligence official.
Periods of one to three years separated the group's past dramatic attacks: the first World Trade Center bombing in 1993; the 1998 embassy attacks in Africa; the 2000 bombing of the destroyer USS Cole.
Others warn the success of the military campaign may be fleeting. About 5,000 U.S. troops remain in Afghanistan, working with allies to search out and destroy al-Qaida and Taliban remnants. Some analysts say their presence and tactics could lead Afghans to rise up against the United States. Military analyst William Lind of the iconoclastic Free Congress Foundation sees evidence for that in recent attacks on U.S. troops, which he predicts will increase "until eventually we are driven out of Afghanistan."
The rout of the Taliban was a battlefield victory only, Lind contends, like initial American success in the Vietnam War, the Soviet Union's success in occupying Afghanistan in 1979 and 19th century Britain's early success in trying to conquer Afghanistan. The message al-Qaida probably took from the Afghan campaign is that "they can survive the worst the United States is willing to throw at them," Lind said. "They were hurt by it, but they certainly weren't destroyed by it."
Even those who see the glass as half full warn that it is only half full at best. President Bush warns that the nation still is closer to the beginning of the war on terrorism than to its end. Others firmly agree.
Said Gen. Clark: "We're about one pawn and maybe a knight move into a long game of chess."

Load-Date: September 13, 2002


End of Document