PROMISES, PROMISES COUNTER-TERRORISM PLANS TO PROTECT FOOD ARE COSTLY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 18, 2011 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 1354 words
Byline: Garance Burke, Associated Press
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- One of the deepest fears sweeping a shattered nation following the Sept. 11 attacks was that terrorists might poison the country's food.
Hoping to ease people's anxieties about what they were eating, then-President George W. Bush vowed to draw a protective shield around the food supply and defend it from farm to fork.
An Associated Press analysis of the programs found that the government has spent at least $3.4 billion on food counter-terrorism in the last decade, but key programs have been bogged down in a huge, multi-headed bureaucracy. And with no single agency in charge, officials acknowledge that it's impossible to measure whether orchards or feedlots are actually any safer.
A Senate subcommittee held a hearing Tuesday to examine a congressional watchdog's new report revealing federal setbacks in protecting cattle and crops since Sept. 11. Just days after the 10th anniversary of the attacks, lawmakers demanded answers about potential food-related threats and reports that the government could have wasted money on languishing agriculture anti-terror programs.
"The unfortunate truth is that we, as a nation, lack effective surveillance," John Hoffman, a former Department of Homeland Security senior adviser, testified at the hearing. "At present, our primary detection capability is the emergency room."
Top U.S. food defense authorities insist that the initiatives have made the food supply safer and say extensive investments have prepared the country to respond to emergencies. No terrorist group has threatened the food supply in the past decade, and the largest food poisonings have not arisen from foreign attacks but from salmonella-tainted eggs produced on Iowa farms that sickened almost 2,000 people.
Seeking to chart the government's advances, the AP interviewed dozens of current and former state and federal officials and analyzed spending and program records for major food defense initiatives, and found:
* The fragmented system leaves no single agency accountable, at times slowing progress and blurring the lines of responsibility. Federal auditors found that one Agriculture Department surveillance program to test for chemical, biological and radiological agents was not working properly five years after its inception, in part because agencies couldn't agree on who was in control.
* Efforts to move an aging animal disease lab from an island near New York City have stalled after leading scientists found an accidental release of foot-and-mouth disease was likely to happen at the new facility in America's beef belt.
* Congress is questioning whether $31 million the Department of Homeland Security spent to create a state-of-the-art data integration center to monitor biological threats to food and other arenas has accomplished anything, because agencies are not using it to share information.
* Despite the billions spent on food defense, many of the changes the government put into place are recommendations that the private sector isn't required to carry out. As a result, it's difficult to track successes and failures, and the system's accomplishments are largely hidden from public view.
"Everything that has been done to date on food defense in the private sector has all been voluntary," said LeeAnne Jackson, the Food and Drug Administration's health science policy adviser. "We can't go out and ask them what they have done, because they're not obliged to tell us, so we don't have a good metric to measure what's been done."
The food defense effort shifted into high gear in 2004, when Mr. Bush directed the government to create new systems to guard against terrorist attacks. Agencies got money to assess risks, contain foreign disease outbreaks and help farms and food-processing plants develop protection programs.
The newly established Department of Homeland Security, which was charged with sharing information about federal food defense plans, also distributed grants among agencies, contractors and universities. During the past nine years, it spent $467 million on food-related research alone.
A $6 million counter-terrorism network headquartered in Iowa that helps veterinarians stop viruses from spreading between herds is considered one of the successes. Another is a program that gave California dairymen hundreds of thousands of dollars to buy high-tech locks for their milking barns.
The department also spent $550 million to run its Office of Health Affairs, which coordinates bio-surveillance across federal agencies. In fiscal year 2008, that office set out to build a new data integration center where food, agriculture, disease and environmental agencies could view each other's surveillance information in real time.
But Jeffrey W. Runge, DHS's former chief medical officer, said the other agencies did not want to hand over their data, and turf battles delayed the government's progress in pinpointing a culprit that summer, as hundreds of people fell ill during a nationwide salmonella outbreak tied to peppers.
"FDA was going on its own track, DHS was on its track, and no one was talking to each other," said David Acheson, who was then FDA's assistant commissioner and is now a food industry consultant.
In June, Rep. Bill Pascrell, D-N.J., introduced a bill that would eliminate the data center. The GOP-led House Appropriations Committee also has questioned what Homeland Security has accomplished after spending $31 million running the program.
"It just didn't work," said Dr. Runge, who oversaw the center. "Now, al-Qaida is headed by a physician who has expressed interest in biological attacks, and I don't think we are putting enough brain cycles on this issue."
The department is working to integrate data across federal agencies, and is trying to enhance the center's effectiveness by reviewing the "challenges and opportunities of integrated bio-surveillance," a DHS official said.
Sen. Daniel Akaka, D-Hawaii, convened Tuesday's hearing in light of a new Government Accountability Office report which found that there was no coordinated effort to oversee the government's progress on food defense.
"Since the Sept. 11 attacks, we have taken steps to prepare for an attack on our food and agriculture system, but I remain concerned that America is not ready to effectively respond and recover," Mr. Akaka said.
FDA and USDA have handled much of the on-the-ground work with farmers, ranchers and manufacturing plants. FDA has spent $1.3 billion on food defense programs since 2005, the most recent year available, said spokeswoman Patricia El-Hinnawy. The USDA said it has spent $1.64 billion on food defense since 2003.
Some small farmers claim that some of USDA's rules have become so unwieldy in the last decade that they threaten business.
Under agency guidance issued since Sept. 11, USDA inspectors have strongly encouraged slaughterhouses and other facilities they regulate to write Food Defense Plans, and now nearly three-quarters have them.
Uli Bennewitz, who owns a small farm-brewery-butchery near the Outer Banks in Jarvisburg, N.C., and wins national foodie awards for his artisan sausages, said he had to hire one of his three employees just to deal with the on-site meat inspector. He said the federal involvement lacks common sense.
"When it comes to treating a Tyson chicken plant the same as a one-man brewery butchery, that's when these laws get completely out of control," Mr. Bennewitz said. "What is a small farm doing writing a Food Defense Plan? That is not going to save the nation from some terrible disease."
That's where upgrading the nation's primary animal disease laboratory comes in, federal officials say. The facility, which does crucial research on foot-and-mouth disease, is now housed on a tiny island 100 miles east of New York City. DHS spent $233 million running the lab in the past few years and plans to move the operations to Manhattan, Kan., by 2018.
But a National Research Council report issued last year cited safety concerns with the Kansas location, including a 70 percent chance that dangerous pathogens could be released close to urban populations and cattle yards over the project's 50-year life.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: USDA-ARS Plum Island, a tiny island off the coast of New York's Long Island where the nation's primary animal disease laboratory is located.

Load-Date: September 18, 2011


End of Document