PROOF OF SOVIET-AIDED TERROR IS SCARCE
The New York Times
February 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 699 words
Byline: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8
Body


Officials with access to United States intelligence services say they have little evidence to substantiate Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s allegation that the Soviet Union trains, equips and provides funds for international terrorists.
Soviet diplomats said that their Government had filed a note of protest to Mr. Haig, denying that the Soviet Union engaged in terrorism and labeling Mr. Haig's accusations a ''gross and malicious deception.''
Secretary Haig said on Jan. 28 in his first news conference that the Soviet Union, as part of a ''conscious policy,'' undertook the ''training, funding and equipping'' of international terrorists. He asserted that Moscow fostered, supported and expanded that activity.
Proof of Soviet aided terror is scarce
But officials in the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency and the State Department, asked to document those charges, said they were unable to do so. ''There's just no real evidence for it,'' said an official.
 
Bloc Has Had Few Attacks
Mr. Haig also asserted that Soviet support for international terrorism was ''surprising'' because ''the Soviet Union itself has been victimized by it.''
Reports made public by the C.I.A. said that about 5 percent of the victims of terrorism were nationals of the Soviet Union or its East European allies. Relatively few terrorist attacks are known to have taken place inside the Soviet bloc.
A recent study of 18 embassies under siege, written by Brian M.  Jenkins of the Rand Corporation, a research institute, showed that no diplomatic posts of the Soviet Union or its allies had been attacked and that only one embassy in a Communist country had been invaded.  An anti-Castro Cuban kidnapped the Belgian and French ambassadors at the French Embassy in Havana in 1973.
Specialists in terrorism outside the Government said it was important to distingush between Soviet support for what the Communists call national liberation movements, which the Soviet Union avowedly supports, and genuine terrorism. The Soviet Union has admitted aiding its allies in Vietnam and the Palestine Liberation Organization and has barely concealed its help to Communists in Turkey.
 
Little Evidence Is Available
But those specialists said there was little evidence to show that the Soviet Union had formed, trained or directed terrorist organizations such as the Red Brigades in Italy or the Japanese Red Army. Those groups, the specialists said, would most likely have appeared whether they had Russian help or not because they were products of political forces within their own countries.
The specialists said, however, that some Russian help to terrorists might have come from Libya, which has been the recipient of large shipments of Soviet arms that later were sold or distributed to terrorists.
Some organizations that have carried out terrorist attacks, such as the P.L.O., have also sent people to the Soviet Union for training, the specialists said. A Palestinian terrorist, Adnan Jaber, who is in prison in Israel, said last year that he had been given six months training in the Soviet Union in weapons, tactics and explosives.
He also said that similar training was conducted in Vietnam and North Korea, both allies of the Soviet Union, and in China. The specialists in terrorism reported that other training had been provided in Czechoslovakia for Italy's Red Brigades and in North Korea for the Japanese Red Army.
 
Cuban Link Is Seen
Cuba is also thought to have trained terrorists for action in Latin America and to have been a conduit through which weapons, either captured from the United States in Vietnam or obtained from the Soviet Union, have been shipped to Latin America.
The diplomatic note from the Soviet Union that was reflected in a dispatch carried by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said that the Soviet Union had supported measures to prevent air piracy. Another Tass dispatch said that the Soviet Union had criticized the seizure of the Americans diplomats in Iran.
The note defended a Soviet right to assist national movements of independence. The Tass dispatch said that Mr. Haig's reasoning would have made terrorists out of George Washington and other early American leaders.


End of Document