Proposal aims to boost airport security, deter terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
January 7, 2000, Friday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 537 words
Byline: By Scripps Howard News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- To better deter terrorism against U.S. airlines, federal aviation officials on Wednesday proposed expanded and standardized training for security workers at airport checkpoints.
With security employee turnover higher than 100 percent annually "in many locations" and wages averaging only $5.75 an hour, it is time to boost standards for the thousands of workers at the 449 traffic-controlled airports, the Federal Aviation Administration said in its proposed rule.
Rep. John Duncan Jr., R-Tenn., chairman of the House Aviation subcommittee, said he expects to hold a hearing this year on whether the FAA plans will be adequate.
"An awful lot of these screeners at the larger airports seem to be recent immigrants. With the rapid turnover … we may need to require background checks of screeners. It might be … fairly easy for somebody with bad intentions to get into that kind of job if they wanted to."
Duncan welcomed the proposed higher training standards, which he expects will lead to increased wages and reduce turnover, and noted that he made a similar proposal in House-passed legislation last year. That measure, however, wasn't passed by the Senate.
Just a few days before Christmas, federal officials warned of possible problems at U.S. airports from terrorists, and security was tightened. No terrorist attacks occurred.
The 1993 terrorist bombing of the World Trade Center in New York prompted a federal probe that found Islamic radicals also had plans and bomb materials to blow up as many as 12 commercial aircraft operated by United, Northwest and Delta airlines. A fire in their apartment attracted police, and the plot was not carried out, the FAA said.
The agency received $100 million from Congress to expand purchases of explosives-detection equipment at more airports. There already are more than 600 such systems being used at many of the 449 airports with control towers.
The nation's airlines, which are required by federal law to pay for security checkpoints at airports, welcomed the FAA proposal for standards that all private security companies would have to meet to bid on contracts with airlines.
But the Air Transport Association, the airlines' trade group, will have to study the lengthy proposed regulation before endorsing all of it, spokesman Richard Doubrava said.
Airlines already have increased training of security checkpoint screeners, Doubrava said.
"We think it gets overlooked that they're doing a very good job," he said. But requiring security companies to meet new FAA standards to get a certificate of approval will help make more improvements, he said.
A year ago, Duncan visited airports in western Europe and said he found that airport security workers were much better paid -- about $40,000 to $50,000 a year for senior employees -- and had a lower turnover rate than their American counterparts.
If U.S. security workers are paid fast-food-level wages, they cannot be expected to stay on the job long, Duncan said.
Doubrava said airports in Europe use security workers who are government employees and receive higher pay and good benefits. The industry has favored having the FAA take over security at U.S. airports, but neither the agency nor Congress has backed the idea.

Load-Date: January 7, 2000


End of Document