PROPOSAL TO FIGHT TERRORISM WOULD COST $1.1 BILLION
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 10, 1996, Tuesday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 542 words
Byline: Ron Fournier
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Promising safer skies, President Clinton issued
orders Monday to tighten airport security and challenged Congress to
support a $ 1.1 billion anti-terrorism crackdown. "Terrorists don't
wait," the president said. "And neither should we."
Clinton unveiled the proposals in an Oval Office ceremony designed to
reassure jittery Americans after the Oklahoma City bombing and the
explosion of TWA Flight 800.
"As a result of these steps, not only will the American people feel
safer, they will be safer," the president declared.
The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security, which
unveiled its recommendations last week, formally presented them to the
president Monday. In embracing the report, Clinton:
- Ordered immediate criminal background checks of airline workers with
access to secure areas.
- Ordered the Federal Aviation Administration to set up a system in
selected airports to match each piece of luggage with a passenger.
- Promised to sign an executive order making the National
Transportation Safety Board the point agency to help families of plane
crash victims.
- Announced that the U.S. military will provide several dozen
specially trained dogs for security at key airports.
Some of the ideas are old. The report calls for $ 21.3 million for a
study of markers - called taggants - that can be placed in explosive
material. The Republican Congress has repeatedly blocked the
Clinton-backed measure.
Vice President Al Gore, who chaired the commission, warned against
expecting too much.
"There is no silver bullet, or single magic answer," he said. "So
we're presenting a combination of approaches - some high-tech, some
low-tech, even some no-tech."
Though terrorism is suspected in the July 17 TWA crash, Clinton did
not speculate about its cause. "We don't have an answer for you," he
said.
The airport safety recommendations would cost $ 429.4 million. On top
of that, Clinton proposed $ 667.4 million in anti-terrorism measures
that are not solely aimed at airport security. They included:
- $ 436.9 million to improve security at U.S. facilities in America and
around the world. That includes $ 122.6 million to relocate troops and
improve security at military installations in the Persian Gulf after
the June bombing that killed 19 American airmen in Saudi Arabia.
- $ 114 million to expand and strengthen federal law enforcement
agencies, including the FBI, the bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
- $ 117 million to protect Americans in the aftermath of terrorists
acts, including $ 93 million to the Pentagon so it can train soldiers
about the tactics of terrorists and how to use physical protection
equipment.
About one third of the $ 1.1 billion package will be covered by a
supplemental spending bill the administration will send to Congress,
the Office of Management and Budget said.
Requesting swift action from Congress, Clinton said, "We need these
laws and we need them now before Congress recesses for the year."
Administration officials said the rest of the money would come from
current budgets, though they did not say what programs would be cut to
pay for the anti-terrorism plans. With an election approaching, it was
unclear whether the spending bill had much chance in the GOP Congress.

Load-Date: September 11, 1996


End of Document