PROSECUTORS GET WIDE LATITUDE IN BOMBING CASE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 29, 1993, SUNDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 967 words
Byline: Kevin McCoy 1993, Newsday 1993, New York Daily News
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


THE INDICTMENT against Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman opens a high-stakes legal battle that allows federal prosecutors sweeping grounds to introduce damning evidence while enabling defense lawyers to present political arguments that could trigger acquittals, legal experts say.  In obtaining a conspiracy indictment against Abdel-Rahman and 14 co-defendants, federal prosecutors gained the right to introduce evidence that would be excluded at most other trials.  Hearsay evidence - based on the reports of others, rather than on a witness' personal knowledge - is permitted in federal conspiracy trials.  This will allow prosecutors to introduce statements co-defendants made to federal informant Emad Salem about others charged in the case.  For instance, the indictment charges that co-defendants Siddig Ibrahim, Siddig Ali and Earl Gant met in Philadelphia in May to discuss obtaining weapons and explosives. Court records show Salem did not attend the meeting, but was later told about it by Ali.  In addition, the federal conspiracy statute allows a defendant to be charged for an action a co-defendant committed without his knowledge. Thus, although some of the 15 suspects may have been unaware of the alleged 1990 plot to kill Rabbi Meir Kahane, all can be charged as co-conspirators with El Sayyid Nosair, the accused gunman who was acquitted of the murder in an earlier state trial but convicted on weapons charges.  "The federal laws that govern conspiracy cases are amazingly lenient in terms of the types of evidence that may be presented," said Edward Little, a former federal prosecutor now in private practice.
Defense lawyers argue that the conspiracy law and the federal racketeering statute used to charge the suspects may unfairly influence the jury.  "There's a spillover prejudice any time you have an indictment involving many different allegations and events. The evidence against some of the defendants may be weak, but the jury may convict anyway just because they're told that all the suspects were part of the same scheme," said Gerald Lefcourt, a veteran defense lawyer.  The structure of the new indictment also gives defense lawyers unique legal weapons.  The case includes a sedition conspiracy charge, an accusation that the defendants plotted to "overthrow" or "destroy" the U.S. government. The rarely used charge can be applied even if there is no evidence Abdel-Rahman or his co-defendants took overt action to bring the government down.  "It's an outrageous law because it's a thought crime," said Elizabeth Fink, a New York City lawyer who was part of the defense team that defended bombing suspects charged with seditious conspiracy in the so-called Ohio 7 case.  They were indicted for carrying out a series of bombings in the city and Long Island between September 1982 and September 1984. Although several of those defendants were convicted on other charges, all were acquitted on the seditious conspiracy count.  Indeed, the only recent convictions in a seditious conspiracy case came in 1985 against four alleged members of FALN, a Puerto Rican separatist group charged with several bombings in New York and elsewhere, legal experts said.  Only one of those defendants, however, mounted a conventional defense, while the others used a political defense that essentially argued the court had no right to try them.  "Any time there's been a real defense in cases like this, the government has lost," Fink said.  In part, said Fink and other defense lawyers, that's because a seditious conspiracy charge enables the defense to introduce evidence involving a defendant's political beliefs.  "The prosecution may have a harder time proving the case does not represent political persecution. Jurors don't like to convict in cases like this," said Michael Deutsch, a defense lawyer in one of the FALN trials.  Terrorist Attack Expected 1993, New York Daily News Terrorism experts say a retaliatory terrorist strike at the United States for the arrest of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman is inevitable.  The exact time and target are anybody's guess - but there's no doubt that followers of the Muslim cleric will try to avenge the incarceration of their spiritual leader, according to authorities and terrorism experts.  The worst fears of local, federal and international law enforcement officials were confirmed Thursday by the sheik's followers themselves.  They issued a statement in Egypt threatening to avenge the blind cleric.  "We will take revenge on all U.S. interests and citizens, either in Egypt or outside, if any harm occurs to Sheik Omar," said a statement from three Egyptian radical groups.  "I don't want to preach gloom and doom, but there is a good chance of a retaliatory act by this group," said Steve Davis of the Fairfax Group, a security consulting company.  "The basic tool of terrorism is retaliatory violence," said Davis.  "You have to realize that the U.S. now has this group's leader," added Davis. "The followers and the members of the terrorism cell who were not arrested now are going to be frustrated and outraged. I know for a fact that authorities are very concerned about it." Robert Kupperman, senior adviser for the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said a retaliatory strike could take place anywhere in the world but predicted it would not occur "for four to six months." "The purpose will be to demonstrate our vulnerability after all the news stories end," said Kupperman, adding that it would take that long because "these are tiny organizations that are very fearful of being penetrated and (their members) will be extremely cautious." He added, "No matter what you do, we have to be realistic. It's not the happiest thing to tell people, but terrorism is a way of life, it's here and it's not going away."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Photo by AP - Suspected Muslim extremists in jail in Cairo, Egypt, last week displaying a homemade flag equating the United States and Israel. Three Egyptian radical groups issued a statement threatening vengeance after United States arrested Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman on conspiracy charges. (2) Photo Headshot - Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document