Prosecutor: Warfare manual found; Chicago raid: Executive denies claim the charity bankrolls terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 10, 2002 Saturday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a11
Length: 394 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


A guerrilla warfare manual telling how to turn common household items such as irons into lethal weapons was discovered in a raid on a Chicago-based Islamic charity's Bosnian office, prosecutors said Friday.
"When you go to iron your clothes, it explodes," Assistant U.S. Attorney John C. Kocoras told U.S. District Judge Joan B. Gottschall at a hearing into charges against Benevolence International Foundation.
Benevolence lawyer Matthew Piers discounted the importance of the manual, saying Bosnia has been torn by fighting for years and that almost everyone of military age there has been a soldier.
"It's been a dirty, ugly war filled with ethnic cleansing and hatred," Piers said.
News of the manual came as prosecutors pressed to do background checks of defense investigators and experts, saying some of those who played such roles in previous cases had ties to terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden.
Benevolence and its chief executive, Enaam Arnaout, are charged with perjury for denying links to terrorism, violence and military activities.
Bank accounts belonging to the charity, which is based in suburban Chicago, have been frozen by the Treasury Department.
Prosecutors say Arnaout once worked closely with bin Laden and has other links to bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network.
Arnaout, 39, a Syrian-born U.S. citizen who has homes in Bosnia and the Chicago area, denies the charity has bankrolled terrorism. His attorneys say the bin Laden connections date to the era when Afghan freedom fighters were trying expel Soviet troops with American aid.
The investigation is continuing, and Kocoras told Gottschall that one of the directors of the Islamic charity is under grand jury subpoena.
Prosecutors want the green light to perform background checks of any investigators or experts who might be allowed to see unreviewed and sensitive documents.
U.S. Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald told Gottschall that keeping sensitive documents secure is a serious matter. He said some of those hired by the defense in other cases "had direct links to Osama bin Laden."
He didn't elaborate. Fitzgerald made his name in New York prosecuting such bin Laden-related cases as the one involving the 1998 bombing of two U.S. Embassies in East Africa.
Defense attorneys Piers and Joseph Duffy said that could hamper their ability to mount an effective defense of Benevolence and Arnaout.

Load-Date: August 15, 2002


End of Document