Prosecutors: Chicago-area men planned terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 27, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: B; Pg. 5
Length: 468 words
Byline: MICHAEL TARM The Associated Press
Body


CHICAGO - An Illinois Army National Guard soldier vowed to bring "the flames of war to the heart" of America if he was unable to get to the Middle East to join the Islamic State group, and his cousin bragged he could kill up to 150 people in a terrorist attack in the U.S., federal prosecutors said Thursday in announcing the men's arrests. Both also are accused of hatching a plot to attack a U.S. military facility.
Hasan R. Edmonds, the 22-year-old guardsman, was arrested Wednesday evening at Chicago Midway International Airport trying to board a plane on the first leg of a journey to Egypt. Jonas M. Edmonds, 29, was detained a few hours later at home, the U.S. attorney's office in Chicago said. Both men are U.S. citizens from suburban Aurora.
An unsealed federal complaint says the plan was for Jonas Edmonds to carry out an attack in the U.S. after Hasan Edmonds left the country, donning Hasan's uniform to gain better access to soldiers. The complaint says they plotted an armed attack against a U.S. military facility in northern Illinois where Hasan Edmonds had trained. The complaint did not name the facility.
A spokesman for the Illinois National Guard, Lt. Col. Brad Leighton, said Hasan Edmonds was a member of Golf Company 634th Brigade Support Battalion, based in Joliet.
In Internet messages to an undercover FBI agent in January, Hasan Edmonds said that if he was unable to make it to the Middle East, he would help bring "the flames of war to the heart" of America and "cause as much damage and mayhem as possible," the complaint says.
On Tuesday, the cousins drove to a military installation with an undercover agent to discuss an attack, according to the complaint. Hasan Edmonds described the rooms inside and talked about which ones should be hit.
In other messages, Hasan said his knowledge of the U.S. military and American psychology would prove helpful in terrorizing Americans, prosecutors contend.
"If we can break their spirits, we will win," he said, according to the complaint.
He allegedly spoke admiringly of the terrorist attack in Paris on the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo.
"Honestly, we would love to do something like the brother in Paris did," he allegedly wrote.
Both men face a count of conspiring to provide material support to a foreign terrorist organization, the Islamic State. The conspiracy includes their alleged terrorist plots in the U.S. A conviction carries a maximum 15-year prison sentence.
They made initial appearances in a courtroom in Chicago later Thursday. Jonas Edmonds kept swiveling in his chair, stroking his beard and, at one point, yawned loudly. Hasan Edmonds sat still.
Hasan Edmonds' sister, Manchinique Bates, told the Chicago Sun-Times, "They aren't terrorists. ... Just because they choose to worship as Muslims does not make them terrorists."

Load-Date: March 27, 2015


End of Document