Prosecutors to seek life terms in Ft. Dix plot
The Philadelphia Inquirer
April 28, 2009 Tuesday
JERSEY-D Edition


Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01
Length: 755 words
Byline: By Troy Graham

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Prosecutors plan to recommend this morning that the men convicted of plotting an armed attack on Fort Dix spend the rest of their lives in prison, possibly in the federal government's toughest facility.
Defense attorneys say they will argue that life terms are too harsh for men who had no adult criminal records and that sentencing guidelines for terrorism should not apply to them.
"On its face, we all know we're calling this terrorism," said Troy Archie, the attorney for defendant Eljvir Duka. "On paper, it's not so clear."
Eljvir Duka and his brothers, Dritan and Shain, are to be sentenced this morning in federal court in Camden. The remaining defendants, Mohamad Shnewer and Serdar Tatar, are scheduled for sentencing tomorrow.
All five, foreign-born Muslims raised primarily in Cherry Hill, were convicted in December after an eight-week trial on charges of conspiracy to kill U.S. soldiers. The jury, which deliberated for more than five days, acquitted the men of attempted-murder charges.
Prosecutors trumpeted the case as an example of homegrown terrorism detected in its earliest stages and disrupted with arrests before the plot could come to fruition.
They said the men planned to use a pizza delivery pass to gain access to Fort Dix and open fire on soldiers. All five were arrested in May 2007 after Dritan and Shain Duka tried to buy rifles from a government informant.
Defense attorneys argued that two informants, sent to infiltrate the group and record their conversations, ensnared the men in a phony conspiracy by goading them into making their most damning statements.
They said the group would never have carried out a plot, that it was all talk and no action.
Many of those same arguments could play out again during the two days of sentencing.
The defendants were never charged with a crime of terrorism. But prosecutors are expected to ask District Court Judge Robert B. Kugler for a "terrorism enhancement" at sentencing.
A terrorism enhancement is reserved for crimes "calculated to influence or affect the conduct of government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct."
Under federal sentencing guidelines, that enhancement would boost each man's sentence to life.
"If the judge agrees with the terrorism enhancement . . . there's no way around it," Archie said.
Even if Kugler does not grant the enhancement, the defendants face lengthy sentences. Shnewer and Dritan and Shain Duka face mandatory minimum sentences of 30 years because they also were convicted on gun charges.
"On the best day, I'm dealing with 30 years for my client. On the worst day, it's life," said Shnewer's attorney, Rocco Cipparone. "Neither are palatable options."
The Dukas, illegal aliens from the former Yugoslavia, and Tatar, a legal resident alien from Turkey, could face deportation if paroled.
Only Shnewer, who was born in Jordan, is a U.S. citizen.
"I'm going to ask the judge to let him have some semblance of a life after," Cipparone said.
Prosecutors could ask Kugler to recommend the men be housed at the federal Supermax prison, the government's highest-security facility, in the Rocky Mountains.
The prison, where inmates are kept in near-total isolation, is home to leaders of Colombian drug cartels and major street gangs, as well as convicted terrorists Ramzi Yousef and Zacarias Moussaoui.
The U.S. Attorney's Office would not comment on the Fort Dix sentencings.
The hearings could be emotional, particularly for the Dukas, who have a large extended family. After the last hearing, when Kugler dismissed a slew of motions seeking an acquittal, relatives cried out, "This is not justice!", and "It's not over."
Ferik Duka, the men's father, also called out, "Allahu akbar," which means "God is great" in Arabic. His sons, being led from the courtroom, responded loudly in kind.
Several of the defendants have written Kugler since trial, arguing their innocence. A number of Duka family members have written as well, pleading for leniency.
Eljvir Duka wrote to Kugler that he hopes "that the truth of our innocence will prevail on our appeals."
In that letter, he urged the judge to become a Muslim.
"I am only doing my duty of inviting others to the worship of their lord. I seek nothing in return," Duka wrote. "Do not let the fact that I am a convicted defendant delude you from the truth of Islam."
Contact staff writer Troy Graham at 856-779-3893 or tgraham@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: April 28, 2009


End of Document