Prosecution Rests Case In a Trial On Terrorism
The New York Times
June 29, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk  
Section: Section B;  ; Section B;   Page 2;   Column 6;   Metropolitan Desk  ; Column 6;  
Length: 724 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED  

By JOSEPH P. FRIED  
Body


After presenting more than 120 witnesses and more than 100 hours of secretly recorded conversations, Federal prosecutors rested their case yesterday against a militant Muslim cleric and 10 other men charged with waging a bombing and assassination conspiracy in and around New York.
For the last five months, in a heavily guarded courtroom in lower Manhattan, the prosecutors have presented extensive evidence to support their contention that the men plotted to blow up several local landmarks and to kill such figures as President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
But their evidence also raises serious questions that lawyers for Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and his 10 co-defendants are certain to exploit when they begin presenting their case in Federal District Court next week. Among those questions are how much of the plotting was spurred by the Government's chief informer, whether the plots charged were truly part of a single overarching conspiracy and whether the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt that all the defendants were criminally involved.
According to the prosecution, the conspiracy included a lethal bombing that did occur -- the February 1993 attack at the World Trade Center in Manhattan that killed six people -- and plots for subsequent, even deadlier, bombings that were not carried out.
Those plots, the prosecution said, had as targets the United Nations headquarters, the Federal building at 26 Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan, the Holland and Lincoln tunnels and the George Washington Bridge.
None of the defendants is charged with carrying out the trade center bombing; four other followers of Mr. Abdel Rahman were convicted in an earlier trial. But the prosecution says the trade center attack was nevertheless part of the overall "seditious conspiracy."
Late yesterday Judge Michael B. Mukasey, at the request of the prosecutors, dropped a portion of the seditious conspiracy charge that accuses the defendants of plotting to forcibly prevent and hinder the execution of United States laws.
Defense lawyers later said that elimination of that section was not significant because the 11 men still face the two other portions of the charge that were always more central to the case: that they had conspired to "levy a war of urban terrorism against the United States" and to "oppose by force the authority of the United States."
Also at the prosecution's request, Judge Mukasey dismissed three charges, including bomb possession, against some defendants but reserved a decision on defense motions to dismiss many of the remaining 25 charges.
The major evidence presented against Mr. Abdel Rahman, a blind fundamentalist cleric who has long agitated for the overthrow of the Egyptian Government, illustrates both the promise and the pitfalls of the prosecution effort.
Perhaps the most compelling piece of evidence against him is a May 1993 conversation taped by the Government's informer, Emad Salem, in which Mr. Abdel Rahman advises him not to bomb the United Nations but to "find a plan to inflict damage on the American Army." Mr. Abdel Rahman also advises Mr. Salem to put off plans to attack the Federal building in Manhattan.
One of the prosecutors, Robert Khuzami, told the jury that this shows that Mr. Abdel Rahman was the leader of the conspiracy, a figure who was "consulted about which targets were permissible."
But because Mr. Salem was the one doing the consulting -- he had asked Mr. Abdel Rahman whether the two buildings should be bombed -- defense lawyers will be able to argue that Mr. Salem engineered the conversation in an attempt to set up Mr. Abdel Rahman.
The cleric's chief lawyer, Lynne F. Stewart, has maintained that the American Government made a target of her client in such an attempt to help its ally, Egypt. She has argued that by prosecuting Mr. Abdel Rahman and keeping him in jail, the United States was preventing him from continuing to inspire his followers in Egypt in their efforts to topple Mr. Mubarak.
Ms. Stewart has also argued that Mr. Salem, a former Egyptian military officer who infiltrated Mr. Abdel Rahman's circle, is an admitted liar who cannot be believed and whom the Government has paid more than $1 million for his work on the case.
But prosecutors say it is the defendants' own words, captured in the recorded conversations, that support Mr. Salem's five weeks of testimony.

Load-Date: June 29, 1995


End of Document