PROSECUTORS SEEK DEATH FOR MOUSSAOUI IN TERRORISM CASE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 8, 2003 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 274 words
Byline: From News Services
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Prosecutors said Tuesday that they would ask a federal appeals court to allow them to seek the death penalty in the case of Zacarias Moussaoui, the sole person charged in the United States as a conspirator in the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The Justice Department also is seeking to reverse a ruling that essentially gutted the main charges against Moussaoui, 35, a French citizen, and dealt a severe blow to the prosecution.
U.S. District Judge Leonie Brinkema ruled last week that the government must drop the death penalty in the case and that it could not present any evidence or argument that Moussaoui was involved in the Sept. 11 attacks.
She imposed the sanctions because the government refused to present three al-Qaida operatives in U.S. custody as witnesses for Moussaoui's defense. The ruling still would allow prosecutors to try Moussaoui on charges that he had participated in a broader al-Qaida conspiracy against the United States.
U.S. Attorney Paul McNulty asked the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va., to schedule oral arguments the week of Dec. 2.
McNulty said after Brinkema's ruling that restoring the government's Sept. 11 evidence against Moussaoui was essential, leaving the possibility of moving the trial to a military court if the government cannot win restoration of its evidence on appeal.
Brinkema had concluded that Moussaoui had the constitutional right to question captives who might back his claim that he was not a conspirator in the suicide hijackings.
This is the second time the government has appealed the witness access question, contending the captives could reveal classified information.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo headshot - (Zacarias) Moussaoui; Is suspected in 9-11 attacks

Load-Date: October 9, 2003


End of Document