Prosecutors win conspiracy case ; Drug smugglers: High-court ruling could affect terrorism cases
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 22, 2003 Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. d5
Length: 397 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Supreme Court handed federal prosecutors a victory Tuesday, reversing a ruling in favor of convicted drug smugglers in a case that government lawyers argued had implications for the prosecution of terrorism cases.
The case revolved around prosecutors' use of conspiracy charges for planned crimes that already have been discovered and prevented by law officers.
The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals had said that having discovered and stopped a crime in the making, law enforcement officers cannot use informants to lure others into getting involved and then charge them with being part of the conspiracy. The appeals court had applied the same reasoning in a line of cases going back five years.
Rejecting that view, the high court ruled that the conspirators still present a danger to the public even though one crime might have been averted.
The would-be conspirators might go on to commit other crimes, and police are not bound to let part of a conspiracy ring go free simply because police turned the planned crime into a sting operation, the court said.
"When police have frustrated a conspiracy's specific objective but conspirators, unaware of that fact, have neither abandoned the conspiracy nor withdrawn, these special conspiracy-related dangers remain," Justice Stephen Breyer wrote.
In other Supreme Court action:
* Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens blocked Indiana from putting to death its oldest death-row inmate Tuesday to give the 71-year-old prisoner, who is partially deaf and blind, extra time to file federal appeals.
Richard Moore is on death row for killing his wife, her father and an Indianapolis police officer in 1979.
The Indiana Supreme Court refused last week to block Moore's Jan. 29 execution because he had exhausted his state appeals. The state justices said Moore could ask federal courts to step in.
* A Supreme Court debate about racial discrimination in a predominantly white Ohio town turned into a broader discussion about another subject Tuesday: referendums - and whether cities and states can be sued for putting all kinds of matters to a public vote.
Cuyahoga Falls, a suburb of Akron, is fighting a $$ @3 million lawsuit that accuses it of holding a racially motivated referendum in 1996 to keep the town from integrating. 
Justices were asked by the town and the Bush administration to protect governments from lawsuits over referendums.

Load-Date: January 22, 2003


End of Document