Prosecutor In Terror Case Quits Agency
The New York Times
May 17, 2005 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 365 words
Byline: By ERIC LICHTBLAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 16, 
Body


A veteran federal prosecutor at the center of controversy over the collapse of a high-profile terrorism case in Detroit resigned from the Justice Department on Monday and said he planned to become a defense lawyer.
 ''I've seen my career and everything I've devoted my life to in government mischaracterized and vilified,'' the prosecutor, Richard G. Convertino, said in an interview, ''There's no future for me here, and as much as I love the Department of Justice, I recognize that.''
 The department declined comment on the resignation. In court filings and interviews, department officials have blamed Mr. Convertino in large part for the dismissal of criminal charges against three Moroccan men suspected of operating a Qaeda terrorist cell in Detroit. The case was dismissed after an internal review found that prosecutors had failed to divulge material casting doubt on the suspects' links to terrorism.
 The case, the first terrorism trial after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, was once hailed by the department as a sign of its new pre-emptive strategy to disrupt terrorist attacks. But it has become a black mark for the department, and senior Justice Department officials have apologized for it. Mr. Convertino is suing the department over his treatment, and the department in turn is investigating ethics accusations against him in his handling of this case and others in his 15-year career. 
 Mr. Convertino had been on paid administrative leave since February. He attributed his frayed relations with department officials in part to the lawsuit he filed against the department last year, saying, ''Their recourse is to destroy me and my credibility in order to end the lawsuit.''
 Mr. Convertino has said little publicly about the case, but in the interview he denied accusations that he had intentionally withheld material that could have aided the defendants. He said he remained ''convinced unequivocally'' that the suspects were terrorists. 
 ''We did the best we could in this prosecution,'' he said. ''No one did anything even remotely close to unethical, let alone criminal, and if there were any mistakes made, they were honest and due to exhaustion, understaffing and overwork.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 17, 2005


End of Document