PROS MULL TERRORISM SABOTAGE FEARED IN AIR CRASH
Daily News (New York)
November 14, 1999, Sunday


Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  4
Length: 497 words
Byline: By DAVE SALTONSTALL SUNDAY NEWS STAFF WRITER With Debbie Tuma
Body


Experienced pilots and other aviation experts increasingly think doomed EgyptAir Flight 990 might have been the victim of a criminal or terrorist act.
Based on what's known of the plane's final actions an autopilot switchoff, a near-supersonic descent, a cutoff of both engines, and not a single radio cry for help many experts cannot imagine any other explanation.
"I racked my brains and I can't think of any emergency that would lead to these maneuvers," said Barry Schiff, a former TWA Boeing 767 pilot and now an aviation accident investigator.
Federal probers insist they have no evidence of foul play on the jet, which crashed Oct. 31, 60 miles off Nantucket Island, killing all 217 aboard. Navy robots continued an underwater search for the cockpit voice recorder to hear what the pilots were saying as the Boeing 767 took its final dive.
"We are not going to speculate about causes," National Transportation Safety Board Chairman James Hall said yesterday.
He added that investigators plan to run data about the plane's final seconds into a Boeing simulator next week to help figure out what happened.
But from what Hall said was found on the recovered flight data recorder which reveals what was happening mechanically experts yesterday told the Sunday News that they think sabotage might have caused the crash.
"You hate to think of the conspiracy stuff," said Chuck Leonard, a former chief investigator for the NTSB. "But the information so far makes it hard to deny that a criminal thing could have been part of the cause."
Data show that the jet's autopilot was manually switched off from the cockpit while cruising at 33,000 feet. Eight seconds later, the plane took a dive so steep and fast nearly the speed of sound that unbelted passengers and food carts would have been rendered weightless and tossed about, Hall said.
About halfway into the dive, Hall said, a master alarm sounded probably because of the speed. That the alarm did not sound until then is considered significant, experts said, because it further bolsters that the autopilot was turned off deliberately, and that, until then, there was no fire or loss of cabin pressure.
As the plane then approached 18,000 feet, it slowly pulled out of the dive. Moments later, however, both engines were inexplicably switched off, Hall said. Radar tapes show the plane then climbed to 24,000 feet.
That there was no call for help as would be expected in a severe dive strikes experts as odd. "Maybe someone had a gun to their heads," said Frank Delgandio of the International Society of Air Traffic Investigators. The answer, officials hope, will be on the cockpit voice recorder.
The possibility that foul play brought down the plane provided an unsettling backdrop yesterday during a jammed memorial service for crash victims Robert and Sharon Fitzpatrick of Southold, L.I.
One friend, Bob Rothman, a Southold pilot, said, "I can't believe there wasn't a confrontation in that cockpit. . . . You don't just turn off engines."

Load-Date: November 15, 1999


End of Document