Prosecutors urge judge: Keep FBI agent's identity safe; Involved in a Tampa terrorism case, he's set to testify at trial
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 30, 2013 Friday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 0
Length: 481 words
Byline: ELAINE SILVESTRINI

Tribune staff
Dateline: TAMPA 
Highlight: Govt moves to protect identity of undercover agent in case of Pinellas Park man accused of plotting a terrorism attack in Tampa
Body


 - Fearing dire consequences if an undercover FBI agent's identity became known, prosecutors are asking a judge to keep the public from the courtroom when the agent testifies in an upcoming terrorism trial.
The agent was involved in the case of Sami Osmakac, a naturalized citizen from Kosovo who was arrested last year following an FBI sting. 
Osmakac is scheduled to go on trial in October on charges of attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction and possession of an unregistered machine gun. Authorities said he planned to attack a busy Tampa nightspot, then take hostages and demand the release of Muslim prisoners.
According to an affidavit by FBI counterterrorism official R.J. Holley, failing to protect the identity of the agent could compromise several national security investigations and put the agent and his family in jeopardy.
The prosecution is also asking a judge to allow the agent to use a nonpublic courtroom entrance, testify using a pseudonym and wear a light disguise such as changing his facial hair, hairstyle or clothes. 
They also want to prohibit the defense from asking any questions designed to seek identifying information.
Under the prosecution's proposal, only the court, essential personnel, jury, defendant and defense and prosecution attorneys would be allowed in the courtroom. The public would be allowed to view the trial through a closed-circuit broadcast that did not show the agent's image.
Finally, the prosecution wants to obscure the agent's face on any video recordings played over the closed circuit feed during the proceedings.
The undercover agent met Osmakac in 2011 after Osmakac told an informant he wanted to carry out a violent attack, according to prosecution court filings. The informant introduced the agent to Osmakac as someone who could provide firearms and explosives.
The prosecution says Osmakac told the agent he wanted to get  one AK at least, a couple of Uzis, 10 grenades minimum, and an explosive belt with a multidirectional blast range of approximately 15 yards.
The agent also agreed to Osmakac's  request that he help build an improvised explosive device, according to the prosecution. 
Initially, Osmakac told the agent he wanted to attack Ybor City on a Thursday night because there would be a lot of people there. But he later changed his mind because there was too much law enforcement in the area.
On Jan. 7, 2012, Osmakac met the agent, who gave him six fake grenades, a nonfunctional automatic AK-47, inert ammunition, a nonfunctioning .45 caliber Colt Mark IV pistol, a fake explosive belt and a bogus vehicle-borne improvised explosive device.
During the same meeting, according to the prosecution, Osmakac had the agent film him explaining his motives for the planned attack, saying he wanted vengeance for wrongs done to Muslims.
Osmakac was later arrested.
esilvestrini@tampatrib.com 
(813) 259-7837
Twitter: @ElaineTBO

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document