Prosecutors form anti-terrorism task forces
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 22, 2001 Saturday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a11
Length: 454 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: DES MOINES
Body


Iowa's two U.S. attorneys each have formed task forces to coordinate anti-terrorism efforts.
Attorney General John Ashcroft directed that the task forces be formed to help coordinate the dissemination of information and the development of investigative and prosecuting strategy in dealing with terrorism.
Inga Bumbary-Langston, U.S. attorney for the Southern District of Iowa, appointed prosecutor Stephen Patrick O'Meara to head the task force coordinator in her office. Charles Larson Sr., U.S. attorney for Iowa's Northern District, appointed prosecutor Robert Teig to head the task force in Cedar Rapids.
The two Iowa groups met jointly this week in a video conference, but it's unclear if they will operate jointly, said Al Overbaugh, spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Des Moines.
Other representatives on the task force are from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the U.S. Marshals Service, the Secret Service, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Postal Inspection Service, Internal Revenue Service, Social Security Administration, Iowa State Patrol and Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation.
In related news:
* The Iowa Firemen's Association plans a memorial service at the Iowa Firefighters Memorial at 2 p.m. Sept. 30 to honor firefighters and police officers killed in the terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center.
The public is welcome to attend.
The association also has established an IFA Help fund to collect money for families of the fallen firefighters. Contributions may be sent to IFA Help, in care of Iowa Firemen's Association Treasurer Mike Reuman, P.O. Box 7, Traer, Iowa 50675.
* Last week's terrorist attacks prompted a reunion of rescue and morgue workers who responded to the fiery crash of United Airlines Flight 232 in Sioux City in July 1989.
They held a prayer service Thursday evening.
Marliss DeJong, regional director for Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, worked in the morgue helping to keep track of the paperwork identifying the 112 people who were killed in the Flight 232 crash.
"We experienced the heartache, the sadness and the difficult job that they have to do," she said. "It is 50 times worse in New York."
* The Iowa Air National Guard's 133rd Air Squadron is being called to support the nation's military strike at terrorism, said Guard spokesman Col. Bob King on Friday.
The exact start date and duration of the mobilization has not been determined, King said in a statement. The unit, based in Fort Dodge, has about 125 officers and airmen.
Details are being coordinated by the Air Combat Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.
The unit's mission is to test and evaluate air defense command and control systems, King said.

Load-Date: September 27, 2001


End of Document