PROTESTS PLANNED AT ECO-TERRORISM HEARING
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 18, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. c7
Length: 309 words
Byline: ROBERT GEHRKE, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Animal-rights groups are rallying supporters for a protest next month at a House hearing on eco-terrorism and similar protests across the country.
The organizers, Mobilization for the Protection of Civil Liberties, have also called for "direct action" a term commonly used to refer to acts of vandalism or arson committed by groups like Earth Liberation Front and Animal Liberation Front.
However, MPCL spokeswoman Elaine Close said how people interpret their call for action is up to them.
"It's really open to interpretation," she said Thursday. "We're not specifically asking people to go break the law or vandalize things, but to think about things that would be effective."
The rallies are meant as a show of support for former ELF spokesman Craig Rosebraugh, who has been subpoenaed by the House Resources forests subcommittee to testify about acts of eco-terrorism for which the ELF has claimed responsibility.
Rallies are scheduled in Washington, Boston, Los Angeles and Portland.
Rosebraugh said he will attend the hearing, but does not plan to cooperate.
"I have no information to give the committee," Rosebraugh said. "And I have no reason in my mind why I would want to cooperate with this attempt to stop the ELF."
Rosebraugh has said he had no firsthand knowledge of who committed acts of eco-terrorism. Instead, he merely relayed messages for the group from 1997 until he quit in September.
Over the years, the groups have done tens of millions of dollars in damage in an effort to undermine businesses and government entities they say exploit animals or the environment.
In a report the ELF and ALF released this week, the groups claimed responsibility for 137 illegal direct actions in 2001, ranging from petty vandalism to burning down a horticulture building at the University of Washington at an estimated $ 5.4 million in damage.

Graphic

 
FILE/The Associated Press * Animal-rights groups are rallying their members for protests next month outside a House hearing in Washington, D.C., on eco-terrorism, designed as a show of support for Craig Rosebraugh, pictured, a former spokesman for the Earth Liberation Front.

Load-Date: January 18, 2002


End of Document