PROTECTING OUR PROTECTORS; GOVT. MUST STUDY HEALTH EFFECTS OF MILITARY SERVICE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 27, 2019 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 368 words
Body


The U.S. government must fully come to terms with the health costs of deploying the people in our military to some very dangerous and distant places in the nearly 20 years since the 9/11 terror attacks.
U.S. troops have been stationed in Afghanistan for more than 18 years and in Iraq for more than 16. A total of 2.77 million have served in those theaters.
A range of studies verify a serious health toll on those who serve on such deployments. Most significant is a suicide rate 1 ½ times greater among veterans of those conflicts compared to non-veterans, with a particularly high rate among people ages 18 to 34. Nearly 20% of those who served in the military in those theaters report symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder or major depression. And, of great concern, only a bit more than half of those have sought treatment.
Other studies have found a strong association between PTSD and suicide, according to a 2017 research roundup published by the Department of Veterans Affairs. That publication called for additional research to address the increasing rates of suicide in active duty personnel, including the impact of mental health drugs, suicide prevention programs and shorter deployments.
This kind of overall look at the health effects of military service on active duty personnel and veterans is urgently needed. Battling terrorism has led to deployments to hostile regions such as Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, and continuing threats of worldwide terrorism could mean more such commitments of the U.S. military in the future.
The U.S. Department of Defense's participation in the efforts by the VA to battle these problems is essential.
Terry Rauch, an acting deputy assistant secretary of defense, told Michael A. Fuoco of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette that "recognizing, researching and implementing solutions geared toward addressing issues faced by warriors returning from the battlefield is the single greatest priority within the military health system."
The United States asks much of its military personnel. They fulfill their duty to our country. Our government must fulfill its duty to them. That duty begins with understanding and mitigating the challenges they face when they come home.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Associated Press: U.S. military vehicles travel down a main road in northeast Syria on Oct. 7.

Load-Date: December 2, 2019


End of Document