Protest day sparks fear of violence against Israel; Israeli Arabs, Palestinians plan march
USA TODAY
March 30, 2012 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 9A
Length: 556 words
Byline: Oren Dorell, USA TODAY
Body


Israel analysts said the involvement of terrorist groups connected to Iran in  today's "Global March to Jerusalem" to press Palestinian demands in neighboring countries and world capitals could lead to violence.
March organizers said they hope that thousands of people will hold protests on Israel's borders from neighboring countries to demand the "liberation" of Jerusalem and Palestine, according to its website.
March 30 marks the date in 1976 when six Israeli Arabs were killed during violent protests against the government confiscating Palestinian land.
The march is part of an effort "to delegitimize Israel and its duty to protect its own borders," said Michael Rubin, a former Defense Department adviser under President George W. Bush. "This is designed to start crises not resolve them."
Despite the stated intention of a non-violent protest, Iran, Hezbollah, the Muslim Brotherhood and Hamas are assisting in the march, according to a report by the Meir Amit Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center, based in Israel. Hezbollah and Hamas are both U.S.-designated terror groups that have waged attacks against Israel.
Iranian supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei appointed a committee to assist in march preparations and a convoy passed through Tehran on its way to Turkey and Lebanon for the march,  the Amit center said, citing Iranian news sites and other sources.
"The presence of extremist Middle Eastern elements in the planned events  heightens the potential for violence and provocation," the center said.
Hezbollah is based in southern Lebanon on Israel's northern border. Several Western activist groups are also taking part, including the anti-war CODEPINK Women for Peace and the International Solidarity Movement, a United Kingdom-based group.
Others said that Israel is trying to discredit a march that is about reviving peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians and seeking change through non-violent means.
"It's hard to predict if this is going to be a real mass movement or a hiccup," said Khaled Elgindy, a Brookings Institution scholar who has advised the  Palestine Liberation Organization in negotiations with Israel.
Ely Karmon, a  scholar at the Institute for Counter-Terrorism in Herzeliyah, Israel, said march promoters hope to attract more Arab participation, "and if there will be casualties because of the Israeli response, this will create a favorable light in the international media,"  he said.
Israel  seeks to avoid a repeat of a similar protest in May in which hundreds of people stormed the border from Syria and Israeli police fired on them to keep them out, killing 12 people. Israel has posted thousands more police and soldiers on its borders with plans to rely on non-lethal weapons.
"We hope it will be done with caution not to provoke casualties," Karmon said.
However, some protest organizers were involved in an attempt to break the Israeli sea blockade of Gaza in 2010. An Israeli commando team dropped  tried to thwart the attempt and were met with violence that ended with the deaths of nine activists.
A march organizer in Jordan, Ribhi Halloum, told The Jewish Chronicle online that the aim of the march is to end Israel's "occupation" of Jerusalem. "Just as all the occupations throughout history concluded in defeat, so will the present Israeli occupation of Jerusalem," he said. 

Graphic

 
photo By Hamad Almakt, AP Tightened security: Israeli soldiers stand at the border Thursday between Majdal Shams in the Golan Heights and Syria.

Load-Date: March 30, 2012


End of Document