Protesters march to end police brutality
Independent Collegian: University of Toledo
December 10, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 501 words
Byline: Samuel Derkin
Body


Filed under News, Top Stories
Demonstrators chanting, "Black lives matter," marched on
Dec. 6 from University of Toledo's Rocket Hall to the Monroe and Secor Road intersection.
The protest formed after the grand jury decision not to prosecute police officer Darren Wilson who shot Mike Brown of
Ferguson, Missouri in August. Protest leaders stressed that this demonstration was to observe and follow all laws as they marched.
Protest organizer Cherry Forward, leader of the off-campus group Community Solidarity/Ferguson Response Network of Toledo, said she wants to let people know that the issues arising are bigger than Ferguson itself.
Forward said that she wants to let the people of Ferguson know it is not an isolated problem.
"This happens everywhere and it doesn't get televised," she said.
Forward said the main goal of the protest is to let others know that there are people who care.
Protestor Makayla Lockett, in UT's English as a Second Language program, said she was a part of the protest to advocate change.
"We're here because things need to change," Lockett said. "There are a couple of instances or circumstances that have happened recently that seem a little unjust so we wanted to make sure that we could at least bring some attention to that or what's going on right now."
Lockett said being a part of the protest means a lot to her.
"Honestly I didn't think we would have to do this in this day and age," Lockett said. "But it's pretty exciting to see people getting into a cause and joining together for this one cause and that people agree and people are working to change circumstances that they don't agree with or injustices that they think are happening that they want to change."
Andrea Harris
Alexis Smith, a first year bio-engineering major, said she felt the need for change is long overdue.
"There's a need for change you know?" Smith said. "A need to speak out for those who obviously had their voice taken from them and can't speak for themselves. This is long overdue, but it's happening now and that's what matters. I think it's good that people of all races have come together. It's about race, but it's also about keeping peace and justice."
This protest came after a Black Student Union meeting on Dec. 3 in which an open forum was held to discuss topics such as the shootings in Ferguson and Cleveland.
The forum had a topical discussion with subjects ranging from asking if protests were effective to breaking down the events of the highly publicized Mike Brown shooting.
The question was raised about whether or not the riots in Ferguson were effective.
David Young, director of the Office of Excellence and Multicultural Student Success and adviser to the BSU, said that he viewed those riots as an act of terrorism.
"Somebody blowing up a bridge is not a form of protest," Young said. "It is an act of domestic terrorism."
Young advocated for young people to be an active force of change by getting involved and voting on issues that matter.
"Don't underestimate yourselves," Young said.

Load-Date: February 5, 2015


End of Document