Protection from terrorism
University Wire
April 30, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Technician via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 867 words
Byline: By Baruch Mechanic, Technician; SOURCE: North Carolina State U.
Dateline: RALEIGH, N.C. 
Body


Recently I have been intrigued with a very important question that not only concerns me and you as human beings (the all mighty idealist point-of-view), or us together as Americans (a patriotic point-of-view), but also each and every one of us as students, professors, employees, employers and so on. I am talking about the importance of the Middle East, you know ... the desert, camels, hookahs and we cannot forget about fossil fuels (aka "Exxon Mobil").
First let's start with the abundant amount of oil that the United States imports from the Middle East. Do you enjoy driving your car? Do you like going to the movies, shopping malls, out to eat, to bars or how about driving to school? But gasoline, motor oil and other forms of transportation petrol are not the only things that come from fossil fuels. Such chemicals come from oil like plastic (just think of all the things made from plastic), washing powders, farming chemicals, fibers such as nylon and polyesters, grease in candle wax, road surfaces, and the list is endless. So stop blaming the high prices of oil on SUVs! Yes, they do contribute since smaller cars would be more efficient and environmentally safer, but that is not the point. The point is that our lives and lifestyles are heavily dependent on the byproducts of oil.
In 1991, Iraq attacked Kuwait because they were illegally tapping into Iraqi oil. This in turn required a response from the United States because of the economic effects that would occur from Saddam Hussein having control of such large amounts of oil and highly destabilizing the region. Now, in 2003 we find ourselves once again in Iraq finishing what we started over a decade ago because Saddam's pursuit of chemical weapons capable of such horrendous and catastrophic damage was a major concern not only of the current Bush administration but also the Clinton administration as well. If Saddam were successful, and he might have well been, he would have caused such regional destabilization that the economic side affects would have given us no choice but to go to war.
The stabilization or balance of powers of the Middle East is one of the major reasons why the State of Israel is so important for U.S. interests and every one of our interests too. The cost/benefit analysis of having Israel as a friend is by far a benefit to the United States. About a week a go a column in Technician would have you believe that Israel is nothing more than an outdated Cold War ally that wastefully soaks up our foreign aid and provokes anti-Western sentiment in the Middle East. That is nothing short of a bowl of crock! First of all, the anti-Western sentiment in the Middle East, or shall I say Muslim countries, is a byproduct of globalization and U.S. foreign relations. The enormous span of Muslim countries in the Middle East is anti-Semitic at heart (as if they had a heart) and they attack U.S. relations with Israel in a cheap attempt to influence support of Israel.
There is a deeper level of thinking about the regional conflicts of Israel and its neighbors. As time progresses on and our technological capabilities advance the world becomes a smaller and smaller place. Soon the physical barriers that we utilize for our blanket of protection will be nonexistent, just as we thought prior to 9/11. We enjoyed this comfort of pseudo isolationism from the reach of terrorist organizations in other parts of the world. Therefore we can learn a lot about the interaction of Israel and Islamic fundamentalist terror organizations. I am not just speaking of a militant gunman that opens fire into a crowd of civilians or a homicidal bomber; I am talking about chemical weapons. Two such incidents happened recently in Israel, one involved a man who attempted to make a bomb that when detonated would deliver HIV infected blood along with nails and other shrapnel into a crowd (a very simple type of chemical bomb). The second occurred when two terrorists attempted to enter the Ashdod seaport and explode themselves near chemical containers releasing tons of dangerous chemicals that could kill hundreds, even thousands of people.
As I have written in the past, Islamic fundamentalism is one of if not the most dangerous beliefs in the world. There are of course terrorists of other religions and cultures but none go to such an extent of homicidal bombings using women, men disguised as orthodox Jews, and children as young as 12. These beliefs and practices are fueled by the increasing globalization that is a strong and integral part of the U.S. economy, in lamest terms that means it will never stop and we have to prepare for such terror that plagues Israel will soon be on our shores, in our malls, in our busses and deaths in our families.
We thought that no one would be able to attack American soil, then there was Pearl Harbor; we thought that al Qaeda posed no immediate threat after the embassy bombings in Africa and the bombing of the USS Cole, but we were wrong. Let us not find ourselves in the same situation that we have time and time again, we must do what we can to secure state supported terrorism so we can maintain our economy, our way of life and our freedoms.
(C) 2003 Technician via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 30, 2004


End of Document