Protestors Say A New Movie Likens Islam To Terrorism
The New York Times
November 7, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 411 words
Byline: By JULIAN E. BARNES 

By JULIAN E. BARNES 
Body


A group of Arab-Americans gathered outside a Times Square movie theater last night to protest the debut of a new thriller, "The Siege," saying that the movie equates Arabs and Islam with terrorism. But after the film received tepid reviews this week, other Arab-American groups decided to cancel their protests for fear of giving the film free publicity.
About 30 people stood outside the Criterion Theater, on Broadway at 45th Street, waving some placards that criticized the movie and others that gave away the ending. Other protesters, from the advocacy group New Yorkers for a Just Middle East Peace, tried to talk to moviegoers about the film, which opened across the country yesterday.
"It reinforced negative stereotypes of Arabs and Muslims in America," said Laura Haddad, an organizer of the protest.
The film stars Denzel Washington as an F.B.I. agent investigating a series of terrorist bombings in New York City. Bruce Willis plays a general who is put in charge of the city after martial law is imposed in an effort to stop the attacks.
Criticism of the film among Arab-Americans began while the movie was being filmed in Brooklyn and some details of the plot were revealed. The controversy intensified after previews appeared in movie theaters last summer. Arab-American groups in other parts of the country have been faxing letters to the studios, writing to advocacy groups and holding news conferences.
The director of the film, Edward Zwick, said he intended to portray the difficulty an Arab-American has dealing with Arab terrorism and American racism. One of the film's heroes is an Arab-American F.B.I agent. The character, portrayed by Tony Shaloub, who is of Lebanese descent, is torn when the Government detains Arab-Americans.
"The movie makes the point that it is impossible to generalize about Arab-Americans," Mr. Zwick said in a telephone interview.
Some of the moviegoers in Times Square last night agreed. Angel Swanson, 20, left the theater and confronted Ms. Haddad. "I saw it as a way of showing people racism about Arabs is just as bad as racism against anyone," Ms. Swanson said.
But others said that such nuance was lost on the screen, and that viewers were left equating both Arabs and Islam with terrorism.
Kevin James, spokesman for the New York Chapter of the Council on American/Islamic Relations, compared Mr. Zwick to a vandal defacing a mosque with spray paint. "The only difference is the director has a $70 million budget," he said.

Graphic

 
Photo: A ticketholder to the thriller "The Siege," which opened yesterday, made her way through a group outside the Criterion Theater in Times Square that protested the film's portrayal of Arabs and Islam. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times)

Load-Date: November 7, 1998


End of Document