Protect our rights, despite terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 30, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: NEIGHBORHOOD TIMES; GUEST COLUMN; Pg. 2
Length: 674 words
Byline: Thomas W. Rezanka
Body


We can describe the hijackings and attacks upon the World Trade Center and Pentagon as horrific, murderous, conscienceless, unbelievable and as a declaration of war upon each and every American.
Because of our free and open society, we were and will probably continue to be an easy target. If we make it more difficult for terrorists to attack us in the same way that they have or to terrorize us in other ways, we necessarily intrude upon basic American freedoms such as the right of privacy, the right to not have our conversations wiretapped and listened to, the right to not be unreasonably searched, or to have possessions unreasonably seized, as well as the right to speak openly and freely and to criticize our government and elected officials. Recent polling of Americans indicates that 90 percent of us desire some form of immediate revenge, retribution and justice against those who have stolen the lives of fellow Americans as well as stolen our sense of invulnerability, security and peace of mind. Our elected representatives and law enforcement officials are already suggesting that our civil liberties must give way, at least in some small measure, to greater government intrusiveness. It's the phrase "in some small measure" that causes me the greatest concern.
REZANKA.TXT
One of the characteristics of being an American, and one of the things that we hold so dear, is how different we are from those countries  that have  few or no personal freedoms  and how we inherently detest being forced to trade those very freedoms for more personal security. If we allow terrorism to constrict or limit those personal freedoms, then haven't we allowed terrorists to destroy the very American way of life that we hold so dear, and isn't that what they were attempting to accomplish in the first place?
The recent atrocities committed against American citizens raise a number of other significant issues for this country. Without being an exhaustive list, they are: (1) What have we done in the course of our history to make people in other parts of the world so vehemently hate us? (2) What responsibility do we have to re-educate those so-called religious leaders in other countries who decry terrorism and wanton acts of murder but at the same time make an exception when it comes to killing citizens of this country? (3) Should we take those who declare themselves to be our enemies and accept them at their word? Should that then lead us to wipe them off  the face of the earth,  or should our Judeo-Christian heritage lead us to find ways for reconciliation? (4) Do we bring those to justice who committed these atrocities (including trial by jury),  or do we simply kill them when we find them? If we do the latter, does this in any way diminish us as a great and noble people? (5) Should we utilize these events as a way to spread freedom of thought throughout the world, thereby encouraging debate of the root issues underlying terrorism and perhaps enabling us to determine how it can thereby be eliminated without military action? (6) Can we turn these atrocities into an opportunity to unite as Americans and disregard our socioeconomic, racial and religious differences,  as well as forever bury our petty prejudices?
America is rich in its diversity as well as in its overriding respect for human dignity. In all that happens to us, we must not accept a  diminution of our basic and essential freedoms, freedoms that were once so curtailed that our Founding Fathers felt the necessity to spell out those rights in writing and make them part of our most cherished law, the Bill of Rights. All of those rights are essential to maintaining a free and democratic society. The ability to discuss and comment upon positions taken by our government and the inherent right to take nonviolent means to see that those positions are changed when we believe that they are not well-founded cannot be abridged in any way, even to combat terrorism.
Thomas W. Rezanka is an elder law, trusts and estates attorney. His office is in Palm Harbor.  

Load-Date: October 1, 2001


End of Document