Protest Marks Al-Arian Anniversary
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 20, 2006 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 6
Length: 466 words
Byline: JULIE PACE, , jpace@tampatrib.com
Dateline: TAMPA 
Body


TRIED ONCE, HE HAS BEEN JAILED 3 YEARS
By JULIE PACE
jpace@tampatrib.com
TAMPA - Three years ago, Sami Al-Arian was arrested on terrorism charges.
More than two months ago, Al-Arian was acquitted of eight terrorism-related charges, including conspiracy to murder or maim people abroad. The jury was deadlocked on nine other charges.
Today, Al-Arian remains behind bars at the Orient Road Jail. That's where about 150 supporters gathered Sunday to call for the release of the former University of South Florida professor.
Holding signs that read "Justice Delayed is Justice Denied" and "The Jury Has Spoken," the group sang folk songs and listened to speakers, including religious leaders and civil rights activists from across the country.
Between speeches, the demonstrators chanted, "Free Sami now."
Several speakers, including Eric Vickers, a St. Louis lawyer, met with Al-Arian before the rally. Vickers said federal prosecutors had abused unlimited power during the trial, and are using that power to trump the jury's decision.
"Sami Al-Arian has called into question what this nation is all about," Vickers said.
Other speakers read statements of support for Al-Arian from Amnesty International and the National Council of Churches.
Vicki Walker, a Tampa minister and National Council member, urged the crowd to also offer support for Al-Arian's wife, Nahla, who was among the supporters gathered Sunday.
"As long as Sami is not free, she is not free," Walker said before returning to the crowd to hug Nahla Al-Arian and clasp her hand for the rest of the rally.
Al-Arian's three co-defendants - Ghassan Ballut, Hatim Fariz and Sameeh Hammoudeh - also were acquitted of terrorism charges. The jury was hung on several of the charges against Fariz, but acquitted the other men on all charges.
Hammoudeh is in a Bradenton jail awaiting deportation. He was expected to leave for Jordan with his wife and children earlier this month, but his release was delayed.
Ahmed Bedier, director of Central Florida's branch of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said it was a violation of Hammoudeh's and his family's rights to keep him incarcerated when he's been exonerated by a jury.
Hammoudeh's family "is in a dangerous part of the world without the head of the household to take care of them," he said.
Federal prosecutors say they hope to retry Al-Arian and Fariz on the unsettled charges later this year.
Reporter Julie Pace can be reached at (813) 865-1505.
Photo credit: News Channel 8 photo by JIM FARQHAR
Photo: Demonstrators chanted "Free Sami now" Sunday at the Orient Road Jail as they protested the continuing incarceration of Sami Al-Arian, who has been acquitted of several terrorism charges.
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

COURTS

Graphic

 
PHOTO
TAMPA - Three years ago, Sami Al-Arian was arrested on terrorism charges.

Load-Date: February 22, 2006


End of Document