Protecting high-rises from terrorism isn't easy
Chicago Daily Herald
September 12, 2001, Wednesday All


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 571 words
Byline: Lorilyn Rackl Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


Skyscrapers symbolize power and prestige, and when the country's second and third tallest collapsed like a house of cards Tuesday morning, the nation saw just how vulnerable these behemoths can be.  
"When you hit these high profile, signature buildings, it's like hitting at the heart of the United States," said Geoff Craighead, an expert in high-rise security.  
"If you hit the Sears Tower, the World Trade Center, the Empire State Building, you're going to get the headlines. You're going to get the head count," added Hermann Gruenwald, an architect and professor at the University of Oklahoma.  
The very qualities that make high-rises so spectacular also make them sitting ducks for terrorists bent on destruction.  
The question is, can you protect these soaring structures?  
It's a question increasingly asked by engineers and architects such as Mir Ali, who plans to talk about this topic next May at an international conference on buildings designed for blast- resistance.  
"We can do things to minimize damages … but you can't build a 100 percent terrorist-proof structure," said Ali, a professor of architecture at the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana.  
Structures built to withstand earthquakes, for example, are better equipped to handle the blasts of bombs.  
Specially-treated window glass can minimize the types of injuries that were so prevalent in the Oklahoma City bombing six years ago, experts added.  
"After Oklahoma City, literally millions of dollars have been spent on federal buildings with protective glazing, making windows more like car windshields," said Gruenwald, who does research for the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism.  
Setting a building back from the street and buffering it with planters and stairs can help keep a car with a trunk full of explosives from getting too close.  
The World Trade Center set "the gold standard for trophy building security," according to the American Society for Industrial Security, which lauded the center's $60 million in security improvements since a 1993 bombing attack.  
No landscaping trick or engineering marvel can keep away a jet on a suicide mission. Certain buildings, however, can better sustain that kind of blow.  
Indeed, the twin towers of the World Trade Center were extremely well-built, Ali said.  
"The concept is similar to the Sears Tower," he said. "It has steel columns very closely spaced on the perimeter and the girders or beams are pretty deep. It's called a tubular structure. They're much more sturdy than conventional buildings."  
So sturdy, in fact, that Ali suspected a secondary explosion somewhere else in the buildings - not the massive impact of the jets - might have caused their ultimate collapse. Most others attributed the collapse to fire damage, exacerbated by jet fuel explosions.  
"They (the hijackers) didn't just pick any flights," said Marc Hoit, professor of civil engineering at the University of Florida. "They obviously took long-distance flights with more jet fuel."  
He said tall buildings are often built with a high degree of redundancy, meaning they have multiple columns for support. That way if you knock some columns out, the remainder should be able to keep an embattled structure upright.  
Hoit agreed that it's virtually impossible to build something that could withstand an attack like Tuesday's.  
The absolute safest thing to do, he said, would be to "put it underground."

Load-Date: September 13, 2001


End of Document