PROVING A NEGATIVE;
A THOROUGH FBI PROBE FINDS NO TERRORISM IN THE TWA CRASH
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 27, 1997, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 388 words
Body


The Federal Bureau of Investigation has been widely criticized for its actions at Waco and Ruby Ridge.  But its reputation for thoroughness and professionalism should be enhanced by its investigation into the crash of TWA Flight 800.
Flight 800 was headed to Paris from New York July 17, 1996, when it exploded minutes after take-off, killing 230 people.
Determining the cause of the crash was complicated by the widely held suspicion that the explosion was the result of a terrorist attack. Eyewitness reports of streaks of light in the sky that could have been missiles fueled the theory.
Ultimately investigators concluded that the light streaks were caused by the break-up of the aircraft. Because sound travels more slowly than light, when eyewitnesses heard the explosion, they looked up to see its aftermath, not its inception. The shocking video simulation released by the FBI should put to rest all thoughts of any attack - intended or otherwise - on the aircraft.
The FBI's conclusion that there is no evidence of a criminal act leaves a lot of red faces among those conspiracy mavens who believed that groups as disparate as terrorists and our own Navy downed the plane. Most chastened of all should be Pierre Salinger, who asserted that a stray navy missile downed the plane.
This was an exhaustive and expensive investigation by the FBI. More than 7,000 interviews were conducted, every piece of cargo was traced, every worker who had anything to do with the plane was looked at. Eventually, suspicions of a criminal act proved baseless - and many of the families accept this.
It is to the agency's credit that the investigation was so thorough, and that its explanation of what it did and what it found have been so public.
Now the focus will be on the hearings next month in Baltimore of the National Transportation Safety Board, whose investigators have determined the explosion was the result of fuel vapors in the plane's center fuel tank igniting - although what caused that ignition isn't known. Families of those who were killed are likely to file suit against TWA and Boeing.
In fact, the knowledge that the explosion and crash were caused by a mechanical failure, not a terrorist's missile, may increase concerns about the safety of aircraft - particularly until the exact cause of the ignition can be determined.

Load-Date: December 3, 1997


End of Document