Psychology's Black Hole: The Mind of a Terrorist
The New York Times
July 18, 2004 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 3; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4; The Nation
Length: 843 words
Byline: By MARK GLASSMAN
Body


WHEN the 9/11 Commission released its preliminary staff reports last month, some of the most compelling material came from the lives of the men who hijacked the airplanes. 
 Who were these guys, anyway? 
 There was Ziad al-Jarrah, a pilot who considered dropping out of the plot. Mr. Jarrah had a girlfriend, a penchant for nightclubs and a private Christian school education. He was from a well-to-do family, with whom he was quite close. He was, in short, ''a relatively unlikely candidate to become an Al Qaeda suicide operative,'' according to Staff Statement No.16. But that did not stop him from hijacking in God's name United Airlines Flight 93, which crashed into a field in Pennsylvania.
 It is unclear whether security officials could have seen this kind of behavior lurking in a man like Mr. Jarrah -- in any man, really -- but the Department of Homeland Security is looking for a few good scientists to at least give it try.
 A $12 million grant from the department will finance an academic center to study the behavioral and social aspects of terrorism. The goal is to attract a group of researchers yearning to find out not only what makes terrorists tick, but also when they'll go off. When did terrorism become the new physics? Can we really make a science of all this? 
 There is no established terrorism questionnaire. No one has validated a terrorism quotient or found a terror gene. Which is not to say no one has tried. Dr. Jeffrey Victoroff, a professor who studies terrorism at the University of Southern California, said no ''terrorist personality'' has been unearthed. ''There is no mind of the terrorist,'' he said. ''There are only minds of terrorists.'' 
 Jessica Stern, who lectures on terrorism at Harvard, traveled around the world conducting interviews with known terrorists. She said that she found great variation in their reasoning, but that there was a common thread: most of them felt humiliated and spoke of being pigeonholed into a lower, weaker caste by some other group. 
 In her research, Dr. Stern said, she came across a follower of the extremist American group, the Identity Christians. He had suffered bronchitis as a child, was discouraged from joining the boys' gym class and instead joined the girls. An Islamic Kashmiri militant lamented that Muslims no longer held the power and stature in the world that they once did; he said, ''Our ego hurts.'' Dr. Stern said that while both terrorists felt humiliated, there was a difference in their shame. ''For Americans,'' she said, ''it tends to be a lot more personal.'' 
 Dr. Stern's research, published as ''Terror in the Name of God,'' benefited from access to the lives of terrorists. But even Dr. Stern, who did her research before 9/11, said it would be dangerous to return. ''For an American to do that today,'' she said, ''I think it's very likely they would end up the way Daniel Pearl did.'' And that is one reason why the opportunity to work with Homeland Security might be worth more to scholars than a grant. 
 For scientists, it could mean access to an invaluable subject pool (terrorists) and unprecedented clearance to classified documents. ''The closer that you can get to that tiny subgroup of humans who choose the life of terrorist,'' Dr. Victoroff said, ''the better your understanding will be.'' 
 In this case, getting close might mean something as off-limits as a visit with a detainee in Guantanamo Bay. But how to understand a terrorist's motivation is a matter of debate. Some scientists advocate a psychoanalytic approach that hopes to understand a terrorist's family history and early-life events and the development of the psyche.
 Others say that this method is outdated. ''They're trying to apply 1920's Freudian theory to explain the actions of 21st-century terrorists who grew up in a society that was nothing like Vienna in the 1930's,'' Dr. Victoroff said.
 He has developed what he called ''the oppression questionnaire'' to gauge the degree to which a person feels subjugated. But there could be an X-factor to the terrorist personality, something that cannot be quantified. ''I think that if we overemphasize a quantitative, micro-economic approach to terrorism, we may fail to recognize the deep effects of religious fervor, hatred, bravado and psychodynamic pressures that are unknown to the typical Western mind,'' Dr. Victoroff said.
 The center could provide a new stream of information on fighting terrorism, experts said. ''When we decide what we're going to protect in this country, we tend to do it because it's vulnerable or because we think there's a way to threaten it,'' said David Aaron, the assistant to the president for counterterrorism at the RAND Corporation. ''But we don't really take into consideration what these people are likely to do.'' Spending money on airline security seems to make sense because we know terrorists hijack airplanes, Mr. Aaron said, not because airplanes are easy targets.
 More knowledge about terrorist behavior is crucial, he said. After all, Mr. Aaron said, ''we can't protect everything."


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: What do Ziad al-Jarrah, above, part of the 9/11 hijackings, and Timothy McVeigh have in common? (Photo by Associated Press)                                                 

Load-Date: July 18, 2004


End of Document