Psychologists accused of condoning Gitmo abuse
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 8, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 323 words
Byline: ANDREW WELSH-HUGGINS The Associated Press
Body


Plea deal reached in military trial SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico -- One of the first terrorism suspects taken to Guantanamo Bay reached a plea deal Wednesday with military prosecutors, giving the Obama administration its first conviction of a prisoner at the detention center in Cuba. Ibrahim Ahmed Mahmoud al-Qosi pleaded guilty to one count each of providing material support for terrorism and conspiracy at a hearing before a military judge, sparing him from additional counts at trial. Terms of the plea agreement were not disclosed.
COLUMBUS, Ohio - Two Army psychologists helped perpetrate abuse of detainees at Guantanamo Bay including sleep deprivation and sexual humiliation, according to complaints filed Wednesday by human rights groups trying to have the psychologists' state licenses revoked.
The San Francisco-based Center for Justice & Accountability filed a complaint against Dr. John Leso with the New York Office of the Professions, alleging professional misconduct. Leso led a behavioral science consultation team at Guantanamo in 2002 and 2003.
The complaint says a memo Leso wrote in 2002 promoted techniques such as exposing detainees to severe cold, forcing liquids into them intravenously and sleep deprivation.
In a second complaint, a Toledo psychologist and others allege that retired Army Col. Larry James observed abuses and didn't do anything to stop them.
In one case, the complaint said, James did not intervene while an interrogator and three guards subjected a near-naked man to sexual humiliation by forcing him to wear women's underwear.
The complaint, by Harvard's International Human Rights Clinic, seeks to have James stripped of his license to practice psychology in Ohio.
James said in his 2008 book, "Fixing Hell," that the Army sent him to clean up abuses in Guantanamo and later in the Abu Ghraib detention center in Iraq. He said last fall that he doesn't understand why the allegations continue to come up.

Load-Date: July 8, 2010


End of Document