Psychiatrist: Solitary confinement has made Padilla unfit for trial
USA TODAY
February 23, 2007 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 402 words
Byline: Laura Parker
Body


MIAMI -- A New York psychiatrist testified Thursday that Jose Padilla, a U.S. citizen accused by the government of being an "enemy combatant," developed so many mental ailments during three years of solitary confinement in the Navy brig in Charleston, S.C., that he is not competent to stand trial.
That view of the 36-year-old terrorism suspect, once accused of planning to detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb," emerged as Angela Hegarty took the stand as the first of three psychiatrists expected to testify at a hearing to determine Padilla's mental fitness. "He lacks the capacity to assist his counsel in this case," Hegarty said.
More revelations are expected next week when four officials from the brig, as well as four officials from the Miami Federal Detention Center take the stand. Their testimony will provide an unprecedented window into the U.S. military's treatment of terrorism suspects. Since the Sept.11, 2001, attacks, officials responsible for the detention of terrorism suspects have been ordered by a federal judge to testify only a few times.
Padilla, 36, faces trial April 16 on federal charges of conspiring to murder, kidnap and maim people overseas and conspiracy to support terrorism by supplying money and materials. He was arrested in May 2002, and spent three years and eight months in the brig until he was transferred into federal custody after his indictment in Miami in November 2005.
Federal prosecutors have fiercely resisted defense efforts to call the brig officials for the hearing, arguing that Padilla's treatment at the brig is not relevant to the federal charges he faces. Defense attorneys contend that Padilla's treatment amounts to torture and caused his mental break.
U.S. District Court Judge Marcia Cooke ordered Defense Department attorney Mike Reheuser, brig technical director Sandy Seymour, brig psychologist Craig Noble and brig social worker Maj. Andrew Cruz to testify. Federal Detention Center officials Jorge Luis, Dr. Victor Shoukry, Dr. Lisa Feldman and Dr. Hoa Ngo also will testify.
Hegarty, who testified for the defense, was followed to the stand by Patricia Zapf, a psychologist hired by the defense. Both experts said Padilla suffers from post traumatic stress as a result of his confinement.
Prosecutors will call Rodolfo Buigas, a medical expert for the Bureau of Prisons, who examined Padilla and found him mentally competent. The hearing resumes Monday. 

Load-Date: February 23, 2007


End of Document