Punish Greece for terrorism
USA TODAY
June 20, 2000, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 656 words
Byline: Wayne Merry
Body


The brutal murder of British defense attache Stephen Saunders
in Athens on June 8 is a reminder that one of the most persistent
and inexcusable terrorist nests in the world is in friendly Greece.
Only 12 years ago, our own defense attache, Navy Capt.
William Nordeen, was murdered in the Greek capital in a crime
that remains unpunished and, for practical purposes, uninvestigated.
In the aftermath of bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa, Congress
created the National Commission on Terrorism to examine the worldwide
threat. The commission's most courageous act was its blunt assessment
that terrorism in Greece justifies sanctions against that country:
denying its citizens visa-free U.S. entry and blocking arms sales.
But Secretary of State Madeleine Albright hurriedly responded
that no such actions would be taken.
What is the problem? For 25 years, an extreme nationalist group
with left-wing rhetoric called "November 17" has conducted an
unbroken campaign of killings and bombings against prominent Greeks,
Americans and other foreigners.
For many years, U.S. taxpayers have spent more money on embassy
security in Athens than in any other capital in the world. Our
embassy in the Greek capital is a fortress; our diplomats live
in justifiable fear for their lives.
November 17 is a skilled, determined and successful group of political
assassins, but it could not survive without official tolerance.
Greece has the undisputed worst counterterrorism record on Earth.
In a quarter-century, not a single member of November 17 has been
officially identified, let alone caught.
Not simple incompetence
The commission identified 146 terrorist acts against U.S. interests
in Greece since 1975, with only one case solved. A record that
bad is neither an accident nor the product of police incompetence.
It is a policy.
Why would the "birthplace of democracy" accommodate domestic
terrorists? Because arrests and public trials would expose skeletons
in the closet of the ruling PASOK party, in power for 20 of the
past 23 years. There is clear evidence of ties between PASOK and
November 17 in their early years. Prime Minister Costas Simitis
today certainly has no direct connections with the terrorists,
but he is unwilling to face up to his party's ugly history. So
Greece's terrorism policy is one of benign neglect, even appeasement.
For years, Washington has attempted to jawbone Greek authorities
into action, without effect. The Clinton administration offered
aid and joint efforts in counterterrorism without grasping that
Athens does not want to catch the terrorists. Greek leaders also
know how to read political signals from Washington and respond
accordingly. When President Clinton visited Greece last November,
he could have raised the terrorism issue, but did not. Albright's
light-speed promise of no sanctions was received smugly in Athens.
Act against an ally
Now Saunders, another innocent victim, is dead, but he will not
be the last, unless Greece pays a price for inaction. The commission
has pointed the way: Designate Greece as "not cooperating fully
on counterterrorism" under an existing law that would prohibit
weapons sales. Such action against an ally would send the best
possible message to other governments that America is serious
about terrorism.
This would be bitter medicine for Athens, but the point of medicine
is to cure a disease. Congress can do Greece no better favor than
to administer a dose of effective counterterrorism. In parallel,
London and Brussels must demand that Athens live up to its claim
to be a European, rather than a "Balkan," country.
American friends of Greece, including Greek-Americans, should
commit this act of true friendship. Would the United States be
a villain in Greek eyes and vilified in the overheated Athenian
media? Certainly, but the cancer would be rooted out -- and lives
saved.
Wayne Merry, a former State Department official who served
in Athens, now is senior associate at the American Foreign Policy
Council in Washington.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, P. Saitas, AFP; Costas Simitis

Load-Date: June 20, 2000


End of Document