PUNISHMENT WILL REQUIRE PATIENCE;
   THE BEST WAY TO FIGHT TERRORISM IS NOT ONLY TO KNOW WHAT THE TERRORISTS ARE UP TO BUT ALSO TO ELIMINATE THE TERRORISTS.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
September 13, 2001 Thursday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2001 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A12; Editorial
Length: 531 words
Body


In the coming weeks policy makers will, and should, review the shortcomings in our intelligence-gathering operations that were exposed by Tuesday's terrorism. But any outrage over why the intelligence gathering community failed to protect the nation against the attack should be tempered by the knowledge that our intelligence operations have helped foil many previous attempts at terrorism.
The fact is, intelligence-gathering operations cannot guarantee us protection from any and all acts of terrorism. That is especially true in a democratic society that values freedoms antithetical to the kinds of security measures that would be necessary to clamp down even harder on terrorists. We are Americans. We don't like people telling us where we can and cannot go. We will tolerate a measure of it, especially in times of national emergency. But we cannot become prisoners in our own land.
The question we ought to ask is not "how did the intelligence community fail us?" but rather "what is the best way to defend our homeland against this kind of terrorism?"
Toward that end, we should make sure the intelligence community has the resources, leadership and tactical structure needed to do its job. We should also make sure its work is combined with military action against terrorists.
The best way to fight terrorism is not only to know what the terrorists are up to but also to eliminate the terrorists.
This will be a difficult task. If it were easy, we would already have eliminated Osama bin Laden's network of terrorists, a particularly evil and sophisticated web of groups suspected of involvement in Tuesday's attacks. The elimination of bin Laden and his network is especially important because of the threat that his wealth and sophistication could allow him to acquire chemical or nuclear weapons. But knowledge of bin Laden's whereabouts at any given moment, so that he could be killed and his operations destroyed, has proved elusive.
Military operations against terrorism will require patience. They cannot be conducted indiscriminately. When conducted, they must be decisive, on target and accompanied by assessment of diplomatic aftermath.
Such operations will require us to involve our allies in a united front against terrorism. That front is building, perhaps faster than most Americans might have imagined. Already, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization has invoked its mutual-defense clause, which essentially says that an attack against one NATO member is an attack against all.
Such operations may also require us to confront governments that harbor and support terrorists -- including Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Syria -- to make those governments "offers they cannot refuse" and, if necessary, to extend our military actions against them. The Bush administration has made that policy clear.
If you doubt that, or are uncomfortable with the thought of U.S. military operations against the likes of bin Laden, review the pictures of Tuesday's attacks and consider the number of Americans murdered.
We are involved in a war unlike any war we have previously waged. But it is a war, nonetheless, and we must fight it, because -- make no mistake -- it is being fought against us.

Load-Date: September 14, 2001


End of Document