Put freedom over fear
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 30, 1996, Tuesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 8A; EDITORIAL
Length: 644 words
Body


The pipe bomb that ripped through an outdoor Olympics festival, killing one  person and injuring more than a hundred others, did more than mar this  international athletic competition. It also heightened the sense of  vulnerability and fear Americans have been feeling since a TWA jetliner blew  up and fell into the Atlantic Ocean almost two weeks ago.
Olympic officials rightly decided to continue the games, just as they did  in the 1972 Olympics when 11 Israeli athletes and officials were killed in a  terrorist attack in Munich. But there is no use pretending nothing has  changed.
GAILEY
Terrorism has come to America, both the international and home-grown  variety, and with it increasing security restrictions that will make life more  inconvenient and anxious. Officials have tightened security at the Olympics  and at airports. This and other things we can and should do. But there is one  response to terrorism that we must resist: sacrificing our civil liberties for  a sense of security. Fear can be a dangerous force in a free society.
Investigators cannot yet say conclusively that TWA Flight 800, which  exploded and plummeted into the ocean shortly after takeoff from New York, was  the work of terrorists. But the clues gathered so far point in that direction.  If that turns out to be the case, the TWA crash will be added to a list of  horrors that includes the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center in New York,  the 1995 bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City, the recent  truck-bomb that killed 19 American airmen in Saudi Arabia, and now the bomb  that shattered the Olympics celebration. The nationality of terrorists no  longer matters. All of them are willing to kill innocent people. They are  evil.
That the Olympics bomber, or bombers, could penetrate the tightest security  net ever thrown over an event - Olympics security involves more than 30,000  law enforcement and military personnel and some of the most sophisticated  security technology ever deployed - is a reminder, if one was needed, that no  system is fail-safe.
The worst thing we could do is to compromise our civil liberties, as  President Clinton and other elected officials proposed after the Oklahoma City  bombing and again after the Olympics blast, in the name of fighting terrorism.  A police state is not the answer. In the wake of the Atlanta bombing, the  president is asking Congress to reconsider some of the provisions it stripped  from the anti-terrorism legislation it passed earlier this year.
Congress rejected the president's proposal to expand the FBI's wiretap  authority, a measure strongly opposed by civil liberties groups. It also  weakened a provision to require chemical markers in most kinds of explosives  to make them easier to trace. The law now applies only to plastic explosives,  but it makes sense to require chemical tags, which are opposed by the National  Rifle Association, in other explosives. That would improve existing law. But  Clinton's proposal to give the FBI "roving" search warrants that would allow  it to tap any telephone used by a suspect should be rejected.
House Speaker Newt Gingrich and other congressional leaders have indicated  they are willing to give the president what he wants. Once again, elected  officials who took an oath to protect and defend the Constitution of the  United States are ready to diminish its protection of individual freedoms. The  anti-terrorism bill passed by Congress and signed by Clinton is a travesty  even without the FBI wiretap provision.
These are frightening times, and not just because of the threat of  terrorism. "I don't want to see the terrorists win by, in effect, revoking  our Constitution," said Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt. Let us hope Leahy speaks  for a courageous majority in Congress that will refuse to trade individual  liberty for a false sense of security. 

Load-Date: July 31, 1996


End of Document