Putin must reform approach in order to curb terrorism
University Wire
September 17, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 The Battalion via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 743 words
Byline: By Jonathan Smith, The Battalion; SOURCE: Texas A&M U.
Dateline: COLLEGE STATION, Texas 
Body


On Sept. 1, a group of Chechen rebels took an entire school in Beslan, Russia hostage. More than 1,000 Russian children and adults were held until Sept. 3, when the school was taken back after a long struggle. The high casualty rate that resulted showed the world that Russia is not prepared to deal with terrorist threats in the beginning of the 21st century.
During those defining moments, the Russian government's poor decisions quickly turned the crisis into its worst-case scenario. The Russian Spetsnaz, or elite forces, failed to prepare a plan to storm the school and were taken by surprise when a bomb went off in the school and ended the standoff. The result of this poor procedure was 10 hours of violent struggle that ended with the death of 40 percent of the hostages and the injury of another 40 percent.
Chester Dunning, a history professor at Texas A&M University, criticized the Spetsnaz "for slow, stupid, poor tactics, low measures of safety and indifference to loss of innocent life."
In fact, two of the elite squads, the Alfa and the Vympel, did not even fare well in the combat, which pitted the traditional expertise of the Spetsnaz against the hostage-takers, as both groups suffered unprecedented casualties.
The Chechens were so well trained that the Kremlin and Putin are reexamining possible connections to Muslim extremist groups such as al Qaeda.
Dunning said he sees other clues indicating ties to al Qaeda. When al Qaeda is involved he added the "United States feels uncomfortable criticizing Russia's heavy hand in the Caucasus." He also said the connections help the Kremlin by making "requests for more money seem defensible...even prudent."
To many, the Beslan crisis shows that Russia has many expensive changes to make if it wishes to better defend its citizens from terror. The poor coordination, planning and training of the Russian special forces must be dealt with.
"The Russian officer class still belongs to the generation educated in waging total war on the plains of Europe, rather than the carefully calibrated art of a small amount of firepower," according to the British Broadcasting Corporation.
Russia should work to emulate the transformation that the U.S. military has gone through since the Cold War; a transformation that allowed America to wage successful campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Russia might also have to change its policies regarding Chechnya, even though the last 10 years of despicable acts on both sides (such as the killing of children by Chechen's or the carpet bombing of cities by the Russians) have made peace an increasingly hard goal to achieve.
How has Putin dealt with the exploding terrorist problem in his country since the hostage crisis? Primarily, he offered $10 million for information about Chechen rebel leaders Shamil Basayev and Aslan Maskhadov. Maskhadov was elected president of Chechnya in 1997 and Basayev is a Chechen field commander. The capture of both men might make Russia safer, but more must be done to reform Russia's way of dealing with terrorism.
In this quest for a new method, Putin followed President Bush's lead and revealed a doctrine stating that Moscow planned to launch preemptive strikes on terrorist bases "in any region of the world," according to the British Broadcasting Company. Dunning said this statement is probably a bluff because "in truth, the Russians would have great difficulty projecting power far beyond their borders."
Putin went one step further than Bush when he made a power grab and introduced new measures this week that would end direct election of governors in Russia's 89 regions. Putin apparently believes this will make Russia stronger, but this tactic does not seem to be as much about terrorism, as it is about solidifying the state's power in a moment of crisis.
U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell directly criticized these moves, telling the BBC, "I hope... that the government of the Russian Federation will not conclude that the only answer to terrorism is to increase the power of the Kremlin."
The problem within Russia is much deeper than Putin admits. His recent power grab shows his priorities aren't what they need to be. In the words of Dunning, "all in all, the forces of defense and repression have suffered serious budget problems and serious personnel problems."
Until Putin reforms his tools of fighting terrorism, Russian citizens will be in constant danger of terrorist attacks.
(C) 2003 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 17, 2004


End of Document