Putin Vetoes Curb on News of Terrorism 
 The New York Times
November 26, 2002 Tuesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 595 words
Byline:  By STEVEN LEE MYERS
Dateline: MOSCOW, Nov. 25  
Body


President Vladimir V. Putin vetoed legislation today that would have sharply restricted news media coverage of security operations against terrorist acts like Chechen guerrillas' 57-hour siege of a theater here last month. 
     The legislation, which Parliament adopted overwhelmingly after the siege, was widely criticized here and abroad as an overly broad attack on press freedoms. Critics warned that it would be used not only to restrict coverage of operations against terrorists, but also to censor reporting of the war in Chechnya. Russian officials routinely describe that conflict as a "counterterrorism" operation. 
 Mr. Putin, whose aides have sharply criticized local and foreign coverage of the siege, announced his veto today at a meeting in the Kremlin with executives of the country's leading newspapers and television and radio stations. The executives, including those from state-controlled news organizations, made an unusual public appeal to Mr. Putin last week to veto the legislation. 
Mr. Putin said the legislation had gone too far in restricting coverage, even as he again strongly rebuked some news organizations for reporting that he characterized as sensational and potentially dangerous.
"It is important that a balance be found between restrictions and informing society on the state's activities, so that the state should not regard itself as infallible," Mr. Putin said at the meeting.
The legislation would have forbidden the publication or broadcasting of terrorists' statements, as well as operations of security forces during terrorist acts. It would have also prohibited statements that could be construed by officials as justifying terrorist activities.
Had the law been in effect during the siege, critics warned, it could have restricted coverage of the guerrillas' demands, as well as the daring, but deadly commando raid. The toll from the siege continues to increase. Officials now say 129 hostages died in the rescue, most from the effects of a debilitating gas that the commandos used to subdue the guerrillas. 
In addition to complaints from Russian journalists, the legislation drew rebukes from the United States and the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe. Despite his veto, Mr. Putin left open the possibility of a revised law, sending the legislation back to Parliament for revisions. 
After the theater siege, several news organizations have reported harassment from the authorities. The Press Ministry complained to a radio station, Ekho Moskvy, after its Web site published an interview with a guerrilla. The government also blocked the signal of an independent television station, TVTs, while the police raided a weekly newspaper, Versiya. 
Today, Mr. Putin singled out the coverage of one television station, saying it had broadcast commandos' movements moments before they stormed the theater. The broadcast, he said, "could have led to a terrible tragedy."
Although Mr. Putin did not name the station, the Kremlin has criticized NTV for its coverage that morning. The state-controlled energy company, Gazprom, took over the network last year in what was seen as a government effort to limit independent media outlets. But NTV continues to provide fairly critical coverage of the government. 
Mr. Putin warned that journalists should exercise restraint and not exploit terrorism to enhance ratings.
"The main weapon of terrorists is not bullets, machine guns or grenades," he said. "It's the blackmail of citizens and the state, and the best means of such blackmail is to turn a terrorist act into a public show." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 26, 2002


End of Document