Putin sends Christmas note to Trump saying he wants to talk
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
January 1, 2019 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 370 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Russian President Vladimir Putin has reassured his United States counterpart Donald Trump thatMoscow remains "open to dialogue" despite the year ending without the hoped-for warming of relations, the Kremlin said on Sunday.
The US president cancelled a planned meeting with his Russian counterpart at the G20 summit in Argentina in November, citing tensions aboutMoscow's forces opening fire on Ukrainian naval ships and then seizing the vessels.
In a separate letter to Syria's Bashar al-Assad, Putin pledged a continuation of aid to the Syrian government and people in the "fight against terrorism".
The Kremlin said that former President George W. Bush was among the former heads of state to whom Putin had also sent a holiday message.
Moscow has said one of the key issues it wants to discuss with the United States is Washington's plans to withdraw from a Cold War-era nuclear arms agreement.
In messages to other leaders, Putin discussed relations between the two countries, including his message to Assad.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov was quoted by Russian news agency TASS that it is now up to the U.S.to hold a meeting with Russia.
Kim Jong-un's new year message
Meanwhile, Trump used his New Year's message to brag about the "accomplishments" of his adminstatrion so far. Kim called for increasing electricity power generation in the country that battles chronic power shortages.
"(Putin) stressed that Russian Federation will continue to provide all-round assistance to the government and people of Syria in their fight against terrorism and efforts to protect state sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In his message to May, Putin wished the British people "wellbeing and prosperity" in 2019.
The message to Assad comes weeks after Trump announced that the USA will remove 2,000 troops from Syria.
India had signed a $5 billion deal to purchase the S-400 air defence system from Russian Federation, in spite of U.S. warnings of punitive sanctions against nations doing military transactions withMoscow.
Vladimir Putin responded with announcement thatMoscow would be developing new missiles.His recent statement however may pave the way for more stable US-Russia relations.
In the letter, Putin stressed that U.S.

Load-Date: January 1, 2019


End of Document