Q&A / YARON DECKEL, Israel Broadcasting Authority: Israeli settlers lived an 'illusion'
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 10, 2005 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Atlanta & the World;; Interview
Length: 590 words
Byline: RUBINA MADAN
Body


Yaron Deckel, the Washington bureau chief for the Israel Broadcasting Authority, visited Atlanta this week to address Jewish and Israeli communities here on the impact of Israeli disengagement from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Staff writer Rubina Madan interviewed him at the office of the Consul General of Israel to the Southeast.  Here are some excerpts from that interview.
Q: What does Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip mean for the economy of the area?
A: It depends on the outcome of the disengagement. Because if this disengagement goes quietly and smoothly as supporters of the disengagement hope, it will bloom the area, push the economy. It will bring foreign investment into Israel and it will again be a good place for big business. . . . In the last few months, you see the influence on the economy already. Businesses are doing better, foreign money comes into Israel and Israel attracts businesses, including from the United States. Tourism is up already in the last 12 months. If you compare the numbers, you see it quite clearly.
Q: What will be the impact of Israeli Finance Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's resignation from the Cabinet this week?
A: I don't think it's going to have an imminent impact. I think the disengagement is a fact. The train has departed and it's pretty close to the new destination. Nobody could reverse it. Netanyahu did understand that. He didn't resign to stop the disengagement plan. . . . In the long run, the resignation is a political statement of his intention to run against Mr. [Ariel] Sharon in the Likud Party primaries for the job of the prime minister of Israel.
Q: Ariel Sharon's support has fallen over the disengagement proposal. Beyond poll numbers, how have Israelis responded to this plan?
A: Since the initiative of the disengagement, Prime Minister Sharon had a majority of the Israelis. Now, saying that, you should bear in mind that even the supporters are concerned: "What does it lead to in terms of security?" And security is a key word in any political process in the Middle East because the Israelis will not accept terrorism, and negotiation and concessions and compromise under terrorism.
Q: Some critics have gone so far as to say evacuating Israeli settlers from the area violates their human rights. How do you feel about this?
A: This is one of the arguments those who oppose the disengagement plan to make. I think that some of the settlers really lived in a kind of illusion in the last 37 years, created by both major parties of Israel, the Labor Party and the Likud Party. It would have been better telling the settlers the truth --- "You are there temporarily for the sake of the security of the state of Israel. But don't take this as forever." This might have caused a better situation right now.
Q: What effect will this plan have on military security in Israel? Will there be more terrorism against the state of Israel?
A: The best scenario is that the violence decreases and the Palestinians take the initiative, having the opportunity to run their own lives and try to make the best out of it, to continue negotiating on the West Bank.  That's if the parties build their mutual trust and they get back to the negotiation table. But there are some other scenarios in which the Palestinians will try to resume terror activities. And then President [Mahmoud] Abbas will have to forcefully act against terrorism as he didn't do so far. He made a cease-fire with the terror groups, but the administration and the government of Israel expect him to do more.

Load-Date: August 10, 2005


End of Document