Q&A ON TERRORISM
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 22, 2001 Monday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 486 words
Body


Q: If anthrax is completely curable, whey did the man in Florida die from it? At what point is it not curable with antibiotics?
--- Mikel Estes, Marietta A:Robert Stevens, 63, a photo editor at the Sun tabloid, died Oct. 5 of inhaled anthrax. He was the first person in the United States to die of inhaled anthrax since 1976.
AJC
Antibiotics might have helped Stevens, but only if he had known he had been exposed to anthrax spores and sought help right away. With inhaled anthrax, if antibiotic treatment does not begin before symptoms appear --- in as little as one day --- the disease usually is fatal. Stevens had no idea he had been exposed, and was very ill by the time he was taken to the hospital. It was too late for antibiotics to save him.
Another case of inhalational anthrax, this one in the District of Columbia, has left a postal worker gravely ill.  The six reported anthrax cases in New York and New Jersey all involve cutaneous, or skin, anthrax, which is much less lethal and more easily treated, even after symptoms have appeared. Without antibiotics, about 80 percent of patients survive; with the drugs, more than 99 percent do, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Do you have a question about the news? Colin Bessonette will try to get an answer. Call 404-222-2002 or e-mail q&a@ajc.com. Include your name and city.  
Q&A on other topics in the news, Page 2.
 
GLOSSARY Some terms that are being used during coverage of the war on terrorism:
Spore: The "seed" form of bacteria, algae, mosses and some other organisms. Anthrax spores can survive for decades, often in soil, before touching an animal's body and developing into "adult" bacteria.
Cipro: The brand name for the drug ciproflaxin, it is the most commonly prescribed antibiotic for anthrax. It is not the only drug that fights anthrax infections, however; penicillin and doxycycline are both approved for such use.
Aum Shinrikyo: The terrorist group that tried, but failed, to infect Tokyo with anthrax in the early 1990s. (The group did kill 12 and sicken thousands when it released the nerve gas sarin in a Tokyo subway.)
BioPort: The Lansing, Mich.-based supplier of anthrax vaccine to the U.S. military. Accused of mismanagement and quality-control problems, the company has lacked approval to ship the medicine since 1998. The company was sued Friday on behalf of two soldiers who received the vaccine. The suit claims the vaccine killed one and caused chronic health problems in the other.
 
BACKGROUNDERS
The terrorist attacks have brought many unfamiliar people, places and things to the fore.
The AJC will explore these topics Monday through Saturday on Backgrounder pages.
Backgrounders from previous editions are available on ajc.com. Scroll down beneath the American flag banner, find the topic you want, and click.
If you have a suggestion for a future Backgrounder, contact Eric Sundquist at esundquist@ajc.com.  

Load-Date: October 22, 2001


End of Document