Q&A;
'63 bombing was era's worst act of terrorism
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 12, 1997, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 02A
Length: 673 words
Byline: Gary M. Pomerantz; STAFF WRITER
Body


Attorney General Janet Reno announced this week that the investigation of the1963 bombing of the Birmingham 16th Street Baptist Church that killed four young girls has been reopened. David J. Garrow, presidential distinguished professor at Emory University and author of "The FBI and Martin Luther King, Jr." and the King biography, "Bearing the Cross," has a keen interest in the case.
Q: The civil rights struggle featured many bombings. In the telling of civil rights history, what place does the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham hold?
A: The Sept. 15, 1963, bombing of Birmingham's 16th Street Baptist Church was the single deadliest act of racial terrorism during the entire black freedom struggle; four young women, Denise McNair, 11 years old, Cynthia Wesley, Addie Mae Collins and Carole Robertson, all 14 years old, were killed. However, that bombing, while atrocious, was not unusual; starting in 1947, dozens of white racial terrorist bombings targeted black Birmingham, aimed both at black homeowners who were seeking to move into previously "all-white" areas and at the homes and churches of civil rights activists, such as attorney Arthur Shores and Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth.
 
Q: Why was the 16th Street Baptist Church targeted?
A: The 16th Street Baptist Church was targeted in part because it had been a major headquarters for the anti-segregation protests that Martin Luther King Jr. had led in Birmingham several months earlier, in April and May 1963.
 
Q: What impact did this bombing have on the civil rights movement?
A: Within the national civil rights context of 1963, the Birmingham church bombing showed how Alabama Gov. George C. Wallace seemed unable to restrain violent backers of his "Segregation Now, Segregation Forever" stance. For President John F. Kennedy Jr., the bombing represented a tragic challenge to his adminsitration's efforts to keep the civil rights struggle in the South as nonviolent as possible. For civil rights movement activists who just two weeks earlier had experienced the emotional "high" of the Aug. 28 March on Washington, the bloody reality of the Birmingham bombing represented what Dr. King termed a "return to the valley."
 
Q: Who committed this act? And why?
A: The Birmingham church bombing was carried out by members of a relatively tightly knit network of racial terrorists who committed almost all of the anti-black and anti-Jewish bombings that took place across the South from the late 1940s through the late 1960s. The one man ever convicted for the 16th Street bombing, Robert E. Chambliss (who died in prison in 1985), was so well-known in Birmingham for his terrroist exploits that his nickname was "Dynamite Bob." The only other member of this larger terrorist network who eventually served jail time was Marietta's infamous J.B. Stoner, who later was convicted of the 1958 bombing of another Birmingham church. FBI files from the 1960s name Chambliss' co-conspirators in the 16th Street killings. One is deceased. Two others are still living. They have never been charged.
 
Q: Why is a new effort to investigate the bombing under way?
A: Law enforcement statements this week do not explain what new information may be in hand. Perhaps some law enforcement informant of that era is now more forthcoming. Perhaps a former girlfriend of one of the suspects is now ready to talk. Maybe even some aging former Klansman has decided to "come clean."
Just like the final, 1994 conviction of Byron de la Beckwith for the 1963 assassination of Mississippi civil rights activist Medgar Evers, other long-ago killings might still be fully prosecuted. Many more people, for example, remember the 16th Street Baptist Church killings than recall the 1966 Klan murder of Mississippi activist Vernon Dahmer.
Q: Is the timing of Spike Lee's documentary, "4 Little Girls" related to the renewed interest in this case?
A: Spike Lee's new documentary is an important reminder of a story that should not be forgotten. But its appearance is unconnected to the reopening of the case.

Graphic

 
mug of David J. Garrow

Load-Date: July 14, 1997


End of Document