Q&A: Internet extremism and how to combat it
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 5, 2017 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A12
Length: 753 words
Byline:  By DEE-ANN DURBIN Associated Press  
Body


DETROIT - In the wake of Britain's third major attack in three months, Prime Minister Theresa May called on internet companies to do more to block extremist groups who use the web to recruit members and send coded messages.
Here's a look at terrorism on the web, what's being done to stop it, and what could come next.
What are technology companies doing to make sure extremist videos and other terrorist content don't spread across the internet?
Internet companies use technology plus teams of human reviewers to flag and remove posts from people who engage in terrorist activity or express support for terrorism. Google, for example, says it employs thousands of people to fight abuse on its platforms.
Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter and YouTube late last year teamed up to create a shared industry database of unique digital fingerprints for images and videos that are produced by or support terrorist organizations. Those fingerprints help the companies more quickly identify and remove terrorist content on the web. After the terror attack on Westminster Bridge in London in March, Google and other tech companies also agreed to form a joint group to accelerate anti-terrorism efforts.
Twitter says in the last six months of 2016, it suspended a total of 376,890 accounts for violations related to the promotion of terrorism. Three-quarters of those were found through Twitter's internal tools; just 2 percent were taken down because of government requests, the company says.
Facebook says it alerts law enforcement if it sees a threat of an imminent attack or harm to someone. It also seeks out potential terrorist accounts by tracing the "friends" of an account that has been removed for terrorism.
---
What are technology companies refusing to do when it comes to terrorist content?
After the 2015 mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., and again after the Westminster Bridge attack, the U.S. and U.K. governments sought access to encrypted and password-protected communication between the terrorists who carried out the attack. In both cases, the tech companies involved - Apple and WhatsApp - refused, although the governments eventually managed to go around the companies and get the information they wanted.
Tech companies say encryption is vital and compromising it won't just stop terrorists. Encryption also protects bank accounts, credit card transactions and all kinds of other information that people want to keep private. But others - including former FBI Director James Comey and Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif. - have argued that the inability to access encrypted data is a threat to security. Feinstein has introduced a bill to give the government so-called "back door" access to encrypted data.
---
Shouldn't tech companies be forced to share encrypted information if it could protect national security?
Richard Forno, who directs the graduate cybersecurity program at the University of Maryland, said weakening encryption wouldn't make people safer. Terrorists will simply take their communications deeper underground by developing their own cyber channels or even reverting to paper notes sent by couriers.
But Erik Gordon, a professor of law and business at the University of Michigan, said society sometimes determined that, in times of war, the government can intrude in ways it might not normally. He imagines a system where law enforcement would have to ask a judge for a warrant to retrieve encrypted information.
"If we get to the point where we say, ‘Privacy is not as important as staying alive,' I think there will be some setup which will allow the government to breach privacy," he said.
---
Is it really the tech companies' job to police the internet?
Tech companies have accepted that this is part of their mission. In a Facebook post, CEO Mark Zuckerberg said the company was developing artificial intelligence so its computers can tell the difference between news stories about terrorism and terrorist propaganda. "This is technically difficult as it requires building AI that can read and understand news, but we need to work on this to help fight terrorism worldwide," Zuckerberg said.
But Ross Anderson, a professor of security engineering at the University of Cambridge, says blaming Facebook or Google for the spread of terrorism is like blaming the mail system or the phone company for Irish Republican Army violence 30 years ago. Anderson says instead of working together to censor the internet, governments and companies should focus on working together to share information more quickly.

Graphic

 
 The Union flag flies at half mast in Whitehall, central London, Sunday June 4, 2017, after Saturday night's terrorist incident on London Bridge and at Borough Market. Several people were killed in the terror attack at the heart of London and dozens injured. Prime Minister Theresa May convened an emergency security cabinet session Sunday to deal with the crisis. (Stefan Rousseau/PA via AP)  A person, centre, is led away at an address in Barking, east London, during a police operation Sunday June 4, 2017, following Saturday night's terrorist incident at London Bridge. Several people were killed in the terror attack at the heart of London and dozens injured. Prime Minister Theresa May convened an emergency security cabinet session Sunday to deal with the crisis. (Stefan Rousseau/PA via AP)  An armed Police officer looks through his weapon on London Bridge in London, Saturday, June 3, 2017. British police said they were dealing with "incidents" on London Bridge and nearby Borough Market in the heart of the British capital Saturday, as witnesses reported a vehicle veering off the road and hitting several pedestrians. (Dominic Lipinski/PA via AP)  London Bridge, left, and The Shard are seen following an attack in central London, Saturday, June 3, 2017. Terrorism struck at the heart of London, police said Sunday, after a vehicle veered off the road and mowed down pedestrians on London Bridge and gunshots rang out amid reports of knife attacks at nearby Borough Market. (Yui Mok/PA via AP)  Police sniffer dogs on London Bridge after an incident in central London, Saturday, June 3, 2017. British police said they were dealing with "incidents" on London Bridge and nearby Borough Market in the heart of the British capital Saturday, as witnesses reported a vehicle veering off the road and hitting several pedestrians. (Dominic Lipinski/PA via AP)  Armed police on St Thomas Street, London, Sunday June 4, 2017, near the scene of Saturday night's terrorist incident on London Bridge and at Borough Market. Several people were killed in the terror attack at the heart of London and dozens injured. Prime Minister Theresa May convened an emergency security cabinet session Sunday to deal with the crisis. (Dominic Lipinski/PA via AP) 

Load-Date: June 9, 2017


End of Document