Qaeda Leader Reported Dead In Yemen Attack
The New York Times
October 19, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 271 words
Byline: By NASSER ARRABYEE
Body


SANA, Yemen -- A drone fired on a group of people preparing to attack Yemeni troops on Thursday, killing at least nine, including a man identified as a leader of the local branch of Al Qaeda, according to Yemeni and security officials, who said the aircraft was American-operated.
The strike took place less than a mile from a Yemeni brigade's position in the southern province of Abyan, the officials said, adding that troops from the brigade found and defused an explosive belt that was wrapped around the waist of one of the dead, identified as Nader al-Shaddadi, one of the top leaders of Al Qaeda in the region.
The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to brief reporters.
Residents said that they had identified four other bodies but that the remaining four dead were not known to them.
The use of drones to mount attacks in Yemen has been contentious, with critics and some American government officials saying that the strikes cause civilian casualties that can fuel anti-American sentiment.
American military strikes in Yemen started in late 2009. They were directed at terrorism suspects, particularly members of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the network's branch in Yemen.
The drone attacks were suspended here in May 2010, partly because of concerns about civilian deaths, including the killing of a Yemeni deputy provincial governor.
But President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi endorsed the drone strike program last month during a visit to Washington, saying Yemen's Air Force could not mount attacks at night and praising the drones' accuracy as ''unmatched by the human brain.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/19/world/middleeast/yemen-drone-strike-al-qaeda.html

Load-Date: October 19, 2012


End of Document