Qatar to seek compensation for damages from Arab blockade
The Acorn: Drew University
July 10, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 369 words
Body


"A senior Foreign Ministry source described the statements' claims about the State of Qatar's interference in internal affairs of countries and financing terrorism as baseless allegations, noting that the State of Qatar's position on terrorism is consistent and known for its rejection and condemnation of all forms of terrorism whatever the causes and motives are", the statement added.
UK's Foreign Secretary is already in the Persian Gulf where he met with the Saudis Friday.
Sheikh Mohamed also stressed that the siege was set without resorting to the mechanisms adopted by regional and global organisations.
Johnson, who is in a three-nation Gulf tour aimed at calming down the tensions in the Gulf, issued the call during a meeting with his Kuwaiti counterpart Sheikh Sabah Khaled Al-Hamad Al-Sabah, the official KUNA news agency reported.
Al-Jubeir said: "I believe the G20 summit statement was very clear in that it stressed the importance of combating terrorism and its funding".
"We must not allow any country to support or finance terrorism", added al-Jubeir according to Al-Arabiya.
The defiant Doha government has strongly refused to comply with the demands, calling them "unrealistic, unreasonable and unacceptable".
Shutting down the Doha-based Al Jazeera broadcaster, severing diplomatic ties with Iran, closing down a Turkish military base in Qatar and paying an unspecified sum in reparations were some of the demands that Qatar had received.
Kuwait has been leading mediation efforts to resolve the crisis. Three out of the six Member State of the Gulf Cooperation Council ; Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, UAE, in addition to Egypt, are in a political gridlock with Qatar; another GCC member; a rather sensitive situation that the region is not accustomed to.
Tillerson plans to spend the week talking to leaders of the Gulf nations, receiving them in Kuwait or shuttling among regional capitals, The Washington Post reported quoting senior United States officials.
"My impression is that progress can be made". As our Prime Minister has said: The Gulf's security is our security and we remain deeply committed to the stability of the region and to working with our friends in the Gulf to keep all of our people safe.

Load-Date: July 10, 2017


End of Document