QDR may pit nuclear, conventional programs; Change in review could favor weapons used in war on terrorism
Air Force Times
January 17, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWSLINES; Pg. 28
Length: 611 words
Byline: By Jason Sherman; Times staff writer
Body


The Pentagon may consider strategic nuclear forces in the 2005 Quadrennial Defense Review -- marking the first time the highly specialized weapons are debated alongside conventional forces.
Previous reviews have looked at nuclear forces simultaneously, but separately, from U.S. military conventional power.
"I think what they're doing now is opening up the possibility that at least they could look there," said a government official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "It is still very early in the decision process."
Should Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld elect to pull strategic weapons programs into the 2005 review, nearly $10 billion in annual spending on offensive nuclear attack capability would be weighed against conventional needs.
A decision is expected in the next few weeks, when Rumsfeld issues a memo proposing a framework for the 2005 defense review.
In 2004, the Pentagon spent $9 billion on its offensive nuclear strike capabilities -- ballistic submarines, intercontinental ballistic missiles and nuclear bombers. That figure does not include spending to support command, control, communications, computers intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance for nuclear weapons, which totals another $5 billion.
The government official said the question shaping up is this: "Is it possible for us to trade off some of our nuclear or strategic capability to develop capabilities for the war on terrorism?"
This line of inquiry comes as Rumsfeld is encouraging the Pentagon to consider paring back spending on programs in which the U.S. military enjoys significant overmatch against potential enemies. It also comes as the Pentagon is hunting for funds to pay for an increasingly costly war in Iraq.
"I think that dealing with strategic weapons in a more integrated fashion actually makes a lot of sense because … it allows you to look at some of the inherent tradeoffs between nuclear and conventional forces and other strategic instruments," said Michele Flournoy of the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
In the past, nuclear issues have been treated in separate, parallel studies. The January 2002 Nuclear Posture Review, for example, was released on the heels of the 2001 QDR. A similar assessment of U.S. nuclear forces also followed the "Bottom-Up Review" in 1994, a precursor to the QDR.
The 2002 Nuclear Posture Review advocated a new "triad" to replace the Cold War redundancy of nuclear missions that could be launched by submarines, missile silos and bombers.
That review called for making the nuclear triad just one leg of a broader deterrent triad with new active and passive defenses, including missile defenses, and a highly responsive infrastructure encompassing all defense research and development, scientific efforts and the industrial base.
Such a strategy "presents the blueprint for transforming our strategic posture," Rumsfeld wrote in a foreword to the report.
A goal of the new triad is to reduce both the Pentagon's dependence on nuclear weapons and improve the U.S. military's ability to deter attack in a world where nuclear weapons technology is likely to proliferate.
A key to this approach includes not only an effective missile defense capability, but also improved intelligence and the addition of new conventional strike capabilities.
David Mosher, a senior policy analyst at the Rand Corp. who has studied the cost of the military's nuclear enterprise, says that without major policy changes to cut the size of the strategic submarine force or scrap the land-based missile program, there may not be a lot of room to garner savings.
"There's not a whole lot to pare," he said. "We're not talking big dollars here."

Notes

1 BW PHOTO.

Load-Date: January 25, 2005


End of Document