Qualms about anti-terror law unite the left and right
USA TODAY
December 14, 2005 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 22A
Length: 1026 words
Body


Patrick J. Leahy first made his name in politics as a tough-on-crime, attention-grabbing county prosecutor in the turbulent late 1960s and early '70s. His law-and-order aggressiveness propelled him to election as the first -- and, so far, only -- Democrat to represent historically Republican Vermont in the U.S. Senate.
After the 9/11 attacks, as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Leahy helped shepherd the questionably named "USA Patriot Act" through Congress. Reassuring a frightened nation, the Patriot Act granted unprecedented powers to law enforcement, some of which are set to expire at the end of this year.
Federal investigators and prosecutors have welcomed the law as providing a clutch of much-needed tools in the war on terrorism. Indeed, much of the act is a good fit for threatening times. But it's also something else: cover for sweeping invasions of citizens' privacy, secret fishing expeditions into privately held records and muzzling of targets who want to complain about it.
All are convenient for law enforcement. All have already been abused.
This year's rewrite fails to solve these problems and, in fact, would add provisions that have nothing to do with terrorism (see box at right).
Leahy is a useful barometer of just how troubling the latest legislation is.
Today, the former prosecutor is leading a bipartisan coalition in the Senate seeking to block renewal of some of the Patriot Act's most controversial provisions until more is done to curb the potential for assaults on privacy and civil liberties. "This much unchecked power doesn't make us any safer," Leahy told us Tuesday. "It makes us less safe. ... Ultimately, you're secure only if you maintain basic liberties."
Other Senate critics of the bill range the full breadth of the political spectrum, from Idaho Republican Larry Craig to Wisconsin Democrat Russ Feingold. Their bid to hold up the legislation is a worthy one.
Since Sept. 11, 2001, using the Patriot Act and stretching authority under other laws, government investigators have collected private information on thousands of people who have no apparent connection to international terrorism. Secret sweeps have been made into library records, hotel bookings, car-rental files and other documents. That material is retained, perhaps forever, in government computers. In at least one case, a lawyer's home and office were searched based on false information.
The Bush administration and its allies in Congress have resisted calls for more meaningful protections against invasion of privacy and abuse of civil liberties. While some of the most troubling provisions have been modified in the latest changes, many of the revisions are cosmetic at best.
The pressure is on because portions of the Patriot Act, including several of the most troubling provisions, expire Dec. 31, and lawmakers are trying to get home for Christmas.
Leahy and his allies are proposing to extend the law for three months to allow more time to fix what's wrong. That makes sense. Mistakes made in the heat of post-9/11 anxiety shouldn't be compounded and extended based on an artificial deadline.
As Leahy and others have discovered, there's more to patriotism than the label on an anti-terrorism law. True patriotism requires not only giving law enforcement the tools it needs, but also adequately protecting citizens against abuse of that power.
Law's flaws
Although much of the USA Patriot Act's renewal pending this week in Congress is non-controversial, several provisions are troubling. Among them:
National Security Letters. Federal agents have employed these to obtain private records on thousands of individuals without having to get a court's permission. Everything from credit reports to electronic communications to travel and retail purchase records are fair game. And there's no requirement that this power be limited to use against suspected terrorists. The pending legislation would do little to curb such abuse.
Businesses and institutions holding these records are ordered not to tell anyone that the government has collected someone's personal information. And if a court challenge is mounted, the proposed law declares that the judge would have to defer to any government claim of potential harm to national security, diplomatic relations or criminal investigation. Thus the right to go to court would be rendered virtually useless.
Secret court orders.  Known misleadingly as the "library records" provision of the 2001 law, this tool can be used to get a secret court order for tax records, medical records, gun records and more. The recipient of such an order is prohibited from disclosing that it exists, and new language does little to allow for meaningful judicial review. The revisions would impose only the vaguest requirement that the records sought are actually connected to a terrorist organization, a suspected terrorist or even someone in contact with a suspected terrorist.
'Sneak and peak' raids. The government would still, with a warrant, be able to break into your home or business, poke into anything there and not have to inform you for 30 days -- and there's an escape clause to justify further delays. Most troubling, the Justice Department recently acknowledged that 88% of the search warrants issued under this provision have been used in cases that have nothing to do with terrorism.
Defining terrorism. One section creates a definition of domestic terrorism so broad that it potentially could be used to include acts of civil disobedience -- such as protesters blocking a road or simple trespassing. It also allows for forfeiture of an organization's assets without criminal conviction and without a prior hearing.
Miscellaneous mischief. The bill is loaded with extraneous provisions, many of which have little or nothing to with terrorism. Among them are the creation of new crimes subject to the death penalty, stripping the federal courts of some of their remaining power to review potential miscarriages of justice in state death-penalty cases; and, believe it or not, provisions dealing with tobacco smuggling, combating methamphetamine abuse and donating equipment to local fire departments.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: December 14, 2005


End of Document