Quebec Retires the Quebecois
The New York Times
December 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 320 words
Body


In an election remarkable for its calm, Quebecers on Monday deposed a provincial government long remarkable for its view that Quebec should pull out of Canada's Confederation. The defeat of the volatile Parti Quebecois by the Liberal Party won't end the debate about separatism. But the debate has lost its menacing rancor. Canada's union has survived a severe test. And in paradoxical ways, this cycle rounds out the career of Canada's and Quebec's creative and divisive leader, Pierre Trudeau.
The young Mr. Trudeau flirted with separatism on his way to prominence, but recoiled when he saw the terrorism the idea inspired in the 1960's. After 200 bombing incidents, the campaign climaxed in 1970 with the murder of Quebec's labor minister, Pierre Laporte. Mr. Trudeau, by then the federal Prime Minister, briefly imposed martial law, then addressed the main grievance of French-speakers by enacting the Official Languages Act, fixing bilingualism as national policy. Terrorism ebbed but separatism flourished, fueled in part by Quebecers' ambivalence toward Mr. Trudeau. The Parti Quebecois took over the province in 1975, under Rene Levesque, only to face misgivings about the economic consequences of independence. In 1980 Quebecers rejected the party's plan for ''sovereignty-association'' with the rest of Canada. Its cause lost, the party also lost its following. After resigning as leader last June, Mr. Levesque judged his party to be a ''beast backed up against a wall gnawing at its own limbs.''
Mr. Trudeau contributed to this demise, first by dealing with Quebec's grievances but also by stepping down as Prime Minister last year. His changes endure, yet he has ceased to be an irritant among Quebecers. Power now passes again to Robert Bourassa, the Liberal who twice before served as Quebec's Premier. He calls his election a great victory for the province and for Canada. In fundamental ways, he may be right.


End of Document