Queens Man Pleads Guilty in Plot to Blow Up Manhattan Synagogue
The New York Times
December 5, 2012 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 29
Length: 650 words
Byline: By COLIN MOYNIHAN
Body


An unusual prosecution of a man from Queens accused of plotting to blow up a synagogue in Manhattan ended on Tuesday when the man, Ahmed Ferhani, pleaded guilty to 10 charges, including conspiracy as a crime of terrorism and criminal possession of a weapon as a crime of terrorism.
The case, which differed from most terrorism investigations because it did not involve federal authorities, began in May 2011. That is when detectives arrested Mr. Ferhani and a second man, Mohamed Mamdouh, on West 58th Street along the West Side Highway as they met with an undercover detective pretending to be a weapons seller.
They had just handed over a $100 down payment in exchange for a hand grenade, three semiautomatic pistols and 150 rounds of ammunition.
On Tuesday Mr. Ferhani told Justice Michael J. Obus of State Supreme Court in Manhattan that he and Mr. Mamdouh had developed a plan to attack a synagogue with a man called Ilter, who was an undercover officer.
''I repeatedly discussed with him my anger towards Jews based on what I believed and perceived to be their mistreatment of Muslims throughout the world,'' he told the judge. ''I intended to create chaos and send a message of intimidation and coercion to the Jewish population of New York City, warning them to stop mistreating Muslims.''
Mr. Ferhani is scheduled to be sentenced in January. Justice Obus said that he expected to impose a sentence of 10 years, less than the 14 the district attorney's office requested on Tuesday or the 25 Mr. Ferhani would have faced if he had been convicted of all charges after a trial. The case against Mr. Mamdouh is pending, the district attorney's office said.
After serving his sentence, Mr. Ferhani, who was born in Algeria, is likely to be deported, the justice added.
Officers from the New York Police Department's intelligence division, including the man known as Ilter, conducted the investigation into Mr. Ferhani's and Mr. Mamdouh's activities. The prosecution was then handled by the Manhattan district attorney's office.
Both defendants were charged under a state terrorism statute passed after the Sept. 11 attack that the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., said had not been used before in New York City in a terrorism case.
Defense lawyers said that the federal authorities had steered clear of the case because of concerns over how the intelligence officers had handled it. The lawyers added that their client had a history of mental illness and that they planned to pursue an entrapment defense.
Their position appeared to be bolstered in June 2011 when a grand jury rejected the prosecution's assertion that Mr. Ferhani and Mr. Mamdouh had plotted to blow up synagogues while there were worshipers inside. Instead, the panel favored lesser charges that suggested that the defendants had wanted to destroy a synagogue when it was empty.
On Tuesday evening, Mr. Vance said that Mr. Ferhani's plea should dispel any doubts about the police investigation or the importance of prosecuting the defendants.
''The threat of terrorism is real,'' he said during a telephone conversation, adding that the conviction of Mr. Ferhani highlighted ''the importance of state prosecutors and N.Y.P.D. intel working in partnership to play a critical role to complement our federal colleagues.''
One of Mr. Ferhani's lawyers, Lamis J. Deek, took a different view, telling reporters that the Joint Terrorism Task Force, which is led by the Justice Department, had repeatedly declined to get involved in the investigation because of concerns about the conduct of the undercover officer her client knew as Ilter.
During pretrial hearings it emerged that the officer, who was referred to in court documents as UC 242, had apparently been criticized by a task force led by the Federal Bureau of Investigation over his actions in a separate investigation, when he was said to have initiated a mention of Hamas.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/05/nyregion/ahmed-ferhani-pleads-guilty-in-plot-to-blow-up-synagogue.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ahmed Ferhani, a native of Algeria who was accused of plotting to blow up the largest synagogue  in Manhattan, pleaded guilty on Tuesday. He and another man were arrested in 2011.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN MARSHALL MANTEL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: December 5, 2012


End of Document