Questions for: 'In Turkey, a Capstone to a Violent Year. In Germany, a Realization of Fears'; Article of the Day
The New York Times 
December 22, 2016 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: LEARNING
Length: 268 words
Byline: CAROLINE CROSSON GILPIN
Highlight: How should open societies handle the profound effects of global terrorism?
Body


Article: In Turkey, a Capstone to a Violent Year. In Germany, a Realization of Fears
Before Reading
Watch this short video titled "After Berlin: 'We Just Have to Go On'" and discuss with a classmate how you view the aftermath of the Berlin marketplace attack this week.
What are your reactions to the wide variety of comments in the video? Can you imagine how you might feel in this situation? Do you identify with anyone in the video?
Questions for Comprehension and Analysis
1. What happened in Ankara, Turkey, on Monday night? What happened in Berlin on the same night? How are the attacks similar? How are they different?
2. Why does the article report that, for Germany, "the future could be ominous"? Can you make any comparisons to other countries undergoing similar tensions and stress?
3. Who is Can Dundar? What does he think connects the two attacks? Do you agree? Why or why not?
4. What has the last year been like for Germany? What has happened in Turkey in the same time period? How are the two countries at odds, and how are they bound together in other ways?
5. How is Western Europe different from Israel, according to Marc Pierini? How do the people quoted in this article feel about living in Germany, France and Turkey? Which countries feel more safe to them? Why?
What Do You Think?
How will open societies handle terrorism in the near future? Would some combination of an increase in security, vigilance and caution be advisable? Is continuing life as usual the best course of action?
For citizens and for leaders of countries, what is the best response to the profound effects of global terrorism?

Load-Date: December 23, 2016


End of Document