Questions For The Faithful
Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
September 7, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 9
Length: 290 words
Byline: Letters
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


To the EditorS:
On 9/11, terrorists killed nearly 3,000 innocent American civilians. Within a few minutes, Americans shared the reality of other civilians living in Iraq, Palestine, Israel, Afghanistan and Libya. That is what it means to say that 9/11 changed America.
How are American churchgoers responding to the disproportionate response by American leaders to terrorism? In 2003, America launched a reprisal bombing on Baghdad with bombs exploding every 60 seconds. Since 2008, American predator drone attacks in Pakistan have killed 2,134 people, including 282 innocent women and children. They had no chance to escape.
The CIA adviser on counterterrorism, John O. Brennen, said that drone attacks since 2008 have not caused any collateral damage. He argued that robot-controlled technology has "exceptional proficiency (and) precision." Robotic warfare thankfully saves American lives but it kills and wounds Pakistanis, increasing hostility toward Americans. Do churchgoers question the morality of drone warfare?
The killing of Osama bin Laden dealt the coup de grace to pacifism, not terrorism. Some say that his killing violated the basic principles of international law. Others say President George W. Bush revoked the sovereignty of any nation suspected of harboring terrorists. Current U.S. legal opinion is that America is exempt from international law and conventions. How can one speak truth to such unlimited power?
What does it mean to sit in worship in this changed world? Passivity leads to alienation, objectifying the effects of sanctions and robotic bombings from a distance.
The pacifist, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, said that to remain silent is to speak; to not act is to act. Is ours an active faith?
Robert H. Lowing
Lancaster

Load-Date: September 8, 2011


End of Document