QUESTION FATE OF UNUSED EMBRYOS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
July 16, 2004 Friday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2004 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A8; Letter
Length: 443 words
Body


The pro-life groups are upset about unwanted fertilized embryos being used for stem cell research. Aren't they upset about the alternative fate of those embryos: to be thrown away?
If it's so important to save every possible human life, perhaps fertility clinics should give those extra embryos to the pro-life people who could then raise them to be important and valuable humans.
-- Nancy Rathke, Madison
/ Election terror threat exploited
In recent weeks we have seen articles in magazines and newspapers and stories on television about the possibility of terrorists using attacks to influence the upcoming election. The threat of terrorism is already being used by the Republican Party and the Bush administration. They know that they cannot stand on their record on the economy, job creation or the handling of the ill-advised war in Iraq, so they use the fear of terrorism to try to win votes.
Obviously the threat of terrorism does exist around the world, but the Republican Party and the Bush administration should not use it to win votes. Currently the only way terrorism is being used is to attempt to influence the election through fear. Don't let the Bush administration use terrorism to influence election year politics.
-- Lance Bagstad, Bangor
/ Teachers don't waste time
As a seventh grade teacher, this is my response to Saturday guest columnist Evan Harrison: I dare you to teach school all day, every day, with no planning time. You will soon find that your premise of teachers wasting their prep time "managing baseball leagues" is fallacious.
The average salary in 2002 for a Monona Grove teacher was $39,258. Teaching is a rewarding profession. I wish Harrison would take the time and considerable expense to earn his teaching certificate and thus gain a realistic view of what is needed to provide a quality education.
-- Chuck Price, Madison
/ Don't ban drink specials
I just read about the proposal about to be introduced to the Alcohol License Review Committee by its chairman Ken Kamp that would ban drink specials.
If the ALRC approves this proposal, would I ever like to be an owner of a tavern or restaurant and bar in one of the areas surrounding Madison. I am sure that would certainly increase the happy hour business for those establishments.
Wake up. People should make up their own minds about where to drink and eat.
-- Charles R. Merkle, Poynette
/ Cure for what ails democracy?
How about "none of the above" on the ballot? And when "none of the above" wins, the savings in legislators' pay, per diems, support staff, and office space would be returned to the communities in the district which so voted.
-- Mike von Schneidemesser, Madison

Load-Date: July 17, 2004


End of Document