Quick-hit Review: Rendition
The Whit: Rowan University
October 25, 2007 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2007 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. 1
Length: 346 words
Body


"I fear you speak upon the rack, where men enforced do speak anything." This Shakespearean line from "The Merchant of Venice" is echoed again in the new film "Rendition," which introduces the viewer to the "enhanced methods of interrogation," known as "renditions," which began in the Clinton Administration and have become more commonplace since the terror attacks of September 11, 2001.
The film features an all-star cast, with Oscar winners Meryl Streep, Alan Arkin, and Reese Witherspoon, as well as Peter Sarsgaard, Jake Gyllenhaal, and Omar Metwally. Supporting roles filled by unfamiliar actors deliver as well. They pull the audience into the plot and show how many people can be affected by overseas terror attacks.
"Rendition" follows an Egyptian-born terrorism suspect (Metwally) who is taken to an undisclosed prison overseas by U.S. officials following his flight from South Africa to Washington, D.C. His pregnant wife (Witherspoon) ventures to Washington, D.C., to find out about his disappearance through a family friend and Senator's employee (Sarsgaard). Gyllenhaal plays a young CIA analyst who monitors the violent interrogation at the overseas detention facility.
This film follows the emotional plights of the tortured terrorism suspect and those involved in obtaining the supposed information from him. Some, like the CIA analyst, are visibly shaken and horrified by the methods exercised. Others such as the stern Senator (Streep) and foreign interrogator (Yigal Naor) see it as necessary and effective.
The film may be described by some as a political piece, but it is ultimately an emotional one. Metwally's performance as the tortured prisoner is Oscar-worthy. The film does not intend to preach, but rather to question and inform the audience on a topic that does not often have a human face put on it. The film plainly depicts the emotional struggles of those involved in such grave business, and does so in a way that will affect every viewer differently. The film will keep your interest and have you engaged in each of the characters' plights.
Grade: B+

Load-Date: January 16, 2018


End of Document