R. Kelly 'hopeful' despite struggles in jail
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 29, 2020 Sunday
MAIN Edition


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 004
Length: 462 words
Body


Beleaguered singer R. Kelly is to go to trial on federal racketeering charges in New York in just four months, but already he's feeling the squeeze.Facing the potential of decades in prison, Kelly is back on lockdown at Chicago's federal jail because of a new COVID-19 outbreak. His repeated attempts to win release on bond pending trial have been denied. And he still suffers headaches and pain from a recent beating at the hands of a fellow inmate, his lawyers say.
"Mentally, he's probably in as bad of shape as I've seen him," Kelly's lead attorney, Steven Greenberg, said last week. "His mood at this point is certainly still hopeful about his case, but I think on some level he's just very beaten down physically and mentally."
Tuesday will mark Kelly's 500th day in federal custody - a clock that started ticking when he was arrested by federal authorities on July 11, 2019, while walking his dog outside his home in the Trump Tower in downtown Chicago.
The indictment filed in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn alleged Kelly and his associates ran a criminal enterprise that recruited women and underage girls for illegal sexual contact, then isolated and threatened them to keep them under control and prevent them from going to authorities.
A separate indictment brought by federal prosecutors in Chicago alleged the singer conspired with two former employees to rig his 2008 child pornography trial in Cook County by paying off witnesses and victims to change their stories. Kelly, 53, could face up to 20 years in prison if convicted in the New York case alone. The Chicago federal charges carry the potential of decades more in prison, and Kelly is also facing criminal sexual abuse charges filed in Cook County in February 2019.
U.S. District Judge Harry Leinenweber said he intends to set a trial date for the federal Chicago charges during the next status hearing on Dec. 16.
After three previous trial dates in New York had to be scuttled because of the coronavirus pandemic, U.S. District Judge Ann Donnelly has reset Kelly's trial for April 6, when potential jurors will be questioned in the courthouse's large ceremonial courtroom about their answers to questionnaires that will be sent out in March.
Last month, Donnelly dealt a blow to the defense by granting prosecutors' request to keep jurors anonymous, a move often reserved for gang or terrorism cases.
In her ruling, Donnelly noted Kelly was alleged to have "secured witnesses' silence, and in at least one instance to have suborned perjury, through bribes, blackmail, threats and intimidation."
Having a trial date adds urgency to Kelly's trial preparation, which his lawyers say has been hampered because prosecutors have yet to turn over key evidence identifying alleged victims and witness statements.

Load-Date: November 29, 2020


End of Document