Rabin says terrorism may harm peace talks
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
January 30, 1995, Monday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 294 words
Byline: LISA ROBBINS Associated Press Writer
Body


JERUSALEM -- Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin told his Cabinet on Sunday that Islamic terrorism has put peace with the Palestinians at a crossroads. Israel's fears of terrorism were underlined by a controversial decision to station dogs at West Bank crossings.
The Cabinet extended the closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip for at least another week, saying it would be removed only if the Palestinian Authority took steps against Islamic militants.
"Terrorism has become a strategic danger and a danger to the peace process," said Rabin, quoted by Israel Radio.
The Cabinet approved the closure last week in response to attacks that have killed 54 people since Oct. 1, including 21 Israelis who died in a suicide bombing Jan. 22. The measure is intended to stop guerrillas from infiltrating Israel.
PLO officials said suffering would only increase if tens of thousands of Palestinians were kept from jobs in Israel.
"I don't think that the closure, a separation of this kind, will solve the problem and give security to the Israelis," Sufian Abu Zaide, a member of the Palestinian self-rule authority.
Police Minister Moshe Shahal said he ordered the stationing of police dogs at roadblocks separating the West Bank and Israel to be used in tracking infiltrators and finding explosives.
The move drew immediate Palestinian protest. Dogs are not used for crowd control in most Middle East countries, in part because Muslims consider them unclean.
Sheikh Ikrima Sabri, the chief Islamic cleric of Jerusalem, called it a violation of Muslim beliefs and "inhumane." Saeb Erakat, a minister in the Gaza Strip-based PLO autonomy government, called it "shameful."
Parliament has rejected using dogs in the past because Nazis often used German Shepherds to guard concentration camps.

Load-Date: January 15, 1998


End of Document