RABIN BARS PALESTINIANS FROM ISRAEL; PRIME MINISTER TAKES DRASTIC STEP AFTER GUNMEN SLAY TWO ISRAELI TRAFFIC OFFICERS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 31, 1993, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12A
Length: 445 words
Dateline: HADERA, ISRAEL
Body


Gunmen shot to death two Israeli traffic officers sitting in a squad car Tuesday, and the government struck back by barring the West Bank's 1 million Palestinians from entering Israel.
Police blamed militant Arabs for the pre-dawn slayings.
The killings were carried out at an intersection near Hadera, in Israel's heartland. They appeared to escalate a wave of Arab attacks that has claimed 13 Israeli lives in March. Twenty-six Palestinians also have been killed this month.
Facing a public outcry, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin went on national TV to tell his people: "I understand the pain, the worry, the rage. We are indeed going through a difficult period of escalating Palestinian terrorism."
Flanked by an Israeli flag and speaking in somber tones, Rabin announced he had ordered the army reinforced in the occupied territories, and added:
"From tomorrow, there will be no Palestinians from the territories on the sovereign territory of Israel until further notice.
"Terrorism never defeated us and never will," said Rabin, 71, a former general.
Palestinians said the tough measure of sealing the occupied territories and barring 120,000 Palestinians from their jobs in Israel would damage peace prospects.
Rabin appealed to Israelis "not to lose faith that we will achieve peace." But the attack threatened his effort to defend the U.S.-sponsored peace process against demands from Israeli hard-liners to scrap it.
In Washington, presidential spokesman George Stephanopoulos said the White House wanted to keep the peace talks on track but added, "We're obviously concerned by the escalating violence on all sides."
Police said highway patrol officers Mordechai Yisrael, 35, and Daniel Hazut, 32, had been found slumped in their car, riddled with machine gun bullets, their weapons gone.
"This event represents the bankruptcy of the Rabin government," said Hazut's brother, Gadi.
Rabin, who is also defense minister, canceled his engagements to deal with the violence, unprecedented since the Palestinian uprising began in December 1987.
About 200 people gathered at the scene of the killings, chanting "Death to the Arabs!" and "Rabin go home!"
Arab reports said settlers had stoned Arab cars outside Bethlehem in the West Bank late Tuesday. About 150 Jewish demonstrators briefly blocked traffic near Rabin's Jerusalem home, police said.
Right-wingers denounced the government for failing to halt the violence.
"The blood of Israeli citizens being murdered and stabbed without letup is on this government's head," said former Defense Minister Ariel Sharon of the Likud party.
The Palestinians quit the peace talks after Israel deported 400 Muslim fundamentalists last December.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by AP - Israeli police officers pulling tires away from a fire that was started Tuesday by a crowd to protest the killing of two traffic officers near Hadera, Israel.

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document