RACIAL HATE CRIME CALLED TERRORISM AS 4 ARE CHARGED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 19, 1997, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 01B
Length: 589 words
Byline: Charles Bosworth Jr.; Of The Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


Four whites -  three teen-agers and an adult - were charged Tuesday with burning a crude wooden cross in the front yard of a black family in Glen Carbon last year - a hate crime that authorities hope actually helped bring the races closer together.
State's Attorney William R. Haine of Madison County called the four "local thugs and hoodlums" with lengthy police records when he announced the charges at a news conference in Edwardsville. Flanked by FBI agents, Glen Carbon police and a leader of the NAACP, Haine called the cross burning "an act of terrorism . . . that strikes at the heart of the community, peace and order."
No evidence exists, Haine said, that the four were part of any organized group or that they had any contact with the victims before the attack. He called the cross burning "a random act of hatred and vandalism."
Police Chief Bob Rizzi of Glen Carbon said the incident, in the 100 block of Main Street on June 10, had led to showings of support for the black family. Residents held a candlelight vigil, and officials strongly condemned the attack.
"I don't think it has damaged the community," Rizzi said. "I think it might have brought the community a little closer."
Haine and the others said the intense investigation proved racial vi olence would not be tolerated in the county. He vowed to seek prison sentences if the suspects are convicted.
Arrested Tuesday and charged with hate crimes were Steven J. Horvath, 17, of the 900 block of Troy Road, Edwardsville, and Darren R. Burgess, 2 7, of the 100 block of Frances Street, Glen Carbon. Two others, both 16, were arrested and charged as juveniles, but Haine said he would ask a judge to certify them for trial as adults.
A fifth person, Brandon P. North, 18, of the 100 block of Rosin Street, Glen Carbon, was charged with obstructing justice for allegedly destroying a gasoline can used in the cross burning, and refusing to cooperate with the FBI.
The victims - Antonia Valentine and Keith Ellis - said last year that they had moved to Glen Carbon from Nebraska after being told it was a safe place to raise their two children without fear of violence. They were shocked to find the scorched cross smoldering on their front lawn after a man in a ski mask threw a rock through their 6-year-old daughter's bedroom window.
The family has left the area since the cross burning, Haine said. They could not be reached for comment.
Carl Jason Sr., past president of the Edwardsville chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, said at the news conference that he had been disgruntled with the pace of the investigation but now was satisfied that the police had remained dedicated to solving the crime. He said he hoped the investigation would give black residents hope that local communities were interested in improving race relations.
Haine said the charges Tuesday followed nine months of intense investigation by the FBI and Glen Carbon police.
One of the defendants and an acquaintance from Madison County had been charged with a robbery in Little Rock, Ark., and the FBI interviewed them there about the cross burning.
The four suspects were charged with three counts of hate crimes that allege that they were racially motivated when they committed the crimes of disorderly conduct and property damage for burning the cross on the lawn of the black family's rented house, and property damage again for throwing a rock through the window. State law requires hate crimes to be based on other crimes committed under racial motivation.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Photo headshots -
 (1) (Steven J.) Horvath (2) (Darren R.) Burgess (Appeared in the Three Star Edition)

Load-Date: March 19, 1997


End of Document