Racial terrorism, and justifying pre-emptive strike
University Wire
March 4, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Rocky Mountain Collegian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 318 words
Byline: By Shannon Baldwin, Rocky Mountain Collegian
Dateline: Fort Collins, Colo.
Body


Did you hear about the recent terrorist-related arrest? No, I don't mean the arrest of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the alleged Sept. 11 mastermind. Naturally, you've heard about that. The only news that would top that would be the confinement of Osama bin Laden himself.
Colorado State U.
I'm talking about the other arrest that happened just last month in Washington (State, not D.C.). The arrest of two people for sending (and intending to send) top-secret government information to terrorist groups. Information which involves chemical, nuclear and biological-warfare strategies. Information that, according to the FBI, posses a huge threat to the security of the United States and is worth millions on the black market.
Didn't hear about that, huh? Weird. Seems like that is the sort of thing that would make big news nowadays.
Maybe it's because the suspects do not have a decidedly Arabic last name. Rafael Davila, 51, and his ex-wife, Deborah Cummings Davila, were taken into custody last month. Rafael had served for years as an Army intelligence officer and was a decorated Vietnam special-forces veteran. Deborah is a schoolteacher. You can't get more American than that.
Federal prosecutors allege some of the secret materials they possessed were intended to go to white supremacists and anti-government radicals. Oh. White supremacists. Not al Qaeda. Well, no wonder we didn't hear about it! I know, for a second I had you reaching for your duct-tape.
So, you can go about your business. They may be supplying avowed anti-government radicals with sensitive information, but at least those radicals are good-old homegrown American Caucasians. It's not like they're even close to the Axis of Evil. The loss at the Oklahoma City bombing was only 168. That's peanuts compared to the losses on Sept. 11.
White may not make right, but it doesn't make news, either.
(C) 2002 Rocky Mountain Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 4, 2003


End of Document