RACIAL 'JUSTICE'
The New York Times
February 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 3; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 876 words
Dateline: EVANSTON, Ill.
Body


A South African court recently cleared three black nationalists of murder charges and then condemned them to death anyway for their part in an abortive guerrilla action. In Florida and North Carolina, last year, all-white juries acquitted, despite strong indications of guilt, whites accused of murdering blacks and antiracist white radicals.
In none of these cases were there overt violations of due process of law. In South Africa, violence against the regime is in itself a capital crime. In America, white racists can benefit from a criminaljustice system that gives defense attorneys great latitude in the choice and manipulation of juries. But the results of these trials correlate so closely with the prejudices of a dominant group that they raise the question of whether impartial justice is possible in multiracial societies where one segment has all or most of the power.
Northwestern University History professor George Frederickson letter discusses racial injustice in America and South Africa
By most standards of democracy and human rights, the South African legal system is unjust to its core because the white minority monopolizes political power. Only whites can vote or sit in a parliament that routinely passes inequitable laws. Blacks are thus ruled by laws that they had no part in making and to which they have never consented; from their perspective, the regime lacks legitimacy and has no claim on their support or compliance.
In America, the current sources of racial injustice are harder to pin down. In the 1960's, Southern blacks gained new, more-effective protection for the civil and political rights originally given them by Reconstruction-era constitutional amendments. But the recent wave of violence against blacks may signal a resurgence of the kind of ''white terror'' that helped undermine enforcement of equal rights more than a century ago and set the stage for segregation. Racist organizations calling themselves the Ku Klux Klan have been a common denominator in the two eras. In the early 1870's, the refusal of white juries to convict Klansmen charged with violating the rights of blacks was a sign that the first great effort to provide blacks with the full rights of citizenship was doomed. In the 1980's, is there any real danger that a similar immunity for Klansmen, as apparently reflected in the Greensboro, N.C. verdict - the acquittal of six Klansmen and Nazis in the slaying of five members of the Communist Workers Party - will have a comparable result?
Perhaps not, but Americans committed to civil rights have reason for concern. A return to legalized segregation is unlikely; more conceivable is regression to a state of affairs permitting the practical denial of blacks' rights because the authorities are unable or unwilling to suppress and punish white-supremacist terrorism.
In South Africa, the potential for racial violence results in part from denying black-nationalist groups such as the African National Congress the right to nonviolent protest of the kind that proved effective in the American South. Ruthlessly repressed and driven underground, they have been left with no choices but armed resistance or acquiescence. In America, white extremist organizations such as the Klan and the American Nazi Party pose the main danger to racial peace, for they seek to create incidents that will provoke blacks and other minorities to counterviolence. A major problem in dealing with this menace is that such organizations enjoy full First Amendment protection so long as all that can be proved is that they promulgate racial hatred. Some democratic nations have enacted laws prohibiting the maligning of racial groups, but American civil libertarians oppose such laws as a dangerous infringement of free speech.
If Klan-inspired racial violence and terrorism continue to increase, demands to ban the Klan and similar organizations can be expected. We may have to ask ourselves whether free speech, the right of assembly, and the full protection of our criminal-justice system should continue to be granted to groups that in effect promote racial assassination and race war. It is easy to imagine a situation in which appeals to racism are the equivalent of shouting ''fire!'' in a crowded theater.
But the path toward legal repression of militant racism contains many pitfalls. A predominantly white power structure would be charged with the enforcement of such laws, and there is no assurance that it would not be used primarily against minority nationalists. Even a conscientious enforcement effort could backfire. If, as seems likely, militant racism enjoys the tacit support of many Americans, proscriptive action against the few Klan and Nazi Party members might simply create martyrs and encourage a backlash. Furthermore, driving the movement underground could make it even more vicious and dangerous. But the question of how to achieve racial justice in the face of white terrorism will not go away, and all feasible remedies should be seriously debated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
George M. Fredrickson, professor of American history at Northwestern University, is author of ''White Supremacy: A Compartive Study in American and South African History.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document