RADICALS ON TRIAL CALL CLERIC LEADER
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 10, 1993, Wednesday,
THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 304 words
Byline: SUSAN SACHS, NEWSDAY
Body


Chanting slogans against Jews and President Hosni Mubarak, 43 Islamic militants charged with the attempted murder of tourists proclaimed yesterday in their first court appearance that Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman is their spiritual leader.
The preachings of the blind cleric, now living in the United States, have attracted not only young Egyptians like these, but also the Arab suspects charged in connection with the World Trade Center bombing.
The Egyptian government has accused the defendants, plus six other men still at large, of being members of the illegal Gamaa el-Islamiya, or Islamic Group, that has claimed responsibility for a series of political assassinations and recent attacks on foreign tourists.
A British nurse died and eight foreigners were wounded in the four attacks on tourist buses in which the Islamic militants have been accused.
The defendants were brought into a courtroom and locked into 15-foot-high cages, where they promptly unfurled signs in Arabic and English for the waiting television cameras. ''Islam Is Coming,'' said one banner. ''We Don't Kill Any Tourists,'' said another.
The military prosecutors said the gasoline bombs and explosives thrown at tourist buses, as well as the shots fired at them, showed the group intended to kill tourists.
''What is the Gamaa al-Islamiya?'' Hisham Abdel-Zader, one of the defendants shouted through the metal grill. ''It is led by Dr. Omar Abdel- Rahman. If terrorism and extremism mean legitimate self-defense and the defense of our religion and honor, then welcome terrorism.''
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was assassinated in 1981 by Islamic Jihad, another Muslim fundamentalist group. Abdel-Rahman, then living in Egypt, was charged with ordering his followers to kill Sadat. He was acquitted but has said since that the late president deserved his fate.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document