RADICALS IN EGYPT SIDE WITH SHEIK IN U.S.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 10, 1993, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 15A
Length: 241 words
Dateline: HAEKSTAP, EGYPT
Body


Forty-three Islamic radicals opened their trial Tuesday by professing allegiance to Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, the cleric who occasionally preaches at a mosque in New Jersey attended by the Palestinian arrested in the World Trade Center bombing.
Abdel-Rahman has denounced the bombing in New York.
His lawyer declined to comment on the statement.
The radicals on trial belong to a fundamentalist organization called the Islamic Group. The statement in which they pledged their allegiance to the sheik did not refer to the Trade Center. But British Broadcasting Corp.  said the group had denied, in a fax received Monday in Cairo, that it was involved in the bombing.
Abdel-Rahman has been acquitted three times by Egyptian courts of charges related to violence by radicals; the charges included ordering the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981.
Egyptian fundamentalists have staged violent attacks in Egypt since early last year, trying to oust President Hosni Mubarak's secular government.
The defendants are charged with terrorist acts, including four attacks on buses carrying foreign tourists and an attack on a Nile cruise boat.
One of the defendants, Hisham Abdel-Zaher said: "What is the al-Gamaa al-Islamiya (Islamic Group)? It is led by Dr. Omar Abdel-Rahman. It killed Sadat after he rejected the rule of God. If terrorism and extremism means legitimate self-defense and the defense of our religion and honor, then welcome terrorism."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by Reuters - Muslims on trial in attacks on tourists in Egypt holding the Koran in their cage in Cairo Tuesday. A banner over their heads reads: "We didn't kill anyone of the tourists." They said they were members of the Islamic Group and followers of Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, now in New Jersey.

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document