RADICALIZATION IS NOT TERRORISM; (OR, HOW I BECAME A 'LAZY RADICAL'); FORMER FBI AGENT LAWRENCE E. LIKAR HAS DEDICATED HIS LIFE TO JUSTICE, SECURITY AND THE AMERICAN WAY. BUT WHILE RESEARCHING HIS NEW ACADEMIC BOOK ON TERRORISM, HE CAME TO REALIZE THE MOTIVATIONS OF ECO-WARRIORS AND OTHER ACTIVISTS. HERE'S THE STORY OF HIS 'RADICALIZATION.'
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 29, 2011 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; THE NEXT PAGE; Pg. F-7
Length: 2138 words
Byline: LAWRENCE E. LIKAR
Body


On May 1 in Abbottabad, Pakistan, Osama bin Laden finally received his "just desserts" at the hands of SEAL Team Six. His death removed one source of radical religious ideology that justified the violent acts of nihilistic individuals and groups throughout the world. Bin Laden had no redeeming qualities, but he understood how to inculcate violent behavior in human beings through the psychological process of "radicalization."
I celebrated bin Laden's death, but his death also caused me to reflect on the emotional process that can turn some human beings into remorseless murderers for what they either believe or profess to believe is a "just" cause.
I study human violence, both its causes and methods of prevention. One type of human violence is terrorism. To understand why a sane individual commits murder for a political or social cause, you have to understand the process called radicalization.
I became interested in this process over a period of several years, including an intense period of research into the subjects of terrorism, environmental degradation, risk analysis, and security planning that culminated in the recent publication of my book "Eco-Warriors, Nihilistic Terrorists, and the Environment." My research focused on those individual terrorists and small groups who were motivated either by protective feelings toward non-human animals and the natural environment or by a corrupted form of the Islamic Salafist Movement, referred to by various names, such as Salafi jihadism or Takfiri Islam.
I examined these types of terrorists in relation to their nexus with the natural environment. To do so, however, I had to understand their "mindset" and how it developed. The term "mindset" is best defined as a fixed mental state relating to an individual's cognitive perception of society. The mindset of a terrorist includes inherited personality traits but is also influenced by a social environment that fostered radical beliefs.
The 18th-century political theorist Thomas Hobbes professed that to understand the reasons for human acts one needs only to "read thyself" under similar circumstances.
Hobbes was right. I found that understanding the process of radicalization is easy if you possess the trait of empathy, as most human beings do.
b> The Radicalization Process
/b>
Radicalization is an internal, emotional process in individuals that occurs in response to a specific social or environmental problem. It encompasses the idea that some form of action needs to be taken because of failure on the part of the political process to resolve the problem in an acceptable manner. Radicalization is sometimes described as a pathway. On this pathway, a person can stop at various steps or continue to the end.
Radicalization begins with a causal motivation and ends with a decision to accept or reject violent, illegal actions as an acceptable solution for a perceived problem. Osama bin Laden understood the power of motivation. He appealed to a variety of individuals by identifying problems that he believed would cause some individuals to become radicalized to the point of physical violence.
b> Osama bin Laden and the Environment
/b>
Bin Laden once issued the following, seemingly altruistic, statement: "The life of all mankind is in danger because of the global warming resulting to a large degree from the emissions of the factories of the major corporations."
Bin Laden's statement was accurate. Our warming planet, influenced greatly by human activities, has changed our climate. Problems of environmental degradation, population growth and resource scarcity are magnified by climate change and combined may be the greatest threat to the survival of human civilization. Already some regions of the world are facing what may be irreversible impacts of climate change, such as desertification in Africa and ground instability in the permafrost regions of the world.
Bin Laden's attribution of blame to the actions of corporations was an attempt to influence people in developing countries to perceive multinational corporations, usually headquartered in Western nations, as an enemy. He furnished a target for those frustrated, angry and alienated individuals that are present on the fringes of all societies.
Bin Laden's strategy was to use the endangered environment as a motivational tool to initiate the development of terrorist organizations, whose targets would be Western corporations and whose justification for violence would be the harm those corporations' actions inflicted on the environment.
b> Environmentally Linked Terrorism
/b>
Terrorism is one manifestation of human conflict, and the natural environment has, throughout history, been linked to such conflicts.
Today, the linkage exists in several different contexts. Some terrorist groups have attacked the natural environment in order to inflict economic damage and instill fear in their identified human enemy. This has occurred in Israel, where arson has been used to destroy forests that are regarded as almost religious places.
Other terrorist groups have attacked organizations that they believe are damaging the natural environment. Bin Laden's recognition of global warming's harmful effects caused him to believe that the natural environment could be used as a motivational tool to foment anger and a desire to take action among a population that is being negatively affected by a degraded environment.
Taking action to save the environment was a cause that he believed would appeal to a wide variety of people. It is a cause that resonates with me although I have never had the requisite mindset that would allow me to take direct action against the forces that threaten our environment.
In the last several years, however, my mindset has changed:
I have become radicalized.
b> Bear Truth: Becoming a Radical
/b>
Alaska's coastal brown bears can kill a man with one blow of a paw. It can run at speeds approaching 30 mph and can pursue fleeing prey into the lower reaches of trees.
In the late spring of 2006, at Hallo Bay on the Pacific coast of the Alaskan Peninsula, I first saw such a bear on a rain-soaked trail in the Alaskan wilderness. I was with a guided, six-person group that was moving through the boggy terrain in a single file. We had arrived that day, beginning a one-week stay for the purpose of observing the brown bears in their natural habitat. I was the last person in the file with our guide at the head.
I had reflexively turned to look back on our trail and saw an extremely large brown bear, approximately 30 yards away and moving on all fours up the trail toward me. My thoughts were "Damn! I don't have a gun" and "Jesus, I could be this guy's dinner." When I turned to alert the rest of the group, they were already out of sight around a bend in the trail.
My next thought was "don't run" and I turned back to see if the bear was still coming. He was gone!
I immediately hurried to catch up with the group and told them about the bear. They looked at me with what I thought was a degree of skepticism and we continued moving along the trail. Then, approximately 20 minutes later, our guide signaled a halt, brought us into a circle, and told us to move quietly and not to stop when we saw the bushes moving on the side of the trail up ahead. He said that a male bear was mating with a female and that bears became aggressive when disturbed while mating.
I thoroughly understood the bear's feelings. As we quietly moved along the trail, I saw the shaking bushes to the left of the trail and the brown back of what I now believed was my bear rising above the bushes.
Thus began a fascinating week that ended with my gaining great respect for bears and their importance to the continued existence of true wilderness areas in North America. I also developed a belief that they should not be hunted for pleasure and the awareness and concern that human beings were eventually going to be responsible for the destruction of this magnificent species.
I did not realize it at that time, but I had taken the first step on my pathway toward radical environmentalism.
b> My Radicalization Pathway
/b>
During the research for my book, as I studied the process of radicalization, I discerned what I perceived was the pathway that individual environmental activists would take as they moved toward the commission of an act of violence.
I also soon realized that I was on that path. The pathway has six steps. It begins with an interest in environmental problems.
Although a prior career in the Army's Special Forces developed my initial fascination with wilderness areas, my experience with Alaskan brown bears had led to my recognition that human actions could cause their extinction and there was nothing they could do about it. I became concerned about climate change, a problem, partially caused by humans, that has affected the bears and I realized that I had moved up the pathway to an obsessive concern for the welfare of the bears and the natural environment that they inhabit.
As part of my research, I read the written works by and about those individuals who are legendary environmental activists, including those who have been accused of being terrorists. I realized that I had developed a biocentric perspective when I finished Paul Watson's autobiography. Mr. Watson, the founder of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, equates the lives of whales to human beings and that belief, along with several other beliefs, no longer sounded ridiculous to me.
I realized that there were some individuals I had encountered in my prior career with the FBI whose lives I would not automatically value over wild animals, and certainly not over my own dog.
Then, while researching the tragic deep-sea oil well blowout that resulted in the destruction of the ship, Deepwater Horizon, caused the death of 11 members of its crew, and damage to the ecology of the entire Gulf region, I became angry at the actions of BP.
Corporations, whose goal is to earn profits for shareholders, are often the nemesis of the natural environment. Soon, I became concerned with the surge of Marcellus Shale drilling in Pennsylvania.
Currently, in Pennsylvania and other states, the corporations involved in natural gas extraction are the target of environmental activists. Drilling for natural gas through the use of the "fracking process" does harm the environment. It impacts the quality of both our air and water. The question is not "does it?" but "how much?"
Our national and state governments have been strongly and openly influenced by the oil and gas industry. This same industry is opposed to strong environmental laws if they adversely impact their profits. Unfortunately, if activists believe that this industry is beyond the control of federal and state law, some could become radicalized and eventually resort to acts of violence against the property of this industry.
I understand the motivation for some environmental activists to become eco-terrorists, but for me violence is a bridge too far.
b> The Problem with Violence
/b>
Being a radical is not synonymous with being a terrorist. The involvement in the commission of an act of violence is the sine qua non of becoming a terrorist and is the last part of the final step on the pathway.
To complete the pathway, a radical needs to possess an aptitude for violence. Unlike Salafi jihadis, who glorify the taking of human life, ecoterrorists usually operate in accordance with published guidelines that include an edict to save life, both animal and human. The guidelines do, however, allow violence directed against the property of those organizations and individuals who harm the natural environment or animals.
Although I understand why some environmental activists finish the pathway, I cannot take the final step on the pathway -- the action imperative. I believe that violence against people is terrorism, which our society cannot condone, despite a plausible argument that violent means may be the only way to achieve the just goal of saving the natural environment, including ourselves.
The mildest forms of the action imperative -- acts of civil disobedience, minor property damage -- are justifiable from my radical perspective. But I will never engage in them.
My prior FBI career, emotional and physical maturity, skepticism of the effectiveness of civil disobedience when the general public is more concerned with job growth than they are with environmental problems, and some residual belief that America's citizenry will eventually wake up and address the issue of climate change before it is too late, stops me from engaging in direct actions to save the environment.
I am a radical, but at this stage of my life, I do not have the desire to take direct, physical action in defense of the natural environment.
I will, however, talk and write about it. I guess I have become a "lazy radical."

Notes

Lawrence E. Likar is associate professor and chair of the Department of Justice, Law and Security at La Roche College (Lawrence.Likar@LaRoche.edu). He served as an FBI agent from 1978 to 2001. His book "Eco-Warriors, Nihilistic Terrorists, and the Environment" was just published by Praeger.

Graphic

 
PHOTO ILLUSTRATION: Ben Howard/Post-Gazette

Load-Date: June 4, 2011


End of Document