Radical Cleric In Indonesia Is Acquitted Of Terrorism
The New York Times
March 4, 2005 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 776 words
Byline: By RAYMOND BONNER
Dateline: JAKARTA, Indonesia, March 3 
Body


For more than two years, the Bush administration pressed the Indonesian government to prosecute a radical Islamic cleric, Abu Bakar Bashir, whom the Americans portrayed as Osama bin Laden's lieutenant in Southeast Asia.
 On Thursday, an Indonesian court essentially rejected all of the American accusations, acquitting Mr. Bashir, 66, of all terrorism charges in the bombings in the Marriott Hotel in Jakarta, in August 2003, and of having directed the bombings of nightclubs in Bali in October 2002. In what appears to be a concession to the American pressure, the five judges did convict Mr. Bashir of one of eight counts, of criminal conspiracy in connection with the bombings of the Bali nightclubs, because the judges said he ''knew the perpetrators,'' and his words may have encouraged them
 The judges sentenced Mr. Bashir to 30 months in prison, but said that he would receive credit for the 10 months he had served awaiting trial. The United States and Australia, which had pushed equally hard for his prosecution, expressed disappointment with the outcome.
 But the Bush administration bears some of the responsibility, Indonesian and Australian officials said.
 The prosecution's case was hampered because the administration refused to make available to the Indonesians two important Qaeda members who are in American custody, Riudan Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, who was seized by the Central Intelligence Agency in Bangkok in August 2003, and Omar al-Faruq, who was picked up here and turned over to the agency in June 2002. 
 The two men, who are Indonesian nationals, have given their American interrogators strong evidence directly linking Mr. Bashir and Jemaah Islamiyah, a radical Islamic group, to terrorism, American and Australian officials say. But the Americans will not allow Indonesian officials to interrogate either man, and that diminishes the ability to use their statements in court.
 ''We need Hambali very much,'' Ansyaad Mbai, the leader of counterterrorism in Indonesia's Ministry for Political and Security Affairs, said Thursday in an interview. ''We fight to get access to him, but we have failed.'' He added that Hambali was needed not only for the Bashir case, but for other terrorism cases, as well.
 Australian officials have also urged the Bush administration to make Hambali and Mr. Faruq available to the Indonesians. ''It's hypocrisy,'' said an Australian official. He said the United States could not ask the Indonesians to prosecute Mr. Bashir and others alleged to be terrorists, but then not help them.
 Mr. Mbai said that it was ''very significant'' that the judges had sentenced Mr. Bashir at all.
 ''It shows our judges have the courage to punish him,'' Mr. Mbai said.
 The Bush administration began prodding the Indonesian government to prosecute Mr. Bashir even before the Bali bombings, but the government did not act until after the bombings. 
 Mr. Bashir was acquitted of terrorism and subversion charges after a trial in late 2003, but convicted on minor immigration violations. When he finished his sentence last April, and was released, the United States and Australia began working on the Indonesian government to file new charges, which it did, resulting the verdict on Thursday.
 In general, Indonesian officials have been reluctant to move against Mr. Bashir for fear of antagonizing Islamic fundamentalists. But Mr. Bashir's following has not appeared to be that strong. The protests when he was arrested were small, and his supporters at the court on Thursday were loud in chants and shouts of ''God is great'' but numbered fewer than 500.
 The American Embassy sought to cast the verdict in the most favorable light.
 ''We respect the independence of Indonesia's judiciary, and welcome the conviction of this known terrorist leader,'' said Max Kwak, an embassy spokesman. ''We also welcome the Indonesian court's recognition of the existence of the Jemaah Islamiyah in Indonesia and its involvement in violent terrorist attacks that have left hundreds of Indonesians and others dead and injured.''
 Mr. Kwak added, ''We respect the independence and judgment of the Indonesian judiciary, but given the gravity of the charges on which he was convicted, we are disappointed at the length of the sentence.''
 Australia's foreign minister, Alexander Downer, used similar language. ''It's disappointing that the sentence is just for two and a half years,'' he said in Canberra, Australia.
 Mr. Bashir's lawyers contended Thursday, as they long have, that their client was tried because of political pressure from the United States. They said they planned to appeal.                                         

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 4, 2005


End of Document