Raids highlight Africa's threat; Terrorists operate with little or no risk of punishment
USA TODAY
October 7, 2013 Monday
CHASE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 460 words
Byline: Jabeen Bhatti, and Sarah Lynch, Special for USA TODAY
Body


Two U.S. raids in Libya and Somalia that apprehended a major player on the terrorist most-wanted list highlight how the growing terror network in the region is able to operate freely.
Nazih Abdul-Hamed al-Ruqai, 49, known by his alias Abu Anas al-Libi, was living in Tripoli and was captured by U.S. forces Saturday on the streets of the Libyan capital. He is facing charges of terrorism in the U.S. for involvement in the attack on the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, which killed more than 200 people.
Analysts say the twin raids, in which U.S. military and intelligence operatives also went after senior members of the al-Qaeda allied group al-Shabab in Barawe, Somalia, illustrate that terrorists can operate openly in the Sahel and Maghreb regions, and that local governments won't -- or can't -- do much to stop them.
In Libya, terrorism networks are  thriving, mainly because there is fractured political development to impose  security structures and solid governance. As a result, terrorists are taking advantage of the lawlessness to move weapons and fighters easily across borders.
"The region is now an important arena for jihadists, and the size of their area of operation is growing," says Daniel Byman, research director at the Saban Center for Middle East Policy who focuses on counterterrorism and Middle East security, testifying to Congress earlier this year.
"Libya is ripe for homegrown terrorists and foreign terrorist penetration," he adds. "The al-Qaeda core has long included Libyans in its ranks and reportedly dispatched operatives to build an organization in the post-Gadhafi era."
Libyans worried about how their country has developed since the 2011 revolution say they welcome news of the raid.
"Since the end of the revolution, Islamists groups influenced by al-Qaeda have developed," says Ousama Buera, a founding member of the Barqa Youth Movement, a pro-independence group in eastern Libya. "We don't want them to turn Libya into a terrorist state, so that is why the operation has been well-accepted, even if it was led by American special forces."
Some believe the capture of al-Libi is a significant strike against al-Qaeda.
"If true, reports of the capture of Abu Anas al-Libi would represent a major blow against the remnants of al-Qaeda's core," Adam Schiff, a member of the House Intelligence Committee and Democratic Representative from California, said in a statement.
In Somalia, al-Shabab, which draws fighters from around the region and the West, has long based itself in Barawe. The group has carried out a number of terrorist operations, most recently claiming responsibility for the attack last month at Westgate mall in Nairobi, Kenya, that left dozens of people dead.
Contributing: Mathieu Galtier
in Tripoli 

Load-Date: October 7, 2013


End of Document