Raid on Police Station Rekindles A Fear of Terrorism for Greeks
The New York Times
August 22, 1988, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 783 words
Byline: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ATHENS, Aug. 21
Body


Just as Greece seemed to be recovering from an unusual bout of terrorist attacks, a squad of urban guerrillas seized a police station here without firing a shot, tied up the officers inside and stole a small arsenal of weapons.
The incident last Sunday was the first of its kind here, and it is arousing fears that Greece's most deadly terrorist group, called November 17, has made an evolutionary leap this summer, emerging much bolder and more sophisticated than before.
Virulently anti-American, November 17 carried out the bombing assassination of the United States military attache here six weeks ago, and it promised to strike again as the United States tries to negotiate a new lease for its military bases in Greece.
''Now they have people wondering where they will strike next, and that alone is a success,'' said a senior Government policy maker who discreetly dissented from official proclamations that discounted the threat.
The assault on the police station has been widely depicted in the local press and by opposition figures as graphic evidence that law enforcement has lapsed into disarray.
The incident has had an amplified effect because Greece already faced accusations from some Americans and West Europeans that a lax attitude toward terrorism permitted the use of Athens as a base by Middle East terrorists, including those who attacked the cruise ship City of Poros last month, killing nine people.
 
Concern About Tourism
Since then, Greece has taken a variety of measures to increase cooperation with the United States and West European nations to combat terrorism and to increase security for tourists.
Acknowledging that Greece had maintained a welcoming attitude toward a variety of Middle East groups, Tourism Minister Nikos Skoulas said in an interview: ''We used to think that if we were nice to everyone in the region, they would be nice to us. But we have put a tougher message out now, saying we are still friendly but do not use Greece as a place to settle your differences.''
These efforts seem to have aroused little interest among Greeks, who often say they have been unfairly criticized on the terrorism issue. ''When other countries suffer a terrorist attack, they get sympathy,'' a foreign policy official said. ''When we are hit, all we get are accusations. It is hypocritical.''
But the issue of police efficiency, highlighted by the assault on the police station, seems to strike a much more responsive chord.
''This is going to be a hot political issue,'' said Theodoros Kasimis, chief spokesman for the opposition New Democracy Party, adding, ''People here are used to living in a secure, virtually crime-free society, and now there is a growing sense of disorder.''
He said the police forces are understaffed, poorly trained, demoralized and overly politicized. His comments echoed assessments also offered by several Western diplomats here.
A senior Government official conceded, ''Our biggest problem in fighting terrorism is mounting a sustained, efficient police action.'' But he added, ''We are suffering an inheritance of the dictatorship.''
 
Security Agencies Weakened
Greece's seven years of tough military rule ended in 1974. When democracy was restored, the official said, police and domestic intelligence bodies were stripped of many powers, and since then any efforts to build up law enforcement agencies have been politically sensitive.
November 17's seizing of the police station in the small suburb of Virona on Sunday was ''designed to show up the police as inept and helpless,'' a Western diplomat here said. ''As a political action it was very clever and well-timed.''
Striking in broad daylight during a holiday weekend, six gunmen took over the police station for nearly half an hour, bound and gagged four officers and made off with an unspecified quantity of automatic weapons, uniforms and other paraphernalia.
November 17, named after the date of a 1973 student revolt against the military Government, has been operating since at least 1975, when it assassinated the Central Intelligence Agency station chief in Athens, Richard Welch.
No member of the organization has ever been identified, let alone arrested, according to Greece's Minister of Public Order, Anastassios Sehiotis. ''They are a tiny group, no more than a handful of people,'' he said. ''That's why they have been so elusive.''
But Western diplomats and other terrorism experts are arguing that this assessment may need to be revised. November 17 had carried out mostly hit-and-run assassinations at a rate of one a year, at most. This summer it killed the American military attache, Capt. William E. Nordeen of the Navy, with a more powerful and complex bomb than it had used before.


End of Document