Random searches now common in New York City subway system; Police consider the tactic valuable
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 10, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a5
Length: 302 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body


It was billed as a necessary counterterrorism tactic after the deadly mass transit bombings in London: Anyone entering New York's sprawling subway system could be subjected to a random search of backpacks, briefcases and shopping bags.
One year and countless searches later, the practice once thought of as a temporary imposition, with the potential to trample civil rights, remains in effect and is barely causing a stir.
"We consider it a valuable tactic to use," Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said in a recent interview. "It's not a panacea, it's not a cure-all, but it's another tool in our toolbox."
Officials won't say how many bags police have searched in the past year, or specify where and when they do it. Unpredictable deployment keeps would-be bombers off balance, they say.
The program has resulted in five arrests - not for terrorism, but for drug possession, disorderly conduct and other minor charges.
Still, the nation's largest police department considers the city's 468 subway stations and the average 4.5 million riders who use them daily on average to be ripe targets for terrorism. The subway inspections are just one element of a counterterrorism program that costs the NYPD roughly $200 million per year.
The New York Civil Liberties Union believed the searches were such violations of privacy that it went to court last year to stop them. A federal judge disagreed, saying that following the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks the need for such measures was "indisputable, pressing, ongoing and evolving."
The NYCLU has appealed. Its lawyers argue the searches are too infrequent to be a real deterrent, yet frequent enough to violate constitutional rights.
"We're in favor of making people feel comfortable, but not at the expense of the Constitution," said NYCLU Legal Director Christopher Dunn.

Graphic

 
AP Photo

Load-Date: July 11, 2006


End of Document