RATE AND MONITOR TERRORISM RISK
Tampa Bay Times
June 15, 2016 Wednesday
4 State / Suncoast Edition


Copyright  2016 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 12; YOUR LETTERS
Length: 960 words
Body


Orlando massacre
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the FBI should consider identifying all the relevant factors that can be used to predict the likelihood that a person will commit a terrorist act. Officials could create a formula that incorporates these factors, assigns them specific magnitudes, combines those magnitudes and establishes the likelihood of a terrorist act.
The magnitude would determine what actions to take to prevent an individual from committing a terrorist attack. The lowest magnitude would require no action. The next highest level may require an aggressive investigation looking at the subject's Internet history, weapons purchases or other potential terrorist training activity (piloting and bioweapons knowledge), mental health, country of origin and other factors. The highest level would lead to arrest, with the investigation establishing probable cause that the subject was planning to commit a terrorist act or that a terrorist act was imminent.
This calculation could be made for past terrorism in the United States to see how valid the equation is at predicting a terrorist act.
John Campo, Tampa
* * *
Orlando massacre
Don't politicize this fight
The threats we face are not just an issue of domestic gun ownership; this is a much bigger problem. The terrorism fight is now here on our own land. The terrorists have taken it to our front doors, shopping malls and nightclubs.
They mean to terrorize us, immobilize us and scare us into thinking we need to change the way we operate and think of our rights and privileges. We need to be measured in how we approach this terror. We cannot just look to knee-jerk responses.
Americans are strong, resilient, smart and adaptive. We need to unite in this fight; it should not and cannot be politicized. Maybe these events will galvanize us into a unity that we need now more than ever.
My wife, daughter and I are getting ready to have our son deploy to battle terrorism. We are keenly aware of our young men and women who are heroes in this noble and necessary venture. Please pray for our son and all the other members of our armed forces in the fight for the right to do what you and I are doing right now: speaking our minds and sharing our thoughts freely.
Mark Wickham, Trinity
* * *
Obama let ISIS off the hook
Every time a Muslim enamored with the ISIS way of life kills, it brings more would-be terrorists into the fold. We need to go into ISIS-held territory and wipe them out like we did the Nazis.
Unfortunately, President Barack Obama will leave behind a history of letting the Islamic State grow in Iraq, Syria and Libya instead of taking action when it was needed. Now the job is much bigger than it would have been if he wasn't so intent on "leading from behind."
Andrew W. Schultz, Tampa
* * *
Appalling response
Just hours after the worst case of gun violence in our nation's history, Donald Trump tweets, "Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism." If this doesn't take people aback as much as it has myself, then this nation is far worse off than I ever thought.
Jane Croll, Brooksville
* * *
Florida insurance market
Healthy insurance market
We applaud the Times for the thorough coverage of Florida's homeowners insurance market and willingness to report on the industry's strong financial position on virtually every level, including: the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund, with almost $14 billion in surplus; Citizens, with more than $7 billion; and a healthy and competitive private marketplace led by several Florida-based insurers.
These insurers are well-capitalized. At the end of 2015, Florida's domestic insurers had a combined surplus of $2.4 billion and carried first-event catastrophe reinsurance of $20 billion. They could withstand a major storm that generates $22 billion in claims.
Demotech, a company that assigns financial stability ratings to private insurance companies, confirmed that all of the Florida companies it rates are backed up by reinsurance programs, catastrophe response plans and corporate disaster recovery programs that are stronger than in 2015.
As a result, insurers based in the state can handle not one, but two storms that caused the same devastation as Hurricane Andrew.
William Stander, Tallahassee
The writer is executive director of the Florida Property & Casualty Association.
* * *
Stanford victim symbol of courage - June 9
Lessons from assault
The Stanford sexual assault case offers a critical learning moment. "Emily Doe" was sexually assaulted by Brock Turner, a Stanford University student and athlete. Turner was convicted and sentenced to a mere six months in jail.
Brock's father, Dan, wrote that his son's life will "never be the one that he dreamed about and worked so hard to achieve" and the sentence "is a steep price to pay for 20 minutes of action." That Dan Turner would equate "action" with a heinous sexual assault speaks to the education, or lack of it, that Brock received about consent, respect, judgment and privilege. It also speaks to the call to action to which we, as parents, must respond. These are conversations we must have with our children about decisionmaking and the fact that they are never entitled to take what is not theirs.
The Crisis Center of Tampa Bay sees cases like this every day. It is heartbreaking and, most of the time, the victim is left alone to piece together what happened and never tells anyone. No one has to face a sexual assault alone. At the Crisis Center and other rape crisis centers, victims are believed and supported and parents can get tools to have conversations with their children that can begin to change the culture of sexual violence.
Kathleen Kempke, Tampa
The writer is director of sexual assault services at the Crisis Center of Tampa Bay.

Load-Date: June 15, 2016


End of Document