RAVEN: SCIENTISTS SHOULD HELP CHANGE CONDITIONS THAT PROMOTE TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 15, 2002 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 340 words
Byline: Tina Hesman Of The Post-Dispatch
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


Scientists bear partial responsibility for shaping a world in which resources are more evenly divided between rich and poor countries to eliminate conditions that foster terrorism, said Missouri Botanical Garden director Peter Raven. Raven opened the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Thursday here.
The event is expected to draw more than 5,000 participants. Scientists, students, educators, policymakers and more than 1,200 journalists will hear presentations from leaders in all areas of research science and science education and policy, including bioterrism and stem cell research.
Raven is ending his term as president of the 140,000-member association - the largest scientific organization in the world. The group publishes the journal Science.
Recent anthrax attacks in Florida, New York and Washington may have reinforced the public's notion of the mad scientist, Raven said in a telephone interview Wednesday. But scientists need to take a more active role in society to counteract that stereotype, he said.
"If scientists are retiring and secluded in laboratories and don't participate in the democracy … people will draw their own conclusions about what scientists are doing - most of them bad," Raven said Wednesday.
As scientists and their research become more visible, scientific literacy in the general public will increase, Raven predicted in his address Thursday at the Marriott Hotel in downtown Boston. And education is the key to drawing people together and promoting democracy, he said.
Only 10 percent of the world's scientists live in developing countries. But the developing world contains 80 percent of the world's people. That balance must change, Raven said. Scientists must develop new ways of lookin g at human beings' place on the planet, and find methods that will ensure equitable uses of Earth's resources, he said.
Raven drew quotes from such ideologically opposite figures as Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Newt Gingrich to urge scientists to get involved in their communities.

Notes

Reporter Tina Hesman: E-mail: thesman@post-dispatch.com Phone: 314-340-8325  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - (Peter) Raven, Urges scientists to take more active role in society

Load-Date: February 15, 2002


End of Document