RAVEN SAYS SCIENTISTS SHARE BLAME FOR IGNORANCE THAT FOSTERS TERRORISM ;
 BOTANICAL GARDEN DIRECTOR IS ENDING TERM AS LEADER OF SCIENCE ASSOCIATION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 15, 2002 Friday Three Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 411 words
Byline: Tina Hesman Of The Post-Dispatch
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


Scientists bear partial responsibility for neglecting developing countries and allowing an atmosphere of ignorance to foster terrorism, said Missouri Botanical Garden director Peter Raven.
Raven made the remark Thursday as he opened the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The gathering, held this year in Boston, is expected to draw more than 5,000 participants. Raven is ending his term as president of the 140,000-member group - the largest scientific organization in the world. The organization publishes the journal Science.
The recent anthrax attacks in Florida, New York and Washington may have reinforced the public's notion of the mad scientist, Raven said. But scientists need to take a more active role in society to counteract that stereotype, he said.
"If scientists are retiring and secluded in laboratories and don't participate in the democracy, people will draw their own conclusions about what scientists are doing - most of them bad," Raven said in a telephone interview Wednesday.
As scientists and their research become more visible, scientific literacy in the general public will increase, Raven predicted in his address. And education is the key to drawing people together and promoting democracy, he said.
Only 10 percent of the world's scientists live in developing countries. But the developing world contains 80 percent of the world's people. That balance must change in order to promote a more stable global social and political climate, Raven said.
He said that as the war on terrorism proceeds, the real challenge facing the world will be to decide whether terrorism can be prevented solely by finding and punishing the perpetrators, or changing the relationship between industrialized and developing countries.
Raven drew quotes from such ideologically opposite figures as Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Newt Gingrich to urge scientists to get involved in their communities and help promote science, education and freedom around the world.
"In our interconnected and challenging world, both the connections between the disciplines symbolized by our fellowship and the global connections so evident in the fields of science and engineering are of extraordinary significance," Raven said.
As the meeting continues through Tuesday, scientists, students, educators, policy makers and more than 1,200 journalists will hear presentations from leaders in all areas of research science and science education and policy.

Notes

Reporter Tina Hesman E-mail: thesman@post-dispatch.com Phone: 314-340-8325  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - (Peter) Raven, Says scientists should take more active role in society

Load-Date: February 15, 2002


End of Document