Raymond W. Kelly
The New York Times
November 16, 2008 Sunday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. ; THE NEW TEAM
Length: 513 words
Byline: By DAVID JOHNSTON
Body


As he prepares to take office, President-elect Barack Obama is relying on a small team of advisers who will lead his transition operation and help choose the members of a new Obama administration. Following is part of a series of profiles of potential members of the administration.
  Name:Raymond W. Kelly
  Being considered for: Homeland security secretary
  Would bring to the job: A background as a crime fighter and terrorism expert. In the Clinton administration Mr. Kelly was a senior Treasury Department official responsible for several agencies now part of the homeland security portfolio. As commissioner of the New York Police Department under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg since 2002, he has kept down violent crime. He has also built up the city's antiterrorism and intelligence operation, one of the largest and most aggressive municipal programs in the country, posting detectives overseas and assigning more than  1,000 officers to terrorism duties.
  Is linked to Mr. Obama by: No direct ties, and he did not formally endorse anyone for president. A registered independent, Mr. Kelly has for years kept New York political observers guessing about his party leanings. His lack of overtly partisan commitments may be an asset, demonstrating his neutrality and impartiality.
  In his own words: ''I have never made a career decision based on money, and I have never regretted it. I can see all of you with loan payments cringing. But I mean it. Simply put, money is overrated. America has plenty of money and plenty of moneymakers. What it needs is idealists.'' (Commencement speech, Iona College, May 2008.)
  Used to work as: An up-through-the-ranks New York police officer. Mr. Kelly has held more than two dozen jobs since he joined the force as a trainee in 1960. He is in his second stint as police commissioner; his first was under Mayor David N. Dinkins. In 1996, he became the Treasury Department's under secretary for enforcement; in 1998, he took over as commissioner of the Customs Service when that agency, now under the Homeland Security Department, was still part of the Treasury Department. Returned to New York as global security chief for Bear Stearns, the defunct Wall Street giant. 
  Carries as baggage: His sometimes bruising style, which has created animosities among some of his federal partners in the fight against terrorism. Even so, Mr. Kelly is a powerful figure in New York and beyond and was frequently mentioned as a potential mayoral candidate -- until Mr. Bloomberg recently decided to seek a third term. That step has jump-started the discussion about Mr. Kelly's job prospects in the Obama administration.
  Resume includes: Born Sept. 4, 1941. ... son of a milkman, grew up on the  Upper West Side of Manhattan. ... former Marine and combat veteran of Vietnam. ... graduated from Manhattan College, has law degrees from St. John's University and New York University, and a master's degree from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. ... married; two sons, including Greg Kelly, an anchor at Fox News in New York. DAVID JOHNSTON 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 16, 2008


End of Document