REACTING TO CRITICISM, FBI OPENS NEW EFFORT ON TERRORISM, SPIES
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 12, 1999 Friday SF EDITION


Copyright 1999 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A28
Length: 421 words
Byline: Michael J. Sniffen, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Criticized for lackluster investigations of alleged nuclear espionage and political contributions by China, the FBI yesterday set up two new divisions to devote more attention to catching and thwarting terrorists and spies.
One of the new entities, the Investigative Services Division, also is designed to ensure that top FBI officials and investigators are aware of relevant information scattered in case files around various bureau divisions.
Another goal is to improve the bureau's analytic capability so that it can move to prevent crimes as well as solve them after they occur.
Months in the making, the moves follow recent criticism of the bureau's handling of two sensitive investigations involving China. Critics - including members of Congress, an executive-branch commission and the Justice Department inspector general - said the bureau focused too narrowly, failed to distribute relevant leads to all its divisions and failed to keep top officials aware of key evidence.
The moves were announced by FBI Director Louis J. Freeh after being endorsed by Attorney General Janet Reno and approved by Congress.
One, the establishment of a new Counterterrorism Division, carved out of the old National Security Division, had been leaked by officials last summer.
"Protecting America from terrorism and ensuring our national security are the FBI's highest priorities," Freeh said. "Given the complexity and difficulty of these threats, I have decided that counterterrorism and national security should be handled separately."
A bureau statement acknowledged that "increased attention to terrorism . . . had the effect of diluting senior management oversight given to the very real, systemic threat posed by espionage."
A Senate committee and an executive branch panel headed by former Sen. Warren Rudman criticized the FBI this year for focusing its investigation of possible theft of nuclear weapon secrets by China on one scientist of Chinese descent, Wen Ho Lee.
Lee, who worked at the Los Alamos, N.M., National Laboratory, has been fired. Officials say he may face charges for mishandling secrets, though not of espionage. And the FBI has reopened the entire investigation for a wider look.
In July, Justice Department Inspector General Michael Bromwich criticized the National Security Division for long delays in turning over possible leads from its Chinese intelligence-gathering probe to the Justice Department's campaign-finance task force, which was probing possible foreign contributions to the 1996 presidential campaign.

Load-Date: October 22, 2002


End of Document