Reaction to the Bombing
The New York Times
March 30, 2010 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 751 words
Byline: By CLIFFORD J. LEVY
Body


MOSCOW -- Russians reacted with alarm, anger and resignation to the terrorist attacks on the Moscow subway system on Monday. Here is a sampling of opinion from the Russian-language blog of The New York Times, as well as other Russian-language blogs on livejournal.com, as translated by the Moscow bureau of The Times.
  Vishurshen wrote:
  These were Caucasus extremists, they are fanatics. They will continue blowing up, taking hostages, shooting people until they are finished off. They are still hoping to build their caliphate or emirate or whatever they call it and to bring into subjection or eliminate all non-Muslims.
  I can hardly judge the professionalism of our power structures, I am not an expert. According to their own reports, they constantly prevent terrorist acts. If it is true, and there are more prevented terrorist acts than committed ones, then their work can be considered satisfactory. But the fact that acts of terrorism happen regularly and the number of militants in the Caucasus remains the same -- despite our military structures' reports of the elimination of militants here and there, every now and then  -- it has to be acknowledged that this is evidence that they work badly.
  Vanso wrote:
  How horrible it is when you hear a blast behind your back. I was at Park Kultury at the moment of the blast. Thank God, I managed to enter the walkway tunnel between stations and I was not affected. There was lots of smoke and I could not figure out what was going on. Many people were lying in blood. Horror.
  At about 8 am, I went down at the Universitet station to go to Kurskaya station. I was standing and, as usual, was reading a book. After the Sportivnaya station, the train began to stop in the tunnel, the driver said that it was a technical stop and we will proceed after a brief stop. At that moment I did not know anything about the explosion at Lubyanka.
  We came to Park Kultury and heard the announcement that the train was not going any further and were asked to leave the cars. I went out, called home and was told about the explosion at Lubyanka. Horrible.
  Went to the walkway tunnel to change lines. A siren was blowing for some reason in the transfer tunnel and it seemed that the escalator was not working. As soon as I reached it an explosion blasted behind me.
  It was scary but I did not notice any panic around me. Everybody continued to quietly walk up, at least people around me. The panic was upstairs, the subway workers, policemen, people were running around. I went into the street and by that moment only one ambulance car came. Some of those who were injured walked out on their own, some were carried by other people. Few minutes later the entrance hall was filled by policemen, doctors and firemen.
  I stood for a while and since I was not affected -- just some ringing in my hears -- slowly went home.
  Sostavitel wrote:
  Regretfully the overloaded transport and communication systems in Moscow once again proved their vulnerability. Moscow authorities must think again about how to handle them. As a whole, the special services worked well: without doubt more terrorist acts have been prevented than committed. However, due to understandable reasons I wish they could work better.
  Naher--eto--vse wrote:
  There could be any motive and goals behind this. From Wahabi extremists to internal disputes and infighting within the state structures (attempts to remove heads of the F.S.B., the Interior Ministry, etc.) The F.S.B. does work, I am quite sure. Though their triumphs are not front-paged. As to the subway security service, I would have fired them all if I could. Because they are nothing but a bunch of chair-warmers. They do nothing but shake money from immigrant workers.
  Lepestriny wrote:
  This is the mystery -- there are not any logical motives for these bombings (i.e. aimed against the central authorities) on the part of the 'traditional terrorists.' In the Caucasus, an inter-clan and religious feud system has been formed. The neo-Nazis have changed their tunes after the arrest of suspects in the slaying of the lawyer Markelov assassination and conviction of attacks on immigrants, and so on. Hence, there is no reason for the religious fanatics to carry out indiscriminate terrorism. So it is really hard to guess who could organize this act of terrorism. As to the professionalism of the counterterrorist work, it can be judged by the absence and prevention of terrorist acts, not by the ''stepping up the security measures.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 30, 2010


End of Document