READERS WRITE; Trump's actions put U.S.security at risk; FBIresistancetoTrumpun-Americanatbest
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 12, 2019 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2019 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 441 words
Byline: Staff
Body


A major theme of Donald Trump's campaign was the threat Hillary Clinton's use of a private email server posed to national security. He went so far as to say her actions put American families in grave danger. Since the beginning of his presidency, Trump has consistently disregarded the advice of the intelligence community with regard to his personal and the nation's security. He has ignored the warnings that the phones he uses are not secure. He glibly shared classified information with Russian officials in the Oval Office. Twenty-five people with close access to the president have been given security clearances over the advice of intelligence officials and a White House lawyer. Mar-a-Lago is a security nightmare, recently breached by a woman with two Taiwanese passports, carrying a USB drive with malicious malware. Perhaps it is time to change the refrain to, "Lock Him Up."
SUSAN LAUTENBACHER, DUNWOODY
Christopher Wray should definitely know about domestic terrorism, since he's the head of the FBI. The FBI has committed acts of domestic terrorism against American citizens. Need I remind readers of Ruby Ridge, Waco and Lavoy Finicum? Or shall I discuss the FBI sniper who shot and murdered Vicki Weaver as she held her baby? There's more corruption in the FBI than in the mafia, and they should be considered an organized criminal gang. In my humble opinion, perhaps the RICO Act should apply. Lest we forget how the FBI conspired to unseat President Trump, trying to interfere with the rights of millions of voters who elected Trump is a blatant civil rights violation. Where's the accountability? We the people deserve answers and accountability now!
MICHAEL WEAVER, CARTERSVILLE
Letters to the editor must be no longer than 150 words and must include a daytime phone number for verification.Letters will be edited for length and clarity and may be published in both print and digital formats. Emailed submissions are strongly preferred. Please email to: letters@ajc.com
About the Opinion page: The AJC recognizes the diversity and differences of opinion among our readership, and we strive to accommodate this reality by offering both conservative and liberal opinion voices each day.And we recognize the variety of opinions even within the same side of the political aisle, and hope you do too.For example, some of our liberal writers have been critical of former President Barack Obama--much as some of our conservative columnists have criticized President Donald Trump, while others generally support him.We're continually looking at how best to bring you that breadth of opinion and balance both left and right, in print and online.

Load-Date: April 12, 2019


End of Document