Readers Debate What Is, or Isn’t, Terrorism
The New York Times 
November 1, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: READER-CENTER
Length: 1005 words
Byline: REYNA DESAI and MARIE TESSIER
Highlight: Few topics touch so raw a nerve after massacres as what constitutes terrorism. New York Times readers weighed in on the debate.
Body


Mass killings often touch off anguished discussions about what constitutes terrorism. (Our Interpreter columnists addressed these issues in their most recent column). That was evident in thousands of comments across            nytimes.com and on            social media in the wake of the deadly rampage Monday in Manhattan, which authorities branded as an act of terrorism.
The generally accepted definition of terrorism requires that the violence have a political, ideological or religious motive, as our reporter Scott Shane wrote after the recent attack in Las Vegas. Many readers specifically questioned why that attack wasn’t branded an act of terrorism, and why they believe that label was often linked to religion.
Here’s a selection of comments, which have been condensed for length.
‘The killer of 59 people is labeled a disturbed mind’
“Eight deaths and a person is a terrorist but the killer of 59 people is labeled a disturbed mind. Please explain.” — Terry Thurman, Seattle
‘All of these are acts of terrorism’
“Because a man shouts ‘God is Great’ it’s terrorism? But when a white man has 43 guns in a Las Vegas hotel room, it’s not terrorism? When a white man shoots up a church or a school, it’s not terrorism? Ridiculous. All of these are acts of terrorism.” — Marcia Clearwater, San Francisco
The Times reported that more than 20 guns were found inside the Las Vegas gunman’s hotel suite.
‘He’s automatically a terrorist just because he’s a Muslim’
“He’s automatically a terrorist just because he’s a Muslim, but the guy that did the recent shooting in the U.S. which killed more than five times is not a terrorist, what a double standard.” — Ibrahim Umar, on The Times’s Facebook page
Some readers drew a distinction over why the Las Vegas shooting wasn’t labeled terrorism.
‘The Las Vegas shooter apparently had no such motivation’
“A terrorist is a person who uses unlawful violence and intimidation, especially against civilians, in the pursuit of political aims. The Las Vegas shooter apparently had no such motivation. If he had, he would have been called a terrorist.” — Todd R. Lockwood, Burlington, Vt.
‘There is no threat of a group continuing with such acts’
“Yes the number killed by the act in Las Vegas was greater. But other than a possible copycat, there is no threat of a group continuing with such acts. There is no organization supporting the individual who performs the act.” — Charles, San Francisco
‘Terrorism by definition requires political or religious motivation’
“Terrorism by definition requires political or religious motivation. The Vegas shooter did not have those motivations so he is a mass murderer. His act of violence isn’t any less horrible because he doesn’t have a terrorist label.” — Jessie Jaymez Blaylock, on The Times’s Facebook page
Religion and ideology as a motive was considered by many as what distinguishes terrorism from other mass murders.
‘What makes a mass killing a terrorist attack is not the killer’s race or religion’
“What makes a mass killing a terrorist attack is not the killer’s race or religion, but motive — specifically, whether the killer has a politically or religiously-fueled motive. The attacker today was heard yelling “Allahu Akbar,” which leaves little doubt as to what his motives were. By the same logic, the Charleston shooting was a terrorist attack. Sandy Hook was not.” — MY, Philadelphia
‘Terrorist violence is done “in the name of” a cause or an ideal’
“Terrorist violence is done ‘in the name of’ a cause or an ideal. When Christians kill in the name of Christianity it can be considered terrorism, especially when one target is hit in order to get another, to frighten another and send a message to that larger target. Tim McVeigh and the Unabomber, among others, were white males who fit the criteria.” — Larry Nichols, on The Times’s Facebook page
Some readers felt that Muslims were routinely labeled terrorists more often than Christians or people of other religions.
‘This terminology was made by politicians to take advantage of situations like 9/11’
“The term terrorist is used for Muslims only. The guy who killed 59 people in Vegas can only have psychiatric problems, and Muslims can be terrorist only when they commit crimes like what happened today in lower Manhattan. This terminology was made by politicians to take advantage of situations like 9/11, today’s attack and many others.” — F, New York City
‘If that was not political/religious agenda based killing, I don’t know what that was’
“A few months back a ‘white supremacist individual at a rally organized by the “KKK,”’ who killed a woman, was charged with several crimes and referred to as various definitions by the media as well as the prosecutor, none of which included the word terrorism. Now if that was not political/religious agenda based killing, I don’t know what that was.” — Omar Mohamed Fathy, on The Times’s Facebook page. 
‘Terrorism is terrorism’
“I’m just guessing that after this incident, we’ll be told that immigration must be restricted even further. Terrorism is terrorism, whether it is carried out by a domestic or foreign actor. Why is it that we only seem to feel the need to take action in the latter case?” — Julie W., New Jersey
Some readers called for stopping the use of the term “terrorism” altogether.
‘Let’s just call it what it is: murder’
“Instead of labeling it terror or not and blaming ‘that other (insert religion, race, party)’, let’s just call it what it is: murder. We’re being set up to hate each other. I refuse to be baited by those who wish us to fail as a nation. E pluribus unum.” — Ruth Dunblazier Ferris, on The Times’s Facebook page
‘Stop calling these people terrorists. Call them cowards.’
“A coward. Stop calling these people terrorists. Call them cowards! Here’s your headline: ‘Coward Runs Over People With Truck’. You might have some success recruiting people to be terrorists. Try recruiting young people for a group known for its cowardice. Words matter.” — Liberty Apples, Providence
Related Articles
Manhattan Attack Is Called Terrorism. What About Vegas?

Load-Date: November 3, 2017


End of Document