Readers Write: Common Core doesn't dictate teaching style; Letters for the Editor for the June 24, 2013 weekly print issue: The US Common Core education standards are simply a description of what students should know and be able to do at each grade level. They are not a curriculum. How these skills are taught is decided by individual schools and districts.President Obama must do more than 'call China out' on cyber-espionage and theft. China's cyber-theft violates trade agreements with the US. When the Chinese have to start paying a price for their state-supported economic terrorism, they just might take action to stop the cybertheft.
The Christian Science Monitor
June 24, 2013 Monday


Copyright 2013 Christian Science Publishing Society All Rights Reserved
Section: Commentary
Length: 351 words
Byline: Sally Bergquist Op-ed contributor, James Patterson Op-ed contributor
Body


Common Core isn't a teaching style
As a first-grade teacher, I am finding my way around the new US Common Core education standards. I found the May 20 article "The next big learning revolution" on the standards to be timely but a little misleading. The beginning describes a math class in which the teacher is asking probing questions of students instead of giving answers. The article seems to imply that Common Core brings with it a certain way of teaching.
The standards are simply a description of what students should know and be able to do at each grade level. They are not a curriculum. How these skills are taught is decided by individual schools and districts. Some may choose a more direct approach and some may choose a "discovery-based learning" approach, as this math teacher highlighted in the article was using. I appreciate the high standards Common Core gives us educators, and I also appreciate that there is no hidden agenda in the Common Core telling me how to teach.
Sally Bergquist
Olympia, Wash.
Obama must not tolerate China theft
Since President Nixon's historic 1972 trip to China, which opened diplomatic relations with Beijing, Washington has largely ignored China's disregard of copyright and outright theft of US intellectual property as The Monitor's View of May 20 points out ("China's cyber thievery"). The Chinese have stolen US goods - physical and cyber - for so long, they see it as an industry. The US government has only "jawboned" about this diplomatically with little or no penalties. So the theft continues.
President Obama must do more than "call China out" on cyber-espionage and theft. China's cyber-theft violates trade agreements with the United States. A possible short-term solution to China's state-sponsored cybertheft is to levy a cybertheft tariff on all Chinese goods imported into the US and a cybertheft tax on all US goods exported to China. When the Chinese have to start paying a price for their state-supported economic terrorism, they just might take action to stop the cybertheft.
James Patterson
Member, American Foreign Service Association
San Francisco

Load-Date: June 24, 2013


End of Document