REAGAN, HOME FROM TOKYO MEETING, IS JUBILANT
The New York Times
May 8, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 728 words
Byline: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 7
Body


President Reagan, returning to an enthusiastic welcome here, said today that the leading industrial democracies had moved ''beyond words and rhetoric'' in a unified struggle against terrorism.
''We agreed the time has come to move beyond words and rhetoric,'' Mr. Reagan said, on the White House lawn, where he was greeted by Cabinet officers, staff members and his daughter Maureen.
''Terrorists and those who support them, especially governments, have been put on notice,'' he said. ''It's going to be tougher from now on.''
Mr. Reagan flew all night, except for a refueling stop at Elmendorf Air Force Base in Alaska, after leaving the economic summit meeting at midday Tokyo time. His 13-day, 22,000-mile trip was the longest of his Presidency.
 
'Purpose' and 'Resolve' Cited
Appearing tired but jubilant, Mr. Reagan said the leaders at the Tokyo session were united in their ''purpose'' and steadfast in their ''resolve.''
''In Tokyo, we looked each other in the eye, discussed the challenges we face and reached understandings that will serve the cause of our mutual security, freedom and prosperity,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''The seven major democracies represented in Tokyo set out a unified course on a number of vital issues.''
The leaders of major industrial democracies ended their 12th annual gathering Tuesday with declarations pledging cooperation in fighting terrorism, controlling major fluctuations in the economic systems of the major nations, criticizing the Soviet Union for its handling of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident and urging improved East-West relations.
Mr. Reagan said at a news conference as he prepared to leave Tokyo that the three-day meeting had been ''the most successful of the six that I have attended.''
 
'Measure of Allied Unity'
''The atmosphere was cordial, the talks were candid and constructive, and a strong measure of allied unity on the fundamental issues of our agenda was achieved,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''All we sought to accomplish at the summit was achieved.''
The United States went into the summit meeting hoping for a declaration on terrorism. The seven nations approved measures designed to detect and monitor terrorist suspects, but rejected more stringent proposals, like military action or economic boycotts.
In a major concession to the United States, the seven nations identified Libya in the statement as a nation that is sponsoring or supporting terrorism.
Mr. Reagan said today that in making such a declaration the nations were moving beyond another antiterrorism statement made at the summit meeting in London two years ago.
 
'Winning the War'
''The decent people of the world, as is clear from our statement in Tokyo, are not just standing together in this war against terrorism,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''We're committed to winning the war and wiping this scourge from the face of the earth.''
Pressed about reports that two nations, Japan and France, were already beginning to qualify their support for the joint approach to terrorism, Mr. Reagan had said at the Tokyo news conference that ''as far as I know, seven heads of state agreed to a statement that said that we believe the way to deal with terrorism is on a unified front - that we're in this all together.''
Mr. Reagan acknowledged as he arrived in Washington that in the most contentious area at the meeting, the leaders had failed to achieve a breakthrough on agriculture subsidies, which Administration officials have warned could spark an international trade war.
Mr. Reagan said that despite the lack of agreement, the leaders had discussed the issue ''with candor.''
 
'An Emerging Issue'
''Subsidized agricultural production, primary cause of the world's surpluses of food and fiber and a politically sensitive area, was seen as an emerging issue of great importance,'' Mr. Reagan said.
Asserting that the leaders had achieved a high degree of unity on several crucial economic questions, Mr. Reagan said they had agreed to improve the international monetary system through greater interaction between governments and had taken steps to stabilize exchange rates and correct trade imbalances.
At the welcoming ceremony, the Reagans were greeted by several children from the Martin Luther King Jr. School in Washington. The school received a mural from a Tokyo school that Nancy Reagan had visited and had presented a similar mural from the Washington school.


End of Document