REAGAN SENDS CONGRESS FOUR BILLS AIMED AT INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM
The New York Times
April 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 1003 words
Byline: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 26
Body


President Reagan sent Congress four bills today intended to help detect and prosecute people involved in international terrorism.
 The package includes prison terms of up to 10 years and large fines and forfeitures for people who provide training, ''support services'' and similar assistance to nations or groups found by the Secretary of State to be involved in terrorism.
 
'Essential We Act Immediately'
President Reagan, in a written statement released by the White House today while he was in China, said, ''It is essential that we act immediately to cope with this menace and to increase cooperation with other governments in dealing with this growing threat to our way of life.''
But although Mr. Reagan said the proposed legislation ''is an important step in our war against terrorism,'' not everyone agreed.
Pres Reagan sends Congress four bills intended to help detect and prosecute people involved in international terrorism; package includes prison terms of up to 10 years and large fines and forfeitures for people who provide training to nations or groups found by Secretary of State to be involved in terrorism; Jerry J Berman of ACLU calls proposals 'symbolic effort' by Reagan Administration; claims existing criminal laws are adequate for prosecuting terrorist acts in US, and that parts of proposals raise First Amendment problems (M)
Jerry J. Berman, chief legislative counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union in Washington, said that existing criminal laws were adequate for prosecuting terrorist acts in the United States and that the proposed legislation could raise First Amendment problems.
He said the proposals put forth today seemed a ''symbolic effort by the Administration to show it's tough on terrorism.''
The proposed legislation does not indicate which foreign governments would be listed as terrorist. Secretary of State George P. Shultz said on April 3 that ''the involvement of such countries as Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea has become more and more evident.''
In the past, Administration officials have also used the word terrorism to describe such activities as Nicaragua's support of guerrillas in El Salvador and activities by other countries, including Cuba, Iraq, Southern Yemen.
Other provisions of the package would authorize rewards of up to $500,000 for information on acts of terrorism in the United States or abroad, and would broaden laws against kidnapping and strengthen laws against aircraft hijacking and sabotage in accordance with two international agreements.
 
Aimed at 'State Terrorism'
Mr. Reagan's statement said the legislation was especially aimed at ''the provision of assistance to countries that support terrorism and use terrorism as a foreign policy tool.''
The statement said such ''state terrorism'' was the cause of ''the great majority of terrorist murders and assassinations,'' often with American diplomats, soldiers and other citizens as victims, such as the 241 American servicemen who died in a truck-bomb attack in Beirut, Lebanon, last Oct. 23.
In a separate action earlier this month, Mr. Reagan approved, without seeking new legislation, a series of antiterrorism policies, including pre- emptive strikes and reprisals against foreign terrorists. He said today that ''concerted action on many different fronts'' was needed to fight terrorism.
Mr. Berman, the civil liberties union official, said, ''The danger of such a symbolic act is that it may be so broad that it could be used by a wayward investigative agency or prosecutor to punish or threaten to punish conduct otherwise protected by the First Amendment.''
 
Says the Language Is Broad
He referred specifically to a clause providing 10-year prison terms for people who ''provide any logistical, mechanical, maintenance, or similar support services to the armed forces or any intelligence agency, or their agents, of any foreign government, faction or international terrorist group'' named by the Secretary of State.
Mr. Berman said he was concerned that this language might be broad enough to apply, for example, to someone who ''went to teach the poor in Nicaragua'' or ''provided financial support to any group championing the Irish cause in Northern Ireland.''
The bill specifies that the validity of the Secretary of State's designation of a foreign nation or group as engaged in ''acts or likely acts of international terrorism'' harmful to the United States could not be questioned by the courts or raised as a defense in a prosecution.
A written analysis released by the White House with the proposed legislation today said that ''it is expected that few governments, factions, or terrorist groups will be named'' by the Secretary of State, who would list them by publication in the Federal Register.
The analysis said the criminal penalties were focused on ''the problems of United States nationals or business entities providing the technology of terrorism for use abroad and of the United States being used by foreigners for such a purpose.''
 
Cites Easier Prosecution
An Administration official familiar with the proposed legislation said it would make it easier to prosecute, for example, someone who provided money for the training of a terrorist group in Central America, if it were listed by the Secretary of State.
He said that ''moral support and verbal support'' of groups listed as terrorist would probably not be covered by the prohibition and might be protected by First Amendment rights of free speech and association. But he added that the raising of money used to support terrorist activities abroad ''could be interpreted as logistical support.''
The criminal provisions were developed by an interagency group with the State and Justice Departments playing key roles, the official said.
The prohibition against supporting terrorist groups and governments would apply to any United States national, permanent resident alien or ''United States business entity'' acting ''anywhere in the world,'' as well as to ''any person or entity within the boundaries of the United States.''


End of Document