Reagan's Carter Policy on Handling Terrorism
The New York Times
January 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 739 words
Byline: By Joshua Muravchik; Joshua Muravchik is a fellow in residence at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, a public-policy organization.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Never has President Reagan sounded more like Jimmy Carter than in explaining his decision not to take military reprisals for the Rome and Vienna airport murders. Once again, alas, the President spoke loudly and brandished a very small stick.
In his 1980 campaign, candidate Reagan accused President Carter of having weakened America by allowing our country to be humiliated by anti-American forces around the globe. One issue in particular that had frustrated Americans and led to Mr. Reagan's critique was the scourge of international terrorism. Upon taking office, President Reagan declared: ''Let terrorists be aware that when the rules of international behavior are violated, our policy will be one of swift and effective retribution.'' But now, just as after the massacre at the Beirut marine barracks and after the hijacking of Trans World Airlines flight 847, President Reagan has decided to swallow his tough words and to make do, much as President Carter had done, with small symbolic gestures.
The President insists that he is not ruling out the use of force against terrorists, but that it should only be used when the perpetrators can be clearly identified and located and attacked without harm to innocent bystanders. These conditions, he acknowledges, are not easily met.
But in this, he is unwittingly conceding exactly the point that underlay so much of President Carter's foreign and defense policy. Mr. Carter and his team, after all, were not actually advocates of weakness. They held, rather, that force had lost much of its usefulness in the modern world. There was no point, they argued, in vast military expenditures or in strongly assertive reactions to foreign tormentors. A great power could protect itself with a nuclear deterrent, but beyond that it could rarely bend others to its will by force. Better, in their view, for America to rely on the arts of diplomacy.
Mr. Reagan and his supporters rejected this argument. The problem, they said, was not that force had lost its usefulness, but rather that the United States had lost the will to defend its interests. ''We hear it said that we live in an era of limits to our power,'' Mr. Reagan noted. ''Well, let it also be understood that there are limits to our patience.'' Accordingly, he and his Secretary of Defense inaugurated a mighty effort to restock America's arsenals with the instruments of force - not just nuclear missiles for deterrence but also conventional weapons for projecting American power abroad.
Yet, according to all accounts, the most effective voice counseling the President against the use of force -against Libya and, previously, in reaction to other terrorist incidents -was precisely, that of the Secretary of Defense, Caspar W. Weinberger.
People have suggested that Mr. Weinberger is reluctant to hit back at Libya because he feels a certain affinity for the Arab side in the Arab-Israeli conflict. Perhaps he does. But reports that it was also Mr. Weinberger who weighed in against retaliation for the murder of United States military advisers in a San Salvador cafe last year point to a different explanation for the Secretary's stance. Above all, he seems fearful that the costs of any use of force that is less than surgically precise will rekindle anti-military sentiment among the American public and jeopardize his efforts to rebuild our armed forces.
That program has been the hallmark of Mr. Weinberger's stewardship of the Defense Department and the underpinning of President Reagan's claim that under his leadership America is ''standing tall again.'' Mr. Weinberger has fought to sustain the buildup with bulldog tenacity not only against Democrats and doves and Congressional budget cutters but also against other Reagan Administration officials, such as those at the Office of Management and Budget, who would give deficit reduction higher priority than defense spending.
Yet now Mr. Weinberger may have succeeded in giving the defense cutters the tool they finally need to overcome his resistance. What is the purpose, they and the taxpayers may ask, of acquiring all those weapons, if the circumstances under which they may be used almost never arise? Why not just settle for maintaining inexpensive deterrent forces? Why pay for the Reagan buildup if only to sustain the Carter policies?
Overcoming the era of American weakness will take more than restocking our arsenal; it will take the will to act in our own defense.


End of Document