REAGAN WEIGHS TERROR POLICY
The New York Times
January 18, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 302 words
Byline: By GERALD BOYD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 17
Body


President Reagan is considering issuance of a directive that would establish the State Department as the agency that would take the lead in dealing with international terrorism, Administration officials said today.
The directive, if approved by Mr. Reagan, would be consistent with the recommendations of an interagency terrorism task force headed by Vice President Bush.
The task force sent President Reagan a report last December with more than 50 recommendations for on terrorism. Officials said many of the recommendations incorporate aspects of existing policies.
 
Administration Dispute
In clarifying the State Department's role, the task force apparently sought to at least address a longstanding internal Administration dispute over proper response to terrorist attacks. It stopped short, however, of defining when the use of military force against terrorists is appropriate.
This dispute has pitted Secretary of State George P. Shultz against Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. Mr. Shultz has urged firm action, including the use of force against terrorists and countries that support them. Mr. Weinberger has criticized those who seek ''instant gratification from some kind of bombing attack without being too worried about the details.''
An Administration official familiar with the report said that it recommended designation of the State Department as the agency that would take the lead in dealing with international terrorism and noted that the Justice Department has a similar role in terms of domestic terrorism. At the same time, the task force recommended that the National Security Council have a ''coordinating role'' in Administration responses to terrorist actions.
The report noted that the Defense Department had the responsibility of carrying out any military action in response to terrorism.


End of Document