REAGAN AND O'NEILL SQUARE OFF ON BEIRUT MISSION
The New York Times
January 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 881 words
Byline: By FRANCIS X. CLINES
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25
Body


President Reagan and Speaker of the House Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. bluntly voiced their differences face to face today over the Marines' presence in Lebanon.
 ''Every time I talk to you,'' the Speaker said he told the President at a private meeting, ''you say things are going well, but there's nothing but deterioration over there.''
The White House said later that the President responded to critics at the meeting of Democratic and Republican Congressional leaders by declaring: ''If we were to be driven out by terrorists, it would make it extremely difficult to pursue a policy of peace in the Middle East.''
The President stressed the same point later in his State of the Union address. ''We must have courage to give peace a chance,'' he said in defending his Lebanon policy, ''and we must not be driven from our objectives for peace in Lebanon by state-sponsored terrorism.''
House Speaker Thomas P O'Neill Jr says he told Pres Reagan during private meeting that he, Reagan, underestimated risk of sending US Marines to Lebanon and then failed to follow through, and that he keeps claiming things are going well when in fact there is only 'deterioration' in Lebanon; says Reagan responded by saying US could not be driven out by terrorists; bitterness of meeting underscores issue's growing partisan heat (M)
In recounting the meeting with the President, Mr. O'Neill, a Democrat from Massachusetts, said he had sought to press Mr. Reagan on how carefully he had weighed the risk in sending the Marines to Beirut. ''You either underestimated it,'' he said he told Mr. Reagan, ''or you failed to follow through.''
The bitterness of the meeting underlined the issue's growing partisan heat and was a subject for discussion through the day on Capitol Hill and in the White House as lawmakers and Administration officials sought to find common ground on the difficult issue.
A Republican participant said the words from Mr. O'Neill were as ''harsh and partisan'' as had been heard in such a Presidential gathering in some time. ''At one point,'' this official said, ''the Speaker was told if he wanted to make this the heart of the 1984 campaign, we couldn't deal with him.''
According to Mr. O'Neill, ''I tried to tell him the facts of life as I saw them.''
Several participants said the meeting at least served to depict before the President the depth of feeling lawmakers have sensed in their districts over the issue. Not all Republicans criticized Mr. O'Neill's bluntness.
''The Speaker did a great a service by speaking out very candidly,'' said Ted Stevens, of Alaska, the Senate Republican whip.
Another Republican, Robert H. Michel, of Illinois, the House minority leader, said one reason for Mr. O'Neill's intense, direct message at the meeting was ''his feeling that people around the President are not telling him'' all he needs to know on the subject.
''I have never attended a more frank and energetic exchange,'' Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, said. ''It was forthright and the President replied in kind.''
Last September, Congress worked out an agreement with the President authorizing the marines' presence in Beirut for 18 months. Second thoughts by lawmakers began with the bombing of the Marine compound in Beirut on Oct. 23, in which 241 servicemen were killed. Mr. O'Neill and others pressed the issue as they returned this week from Congressional recess.
 
'Ought to Get Off the Bench'
''The President ought to get off the bench and get out on the playing field and tell the American people,'' Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, the Senate minority leader, said after the meeting today.
As the meeting ended, the House majority leader, Jim Wright, of Texas, made what participants said was an almost casual comment to the effect that perhaps they at least could try to agree that all foreign forces, including the marines, should withdraw from Lebanon at the same time.
Within a short while, Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, apparently took this as a lead to announce that Congressional leaders were considering a resolution that would call for simultaneous withdrawal of all forces. He said the resolution would not be binding on the President but would call for ''an accelerated process of withdrawal for all forces in Lebanon.''
 
'I Know of No Deal'
There was considerable confusion and contradiction on Capitol Hill about the matter - a measure, perhaps, of election-year intensification of the Lebanon issue. But Mr. O'Neill said, ''I know of no deal made whatsoever.''
Aides said the Speaker previously had asked Congressional specialists on the Middle East to draft a measure containing some language listing options for increasing the pressure for the marines' withdrawal. They said this effort was not necessarily related to the idea ''thrown out'' by Mr. Wright.
At the White House meeting, Administration officials said Secretary of State George P. Shultz emphasized that the nation could not retreat from a ''Soviet-Syrian'' challenge exemplified by terrorism.
The agreement of last September authorizing the marines' presence for 18 months went well beyond the next election. But the exchanges today were a clear indication that the issue has not been neutralized in the 1984 campaign.


End of Document