REAGAN STATEMENT ABOUT THE PARDONS
The New York Times
April 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk; Text
Length: 321 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 15
Body


Following is the text of a statement by President Reagan today on his pardon of two former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had been convicted of illegal procedures:
Pursuant to the grant of authority in Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution of the United States, I have granted full and unconditional pardons to W. Mark Felt and Edward S. Miller.
During their long careers, Mark Felt and Edward Miller served the Federal Bureau of Investigation and our nation with great distinction.
Text of statement by President Reagan on his pardon of two former FBI officials who were convicted of illegal proceduresTo punish them further - after three years of criminal prosecution proceedings - would not serve the ends of justice.
Their convictions in the U.S. District Court, on appeal at the time I signed the pardons, grew out of their good-faith belief that their actions were necessary to preserve the security interests of our country. The record demonstrates that they acted not with criminal intent, but in the belief that they had grants of authority reaching to the highest levels of government.
America was at war in 1972, and Messrs. Felt and Miller followed procedures they believed essential to keep the Director of the F.B.I., the Attorney General and the President of the United States advised of the activities of hostile foreign powers and their collaborators in this country. They have never denied their actions, but, in fact, came forward to acknowledge them publicly in order to relieve their subordinate agents from criminal actions.
Four years ago, thousands of draft evaders and others who violated the Selective Service laws were unconditionally pardoned by my predecessor. America was generous to those who refused to serve their country in the Vietnam War. We can be no less generous to two men who acted on high principle to bring an end to the terrorism that was threatening our nation.


End of Document