REAGAN HAILS ECUADOR PRESIDENT AS MODEL LEADER
The New York Times
January 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 463 words
Byline: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14
Body


President Reagan met today with the President of Ecuador, Leon Febres Cordero, and hailed him as a model leader in the Western Hemisphere.
A soft snow fell and the temperature hovered at 23 degrees when Mr. Febres-Cordero arrived at the White House South Lawn for a welcoming ceremony with full military honors.
At the 30-minute ceremony, hundreds of shivering guests clapped their hands for warmth and stamped their feet as Mr. Reagan contrasted the Ecuadorean leader's ''brave struggle'' against international terrorism and narcotics trafficking with the ''oppressive'' Nicaraguan Government.
Mr. Reagan, who is said to be preparing to make a formal request to Congress for military aid for the anti-Government rebels in Nicaragua, used the occasion of the visit of the 54-year-old Ecuadorean President to condemn the Sandanista Government as being responsible in large part for ''the turmoil and bloodshed that is plaguing this hemishpere.''
Ecuador, with a democratic Government, has broken diplomatic relations with the Nicaraguan Government, a step that the Reagan Administration has declined to take.
 
A Self-Made Millionare
Mr. Febres-Cordero, a self-made millionaire who won election in May 1984, was praised by Mr. Reagan for his endorsement of free enterprise and for standing firm against the ''violent, insidious forces'' of narcotics trafficking and international terrorism.
During the welcoming ceremony, three members of the United States Marines Band, which had been standing outdoors before the speeches began, fainted and were treated at a nearby guard house.
Mr. Reagan shivered and blew his nose repeatedly. At one point, Nancy Reagan, in a mink coat and a matching mink hat, seemed to glare in dismay at Mr. Febres-Cordero as he continued his address.
Nevertheless, the mood and the words were cordial on a day in which the two leaders met for 70 minutes to discuss what one Administration official said were issues related to Central America and South America, third world debt and economics, narcotics and terrorism. Tonight, Mr. Reagan welcomed Mr. Febres-Cordero at a State dinner in the White House residence attended by Government officials, entertainers, journalists and business executives.
Mr. Reagan, in the the welcoming ceremonies for Mr. Febres-Cordero, specifically linked Nicaragua to the guerrilla siege at the Palace of Justice in Bogota, Colombia, in November, in which about 100 people died.
Although American officials have linked Nicaragua to the terrorism in Bogota - a charge denied by the Nicaraguan Government - it was the first time the President had addressed the issue in a detailed way. Officials indicated that Mr. Reagan would seek to use the allegation in his efforts to gather Congressional support for arms aid to the rebels in Nicaragua.


End of Document