Reagan stock shoots up in wake of raid
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 17, 1986, Thursday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: National; Pg. 3
Length: 756 words
Byline: By John Dillin, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Body


The American air strike against Libya is playing well in Peoria.
Quick polls taken after this week's raid show strong support across the United States from both Republican and Democratic voters, despite the apparent loss of two American fliers and civilian casualties in Libya.
The positive political impact of the action against terrorism could strengthen President Reagan's hand in dealing with Congress on issues like the military budget and aid to Nicaraguan ''contras.'' It could also help Republican candidates across the country.
Experts say the popularity of the action against Libya is no accident. It reflects a skillful handling of the terrorism issue by the Reagan administration over a period of several years. The President struck a military blow only when public opinion was fully primed for action.
Richard Wirthlin, the President's pollster, says he expects Mr. Reagan's personal popularity to surge in the wake of the air strike. He predicts that polls taken during the next few days will find the President's approval rating near 75 percent, his all-time peak. He adds:
''I think the President's rating . . . will probably be at historically high levels. It will go back to Grenada, back to the time of the assassination attempt. And if that is the case, you will see a halo . . . that will influence some of the Republican (races).''
Everett Carll Ladd of the Roper Center says that Reagan emerges from these raids even stronger than the numbers show. Not only is the President's support level up; his opposition level is way down.
''The big story about the President is his solidification of support over the past two years,'' says Dr. Ladd. Reagan's base of support is ''at its strongest all-time level, anyway.'' Libya may add an upward blip to that. What is crucial, says Ladd, is that while Reagan is drawing support from normal allies, the hostility of his opponents is steadily declining.
As an example, Ladd points to black voters. Six years ago, even when his popularity was high, Reagan got only a 10 percent approval rating from blacks. He still doesn't get black votes, but his approval rating among blacks has moved up to the 30-33 percent range.
Terry L. Deibel, writing in the latest edition of ''Foreign Policy,'' says Reagan has built this broad-based support slowly and methodically, despite some foreign and domestic policy setbacks.
Mr. Deibel says the key to Reagan's success lies in his determination to rebuild American strength - economic power at home, military power abroad. Those are exactly the goals the American people favored.
Ladd echoes those perceptions. Some writers said Americans had become antimilitary following Vietnam; but that was misleading, says Ladd. In fact, American voters were dismayed and distrustful of Washington leaders, who appeared to have failed miserably in the use of US power. Americans felt they had been misled and lied to.
Dr. Wirthlin says this was reflected in polls in the mid-1970s, when voters said the main thing they wanted from their leaders was that they be ''sincere, honest, and forthright.''
Today, that has evolved to a new set of qualities: strength, effectiveness, dependability, and consistency. ''So far as the public is concerned, that describes Reagan,'' says Wirthlin. Ladd, Wirthlin, and a number of intelligence experts (who asked not to be named) say that the solid US support for action now against Libya came about very slowly.
Libya and its terrorist activities have been a high priority with Reagan administration officials since Day 1. But most Americans knew little of that nation or its terrorist involvement. It took a lengthy chain of painful events - the airport bombings in Rome and Vienna, the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro, the TWA bombing, the TWA hijacking, and many others - to heighten US public awareness. At the same time, the Reagan White House began to point the finger at Col. Muammar Qaddafi as a chief architect of international terror.
This sort of public educational campaign is the essence of statecraft, says Ladd. A president ''must be engaged in the engineering of democratic consent.'' The campaign against Libya has been exactly that.
The thoroughness of the educational effort was demonstrated in the polls. A survey by USA Today found that 63 percent of Americans believe the action against Libya could boost terrorism in the US.  An NBC-Wall Street Journal poll found that 63 percent felt the raid would either increase terrorism or make no difference. Even so, 7 of 10 Americans approved of the attack.


End of Document