REAGAN EXPECTED TO BID ALLIES ACT AGAINST TERRORISM
The New York Times
June 6, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 1271 words
Byline: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN , Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, June 5
Body


President Reagan and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher conferred today amid indications that they would press other Western leaders this week for a commitment to improve efforts to combat terrorism.
American and British officials said political issues in general could overshadow economic matters on the official agenda.
They said that during mealtime discussions, the leaders would pay particular attention to relations with the Soviet Union and the crisis in the Persian Gulf resulting from air attacks in the war between Iran and Iraq.
 
Cooperation Is Sought
Mrs. Thatcher, the host of the economic conference of major industrial democracies, has been interested in a public statement condemning terrorism ever since a British police officer was killed in April by gunfire from inside the Libyan Embassy.
Pres Reagan and Prime Min Margaret Thatcher confer, London, amid indications they will press other Western leaders for commitment to improve efforts to combat terrorism; American and British officials say political issues in general could overshadow economic matters on official agenda of economic summit conference; Reagan and wife Nancy lunch with Queen Elizabeth and Duke of Edinburgh at Buckingham Palace and have dinner with Thatcher (M)
A senior Reagan Administration official said today that Mr. Reagan would join Mrs. Thatcher in trying to persuade other leaders at the conference that more can be done to share intelligence information on the whereabouts of known terrorists. He said there was also a need for Western countries to increse the resources used to combat terrorism.
Mr. Reagan, who arrived here from Dublin last night, spent the fifth day of his 10-day European trip largely out of public view.
He and his wife, Nancy, had lunch with Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh at Buckingham Palace and dinner with Mrs. Thatcher at 10 Downing Street this evening. On Wednesday, they return to the public stage in Normandy for the commemoration of the 40th anniversary of the Allied invasion of Europe on D-day.
 
Frustration in Washington
An Administration official, discussing terrorism, said today that there was frustration in Washington about the lack of cooperation among Western allies even as terrorist acts have increased.
American allies, he said, are reluctant to share information with the United States because they prefer to act alone and because they fear that information given to Washington might be disclosed.
Because of objections from France and other countries, the official said, participants at the conference may well not say anything significant about terrorism even if informal agreements are reached. But he said Mr. Reagan hoped something concrete could be decided, even if it is not disclosed.
''We really want to get on with a process that leads to results,'' the official said, asking not to be identified. But he added there would be ''no U.S.- or British-led harangue'' on the subject.
French officials have belittled the idea of addressing terrorism in the elaborate surroundings of a summit conference and are considered likely to oppose any sort of public statement on the subject.
Mrs. Thatcher, meanwhile, was said by British officials to be interested in establishing a ''diplomatic blacklist'' prohibiting diplomats charged with harboring terrorists or other abuses from being allowed into other countries.
 
Reagan Speech Welcomed
British officials said Mrs. Thatcher, who will determine the conference agenda, expects relations with the Soviet Union will also be reviewed by the leaders. She was said to have welcomed Mr. Reagan's conciliatory comments toward Moscow in his speech to the Irish Parliament Monday.
Presidential aides said Mr. Reagan was also pleased at the reaction to the speech. In it, he reiterated that he was ready to negotiate with the Soviet Union and suggested a new willingness to discuss the Soviet demand for a renunciation of the use of force by Western allies.
The initial reaction from Moscow to Mr. Reagan's speech has been negative. The Administration official who asked not to be identified said today that Mr. Reagan was disappointed but not surprised by the reaction. ''It's consistent with what they've been saying for three or four months,'' he said, adding that the reaction was not ''alarming.''
In general, the official said, the Western allies have come to feel that the Soviet Union is in a state of leadership transition and introspection as it struggles over how to deal with the West. The Russians are also thought to be uncertain because of the American election, he said.
 
Soviet Relations Discussed
Soviet internal politics are expected to be discussed at the London meeting, the official said. But he added that he expected no change in the consensus that the West should not try bold initiatives now to revive the nuclear arms control negotiations that have been deadlocked and cut off.
An American official said tonight after the dinner between Mr. Reagan and Mrs. Thatcher that the two leaders had discussed relations with the Soviet Union at some length. He said they had had a talk that was ''theoretical and theological'' in nature on how to induce Moscow to return to nuclear arms talks.
The official said the two leaders both felt Moscow was now ''frustrated'' because of failures in its economy and because of renewed willingness in the West to rebuild its military.
On economic matters, Mrs. Thatcher has let it be known that she is increasingly concerned about high interest rates and budget deficits in the United States.
At a news conference last week, she suggested she would raise these subjects at the conference and also at her separate meeting with Mr. Reagan today. She told reporters that deficit spending and high interest rates violate the principles of ''prudent banking.''
A British official said tonight that at the dinner with Mr. Reagan, Mrs. Thatcher raised the economic issues but that there was no intention to press the President hard on the deficit or other such issues at the conference. He also said Mrs. Thatcher had thanked the President for his comments in Ireland this week denouncing terrorism in Northern Ireland.
The Prime Minister also discussed Central America with Mr. Reagan, according to the officials, and counseled ''caution'' on recent United States actions, in particular the mining of Nicaraguan harbors by insurgents acting with the assistance of the Central Intelligence Agency.
 
Little Criticism Expected
In general, British officials and aides to other participants at the meeting say they do not expect criticism of Mr. Reagan to be as strong at this conference as it has been in the past.
They say that Mr. Reagan long ago proved himself adept at parrying difficult questioning about the subject by asserting amiably that he is working hard to bring interest rates and deficits down and that in any case the world economy has improved greatly in the last few years.
Administration aides said again today that they expected very little trouble from allies at the conference, and indeed they view recent favorable economic trends as vindicating Administration policies.
In another development today, Secretary of State George P. Shultz met briefly here today with Defense Secretary Moshe Arens of Israel. Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said they discussed the situation in the Persian Gulf and Lebanon and other matters.
Mr. Speakes and other officials said that Mr. Shultz was to have met last week with Mr. Arens in Washington but that the meeting had to be put off because the Secretary was tied up with other matters. The spokesman gave no further details of the discussions.


End of Document