Reagan 'Legitimizes' Botha
The New York Times
May 29, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 687 words
Byline: By John B. Oakes; John B. Oakes is the former Senior Editor of The New York Times.
Body


When President Botha of South Africa last week raided three of his southern African neighbors because he said they harbored terrorists, the sound amidst the gunfire was the sound of President Reagan's Libyan chickens coming home to roost.
The South African raid was rightly termed an ''outrage'' by the Reagan Administration and by practically everyone else in the civilized world. President Reagan expelled the South African military attache in protest.
Yet something's wrong with this picture. Only a month previously, it was Mr. Reagan himself who initiated a remarkably similar action in the name of combating terrorism.
Perhaps the Botha raid would have taken place even without the Reagan example. But the terms used by President Botha - and especially his rationale - in defense of his indefensible attack across the borders of states with which he is nominally at peace echoed almost precisely those used by President Reagan to explain away his own bombing raid on a state with which we too were nominally at peace (and where American oil companies were still operating).
In the name of striking back - or out - at the scourge of terrorism, Mr. Reagan was in effect legitimizing actions that not only are illegitimate in themselves but set disastrous precedents for others. He was virtually saying that any big, tough nation can do anything it can get away with in the name of fighting terrorism.
The United States can hardly be held responsible for the South African action - though President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia came pretty close to doing just that in his angry statement immediately after the cross-border raid. But Mr. Reagan's lightning strike against terrorist headquarters in Libya clearly offered Mr. Botha the perfect excuse for his lightning strike against ''terrorist bases'' in Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
''Self-defense,'' said President Reagan in justifying the American attack on ''the headquarters, terrorist facilities and military assets that support Muammar Qaddafi's subversive activities.''
''Self-defense,'' said President Botha in justifying the South African attack on states that provide ''sanctuary'' to ''terrorist elements'' that ''plan, instigate and execute acts of terror against other states.''
''Irrefutable,'' said President Reagan of the evidence that Libya masterminds terrorist acts in Europe, though since then it appears that the Libyans were not alone and may not have been the principals in some of the more spectacular recent incidents.
''Irrefutable,'' said President Botha, of the evidence of ''terrorist'' base facilities beyond South Africa's borders - though his definition of terrorism may differ from Mr. Reagan's.
Mr. Reagan's raid was ''carefully targeted to minimize casualties among the Libyan people,'' he explained. Mr. Botha followed suit. ''The South African Government has nothing against the peoples of our neighboring countries,'' he pointed out through his ambassador to the United Nations.
''We have done what we had to do,'' said President Reagan. ''If necessary, we shall do it again.''
''If it's necessary, we'll strike again,'' echoed President Botha. ''We will fight international terrorism in precisely the same way as other Western countries.''
While denouncing Mr. Reagan and the rest of the Western world for ''hypocrisy'' and ''double standards'' for criticizing South Africa, Mr. Botha stuck like an unwelcome leech to the Reagan method of combating terrorism. Colonel Qaddafi's camps are responsible for training ''terrorists'' against whom the South Africans were fighting, said Mr. Botha, as he approvingly cited Mr. Reagan's Libyan raid while imitating it.
In Libya, President Reagan had fallen back, as usual, on a massive military solution to solve an extremely serious problem that massive military solutions cannot possibly cure nor even alleviate.
This is the Soviet style of problem-solving, not the American. It is a dangerously ill-suited posture for the United States, traditional upholder of the rule of law among nations. It is one that other law-breakers such as South Africa are only too happy to emulate, to our dishonor and our shame.


End of Document