Real patriotism means opposing the Patriot Act
University Wire
April 5, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Daily Evergreen via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 569 words
Byline: By Ingrid Rachinski, Daily Evergreen; SOURCE: Washington State U.
Dateline: PULLMAN, Wash. 
Body


Patriotism is zealous love of one's country, says the New Webster's Dictionary.
To be patriotic is our duty, some say. While this may or may not be true, what has been apparent is that those in the Senate feel that the Patriot Act somehow fits into this definition of zealousness and patriotism.
With help from supporters in the Senate the United States is one step closer to allowing long-term government interference in the name of anti-terrorism.
This act, created in the wake of the terrorist attacks on the United States is broken up into three parts: enhancing domestic security against terrorism, international money laundering abatement and anti-terrorist financing act, and the most controversial, enhanced surveillance procedures.
In many ways this allows the government to have more power when it comes to anti-terrorism security, allowing the government to increase surveillance and communication interference among its own citizens.
Originally a bad idea, the Patriot Act was at least only meant to last for four years. However, the fight against terrorism was not conquered in four years, so it's hard to imagine that our fear was either.
Whatever happened to "the only thing to fear is fear itself?"
Apparently we've made an amendment to add terrorism to the list. And wasn't that the point they were trying to make?
If you ask me, we have already lost the war to terrorism if we are willing to give up some of the liberties we pride ourselves on for a little bit of safety.
We have begun to cling to the thought of the government protecting us with such ferocity that we are willing to put up with just about anything.
U.S. citizens are looked at with suspicion because they fit a profile, borders have tightened, investigations of "foreigners" have increased and the United States has drawn inward, restricting its contact with certain nations, many, like Canada, who have had no part of the terrorism.
Overall, the United States has developed an intense xenophobia which has increased tensions worldwide as well is within our own country.
Unfortunately, the safety we are gaining is next to nothing.
Supporters of the act claim that the new measures have increased the FBI's database and intelligence, allowing them to access more information about terrorism and increasing the technology in order to do so. However, two things are suspiciously vague: the definition of terrorist and the extent which this information can and will be used.
Has terrorist become synonymous with immigrant? Have we actually reverted back to a time when the only people we trust are white middle-class males?
Finally, how can we gauge the effectiveness of the Patriot Act? The lack of successful terrorism seems to be the only logical answer, but by those standards, we did just as well in the years before Sept. 11 in preventing terrorism as we are doing now. The difference now is that we are in a constant state of suspicion and televise warning levels of yellow and red depending on the foreseen danger, tip-offs and threats.
Thankfully, the Senate has had enough sense to bring about some restrictions to the original Patriot Act, adding in some protection to people's privacy. However, is that enough? I don't think so.
While the president is markedly proud of the Patriot Act and its supposed success, I hope that someone has enough sense to at least bring some serious questions to the table.
(C) 2006 Daily Evergreen via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 5, 2006


End of Document