Real-life Hotel Rwanda hero arrested on terror charges
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
August 31, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 454 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The man, whose role in saving people from the Rwandan genocide was celebrated in the film Hotel Rwanda, has been arrested on terror charges.
Rusesabagina was a humanitarian who, while working as a manager at the Hôtel des Mille Collines in Kigali, hid and protected 1,268 Hutu and Tutsi refugees from the Interahamwe militia during the Rwandan genocide.
"Rusesabagina is suspected to be the founder, leader, sponsor and member of violent, armed, extremist terror outfits including the Rwanda Movement for Democratic Change [MRCD] operating out of various places in the region and overseas", police said.
The bureau said via Twitter he had been arrested "through global cooperation", and had been the subject of an worldwide arrest warrant, without going into further details. "Rusesabagina is suspected to be the founder, leader, sponsor, and member of violent, armed, extremist terror outfits, including the Rwanda Movement for Democratic Change operating out of various places in the region and overseas", police said in a Monday statement, per ABC News.
It appears Rwanda quietly worked with foreign intelligence agencies to arrest Rusesabagina.
Belgium was "notified" Monday by Rwandan judiciary authorities of the arrest of Paul Rusesabagina, the spokesperson of the Belgian Federal Prosecutor Office, Eric Van Duyse, told CNN via email.
His supporters, and Rusesabagina himself, have long maintained that he became a target of Paul Kagame's government after sustained criticism of Kagame's government and the conduct of the Rwandan Patriotic Front in ending the genocide in 1994.
Former President Pranab Mukherjee passes away
Doctors attending on the 84-year-old Mukherjee said he continues to be in a deep coma and is on ventilator support . The hospital said he tested positive for COVID-19 after the surgery and his condition was critical.
He is accused by investigators of terrorism, arson, kidnap and murder, including against his own countrymen on Rwandan soil in two incidences in June and December 2018.
He was the real-life inspiration for the 2004 Hollywood film "Hotel Rwanda", starring Don Cheadle and Sophie Okonedo.
Rusesabagina, a critic of President Paul Kagame, moved overseas after the genocide and won worldwide acclaim, receiving the United States' highest civilian award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, in 2005.
About 800,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus were butchered in 100 days in the central African nation from April 6, 1994.
But back home he has sparked outrage with warnings of another genocide, this time by Tutsis against Hutus.
Once championed in Western capitals as a reformer, Kagame has been criticised for overseeing constitutional changes to prolong his rule and cracking down on opposition voices.

Load-Date: August 31, 2020


End of Document