REALITY HELD HOSTAGE IN STORY OF TERRORISM ''TOY SOLDIERS'' RATING: R,; VIOLENCE, LANGUAGE. RUNNING TIME: 1:52.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 26, 1991, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 3F
Length: 354 words
Body


TAKING the entire population of a boarding school hostage is probably the lastthing that would occur to your average terrorist - but when you're a Hollywood screenwriter looking for a plot, well, anything goes.  Although ''Toy Soldiers'' is strictly formula writing, and rather ordinary formula at that, director Daniel Petrie Jr. gets generally good acting from the cast, and the script is guaranteed not to test them too much.  There are overtones of ''Taps'' and ''Dead Poets Society'' here and there as a prep school that caters to spoiled, semi-delinquent sons of the wealthy and privileged is invaded by a group of South American terrorists.  They hold the entire school hostage in an attempt to gain the freedom of the father of the terrorist leader. He's in jail, and the judge who is supposed to rule on his case is the father of a student.  The student has been spirited away for his own safety, but the terrorists obviously decide to substitute quantity for quality.  Sean Astin is the leader of the school's rowdies. He has been expelled from three previous schools, and he's still involved in antics like selling booze, hidden in mouthwash bottles, to his schoolmates, or tapping into the school phone lines to call women who sell verbal sex via long distance.  Louis Gossett Jr., down a notch from training Navy officers, is the dean, and his one confrontation with Astin is good, but Gossett is off campus when the terrorists invade, and we don't see him much after that.
Astin and friends, including Keith Coogan, Wil Wheaton, George Perez and a handful of others, plot to overpower the terrorists.  R. Lee Ermey and Mason Adams (the voice of Smuckers) lead the Army and FBI rescue forces, respectively, and Andrew Divoff and Michael Champion lead the invaders.  Anyone who has seen a movie or two can figure out how things go from there, but the action is good and the pacing proper.  In addition, some of the ingenious things the kids do will hold interest throughout.  (Alton, Clarkson, Des Peres, Esquire, Halls Ferry, Kenrick, Mid Rivers, Northwest Plaza, Regency, Ronnie's, Union Station.) - Joe Pollack

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document