REALITY FOLLOWS FICTION AS TERRORISM TAKES TOLL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 7, 2005 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ARTS and ENTERTAINMENT,; BOOK REVIEW
Length: 493 words
Byline: Carole Goldberg, The Hartford Courant
Body


A former British journalist writes a grimly sardonic fictional account of a young woman who loses her husband and toddler son when 1,000 soccer fans are blown to bits in a terrorist bombing of an English stadium.
 It takes the form of a long, raging letter she writes to Osama bin Laden to explain a thing or two.
 And then, on the very day his book is published, the author himself learns a thing or two about irony. Chris Cleave's book came out in Britain July 7, the same day of the terrorist bomb attacks on the London transit system.
The story is told through a remarkable voice -- that of a working-class woman who is unschooled but surely is no fool. In a stream of consciousness devoid of commas and laced with painful humor, unimaginable hurt and dogged defiance, the never-named narrator lays into the terrorist leader:
 "Dear Osama they want you dead or alive so the terror will stop. Well I wouldn't know about that I mean rock 'n' roll didn't stop when Elvis died 20 it just got worse. Next thing you know there was Sonny & Cher and Dexys Midnight Runners. … My point is it's easier to start these things than to finish them. I suppose you thought of that did you?"
 She goes on: "There's a reward of 25 million dollars on your head but don't lose sleep on my account Osama. …
 "I don't want 25 million dollars Osama I just want you to give it a rest. AM I ALONE? I want to be the last mother in the world who ever has to write you a letter like this. Who ever has to write you Osama about her dead boy."
 So begins a tale that combines elements of a political thriller with a very British obsession with matters of class -- and a bit of grotty sex for good measure.
 Everyone in this grim world is flawed. Though a loving wife and mother, our narrator takes occasional consolation in the arms of others. You would too, she tells us, if your husband defused bombs and you could find no other way to calm your nerves.
 Thrilled when her husband agrees to leave law enforcement, she allows herself one last fling while he and the boy are at the stadium.
 Her lover is Jasper Black, a yuppie-smug yet oddly appealing journalist. In an instant, the world turns upside down. She's left as battered and bloody as her child's beloved toy, Mr. Rabbit, which is eventually returned to her as a gruesome yet treasured memento of her ginger-haired 4-year-old boy.
 She sees him everywhere -- in her flat that smells of chip fat, in the market, in the road.  He talks to her, but no one but Mummy can hear. We never learn his name, but Cleave makes him heart-wrenchingly real.
 Cleave's book resolutely lays bare the prejudices, hungers and dirty dealings that drive the world. Some of the plot twists are hard to accept, but in one respect, he triumphs.
 In his broken heroine, whose long, angry letter is eloquent in its plain-spoken anguish, Cleave has created an unforgettable, incendiary voice for these perilous times.
 / "INCENDIARY"
 By Chris Cleave.
 Knopf. ($22.95)

Load-Date: August 10, 2005


End of Document