REBEL GROUPS DENY KILLINGS; BLAME ONE ANOTHER FOR LIBERIAN MASSACRE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 8, 1993, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1C
Length: 572 words
Dateline: HARBEL, LIBERIA
Body


LIBERIAN MILITIAS argued Monday over who massacred 300 men, women and children at a farming camp over the weekend.  Shocked survivors of the slaughter, the worst atrocity in the civil war in three years, blamed rebels of Charles Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia. "We have seen the crossing of the line from rebellion to terrorism by the NPFL," Amos Sawyer, Liberia's caretaker president, said on national radio.  Taylor denied his men had conducted the raid and accused the Armed Forces of Liberia and militias.  In turn, Gen. Moses Wright of the AFL called Taylor's charge baseless and unfounded. He said it was meant to tarnish the reputation of the AFL, whose men killed 600 civilians sheltered in a church in 1990.  The United States expressed shock at the massacre but said it did not know who was responsible.  "Clearly, we are shocked and saddened by the senseless killings which occurred. We condemn this reprehensible slaughter of displaced persons, including women and children," said Michael McCurry, a spokesman for the State Department. "Now, at the moment, we cannot confirm who's responsible." A statement by the militias issued in neighboring Sierra Leone said its men had not been in the area at the time.  The massacre took place Sunday at Harbel, near an abandoned Firestone rubber plantation, about 40 miles east of the capital, Monrovia.  Photographs published in newspapers showed mutilated women and children.  Hundreds of people fled from the Harbel district Monday, many still too shocked to describe the raid.
"All I can say is, I cannot stay here any more; I cannot stay here any more," said Sarah Toe, 16.  U.N. officials in Monrovia sent medical teams to help treat about 700 wounded. "This act of terrorism is against all international laws of human rights, and we call on those responsible to end this type of violence," a UNICEF statement says.  The AFL's Wright said that in spite of his 25 years of combat experience, he was disturbed by the scene at Harbel.  "It is very regrettable to see Liberians acting like animals,dw" he said.  Lt. Col. Venetius Freeman, the AFL area commander, said the attack appeared to be well-planned, with about 50 rebels setting up heavy machine guns around the camp before showing themselves. Two AFL guards afired at the raiders but were unable to prevent the slaughter, he said.  Machine gunfire stopped AFL reinforcements and troops of the West African ECOMOG force from reaching the scene for about an hour. Two AFL men were killed in the fighting, Freeman said. The raiders escaped by river with about 200 prisoners who were forced to carry rice stolen from U.N. relief supplies.  None of the attackers was killed or captured, Freeman said.  Taylor announced last month that he was switching from open confrontation with ECOMOG to guerrilla tactics, and attacks have been reported recently on civilians northeast of Monrovia. The AFL and ECOMOG captured Harbel from the NPFL in February, and the area is supposedly under their control. But a recent visitor to the area said it was widely infiltrated by rebels.  A nurse said she and several colleagues left the camp a week ago because of rebel threats. She said that rebels visiting the camp were given food and medicine but that supplies were stopped when they refused to register as refugees. The men swore vengeance, she said.  "After that threat I left because I saw blood in their eyes," she said.

Graphic

 
MAP; Map By AP - 300 Massacred - Map of western Africa showing Liberia and surrounding countries.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document