Rebels in Peru Open Drive, Killing 60 People in a Week
The New York Times
June 26, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 899 words
Byline: By NATHANIEL C. NASH,

By NATHANIEL C. NASH,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: LIMA, Peru. June 25
Body


Peru's most violent and powerful insurgency group has mounted an offensive against the Government of Alberto Fujimori that has left more than 60 dead in just the last week.
The drive by the Shining Path guerrilla movement commemorates the fifth anniversary of the execution of more than 100 of the group's members in a Lima prison. Though the Government said it was prepared for the attacks, the killings were carried out with near impunity in many parts of the country, taking the lives of elected officials, students, peasant workers and soldiers.
Experts on terrorism here said the offensive was another example of the inability of Peru, starved for cash and military resources and, so far, a strong public outcry, to stop the march of terrorism.
"Little by little the Shining Path is advancing," said Gustavo Gorriti, an expert on the group. "This is a highly organized offensive with very long-term goals, and the state is just not prepared for this kind of systematic insurrection."
 
Rifles for Villagers
 President Fujimori has tried to show that effective countermeasures are being taken.
On Sunday, in the Andean village of Chaquichocha, he handed out 100 Winchester rifles to civilian militia groups. In a militaristic ceremony, amid shouting and chants calling for the defense of the country, Mr. Fujimori and solidiers thrust the rifles into the outstretched arms of the peasant militia members.
"This is a most solemn act," the President told the peasants. "We are going to deliver blows to terrorism. The militias will continue to fight defending democracy."
Mr. Fujimori also announced that three leaders of the Shining Path had been captured and that his Government had embarked on a new strategy to fight terrorism. Some military experts said the army had adopted a get-tough policy with the guerrillas that would encourage more gun battles and killings during attacks, rather than the taking of prisoners.
The Shining Path has shown no signs that its activities are being restricted. If anything, its actions have been getting bolder and its weapons more sophisticated.
This month, the group twice attacked the Santa Lucia military base in the Upper Huallaga Valley where 15 agents of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration work with Peruvian police officers to combat drug trafficking.
Since it controls large sections of the Upper Huallaga valley, which is the prime location for coca leaf production in Peru, the group has extracted a steady "tax" from traffickers, which has enabled them to buy heavier machine guns, rifles, grenades and grenade launchers.
And because of its presence, plus the presence of the country's other insurgent group, the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, more than 40 percent of Peru's territory and 50 percent of the population are now under an official state of emergency.
Experts contend that the Shining Path is by far the most violent, secretive, disciplined and hardened subversive organization ever seen in Latin America.
Founded in the late 1970's by a former philosophy professor, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, the Shining Path, or Sendero Luminoso, adheres to a Moaist version of Communism and venerates the Chinese Cultural Revolution as the model for perpetuating revolution.
 
Bordering on Worship
 A personality cult surrounding Mr. Guzman borders on worship. Shining Path graffiti and paintings show him beside Mao. The group has rejected the validity of all existing Communist governments, saying they have bowed to Western and capitalist pressures.
Experts say the group now has at least 5,000 full-time soldiers, most of whom are concentrated in the Peruvian highlands. Leaders tend to be educated middle-class Peruvians from Lima, while the soldiers are usually peasants of Indian extraction. As opposed to the $40 a month that teachers in Lima get paid, Shining Path soldiers are reportedly paid as much as $500 a month, primarily from the "tax" on drug traffickers.
Experts say one way the group obtains conscripts is to take over an Andean village and kill the men and women who do not join its ranks.
When the organization has children under its control, leaders often initiate them through a rite of killing. Last year, a Shining Path column stopped a bus on which two French tourists were riding and ordered a 14-year-old boy, as an initiation rite, to shoot them at point-blank range in the head.
"The thinking is that once you get a child to kill for you, he or she is Shining Path for life," said a Western diplomat who asked not to be identified.
With such tactics, experts say, it is uncertain just how much popular support the Shining Path will eventually be able to command. And the ruthlessness may just be its greatest weakness.
Many Andean villages are strongly opposed to the Shining Path and have called on the Government to issue them arms. Up to now, the most sophisticated weapons most have been sticks with knives fastened on the end. Often, villagers were overwhelmed by Shining Path fighters and killed.
Experts believe that a well-armed civilian militia may be the most effective weapon against the insurgents at this point.
While the Fujimori Government has made some inroads against Shining Path, most experts believe that its assertions that it is about to "decapitate" the organization are greatly exaggerated. The three leaders captured last week are not considered part of the highest echelons of the Shining Path.

Graphic

 
Map of Peru showing location of the Huallaga River.

Load-Date: June 26, 1991


End of Document