Recalling An Early Act Of Terrorism
The New York Times
December 14, 2005 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 8; THEATER REVIEW
Length: 455 words
Byline: By MIRIAM HORN
Body


To this day, it remains unknown who threw the bomb at the police advancing on a workers' rally in Haymarket Square in Chicago in 1886, or how many of the seven policemen who died fell to police bullets. Eight anarchists were tried, and four were hanged, including the newspaper editor Albert Parsons, who with his wife, Lucy, a former slave, are at the center of Zayd Dohrn's new play, ''Haymarket.'' 
  Mixing documentary and fiction, Mr. Dohrn has invented a composite of the Parsons children, a girl also called Lucy. At 33, she has been committed by her mother to an asylum. (Squeaky Moore plays both mother and child.) On an austere set that serves as cell, courtroom and home, young Lucy is in talk therapy with an enlightened doctor struggling to shield her from therapeutic floggings and restraints. (Morgan Baker is as affectingly tender as the doctor as he is intimidating in the role of Police Capt. John Bonfield).
It's not hard to imagine why Mr. Dohrn chose the perspective of a child. He is the son of Bernardine Dohrn and Bill Ayers, members of the Weather Underground who were living as fugitives in 1977 when he was born. In 1982, when he was 5, his mother spent seven months in jail. 
  For all that intimate knowledge, however, Mr. Dohrn fails to imagine fully either the anarchist couple or their child. The elder Lucy is pure political commitment, while Albert (Dennis McNitt) is so winsome in the face of danger as to seem naive. The young Lucy's scenes are overloaded with psychological portent but divert the play from its core themes and, despite bloody hallucinations, lack intensity. The director Robert Saxner's gothic effects -- clangings of unseen doors, lights blinding the audience -- are insufficient compensation for the tepid drama. 
  Mr. Dohrn's selective rendition of the history suggests a kind of defense of his parents, both their present lives (with comfortable careers) and their radical youths. 
  But the scenes devoted to the victims are far more effective than the political speechifying. Police Officer Charles Spierling (Judson Jones) has been deafened by the blast. A young nurse, Mary Catherine Barrett (Birgit Huppuch), cares for him with a frantic intensity, trying to ward off the realization that her brother is among the dead. Both performers bring a suppressed anguish to their roles, an almost unbearable intimation of their shattered possibility for happiness. Guarding the prison where Parsons awaits execution, Spierling's wrenching refrain, ''I can't hear you,'' finally bars Lucy's way to see her husband one last time. Pain proves, in the end, more eloquent than violence. 

''Haymarket'' continues through Dec. 23 at the Beckett Theater, 410 West 42nd Street; (212) 279-4200.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Birgit Huppuch as a nurse and Judson Jones as a wounded police officer in Zayd Dohrn's ''Haymarket.'' (Photo by Trevor Oswalt)

Load-Date: December 14, 2005


End of Document