Recent terrorism may affect the 2004 election
University Wire
March 22, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 The Daily Aztec via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 600 words
Byline: By Paul A. Escajadillo, The Daily Aztec; SOURCE: San Diego State U.
Dateline: SAN DIEGO 
Body


The year 2004 is quickly becoming a testament to the brutality of the opponents of democracy. The first instance occurred March 11, 2004, in Madrid, Spain. Two-and-a-half years to the day after the tragedies in New York and Washington, terrorists gave Prime Minister Jose Mar'a Aznar a date that "now occupies a place in the history of infamy." On the eve of the national election, in which the Partido Popular was slated to remain in power, voters quickly realigned themselves and proceeded to express their anger by voting in the Partido Socialista.
According to Time magazine, the terrorists who admitted "We love death" on a tape found near a Madrid mosque succeeded in planting bombs that did not require suicidal acts, as well as changing a national government. I am afraid this will only embolden the planners of mass murder -- they have struck and the paper tiger of the West has retreated in its cave in an attempt to appease them. The Clinton administration's failure to act decisively after the bombings in the African embassies in 1998 was an important precursor to Sept. 11, 2001. The countries of the world must realize unlike the Soviet Union during the Cold War, compromise and negotiation are not possible with al Qaeda and similar terrorist groups. Attacks are now more likely against France for passing legislation banning religious paraphernalia in public schools and Great Britain for aiding in the Iraq coalition.
The second instance happened March 18, 2004, in Taiwan. President Chen Shui-bian and Vice President Annette Lu were shot just as the country was to have a historic referendum on March 20. This is mere speculation, but the culprit may turn out to be none other than the People's Republic of China. That country has always viewed Taiwan as a renegade province, according to BBC News.
China sentences 300,000 citizens to "re-education" camps and executes 4,000 others a year, more than all the other countries with the death penalty combined, according to Parade magazine. Furthermore, the Chinese government controls all Internet content coming in and out of the country, in addition to continuously interrupting search engines, according to The Herald Tribune. Perhaps the United States has been preoccupied with the wrong Asian country (i.e., North Korea). China has the largest army in the world and is a confirmed nuclear power with the third-largest arsenal on the planet, according to www.cnn.com. However, with the U.S. Taiwan Relations Act, "military action against Taiwan by the People's Republic of China would be considered a grave threat to peace and security in the Western Pacific," according to            www.nationmaster.com/encyclopedia. Thus, the future may hold a possible war over democracy for Taiwan.
Thankfully, the leaders of Taiwan were not assassinated and their election will continue as planned. But these two instances should start teaching us that in this election year, this country's citizens must decide who to vote for in November 2004, regardless of what transpires in the days leading up to the election. Homeland Security officials should do their best to protect this country, but something may -- God forbid -- inevitably happen.
Ultimately, I believe President Bush's statement on Oct. 7, 2001, should demonstrate the world's resolve to all terrorists and rogue states for this new century: "In this conflict, there is no neutral ground ... The battle is now joined on many fronts. We will not waver, we will not tire, we will not falter and we will not fail. Peace and freedom will prevail." It must prevail.
(C) 2003 The Daily Aztec via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 22, 2004


End of Document