Record number of terrorism arrests made in United Kingdom in past year
The Acorn: Drew University
September 15, 2017 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 314 words
Byline: Santos West
Body


There was also a leap in arrests for "domestic" terrorism, up from 10 in the year to June 2016 to 52 in the latest period.
The numbers includes a series of arrests that were made following the Manchester and London attacks.
Terror-related arrests have surged to a new record high, with suspects held at a rate of more than one every day as security services confront a "momentum shift" in the threat.
The number of people arrested over terrorism-related offences increased by 68 per cent to 379 in the year to June, theHome Office reports.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks inWestminster, Manchester, and London Bridge. A further 23 arrests followed the suicide bombing during an Ariana Grande concert atManchester Arena in May.
Another man died following a van attack outside a mosque inFinsbury Park, London on June 19, 2017.
A total of 21 people were detained after three Islamist militants drove into pedestrians onLondon Bridge before attacking and stabbing people at nearby restaurants and bars, resulting in eight deaths, in June.
A breakdown of the figures show that 54 of the arrested suspects were women - the largest female proportion on record - and 17 people held were under the age of 18. It is an all-time high in the number of arrests since the government started recording data in 2001. He explained: "That's why we're looking at such a high number, but they are still pretty significant". Meanwhile, 189 were released without charge.
"It has been an exceptional year in terms of the way in which the police operations and intelligence services have been gathering intelligence and trying to bring people to justice after three terrorist attacks in quick succession".
Police and MI5 are running 500 investigations involving 3,000 individuals at any one time, while there are also 20,000 former "subjects of interest" whose risk must be kept under review.

Load-Date: September 15, 2017


End of Document