Records say suspect pondered blasting bridges; Report paints chilling portrait of man charged in terror plot
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 14, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 4
Length: 674 words
Byline: KEITH MORELLI

Tribune staff
Dateline: TAMPA  
Highlight: Defense attorney for accused terrorist Sami Osmakac want expert on terrorism prosecution witness to be excluded, along with his 37 page report that paints the defendant as a "homegrown terrorist." The report details parts of the investigation heretofore unreleased...
Body


Sami Osmakac toyed with the idea of blowing up the bridges crossing Tampa Bay or detonating bombs at the sheriff's office and police departments before settling on a plan to plant explosives in Tampa's Hyde Park party district and then spraying first responders with automatic gunfire, according to recently released court documents.
The planned January 2012 attack, Osmakac said in a martyrdom video, would be payback for Sheikh Osama Bin Laden, may he rest in peace. 
The plots are detailed in a 37-page report by a terrorism expert hired by the U.S. Attorney's Office in Tampa to help in its case against Osmakac, a self-described jihadist who said he was too radical even for Hamas and other fringe Muslim groups.
Defense attorneys have filed a motion in federal court asking a judge to bar the prosecution from using the testimony of Evan Kohlmann, who had been given free range in viewing evidence- including recorded conversations between Osmakac and a pair of undercover FBI agents - and Osmakac's computer records.
The report paints a chilling portrait of Osmakac as a radical Muslim who ridiculed the Muslim community in the Tampa area as being enamored with material wealth and said he worried more about being turned in by local Muslims than infidels.
❖ ❖ ❖
Kohlmann is a controversial figure. In a 2010 issue of New York magazine, he was described as being respected in some quarters but also someone who sees danger everywhere he looks. At that time, he had offered testimony that helped convict 23 defendants in federal courts and the military commissions in Guantanamo Bay.
Prosecutors plan to use Kohlmann's testimony at Osmakac's trial on charges of attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction and possession of an unregistered machine gun. Authorities allege Osmakac planned a terrorist attack in Tampa in January 2012, plotting to set off a car bomb, then take hostages and demand the release of Muslim prisoners.
The defense is arguing Osmakac was entrapped, and because of mental illness, he was susceptible to being influenced.
Kohlmann concludes in his report that the defendant appears to fit many of the characteristics associated with the profile of a contemporary violent extremist, otherwise known as a 'homegrown terrorist.' 
The report says Osmakac made trips overseas, though the reasons weren't clear. He was in Turkey and Turkmenistan and was turned away from the Syrian border. That's when he decided to plan a terrorism attack in the United States, according to a transcript of a conversation between him and an undercover agent.
❖ ❖ ❖
In one recording, Osmakac says:
My dream was always here. It's better for, to get it, for them to get it here ... 'cause that's why America loves to go to war with people, 'cause they think nobody can attack them in their country. That's why they're so shocked about the Muslims. Because they brought it here ... . 
Osmakac discussed a plan to use fishing boats to plant bombs on the bridges that span Tampa Bay and even one bridge in Sarasota. All he needed, he said was five people, maybe fewer, to carry out the plot.
They'll really be terrified, he told the confidential informant. Just take down the bridges, they can't do nothing for a month. Nobody's going to work, that's gonna stop like three million people. They gonna be stopped. This area has millions, with Pinellas and Tampa ... has like two, three million people. They all, nobody's going to work.
Defense attorney George Tragos' motion was filed Wednesday. A hearing date has not been set.
Tragos said in the motion that Kohlmann's conclusions aren't valid.
Mr. Kohlmann here is attempting to classify Mr. Osmakac using rank speculation without evidence, the motion says.
His testimony is being presented to the jury to inflame their emotions with reference to Mr. Osmakac and to prejudice them in a way as to shift their attention from the charges filed by the government.
The motion says the government has plenty of evidence to present, without the necessity of this 'smear campaign.' 
 kmorelli@tampatrib.com 
(813) 259-7760

Load-Date: March 14, 2014


End of Document