RED CROSS HELPS PREPARE FOR TERRORISM;
 PROGAMS ARE OFFERED FOR BUSINESSES ON HOW TO BE PREPARED FOR THE UNEXPECTED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 13, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: JEFFERSON COUNTY POST ; Pg. 3
Length: 481 words
Byline: Tracey Bruce Special To The Post-Dispatch
Body


Employees can learn what to do with their duct tape, and businesses can prepare for the unexpected, through the American Red Cross in Jefferson County.
"Employees who are prepared for a disaster at home are better prepared to handle a disaster at work," says Rita Bauman, human resource director for Liguori Publishing.
About 50 employees at the Catholic publishing house attended a program last week by the American Red Cross on Preparing for the Unexpected. The purpose of the program was to help start a new emergency-preparedness plan for Liguori. It is the first comprehensive plan for the company, which had only fire and tornado drills in the past.
The course was the first program of its type presented by the Red Cross office to a business in the county.
Omar Ruiz, supervisor of the Red Cross service center, said: "People will say that terrorists aren't going to reach the Midwest. We could be proven wrong."
In addition to worries about terrorism, natural disasters also are a problem. In a region where flooding occurs an average of every other year and tornadoes, earthquakes and fires are threats, preparations for an emergency can minimize the loss of life and property and may be a significant factor in the recovery of a business.
Ruiz said: "About two-thirds of the businesses affected by a disaster don't recover. The better prepared employees are for an emergency at work and at home, the sooner they can return to work and business."
Although the Red Cross offers a course in Business Disaster Education as well as preparedness for the home, managers at Liguori chose the home presentation because what happens at home when there is a disaster affects the safety of employees at work, Bauman says.
"In a disaster, the first thing everyone wants to do is run home," she said. "If they know their children are taken care of at home, they are less likely to panic."
The basic elements of a plan - such as a common contact person for the family, current telephone numbers and knowing a school's plan for children in an emergency - can promote order, safety and comfort, Ruiz says.
As far as emergency plans for businesses, according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, having a comprehensive plan enhances a company's ability to recover from financial losses, regulatory fines, loss of market share, damages to equipment or products, or business interruption, Ruiz says. An up-to-date plan reduces exposure to civil or criminal liability, helps businesses comply with regulatory requirements and fulfills a company's moral responsibility to protect employees, the community and the environment, Ruiz says, and also can reduce insurance rates.
The American Red Cross Service Center in Jefferson County offers courses for businesses and other organizations at no charge. A group of 10 or more participants is preferred. For more information contact the office at 636-464-9150.

Notes

NOTE: Second Headline should read: Programs are offered for businesses on how to be prepared for the unexpected.

Load-Date: March 13, 2003


End of Document