RED BRIGADES ITALY IS IN UPROAR OVER PRESIDENT'S PLAN TO PARDON LEADER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 25, 1991, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2C
Length: 652 words
Body


ROME - Renato Curcio has never killed anyone, but many Italians consider him the country's most dangerous terrorist.  President Francesco Cossiga's intention to pardon the leader of the leftist Red Brigades guerrillas has placed Curcio at the center of an intense national debate - and outraged the families of the victims.  From his prison cell, Curcio inspired the murders, ''knee-cappings'' and kidnappings with which the Red Brigades terrorized Italy for more than a decade beginning in the 1970s.  When the Red Brigades killed someone, Curcio cheered. At public trials he railed against Italy's leaders, warning them that his followers would spark the revolution that would bury their capitalist system.  But the revolution never came, and Curcio remained behind bars.  Curcio, now 49, was jailed on charges of subversion and instigating terrorism in 1976, but was never directly involved in a murder. His sentence runs out in 2026.  But he has become the object of a desire by President Cossiga and other politicians to close the book on one of Italy's darkest and bloodiest periods.  Cossiga said earlier this month in announcing his intention to pardon Curcio, ''A part of our history is over. The state is strong now. The state has defeated mass terrorism. . . . this episode is closed.'' Political commentators say a pardon would have great symbolic value, because the government could show that the guerrilla movement was dead and act magnanimously toward the former leader of a group that once brought the state to its knees.
But the families of the politicians, judges, journalists and policemen who were killed or wounded by the Red Brigades are livid and have urged the president to change his mind.  ''There is no respect for our dead,'' said Ilena Leonardi, whose husband headed the five-man police escort killed by the Red Brigades in 1978 in their most notorious operation - the kidnapping and murder of former Prime Minister Aldo Moro.  Ulderico Tobagi, whose son Walter, a prominent journalist, was gunned down by the Red Brigades in 1980, said, ''I would hold Curcio, who preached violence, responsible for every single crime committed by terrorists.  When you preach the armed struggle, it means promoting the killing of innocent people.  He is more guilty than all the others.'' Cossiga says he has the power to free Curcio with an executive pardon, but it would have to be signed by Justice Minister Claudio Martelli.  In a recent poll, 76 percent of Italians surveyed said Curcio was responsible for Red Brigades crimes, 61 percent said he should remain in jail and 64 percent said the state should not show clemency to any convicted terrorists.  Curcio, whose wife, Mara Cagol, was killed in a police raid on a terrorist hideout in 1975, founded the Red Brigades in 1970 and invented their five-pointed star symbol.  From then until 1988, when the group killed its last victim, the star symbol was a chilling calling card sprayed on walls and sent to newspapers to claim responsibility for guerrilla attacks.  Since police dismantled the Red Brigades and its offshoots, most former terrorists have cooperated with the authorities, winning lighter sentences.  Through their killings and bombings, the Red Brigades wanted to provoke a repression by the state, hoping that would spark a revolutionary backlash by Italy's working classes.  Curcio has refused to repudiate his past or ask for a pardon personally.  His mother made the formal request.  But in a letter to Justice Minister Martelli analyzing the guerrilla movement Curcio effectively admitted its defeat. He said the Red Brigades had been born in a unique period in Italian history that was now dead.  Some Italian politicians have called for the repeal of tough laws passed during the years of terrorism that allowed authorities to give guerrillas stiffer sentences than other Italians for crimes such as possession of weapons.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document