Red Light, Green Light 1,2,3!
University Wire
January 8, 2004, Thursday


Copyright 2004 District Chronicles via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 583 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, District Chronicles
Dateline: Washington
Body


The color-coded terrorism alert system is playing tricks on our minds. Since Sept. 11, the government's response to perceived threats of terrorism has been to implement a national color-coded system ranging from green to red. The purpose of this system is to alert the public of potential terrorist activity and to implement protective measures. Although this system is intended to shield us against terrorism, many Americans are forced to give pause or panic, depending on the nation's level of alert on that day.
Howard U.
There are five levels of security alert. Low Condition Green signifies the lowest risk of terrorist attack. Guarded Condition Blue represents a general risk of terrorist attack. Elevated Condition Yellow means we face a significant risk of terrorist attack. High Condition Orange represents a high risk of terrorist attack. Severe Condition Red means to keep your battery power radios on and head for your nearest bomb shelter.
These alerts set local and federal law enforcement agencies in motion. In response to the threat level, District residents face: increased police presence, more invasive screening at airports, security checkpoints and all the other nicely worded trappings that define a police state.
However effective these security alerts may be, they create a general sense of insecurity for the average American. On a green day we can feel relaxed and carefree, on an orange day we may feel tense, and on a red day, panicked and stressed.
We face changes in our emotional make-up as a result of work, money, school and the litany of pleasures and pressures that constitute life. To have to deal with our moods, and mental states changing as a result of al Qaeda communications intercepted by the CIA is just too much. On the other hand, if we are attacked as a result of incomplete security surveillance or an overly relaxed state of mind, we would face a much more severe level of stress. After all, the anxiety of having your trunk searched probably doesn't compare with mass death and destruction. In tangible and identifiable ways terrorism has met some of its goals. We live under the fear of attack, our civil liberties are infringed upon, and sweeping legislation that permits the government to invade out private space is changing what freedom means in the USA.
According to commercedatabase.com, the definition of a police state is a country that maintains repressive control over the people by means of police (especially secret police.) So, we have undercover FBI and CIA agents that monitor suspected terrorist activity. We have African-American and other ethnic scholars detained because of their potential to possibly maybe have an alleged connection to terrorism.
On top of all these mechanisms of control in the name of security, our psyche is manipulated based on the color of the alert we have on any given day. It may be a stretch, but the necessity of heightened security measures, is forcing our nation to repress individual liberties through state and federal police powers. We are a young country not quite 300 years old yet, and in that time, we have made leaps through, independence, slavery, women's suffrage and civil rights to protect personal freedom. We are clearly not under a Saddam Hussein or Idi Amin like dictatorship, but changing the color of the nation's psychology because of perceived threats, simply does not seem like progress on our 227 year struggle for liberty.
(C) 2003 District Chronicles via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 8, 2004


End of Document