RED BRIGADES FREE ABDUCTED MAGISTRATE UNHARMED
The New York Times
January 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 365 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: ROME, Thursday, Jan. 15
Body


Giovanni D'Urso, the Rome magistrate kidnapped by the Red Brigades on Dec. 12, was released unharmed early today, the police said.
A caller from the Red Brigades told the police in a telephone call that Mr. D'Urso was in a small car in downtown Rome.  ''He is fine,'' a spokesman at the police headquarters said. ''He seems to be in excellent condition.''
Red Brigades free kidnapped Rome magistrate Giovanni D'Urso unharmed after 33 days'Death Sentence' Revoked
The Red Brigades said in a communique yesterday that they had revoked their ''death sentence'' against Mr. D'Urso, a 49-year-old senior Justice Ministry official, and would free him ''as an act of magnanimity.''
The communique followed publication by several Italian newspapers of statements by urban guerrillas detained at the Trani and Palmi maximum-security jails, as the terrorist organization had demanded.
The statement contended that the imprisonment of Mr. D'Urso, who was in charge of jail transfers, had been a ''great victory.'' ''The political and material objectives of the campaign of attack begun with D'Urso have been amply achieved,'' it said, apparently referring to the Government's decision to close the top-security Asinara Island Jail and the publication of the statements.
But the terrorists, who kidnapped and killed former Prime Minister Aldo Moro in 1978, said the struggle would go on until they achieved ''the destruction of all prisons and the release of all proletarian prisoners.''
Referring to the Government's stated determination not to negotiate with the Red Brigades, the communique said: ''That is a problem for the forces of the imperialist state. We have nothing to ask or bargain for.''
Prime Minister Arnaldo Forlani's four-party coalition has faced criticism from all sides over its policy on terrorism.  First word of his release came in a telephoned messagetothe Italian news agency ANSA from the Red Brigades; 'We have left Judge d'Ursoin a brown Flat at Via Portico d'Ottavia' a streetclose tothe Justice Ministry, where he was in charge of jail transfers.
The judge, held for 33 days and subjected to a peoples trial' and 'death sentence' by the Red Brigades, was taken to police headquarters.


End of Document