Redeeming dignity in Guantanamo
University Wire
June 15, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 Minnesota Daily via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 315 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Minnesota Daily; SOURCE: U. Minnesota
Dateline: MINNEAPOLIS 
Body


Closing Guantanamo prison would demonstrate to the world that the United States not only waves the banner of human rights, but that it actually adheres to some of its principles as well. Taking this brave step toward justice would mark U.S. hopes to deal with the larger issues present in Guantanamo.
The very idea of Guantanamo is a very twisted scheme that prevents justice from taking its course. In the name of "fighting terrorism" basic rights outlined not only in the constitution, but also in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, have been forgotten. Guantanamo has become an emblem of U.S. hegemony over the entire world. The mere fact that there is a military base in Cuba against Cuba's will demonstrates the United States' willful disregard of a country's sovereignty when it is in its interest. Human rights are thrown out while state power can easily be abused. Shutting down Guantanamo would convey the United States' willingness to cooperate with the rest of the world and confirm the legitimacy in practice of the rights Americans boldly take pride in.
Closing the camp would force the government to deal with the detainees by either giving trials to whom it is necessary or by freeing the wrongfully detained. The bottom line is that a person who cannot be guaranteed a "speedy" trial should not be "detained." Obviously, there are serious administrative issues present in this camp; the stories of torture and the usage of people's faith as a tool to humiliate bring great embarrassment and shame to this country.
Locking people up in Cuba has not solved anything, and it certainly has not brought an end to terrorism. The government-sanctioned terrorism that is occurring at Guantanamo must stop. Shutting down the prison would be the first positive step toward the United States gaining back its credibility in the war on terrorism.
(C) 2005 Minnesota Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 15, 2005


End of Document