Reflections from Sept. 11
University Wire
September 10, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 The Crimson White via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 516 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Crimson White; SOURCE: U. Alabama
Dateline: TUSCALOOSA, Ala. 
Body


With the sixth anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center Tuesday, America will again remember the pain of the past and commemorate the men and women who lost their lives on that fateful day.
Six years ago we stood united as a country, wounded by an unseen enemy. For many, there had never been an attack on American soil in their lifetimes. Everywhere we looked, media coverage brought news of another plane, another attack, more deaths. For the first time since Pearl Harbor, we were suffering as a nation struck by an unseen enemy. It was a suffering that unified Americans against terrorism.
Six years after the attacks, the editorial board of The Crimson White wonders how far we've come. Have we rebounded from the attacks? Is terrorism being defeated?
The unity we felt as a country after 9/11 turned into something else in the months that followed. We were scared. Why did al-Qaida -- a group many Americans had never heard of -- want to attack the United States? United under one banner -- patriotism -- we balled our fear of the unknown and pride in our country into trust that we handed over willingly to our government officials so they would take care of business as they assured us they would. In the months after Sept. 11, that trust manifested itself as unfailing support for the Bush administration and everything it did.
Two different mentalities emerged in those months. One focused on reevaluating and objectively asking why these attacks happened. The other saw the seemingly simple answer of going over there and getting the bastards who planned it.
But what started out as a unifying event turned into an issue that drove a serious philosophical wedge between Americans because each side represented something passionate and justified.
Patriotism turned into support for war in Afghanistan, something most agreed was the right thing. But then the support for war took a new turn, and before the nation even took a second to think about it we were in Iraq. The rhetoric was just too powerful and emotions were still high. If you weren't in favor of the war in Iraq, you were against the troops, and you supported terrorism. There was no gray area.
Four years after that war started, al-Qaida's numbers have grown internationally, and Americans do not stand united.
We stand now more divided than ever.
Above foolish pride and political ties is the issue of what's best to keep the country safe and to keep peace in the world. On Sept. 11, people stepped back and reconsidered the world and America's place in it. Conclusions were drawn --- based on the information given to us - that the majority supported and had a right to believe.
Now, however, it's clear that those first conclusions have taken us backward if anything, and the majority view is finally changing.
Almost 1,000 more people have died in the war in Iraq than did in the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and the Taliban are back on the rise in Afghanistan. Heading into our seventh year of post-Sept. 11 foreign policy, it's time again for us to step back and reevaluate.
(C) 2007 The Crimson White via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 10, 2007


End of Document