Refusing To Go Overboard On Security
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 11, 2008 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 12
Length: 406 words
Body


It was seven years ago today that 19 Islamic terrorists hijacked four commercial airlines and changed our nation forever. As we mark this solemn anniversary, questions remain regarding how safe we are today.
For most Americans, the frontline in the war on terrorism is airport security. We show our photo IDs three times before reaching our departure gates, take off our shoes to make sure no plastic explosives are stuffed into a pair of Nikes, limit the size of carry-on liquids, which must be packed in a see-through container, and submit to searches by Transportation Security Administration workers.
Most of us figure the minor inconveniences are justified by the terrorist threat. After all, these are small sacrifices compared to what our fighting men and women on the real frontlines of the war on terrorism must endure.
Yet there comes a point where the quest for security can become too expensive and too intrusive.
That's why many passengers felt a sense of relief the other day when they learned the new high-tech security device scheduled to be installed at Tampa International Airport and other airports was being delayed.
Such machines can electronically peep underneath a passenger's clothing to detect hidden weapons.
TSA officials have said that passengers who don't want to submit to these electronic strip searches can opt for a hands-on, full-body pat-down instead, but that is no improvement.
Before asking us to reveal our intimate selves, TSA officials should explain the threat they expect machines like this to address. Are current technologies allowing people to smuggle weapons and explosives onboard? The current system seems to be working. Of course, terrorists change their methods and security defenses must also be adjusted.
But we need to think hard about whether this high-tech, invasive technology is genuinely needed. Yes, we are at war, and that entails making sacrifices. But sacrifice is giving something up for a greater purpose. And it is not at all clear the public's safety requires the widespread use of a high-tech device that strips passengers of their privacy and dignity.
Photo credit: Tribune file photo
Photo: The federal government needs to explain why it needs such personally intrusive technologically at airports, as shown above. Simply saying the country is at war is not enough.
Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: September 12, 2008


End of Document