Regulatory, asbestos reform bills likely to stall; Supporters look to next Congress
Business Insurance
September 4, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1130 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON --
The 109th Congress appears likely to end its last regular session in a few weeks with a considerable amount of unfinished risk management and insurance-related business left on the table.
Among the issues likely to be left for the next Congress-or a post-election lame duck Congress if one should be convened-are insurance regulatory reform, the future, if any, of the federal backstop for terrorism insurance and federal tort reform, including asbestos liability reform. With the exception of terrorism insurance, all had at least some chance of being resolved during the current congressional session.
One reason that those issues probably won't be settled now is the congressional calendar, which could mean that lawmakers recess as early as Sept. 29, said Melissa Shelk, vp-federal affairs for the Washington-based American Insurance Assn.
If that's the case, ``that means they're here for 15 days,'' she said.
``So the focus is going to be on appropriations and defense reauthorization. I don't foresee that there will be a whole lot of new issues moving,'' said Ms. Shelk.
``As far as any kind of markups, I think we're done for the year,'' said Justin Roth, senior director-federal affairs in the National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos.' Washington office. ``The amount of calendar days remaining is growing smaller and smaller.''
``I don't think we'll get anything done this year,'' said Terry Fleming, a director-external affairs for the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. and director-risk management for Montgomery County in Rockville, Md. Mr. Fleming said that RIMS is ``working on a white paper for a long-term solution to the terrorism exposure and we're also considering a white paper for the surplus lines reform/optional federal charter legislation for next year.''
``I think Congress wants to get in, get what they have to get done in September and then get on the campaign trail,'' said Ben McKay, senior vp-federal government relations in the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America's Washington office.
The rush to campaign could mean that one of the more promising pieces of federal insurance regulatory reform will remain simply a promise rather than reality. The Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act-H.R. 5637-won the approval of the House Financial Services Committee in late July (BI, July 31). The bill would create a uniform system for regulating and taxing surplus lines insurers by making nonadmitted insurance subject to regulation only in the policyholder's home state. It would also streamline reinsurance solvency regulation.
Although the measure stirred little controversy within the committee, it had to be referred to the House Judiciary Committee, which has yet to take it up.
``The Judiciary Committee won't take it up until they get some time or we see a bill in the Senate,'' said PCI's Mr. McKay. ``If somebody dropped a Senate bill and they got a hearing, you might see some activity.''
``I think there's a likelihood that the full House will act on the surplus lines legislation this year, though it's an uphill climb in the Senate-not that there's any opposition, just that we have a lot of work to do,'' said Joel Wood, senior vp-government affairs for the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington.
He praised the chairman of the committee's subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises-Rep. Richard Baker, R-La.-for doing a ``great job of vetting out any problems with the bill.'' He added that it has been ``gratifying'' to see the National Assn. of Insurance Commissioners ``offering constructive suggestions'' as well.
``Regardless of whether the bill is enacted this year, I think that the case has been made that whenever Congress takes action on any insurance regulatory proposals, this should be the lowest hanging fruit. It begs for a national solution, and it's a win-win for policyholders and the industry,'' said Mr. Wood.
``NAMIC would look forward to working with the Senate to try to get a similar bill introduced, either this year or next year,'' said Mr. Roth.
One issue that won't be decided this year is the fate of the federal terrorism insurance backstop that's slated to end on Dec. 31, 2007. The 2005 law that extended a scaled-back version of the original Terrorism Risk Insurance Act contains a provision that requires the Presidential Working Group on Financial Markets to deliver a report on the state of terrorism insurance marketplace to Congress no later than Sept. 30 of this year.
``I don't expect anything on terrorism because everybody's waiting for the PWG report,'' said AIA's Ms. Shelk.
``All eyes will be on the President's Working Group report at the end of September, though I doubt that it will be inconsistent with other Treasury views during the past two years,'' said CIAB's Mr. Wood.
But insurers and policyholders should be seeking to unite around ``a common proposal that is very different than the current TRIA, yet can pass the narrow political constraints of Congress and the administration,'' he said.
In another area of interest to risk managers-reform of the system for compensating victims of asbestos-related disease-action also appears unlikely this month.
Senate Judiciary Chairman Arlen Specter, R-Pa., won committee approval for his Fairness in Asbestos Injury Resolution Act early this year. The FAIR Act would create a national trust fund, paid for by defendant companies, their insurers and existing asbestos compensation trust funds, to replace the current litigation-based system for compensating victims of the asbestos-related disease. The measure never made it to the floor of the Senate after opponents blocked an effort to halt debate on the measure.
Generally, failure to invoke cloture means that a bill is dead for the session, but Sen. Specter reworked the bill and held a hearing on the revised bill in June. There has been no further significant action on the measure despite the White House's support for the trust fund concept.
``It's mathematically possible that asbestos gets another shake in the Senate, but no one's holding their breath,'' said a spokesman for the Washington-based American Tort Reform Assn.
Regarding major tort reform, PCI's Mr. McKay said ``we think that's off the radar this year.''
The ATRA spokesman pointed out that the House earlier approved several tort reform measures, including the Lawsuit Abuse Reduction Act-which would sanction attorneys who bring lawsuits deemed ``frivolous'' in federal courts-and a measure that would protect food manufacturers and sellers from lawsuits brought by consumers who claimed the products made them obese. The Senate, however, has shown no appetite for the bills, he said.
``We're not holding out much hope for those items,'' he said.

Load-Date: September 8, 2006


End of Document