Regulators find deficiencies at Arab Bank; The Middle East institution will be closing its office in New York
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 26, 2005 Saturday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. d5
Length: 341 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


U.S. regulators said Friday that Arab Bank PLC, one of the largest financial institutions in the Middle East, has inadequate controls against money laundering at its New York branch and has been ordered to stop transferring funds or opening accounts there.
In an unusual move, the Office of the U.S. Comptroller of the Currency, a Treasury Department agency, said the branch was being converted into an entity that will not conduct traditional banking activities but will continue to engage in corporate and trade financing.
Jordan-based Arab Bank, with operations in 30 countries, faces several lawsuits in the United States by relatives of terrorism victims in Israel who allege it supported terrorism by funneling donations to Palestinian suicide bombers and their families.
The bank, which had said recently it would close its New York branch, agreed to the conditions in a consent order with the comptroller's office. It also agreed to keep several million dollars in reserve as security against possible additional government action, not to destroy or alter any records at the New York branch, and to keep all of them in English.
"The inadequacy of the branch's controls over its funds transfer business is especially serious in light of the high-risk characteristics of many of the transfers," the comptroller's office said in the order, which was dated Thursday and announced Friday.
Rep. Sue Kelly, R-N.Y., who heads a House subcommittee that has investigated terrorists' use of the U.S. financial system, called the action by the comptroller's office encouraging but added, "I remain deeply concerned about reports of Arab Bank's role in supporting terrorism and look forward to learning additional facts regarding this situation in the coming weeks and months."
Families of about 1,300 U.S. and Israeli citizens killed in terrorist attacks in Israel sued Arab Bank in federal court in New York City last summer, accusing it of channeling money to Palestinian terrorist groups and of making insurance payments to beneficiaries of suicide bombers.

Load-Date: February 26, 2005


End of Document