Reid, Citing Terrorism Risks, Calls for Nuclear Waste to be Stored at Power Plants, Not Yucca Mountain
CongressNow
October 31, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Energy
Length: 548 words
Byline: Geof Koss, CongressNow Staff
Body


Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) today called for highly radioactive nuclear waste to be stored at the plants where it is generated, saying shipments of the waste to a proposed underground storage facility in his home state of Nevada will prove a tempting target for terrorists.
Reid told the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee this morning that the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, highlighted the dangers posed by "evil people" who would likely target the thousands of shipments carrying the waste to Nevada's Yucca Mountain.
"This is an invitation to them," he told the committee during a hearing on the federal licensing process for the proposed nuclear waste repository.
Reid, a perennial Yucca opponent, said a safer solution would be to employ "dry cask" storage at nuclear plants, which he said can be safely used for decades as a longer-term solution is developed.
"We leave it where it is," he said. "Isn't it more secure there than hauling it by trains and trucks sometimes thousands of miles?"
Reid, along with fellow Nevada Senator John Ensign (R-Nev.) and Sen. Robert Bennett (R-Utah), is the sponsor of legislation that would mandate this approach.
Senators on the panel largely lined up in support or opposition to Yucca Mountain today along party lines.
Senate Environment and Public Works Chairman Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.) called the project "fatally flawed," and expressed concerns about waste shipments through her state, as well as possible groundwater contamination from the site.
Democratic presidential frontrunner Sen. Hillary Clinton (D-N.Y.) also lambasted the proposal. "I want to start by stating what the available scientific evidence makes clear: Yucca Mountain is not a safe place to store spent fuel from our nation's nuclear reactors," she said.
But Ranking Republican James Inhofe (R-Okla.) noted that the federal government is contractually obligated to take the waste and store it underground. He noted that the costs associated with the issue are estimated to increase by $500 million each year the site is delayed past its current opening date of 2017.
"How do you justify this to our taxpayers?" he asked.
Sen. Larry Craig (R-Idaho) linked support for Yucca to concern about climate change, calling the site essential for continued nuclear development, which he touted as crucial to curbing global warming. Nuclear power does not emit greenhouse gases.
Sen. Jim DeMint (R-S.C.), whose state derives half of its power from nuclear energy, concurred. "If we do not open Yucca as planned ... we will stall all nuclear development," he testified to the committee.
However, Ensign testified against the plan. "We are pouring money down a large rathole in the state of Nevada," he said. He touted the recycling of nuclear waste as a partial solution to the problem.
Presidential politics also reverberated through the hearing.
Boxer noted that it was Clinton who requested the hearing, a move seen by some as an effort to court votes in Nevada, which is both an early caucus state and a Democratic target for the general election.
Not to be outdone, a letter was distributed at the hearing from Sen. Barack Obama (D-Ill.), who is also seeking the Democratic nomination for president, to Reid and Boxer expressing his opposition to Yucca Mountain.

Load-Date: November 22, 2007


End of Document