Reinsurance capacity still available-but at a price; Sept. 11 attacks accelerate rate increases, prompt use of terrorism exclusions
Business Insurance
January 14, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 20
Length: 1226 words
Byline: RODD ZOLKOS and JUDY GREENWALD
Body


Negotiations for reinsurance programs renewing Jan. 1 were tough and went long, but when all was said and done, most buyers could find the coverage they sought. That coverage, though, came at higher prices and typically with terrorism exclusions.
''The renewal season actually went fairly well, considering everything that happened,'' said Richard Di Clemente, president of New York-based THB Intermediaries Inc. Reinsurers took ''very, very strong positions on pricing, and, of course, on terrorism exclusions, which have become fairly standard and commonplace.''
Average price increases have been 25% to 50%, ''but in some cases, depending upon loss history, the increases could have been as much as 100%. But capacity is still available if the pricing is adequate and all the conditions for the renewal are met, especially terrorist exclusions,'' Mr. Di Clemente said.
Albert P. Amato, senior vp at Greenwich, Conn.-based C.L. Frates Reinsurance Intermediary Inc., which specializes in casualty business, said: ''We're still working on (renewals). That must mean it's going pretty well for reinsurers. When the brokers don't have things completed by Jan. 1, we know it's a harder market.''
''It always seems to be a late renewal season, but this is a particularly late renewal season,'' said Henry C.V. Keeling, president and chief executive officer at XL Re Ltd. in Hamilton, Bermuda. ''A lot of the casualty business is still outstanding; a lot of the marine and aviation business is still outstanding.''
At least some of those delays resulted from ''a lot of client denial,'' Mr. Keeling said, as buyers shopped for better deals or reassessed their programs.
''I think, generally speaking, the brokers did a very good job in terms of dealing with client expectations beforehand,'' Mr. Keeling said. ''But, even so, I think there were some clients who were finding it very difficult to accept what the market had to do.''
''Negotiations have been extensive and extended. They've been tough, but the market is certainly there,'' said John N. Gilbert Jr., president and CEO of New York-based intermediary Holborn Corp. ''Rates are up, but reinsurers have sufficient capacity to take care of the needs of the primary companies.''
Mark P. Lescault, head of the divisional underwriting office at Swiss Re Americas Corp. in Armonk, N.Y., noted that although there were price increases across all lines of reinsurance business, reinsurers differentiated among risks in their pricing, with the magnitude of the price hikes varying with the exposure. ''It's not a one-size-fits-all sort of approach,'' Mr. Lescault said.
For clients with good information and a good loss history, ''reinsurers are dealing very fairly,'' said Mike Bungert, the president and CEO of Aon Re Inc. in Chicago. The renewal process is ''very civilized and very calm,'' he said.
Rod Thaler, executive vp for Willis Re Inc. in New York, said, ''There definitely is a premium put on those intermediaries that worked closely with their clients to develop much more detailed underwriting information in advance'' of renewals. ''The absence of information this year certainly was construed against ceding companies.''
Mr. Lescault said that the trend toward higher reinsurance prices began a year ago, as reinsurers recognized the need to improve their results. Medical malpractice, petrochemical and marine risks were among the lines of business where price deficiencies had been the greatest, he said. Consequently, those lines are now showing greater pricing increases.
''I think it's important to recognize that 9-11 accelerated a trend that was in motion before,'' said Andreas Beerli, CEO of the Americas division of Swiss Re America in Armonk.
Greg Doyle, executive vp at Guy Carpenter & Co. Inc. in New York, said that with this January's renewals, the marketplace ''seemed to be attempting to return to a technical pricing approach.''
''Certainly, over the last five or 10 years, there's been a fair amount of deviation off of technical pricing,'' Mr. Doyle said. Now, though, reinsurers are less likely to vary from the price that the exposure or the cedent's loss experience demands.
Contrary to the expectations of many after the events of Sept. 11, this year's property catastrophe renewals proved to be a ''non-event,'' according to Paul Karon, the president of Benfield Blanch Inc. in Minneapolis. ''Rates were up 15% to 20%, but they would have been up 10% anyway,'' he said.
But ''casualty was trickier,'' Mr. Karon said, and high-end workers compensation capacity ''was pricey and...hard to get.''
''The workers comp cat market, that (accident and health) market, went away,'' he said. ''That market is hard and dysfunctional, and if you need a couple of hundred million dollars of high-end coverage, you're in a bad spot.''
In addition, excess-of-loss reinsurance ''was a little bit more difficult,'' said Stephen Bolland, senior vp at intermediary Gill & Roeser Inc. in New York. He noted that aviation also was a problem area because of a reduction in available capacity.
Surety reinsurers also have had a very difficult year because of poor results and the recent Enron Corp. bankruptcy, Mr. Bolland said.
''A number of reinsurers announced they are pulling out of the market or cutting back significantly,'' he said.
On the property catastrophe side, the availability of coverage is the result of the capital that came into the market in the final months of 2000, Mr. Karon said. ''It's very simple. A bunch of capital was raised and deployed in time for renewal,'' he said.
Swiss Re's Mr. Lescault said the new capacity ''has helped deal with some of the areas where capacity has fallen away.''
''So far, what we've seen this renewal season is the new capacity has been very disciplined, both in their pricing (and) in deploying that capacity,'' Mr. Lescault said. ''We're not seeing a drive to market share.''
Terrorism exclusions were the norm in Jan. 1 renewals, particularly for heavy commercial business, and they include losses from nuclear, biochemical and chemical terrorist acts, said Guy Carpenter's Mr. Doyle.
Alfred H. Blanton, executive vp at Lawrenceville, N.J.-based JLT Re Solutions Inc., said most major reinsurers are trying to get terrorism exclusions included in their workers comp reinsurance policies.
''The availability of reinsurance without a terrorism exclusion clause is the biggest hurdle for us to get over right now,'' Mr. Blanton said.
Charles T. Black, president and CEO of Dallas-based EWI Re Inc., said that the terrorism exclusion has been included in most of his company's quotes. ''We have been able to get it taken out where it makes sense'' in individual cases, he said, although ''that's not the norm.''
''From a reinsurance standpoint, there's no question that we've looked at terrorism very seriously,'' said Mr. Lescault.
''We've been able to provide a limited amount of coverage, but not a blanket cover. Certainly, the most highly exposed risks are the ones where you're likely to see terrorism exclusions,'' Mr. Lescault said.
James P. Bryce, president and CEO of IPCRe Ltd. in Pembroke, Bermuda, said he thinks reinsurers can write terrorism coverage separately if it's priced and tracked properly and there is a government backstop.
''I don't think you can include it like we have in the past, which is basically for free and not tracking it,'' he said.

Load-Date: January 18, 2002


End of Document