REINSURERS' TERRORISM WORRIES MAY REDUCE AVAILABLE COVER
Business Insurance
June 05, 1995


Copyright 1995 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Special Report; Pg. 13
Length: 390 words
Byline: Dave Lenckus
Body


Some public entities hit by future terrorist acts also may face another crushing blow: inadequate or no property insurance to respond to the loss.
Some facultative property reinsurers are contemplating or already are limiting the amount of terrorist-related losses they will accept from ceding insurers, which surely would cause coverage restrictions for risk managers.  Reinsurers are considering either establishing sublimits or excluding all losses resulting from terrorist acts.
Traditionally, these losses have been fully covered. The typical exclusion has been for acts that could be traced to countries with which the United States was at war.
Reinsurers are reassessing how they want to treat terrorism-related losses in the aftermath of the April 19 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, which claimed at least 168 lives and caused between $125 million and $300 million of insured damage at buildings near the blast site.
Two years earlier, the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York caused $510 million of insured property damage, the bulk of which reinsurers shouldered.
"It's definitely an issue in the market at this time,'' said Louis A.  Adanio, senior vp-manager of facultative alternative risk and direct insurance at SCOR U.S. Group in New York.
SCOR is considering how to approach facultative accounts for high-risk public entities in large cities, he said.
That approach, though, still could leave the reinsurer covering some terrorist targets. ''You certainly wouldn't think of Oklahoma City as a high-risk exposure,'' Mr. Adanio said. Of course, federal buildings are not commercially insured.
American Re-Insurance Co. of Princeton, N.J., is assessing its facultative property risks on a case-by-case basis, a spokesman said.
Other reinsurers had not ruled out the possibility of restricting coverage for losses resulting from terrorism but said they had not determined definitively whether they would.
The one hope for risk managers is that the idea of limiting coverage for terrorist acts is just a knee-jerk reaction that will never come to fruition for most reinsurers. Reinsurers also began talking about restricting coverage after the World Trade Center bombing, but that notion quickly faded away, Mr.  Adanio pointed out. ''It remains to be seen where the market goes on this,'' he said.

Load-Date: June 8, 1995


End of Document