Reject House terrorism proposal
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 23, 2011 Monday
Main Edition


Copyright 2011 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: OPINION; Pg. 12A
Length: 647 words
Byline: Bob Barr

For the AJC
Body


When it was learned U.S. forces had killed Osama bin Laden, many observers quickly concluded this signaled the end of the "war on terror" because our primary objective in bringing those directly responsible for 9/11 had been satisfied.
Unfortunately, those of us seeking to scale back the war on terror --- so costly in term money, lives and civil liberties at home --- may have a long wait. In fact, if the House Armed Services Committee prevails, the "war" will actually expand.
According to a report by Eli Lake at the Washington Times, this committee --- led by Rep. Buck McKeon, R-Calif., --- has added language to the defense budget for the upcoming fiscal year that "would define the current war on al-Qaida to include the Taliban and affiliated armed groups."
House Republicans argue that since bin Laden is out of the picture, the Authorization for the Use of Military Force, passed just days after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, needs to be "updated." This would justify our continued occupation of Mideast countries and the open-ended approach to the current war. It also allows continued detention of "enemy combatants" without trial.
This is not McKeon's first attempt to expand the AUMF. Last November, for example, he declared publicly that Congress "should ensure no court in the land questions the legal authority for our forces to prosecute this war."
At least some House Democrats are resisting. The Judiciary Committee's top Democrat, John Conyers, D-Mich., sent a letter to McKeon urging public hearings on the implications of this proposed policy expansion. Conyers wrote that by "declaring a global war against nameless individuals, organizations and nations 'associated' with the Taliban and al-Qaida, as well as those playing a supporting role," the legislation actually expands the president's authority to prosecute actions anywhere without further congressional approval.
Conyers also takes issue with the indefinite detention of terror suspects and military tribunals, noting they are "mired by legal problems and controversy." Unfortunately, these concerns are falling on deaf ears.
What this latest language does is give the Obama administration and its successors preemptive permission to use military force against an alleged terrorist group, or even a country harboring them, based on some arbitrary, alleged association with al-Qaida or the Taliban. While the administration has not asked for these expanded powers, neither is it offering firm opposition.
In a March 2011 exchange with Rep. Mac Thornberry, R-Texas --- a frequent critic of expansive U.S. military actions --- Jeh Johnson, general counsel for the Defense Department, explained why such expansion was not necessary. He said, "I think that the current legal interpretations of the AUMF that we have and that we've used, which are solid, are sufficient to address the existing threats."
Many Americans are war weary, and understandably so. What should have been a series of focused, covert and Special Forces operations in Afghanistan to dismantle Taliban and al-Qaida units responsible for the 9/11 attacks has turned into a decade-long, nation-building occupation. Iraq has likewise evolved into a trillion-dollar exercise in nation building.
Congress should be looking for ways to reduce our military presence abroad, not expand it. We cannot afford both the cost in lives and the fiscal implications of open-ended nation-building. Nor can we afford continued use of the original AUMF to justify all manner of questionable or openly unlawful actions, such as torture of suspects and warrantless surveillance of Americans' phones and emails.
McKeon's proposal should be debated --- and rejected.
Bob Barr, an Opinion columnist and former U.S. House member, writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. His column appears Monday. Reach him at mail@bobbarr.org
Blog with Bob Barr at ajc.com/opinion.

Load-Date: May 23, 2011


End of Document