RELATIVELY PEACEFUL TIMES PUT GAMES' FOCUS BACK ON SPORTS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 8, 1992, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: SPORTS; Pg. 1C
Length: 917 words
Body


ALBERTVILLE, France (AP) - For the first time since before the 1972 Munich massacre, the Olympic Games open today devoid of a fortress mentality, untroubled by terrorism and focused on, of all things, sports.  The U.S. hockey team, which shook up world champion Sweden in its final tuneup game with hard-checking, National Hockey League-style roughness, may represent the greatest threat of violence. Sweden's coach, Conny Evensson, left the rink complaining that the Americans' play was ''more than dangerous.  It was disgusting.'' If that's the biggest beef at these Winter Games, that'll be fine with everyone. After the terrorist attack on Israelis at Munich, virtually all other Olympics, summer and winter, resembled armed camps. Soldiers packing machine guns, bazookas and rifles stood sentry at stadium entrances and atop buildings, backed up by helicopter patrols, barely concealed tanks and special forces ready to repel any sort of invasion.  In a world largely at peace after the collapse of communism and the release of Mideast hostages, officials here are no longer too worried about terrorism.  Security still will be strong, with 6,500 police and military officers spread out over the 650 square miles of mountainous terrain. But the emphasis will be on discretion, not confrontation; natural dangers, not political problems.  ''We've classified everything that's a potential threat by probability.  Terrorism is not high on the list,'' said Col. Albert Delmas, head of Olympic security. ''For us the greater danger is a technical accident or a massive snow avalanche - something that would interrupt the holding of the events, or transmission of their images.
''It won't be like Seoul. We're in a different period. In 1988 there was the tension between North and South Korea, and there were fears of big trouble. The climate here is much more calm.'' Today's opening ceremony will mark the first time since World War II that th e Baltic republics - Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia - will march in an Olympics under their own flags. It will be the first appearance of the new United Team, representing five republics of the defunct Soviet Union. And it will be the first Olympics for Slovenia and Croatia, independent of Yugoslavia.  Two billion people around the world are expected to watch the Games, and the attention surely will be more on the performances than the politics.  Among the 2,200 athletes competing from a record 64 countries, the stars are likely to be a combination of the famous and the unknown.  One of the most famous and least bashful is Italy's Alberto Tomba - ''Tomba la Bomba'' of Calgary, where he won two gold medals in the slalom and giant slalom. This year, he's looking for a second double.  ''I have a feeling that this is my year,'' he says with characteristic bravado. ''Since the Olympics are in Albert-ville - and that is my name - I think the Olympics will be something special. Don't forget, the last time the Olympics were in Albert-a, and I had good success there. I feel maybe it's destiny for me to win in these places.'' He jokes that ''after the Games, they will have to change the name to Alberto-ville.'' Japan's Midori Ito came out of nowhere to steal the greatest cheers from the crowd in women's figure skating four years ago with breathtakingly high leaps and an effervescent smile. She would be favored to win this time if not for the spills she suffered at the world championships.  If Ito should slip up here, look for any of the Americans - Kristi Yamaguchi, Tonya Harding or Nancy Kerrigan - to take the gold.  Yamaguchi, America's figure skating champion, has plenty of athleticism to blend with her artistic style and charismatic presence on the ice.  ''I've been working hard since the nationals,'' she said. ''I was very happy with that performance. I only hope I won't lose my bow.'' The bow that fell from her hair to the ice at the nationals in Orlando, Fla., added to the drama of her performance as she barely skated by it several times, avoiding disaster.  Todd Eldredge missed the nationals because of a back injury, but is just getting back his confidence and could challenge compatriot Chris Bowman for the gold among men.  ''I've done the routine millions of times in practice,'' Eldredge said.  ''Whether you are practicing or on the ice in competition, you have to put all your energy into what you are doing. There is no slow speed. I try not to get discouraged if I miss something. I haven't had a lot of training lately on the jumps.  ''I don't know if my best will win a medal. I'll go out and try as hard as I can to do what I can. If it's enough, that's great. If not, we'll work even harder.'' American speed skater Bonnie Blair is favored to repeat her gold medal performance in Calgary, and may even make it two or three this time.  Men's speed skater Dan Jansen, the heartbreak kid of Calgary, could become a legitimate star this time around. He set a world record at 500 meters in January and is ready to put behind him the spills he took in 1988 when he raced shortly after his sister's death of leukemia.  TODAY'S SCHEDULE Opening Ceremony: 10 a.m. Ice Hockey: Canada vs. France, 6 a.m.; Czechoslovakia vs. Norway, 9:30 a.m.; United Team vs. Switzerland, 1:15 p.m. Skiing and Ski Jumping: Practice sessions only.  Television: Ice hockey, skiing, ski jumping, KMOV, Channel 4, 3 p.m.; Opening ceremony, KMOV, 7 p.m.; Highlights, KMOV, 10:35 p.m. Inside: For 16-year-old ''Flying Finn,'' V stands for victory

Graphic

 
Graphic Photo; LOGO.....ALBERTVILLE CHART-TABLE.....TODAY'S SCHEDULE (appears below text) PHOTO by AP.....Todd Eldredge could challenge for a gold in figure skating competition. PHOTO by AP.....Albertville (Ala.) Chamber of Commerce officials Lisa Socha (left) and executive director Brenda Rains taking advantage of Olympic interest. (photo ran in 3* edition only)

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document