Released from Turkey, pastor prays with Trump He asks God to give Trump wisdom, strength, courage
Chicago Daily Herald
October 14, 2018 Sunday
MF12 Edition


Copyright 2018 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 791 words
Byline: By Darlene Superville and Zeke Miller Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON — Freed American pastor Andrew Brunson fell to one knee in the Oval Office and placed his hand on President Donald Trump's shoulder in prayer Saturday, asking God to provide the president "supernatural wisdom to accomplish all the plans you have for this country and for him." Trump welcomed Brunson to the White House to celebrate his release from nearly two years of confinement in Turkey, which had sparked a diplomatic row with a key ally and outcry from U.S. evangelical groups. Brunson returned to the United States aboard a military jet shortly before meeting the president. He was detained in October 2016 after a failed coup, formally arrested that December and placed under house arrest July 25 for health reasons. 
"From a Turkish prison to the White House in 24 hours, that's not bad," Trump said. Brunson's homecoming amounts to a diplomatic — and possibly political — win for Trump and his evangelical base. Coming on the heels of the confirmation of a conservative justice to the Supreme Court, Brunson's return is likely to leave evangelical Christians feeling good about the president and motivated get to the polls in the Nov. 6 midterm elections. Brunson appeared to be in good health and good spirits. When he asked Trump if he could pray for him, the president replied, "Well, I need it probably more than anyone else in this room, so that would be very nice, thank you." Brunson left his chair beside Trump, knelt and placed a hand on the president's shoulder. As Trump bowed his head, Brunson asked God to "give him supernatural wisdom to accomplish all the plans you have for this country and for him. I ask that you give him wisdom in how to lead this country into righteousness." He continued: "I ask that you give him perseverance, and endurance and courage to stand for truth. I ask that you to protect him from slander from enemies, from those who would undermine. I ask that you make him a great blessing to this country. Fill him with your wisdom and strength and perseverance. And we bless him. May he be a great blessing to our country. In Jesus' name, we bless you. Amen." Brunson, originally from Black Mountain, North Carolina, had lived in Turkey with his family for more than two decades and led a small congregation in the Izmir Resurrection Church. He was accused of committing crimes on behalf of Kurdish militants and to aid Pennsylvania-based Muslim cleric Fethullah Gulen, who Turkey accuses of engineering the coup attempt. Brunson faced up to 35 years in jail if convicted of all the charges against him. A Turkish court on Friday convicted Brunson of having links to terrorism and sentenced him to just over three years in prison but released the 50-year-old evangelical pastor because he had already spent nearly two years in detention. An earlier charge of espionage was dropped. Brunson was flown out of Turkey hours later and taken to a U.S. military hospital in Landstuhl, Germany, for a medical checkup. Administration officials cast Brunson's release as vindication of Trump's hard-nosed negotiating stance, saying Turkey tried to set terms for Brunson's release but that Trump was insistent on release without conditions. Trump maintained there was no deal for Brunson's freedom, but the president dangled the prospect of better relations between the United States and its NATO ally. "We do not pay ransom in this country," Trump said. Where previous administrations kept negotiations over U.S. prisoners held abroad close to the vest, Trump has elevated them to causes célèbres, striking a tough line with allies and foes alike. Trump thanked Turkey's president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who had resisted the demands of Trump and other high-level U.S. officials for Brunson's release. Erdogan had insisted that his country's courts are independent, though he previously had suggested a possible swap for Brunson. The United States had repeatedly called for Brunson's release and, this year, sanctioned two Turkish officials and doubled tariffs on steel and aluminum imports citing in part Brunson's plight. Trump said the United States greatly appreciated Brunson's release and that the move "will lead to good, perhaps great, relations" between the countries. He also said the White House would "take a look" at the sanctions. After the prayer, Trump asked Brunson's wife, Norine, which candidate she voted for in 2016 before saying he knew she voted for him. "I would like to say I sent in an absentee ballot from prison," Brunson quipped. Erdogan said on Twitter that he hoped the two countries will continue to cooperate "as it befits two allies." Erdogan also called for joint efforts against terrorism, listing the Islamic State group, Kurdish militants and Gulen and his followers.

Notes

Eds: Refreshes news summary. With AP Photos. Eds: Edits throughout. With AP Photos.

Load-Date: October 15, 2018


End of Document