Releases don't mean an end to terrorism
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 4, 1991, Metro Edition


Copyright 1991 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 14A
Length: 873 words
Byline: William Beecher; Staff Writer
Dateline: Washington, D.C.
Body


The freeing this week of Alann Steen and Joseph Cicippio is viewed by top Bush administration officials as resulting primarily from a decision by Iran that keeping hostages in Lebanon no longer serves a useful purpose.
 But policy makers say Iran has not abandoned terrorism and continues to assassinate Iranian dissidents all over the world and is encouraging and assisting radical groups in the West Bank, Gaza Strip and southern Lebanon to use violence to disrupt the Mideast peace process.
 "Iran continues to consider terrorism a legitimate tool to achieve its foreign policy goals, as does Libya and Syria," one senior official said. "For more than six months Iran has been involved in a reassessment of what kind of terrorism is most productive. A recent conclusion: The hostages in Lebanon aren't worth it any longer. Close this deal out, and then Iran can get some benefit by seeming to be more moderate."
Comments another official: "At the same time Iran decided to end the hostage crisis, it has been actively pursuing the assassination of Iranian dissidents. Ten or 12 have been killed in Europe in the last year and a half.
 "In addition, it sponsored a conference of every known thug in the Middle East at the time of convening the Madrid conference. It is providing money, political cover and arms in getting groups ready for violence, particularly Islamic Jihad, Hamas and Hezbollah."
 The objectives, he said, may be to try to assassinate Palestinian negotiators and moderate leaders supporting them, as well as to stir up anti-Israeli activity in Lebanon and the occupied territories.
 For what purpose?
 "To intimidate those who would compromise on traditional Palestinian issues and legitimize Israel, on the one hand. And, strategically, to try to position Iran with the trend in the West Bank, Gaza and southern Lebanon toward radical fundamentalist groups over the PLO (Palestine Liberation Organization) and other secular groups."
 Thus U.S. officials, while exhilarated over the fact that the six-year hostage ordeal is drawing to a close and is vindicating the policy of not paying ransom, are upset that terrorism is not being abandoned by the principal state sponsors.
 Syria, officials say, since the coalition effort to drive Iraq out of Kuwait, has been trying to keep the lid on terrorist groups that it either controls or allows to have safe haven in Syria or the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon. But it has not expelled these groups. Instead, analysts say, it appears to be keeping them on the shelf in case they are needed later.
 Iraq, they say, is lying low on the terrorism front, in part because it has its hands busy at home, in part because it doesn't want to give the United States, in the words of one official, "an excuse to finish the job."
 Libya is nervously hunkering down, denying it had anything to do with the bombing of Pan Am 103 or of a French UTA airliner and watching apprehensively to see what the West may do in addition to demanding extradition of those accused of those atrocities.
 One official said it's not clear whether the Iranian government is prepared to take an active role in a campaign of assassination and terror to disrupt the Mideast peace process, or is only providing rhetorical and limited physical support of rejectionist groups that it may not be able to control.
 "Fortunately, not much has happened in the West Bank and Gaza yet," he noted.
 Even if Iran should decide to get more deeply involved, another official said, it would be constrained by the fact that Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon are all participating in the peace process and appear unwilling to either support activities aimed at undermining the process or even to turn a blind eye. "That's a problem they've got to work out if they decide to become more actively involved," he said.
 "The most important change in the situation," he added, "is that Syria is not cooperating."
 On the other hand, Syrian President Hafez Assad "thinks because we couldn't find Syrian fingerprints on Pan Am 103, that absolves him from responsibility for terrorism," the official said. "We don't see it that way. So Syria stays on the list of terrorist states."
 Last week the United States, Britain and France issued a joint statement declaring that state sponsored terrorism includes harboring, training, providing protection, facilities or financial support to terrorist organizations.
 Syria continues to provide several of those things, analysts say. Besides Mideast-oriented groups in Damascus, they say, Syria enables the Japanese Red Army, two radical Turkish groups, and an Armenian terrorist organization to maintain training bases in the Bekaa and to transit freely through Damascus airport.
 "Assad allows them to be present and maintain a capability should they be useful in the future," one official said. "That's a traditional position in the Middle East - try not to burn any bridges since the politics of the region are so changeable you can't be sure you may not need them later."
 "If you look at it from Assad's point of view," another official said, "if he kicks them out they may come back after him or fall under the control of someone with different interests.  He's holding them in check, but not kicking them out."

Load-Date: December 5, 1991


End of Document