Relief efforts, anti-terrorism fight to get boost from 'Patriotic Bonds'; Treasury Department: The interest rate in effect through April is 4.07%
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 17, 2001 Saturday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a7
Length: 433 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Treasury Department is going to issue war bonds - the first since World War II - to help pay for the fight against terrorism and for relief efforts following the Sept. 11 attacks.
Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill signed off on the plan Friday, after getting a letter from a bipartisan group of lawmakers urging that "Patriot Bonds" be issued.
The department said the bonds would be designated Series EE savings bonds and sold as "Patriot Bonds" through financial institutions and the Bureau of the Public Debt. The rate in effect through April is 4.07 percent. The bonds will be available in denominations ranging from $$ @50 to $$ @10,000. 
"The public is unified in its desire to take decisive action and now will have the opportunity to contribute directly to help rebuild the broken and retaliate against terrorism," said Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who sponsored war-bond legislation in the Senate and signed the letter to O'Neill.
The money raised will not be earmarked for specific purposes, but will help with the government's overall anti-terrorism efforts, according to the Treasury Department.
The U.S. government has issued bonds to help pay for war efforts since the Revolutionary War. During World War II, they were initially offered in May 1941 as defense bonds and changed to war bonds after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
The government raised billions through bond drives between 1941 and 1946, including $$ @50 billion in war bonds, according to the Congressional Research Service. 
The Senate and House both recently approved legislation calling for the issuance of war bonds.
Treasury officials initially had been lukewarm to the idea, saying the best way for citizens to help the country would be to donate to charity or spend money to boost the economy.
The situation was different during World War II, when the government wanted people to save money rather than buy goods to keep inflation in check.
Alex Eucare, a marketing executive from Vienna, Va., predicted people would embrace war bonds today. After hearing about the legislation in Congress, Eucare bought several Internet domain names containing the phrase "war bonds" and plans to donate those sites to the Treasury Department.
Holahan declined to comment on whether the agency would use the domain names but said the bonds would be available through the Web site of the Bureau of Public Debt.
Either way, Eucare says he knows what he will buy this holiday season.
"I've got two granddaughters. I'll probably buy bonds for them, for their college education, and probably give some to local charities as well," he said.

Load-Date: November 20, 2001


End of Document