Remembering;
World must reunite to prevail
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 11, 2004, Saturday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 18A
Length: 583 words
Body


Three years ago today, an explosion of hatred shattered the normalcy of a sunny fall morning. At the World Trade Center, and soon at both the Pentagon and a field in Pennsylvania, innocent lives were snuffed out as the undiscerning furor of terrorists took workers at desks and travelers on planes. It took mutual fund managers and cleaning crews, citizens and visitors, the young and the old - all someone's son or daughter, someone's wife or husband, someone's cherished parent or sibling or partner. In those horrifying moments, Americans - indeed, people the world over - were stripped not only of these innocents, but of innocence itself. Evil was afoot, on a scale unforeseen.
   Whether and how it should have been foreseen, and whether the world has done enough to avert another 9/11, are questions Americans must answer. We owe it to those who died and to those who will if we don't answer correctly.
     The nation has begun to wrestle with these questions. On these pages tomorrow, authors will take up the issue of whether we are safer today than three years ago. But today let us again mourn the deaths and vow to reunite in collective work to prevail against Al-Qaida and others who employ terrorism as a tool.
     Remember how united America, and friends around the world, felt as Sept. 11 sank in? Remember the human empathy, the expressions of international support, the profound appreciation expressed for countless individual and collective acts of courage? To find our way back to the power of that unity, Americans need to think through why it dissolved - and then find a way to re-create it.
     One needn't be partisan to acknowledge that the Bush administration's go-it-alone approach to taking on Al-Qaida, and later to invading Iraq, cost the United States the support - material and otherwise - of valuable friends. Prevailing against terrorism requires those friends. But the necessary repair work is not helped by campaign rhetoric that continues to bash the French and the United Nations. It isn't helped by implying that listening to U.N. colleagues amounts to appeasement of an enemy. Nor is it helped by continuing to pretend that Iraq was connected to the attacks of 9/11.
     If prevailing in the struggle against terrorism requires allies, it also requires facing reality square in the face. And that means admitting, once and for all, that Al-Qaida has not been dismantled. It means acknowledging that Saddam Hussein did not possess the weapons of mass destruction that America went to war to dismantle - that he had already been reduced to the status of a toothless tiger before the invasion. And it means facing the fact that Iraq was not, and is not, a front in the war on terrorism. The invasion of Iraq, and the remaking of it now, was and is a diversion from that war, a costly diversion that will in itself require continued attention and care.
     Above all, prevailing against terrorism will mean thinking anew about how best to dampen radicalism and root out terrorists. Russia's terrible schoolhouse disaster is its 9/11, its version of innocents and innocence lost. As the Russians continue to bury and mourn their children, Americans must join them and commit to a sophisticated rethinking of how to most effectively tackle the multiheaded monster of terrorism. The answer cannot consist entirely of swagger and military might. It must be multilayered and multilateral. It must be focused, and it must work - for the children who will inherit this earth.

Load-Date: September 13, 2004


End of Document