Remember words from Eisenhower
USA TODAY
January 4, 2010 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 669 words
Body


When I read USA TODAY's cover story regarding  retired top brass going to work in the private sector, it immediately reminded me of the words spoken by President Eisenhower ("At Colo. firm, a cluster of retired brass is raking it in," Cover story, News, Tuesday).
His famous exit speech as he left the presidency reminded us all to beware of the "military industrial complex." He knew better than anyone that there were a lot of powerful and influential people making a lot of money because America was at war. That's as true now as it was then, and we shouldn't forget his words.
Nick Benton
Corvallis, Ore.
Generals, congressmen
What retired generals are doing is no worse than what so many former members of Congress (and their staffers) do when they go to work for lobbyists.
The only difference between the former officers and former members of Congress is that most  generals are better educated, well trained, have served honorably for more than 30 years, and truly put their country's needs above their personal desires and the almighty dollar.
Mark Schaffler
Maitland, Fla.
Carter apology
It is disappointing that former president Jimmy Carter, a compassionate and peace-loving man, felt it necessary to apologize to the Jewish community for any words or deeds that might have been offensive ("Former president Carter offers apology to Jews," USATODAY.com, Dec. 23).
Carter brokered the first Arab-Israeli peace treaty, but some feel offended by his book Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid.
There has been no apology from Israel to President Obama for ignoring his request to halt the spread of their settlements as a step toward peaceful negotiations.
Any time there is criticism of Israeli belligerence and expansionism, the critic is erroneously branded an anti-Semite. The word Semite pertains to a member of any group of peoples in Southwest Asia and Africa sharing the Semitic language.
Why can't they all live in harmony?
Thomas G. Hannon
Bradenton, Fla.
Drunken-driving deaths outpace those from terrorism
Your pairing last week of two editorials on terrorism and drunken driving caught my eye ("Post-9/11 security systems fail to connect dots -- again,"  Dec. 28; "Big gain on drunken driving,"  Our view, Highway safety debate).
The number of U.S. lives lost to terrorism and the wars on terrorism since 2001 is  fewer than 10,000,  which is a big number, but it pales  when compared with the more than 100,000  alcohol-related traffic deaths since 2001.
If we break the law, driving while intoxicated and someone dies,  it is often called an "accident." It is not an accident, defined as  an unintentional or unexpected event. From experience, we know that  drunken driving, excessive speed or aggressive driving causes fatalities. In other words, if we break our laws, people die.
We, as a nation, are willing to  endure considerable inconvenience to address the threat of  terrorism in this country (airport delays and more). But we seem to be unwilling to accept any inconvenience (such as obeying our traffic laws) to reduce highway fatalities.
So many Americans have died on our highways. It seems like a fair question to ask who our real enemy is. Maybe it is not the terrorists but ourselves.
Woody Higgins
Southern Pines, N.C.
Allow moderate drinking
USA TODAY's editorial on Dec. 28 didn't mention that mandating ignition interlocks for all drunken-driving offenders is an incremental step toward putting alcohol sensors in all cars.
A project supported by automobile manufacturers and the federal government could one day make interlocks a standard feature installed in all new vehicles. Once in all cars, interlocks likely would be set well-below the legal limit.
That  would mean the end to moderate drinking  before driving. People would no longer be able to have a glass of wine with dinner, a beer at a ballgame or a champagne toast at a wedding before driving home.  That application of the technology isn'tanti-drunks; it's anti-drinks.
Sarah Longwell
Managing Director
American Beverage Institute
Washington, D.C. 

Load-Date: January 4, 2010


End of Document