Remembering the fallen
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
June 13, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: TEEN PULSE; Pg. C2
Length: 590 words
Byline: BRILLANTE KRETCHMAN and MELANIE DARK, Mea
Body


Four planes crash within two hours of each other. Two towers come crumbling to the ground. One building smashed in its side.  Thousands of Americans killed, injured, and scared for their lives. But what was the rest of the world doing on this tragic morning in September?
Elisabeth Wagner, a senior at Meade High School says, "I was only a freshman at the time. I remember perfectly - I was in Mr. Elliot's third period government class when they made the announcement and told us what had happened."
Amanda Mitzman, also a freshman at the time, recalls "walking past Mrs. Young's room and seeing her crying.  I asked her what was wrong and she explained to me what had happened and said that her daughter was in the Pentagon."
These freshmen of Meade High School during Sept. 11, 2001, are now seniors and have had to deal with the after effects for the past four years.  Meade is located on a military base, so the student body was more affected than any other high school in Anne Arundel County.
Many students have parents serving in the military, who had to give up more family time to be at work after the attacks. Some even had to travel overseas for extended periods of time.
Meade also banned all field trips and was no longer allowed to have a homecoming parade out of fear of terrorism.  The security at our school was raised to a new level, just as it was for the rest of the world.
A police officer was assigned to our school, and, at certain times, there were military police guarding the premises.
But did this really affect anyone?  Didi Hammond believes that it only affected military families and says, "It makes people think twice about joining the military. But I plan on joining ROTC in college and then going in to the military as a nurse in the future." Didi made these plans after Sept.11, just as many have changed their plans due to the effects of this tragic day.
Some who have always planned to join the military may now be questioning if they would be fighting for their country or against terrorism.
While others who never considered joining the military have changed their plans and are deciding to join in the service to support their country.
Jacob Reeb doesn't even care about Sept. 11.   "It didn't affect me directly, so it doesn't matter at all.  It hasn't made high school any different."
Many high school seniors feel the same way as Jacob seeing Sept. 11 as a day to remember in the history books.
On the other hand, there is a plethora of seniors who still feel the effects of Sept. 11.  
On the one-year anniversary of this excruciating day in history, EVERYONE in the military had to go in to work, as a precaution for terrorism.
Elisabeth says that her dad still works many shift missions and is away from home a lot of the time.
Now, we also have to deal with the realization that because of terrorism, there is a war going on that affects our country.
"It gives terrorism a new meaning," says Amanda Mulford. Before Sept. 11, terrorism was little known, let alone the World Trade Centers.  Now, terrorism is a new "catch word" that people associate with race, riots, and trouble in general.
Each senior views terrorism and 9/11 in his/her own way.
Some have been affected greatly, while some couldn't have cared less. But all of us have one thing in common - we have lived through an event that will live with us forever.
Amanda Mitzman sums it up for the class of 2005 when she says, "Now that it's all over, and we're fighting back, I'm glad that it's over and hopefully no one will have to go through it again."

Load-Date: June 13, 2005


End of Document