REMEMBER AND NEVER REPEAT
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
September 11, 2007 Tuesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A8
Length: 458 words
Body


The war against terrorism is all too real and frightening, with no end in sight.
It doesn't matter if you support or oppose the Iraq war. It doesn't matter if you admire or detest President Bush.
The war against terrorism must continue no matter what happens in Iraq and no matter who becomes the next president of the United States.
A small yet significant number of extremists across the globe actively seek to exact deadly violence on the United States, its friends and other nations. Osama bin Laden is just one of them. And bin Laden remains at large six years after directing the horrific attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.
America will never forget that terrible tragedy. Nor can our nation afford to be caught off guard again.
Democratic presidential hopeful John Edwards is wrong to dismiss the war against terror as a "bumper sticker slogan." The war against terror, which can take many forms, is one of the most serious and scary challenges facing the world in this new century.
It requires America to be strong. It also requires America to be smart.
A delicate balance between protecting our lives and our freedoms is difficult yet necessary. The next time you're at the airport, don't complain about the elaborate security. Instead, be thankful that your safety is taken so seriously.
Yet protecting against terrorism will ultimately require far more than metal detectors and reasonable surveillance of suspects. It will require the United States to engage and influence the rest of the world without arrogance and haste.
The memory of Sept. 11, 2001, is still raw and difficult to accept. The victims and their families deserve our thoughts and prayers today.
So do the victims and families of so many other terrorist attacks around the world in recent years. Terrorism has savaged Britain, Spain, India, Russia, Uganda, the Philippines, Indonesia and other corners of the globe.
And despite recent progress toward restoring some order in Iraq, the country has suffered from years of car bombs, sectarian violence and thugs who seem to place no value on human life. On a single day just last month, suspected al-Qaida truck bombers killed at least 500 villagers in Iraq's Ninevah province.
No one knows exactly when the next terrorist attack on the United States will be attempted. But it will surely come. Someone with a twisted mind may have already planned and set it in motion for the future.
The obvious goal must be to stop or prevent it. That will require security, intelligence and cooperation. It also will require improved relations with the rest of the world to keep the terrorists on the run or, better yet, in prison.
The memory of Sept. 11 resonates with solemn permanence today. America must make sure those terrible acts are never repeated.

Load-Date: September 12, 2007


End of Document