Remembering 9/11: Students recall memories of a national tragedy that changed lives
Indiana Statesman: Indiana State University
September 10, 2014 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 516 words
Byline: Kristi Ashby
Body


On September 11, 2001 a terrorist attack was made against the United States, leading to the death of thousands of U.S. citizens and the start of a war on terrorism.
This attack brought U.S. citizens together to help each other during a difficult time in American history.
On what was just another day to many people, the actions of some turned it into a nightmare.
Two planes were hijacked and crashed into the Twin Towers in New York City, and another, which was planned to crash into the Pentagon, was taken over by passengers and instead crashed in a field to save others' lives.
These extreme acts were felt across the country, as many watched from their televisions that morning on the news.
Most students, though many were young, still remember that day and what they were doing when they found out about the attack.
Audie Briggs, a junior history and economics major, remembers being sick on the day of the attack.
"I was sick with the flu and my dad got a call from my grandfather," Briggs said.
"My grandfather was a fire captain and was worried because my great uncle had to go through the wreckage with dogs he had trained. Now that I am older, I feel sad for what happened on 9/11."
Another student, Arlene Doble, a junior speech language pathology major, remembers being in her first grade class and seeing teachers crying while watching the TV in the classroom.
"I didn't know what was going on then," Doble said. "I know now what a tragedy happened that day. This is something marked in American history that I will never forget. I think the memorial that is set where the twin towers stood is nice to remember those who passed that day and for their families who lost loved ones."
This year on September 11 marks the thirteenth anniversary for this terrorist action against the United States.
A memorial was built at ground zero, where the twin towers once stood, to remember what happened that day and to honor the lives lost.
"I think the memorial at ground zero was good for recognizing what happened that day," Briggs said.
Many staff at Indiana State University knew more about what was happening that day than students did because they were old enough to understand.
Amanda Solesky, a communication disorders and counseling, school and educational psychology instructor, remembers dropping off her children when she heard the news of the attack.
"At first I was hoping it was an accident," Solesky said. "Then after the second plane hit, I felt fear and disbelief.
Why would someone want to attack us after we have helped so many other countries?
I do believe this attack united American citizens though."
After the attack security tightened all over the country, the economy took a dip and we shortly went to war against terrorism.
Thirteen years later U.S. citizens still feel the effects of this open attack on America soil.
Americans understand what happened that day and we use it as a reminder of what freedom has cost for some people in this country.
We all remember "when the world stopped turning that September day" and will remember tomorrow on the 13th anniversary of this tragic event.

Load-Date: September 10, 2014


End of Document