Remembering September 11; Vitters View
The Jena Times (Louisiana)
September 14, 2011


Copyright 2011 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2011 The Jena Times


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 333 words
Byline: The Jena Times staff
Body


Each of us has a unique memory of exactly where we were or what we were doing on Sept. 11, 2001, and it's hard to believe that a decade has passed since the terrible events of that day.
As we pause to reflect on the lives lost in those horrific terrorist attacks, we also give thanks for the troops who have sacrificed so much in the 10 years since.
America and her allies have pursued the perpetrators of those attacks through the shadows of the world, and earlier this year our armed forces brought justice to Osama bin Laden and dealt a serious blow to the leadership of al-Qaeda.
But we must remember that the long fight against terrorism continues. Our resolve and vigilance as a nation must continue to hold firm for many years to come.
In the ten years since the attacks, I've worked closely with my colleagues in Congress and my fellow senators on the Armed Services Committee to help ensure the safety of all Americans. I voted for legislation that enacted many of the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission, including the reorganization of the intelligence community under the director of national intelligence, and I strongly opposed Attorney General Eric Holder's efforts to bring terrorists to New York City to face u civilian court.
We must take further steps to strengthen our national defense, and I have repeatedly called for enhanced border security and enforcement of our immigration laws. Lax border security and the inadequate enforcement of our immigration laws contributed to this tragedy, demonstrating how important it is that we police our borders and enforce our immigration laws already the on books. As chairman of the U.S. Senate Border Security and Enforcement First Caucus, I am working with rny colleagues to help bring about real immigration reform.
We can take heart that there has been no major terrorist attack on our nation since that day, but the dangers we face are real. It has been 10 years since Sept. 11, 2001, and the long war against terrorism continues today.

Load-Date: September 13, 2012


End of Document