Removing Saddam won't cut terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 27, 2002 Friday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a4
Length: 291 words
Byline: DAVID W. LEIFKER
Body


1000 Whispering Lane, Hazel Green, Wis.
If we had "removed" Saddam Hussein in 1991, would we have had a Sept. 11-type action of massive terrorism? I submit, probably.
Therefore, if one of the principal purposes of a war with Iraq now is to remove Saddam Hussein, will this in any way lessen the chances for more massive terrorist attacks on the United States and our allies? Most certainly not.
The reverse is most likely to occur, with acts of terrorism increased. If Iraq is seen as a "victim" of American imperialism by the Arab world and by millions of people who profess to be Muslims, there will be a natural impetus not only to condone, but also to support anti-western "martyrs."
America's true strength is not its military might, but the resolve of its people to create a just, peace-filled world. It is the character of a God-based people that will stand as the greatest shield against evil, both foreign and domestic.
There is no fail-safe protection against acts of terrorists. Let's face it, there has always been evil in the world. Fortunately, I believe there is much more good.
We must try to limit the acts of terrorists by cutting off their acceptance and support. Those who kill innocent people should be isolated by their respective communities. The silence coming from Muslim clergy is deafening. Using force will only create new martyrs, new heroes of evil.
Fifty years ago, had we treated the threat from the U.S.S.R. the same as we are dealing with Iraq, there would have been World War III and probably the end of much of civilization. Just as U.S.S.R. and ancient Rome have fallen from power, I submit that governments like that of Iraq, which support terror and evil, must someday also fall under the weight of their own evil.

Load-Date: December 27, 2002


End of Document