RENAMING A WAR
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
August 8, 2005 Monday
All Editions


Copyright 2005 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A8
Length: 473 words
Body


The war on terror is over. Well, maybe. Late last month, the effort to combat terrorism got a new euphemism from the Bush administration: the "global struggle against violent extremism." G-SAVE has a nicer, more altruistic ring to it. More hopeful than frightening, and no one keeps track of whether a struggle has been won or lost.
Last week, however, the president was back to calling it a war. He was backed up by Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. "Let there be no mistake about it. It's a war," he said in a speech that was e-mailed to reporters to ensure they knew what to call the effort.
Whatever it is called, the fighting in Iraq is not going so well and has, in fact, pushed more Muslims there, and around the world, toward violent extremism against which the nation now struggles.
The global struggle metaphor is, in some ways, more honest. Military brass had long objected to America's fight against terrorism after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks as a war because this leads people to believe that only those in uniform are responsible for taking action. This is a fair concern.
Also, G-SAVE acknowledges that it takes more than military might to combat an enemy grounded in ideological differences. This acknowledg-ment is tragically tardy, however. More than 1,800 U.S. servicemen and women have died in Iraq, which the United States invaded on the grounds that it had weapons of mass destruction
and was a base for international terrorists. Neither of these claims has proved to be true.
Before the war, many in Congress and the international community were pushing for more diplomacy and economic pressure on Saddam Hussein rather than an invasion. So it seems odd that the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Richard Myers, is now saying that the solution to terrorism is "more diplomatic, more economic, more political than it is military."
Beyond the rhetoric, the reality in Iraq is that the choice to use military rather than economic or diplomatic options has bred more, not less extremism. "Iraq is the latest battlefield in this war," President Bush said last month in a televised news conference from Fort Bragg, N.C. He said that hundreds of foreign fighters from Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iran and Sudan had been captured or killed in Iraq.
What he did not say is that these foreign fighters were not in Iraq before the U.S. invasion or that early failures, such as insufficient forces and inadequate preparation for the postwar occupation, allowed these fighters to flood into Iraq.
Since then, four disaffected Muslims in London blew themselves up, killing 52 people, apparently to protest U.S. and British involvement in Iraq. A second such attack was tried, but the bombs were duds.
Whether a war or global struggle, the United States needs to change its tactics, not just its rhetoric, to truly combat terrorism.

Load-Date: August 8, 2005


End of Document