Reno says states, local governments are on front lines against terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
February 3, 1999, Wednesday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 346 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WILLIAMSBURG, Va. -- State and local governments are on the front lines of the nation's defense against terrorism, U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno told participants at the start of a national terrorism policy summit.
The FBI is the lead federal agency for anti-terrorism efforts, but "that doesn't mean I'm going to tell you what to do," Reno told 200 representatives from 48 states and territories, as well as the federal government.
Federal authorities can't just swoop into a region after a crisis and take over, she said Tuesday. To prevent turf wars and make sure emergency management efforts run smoothly, officials at all levels must share information.
"Key to it all is listening to you who are on the front lines," Reno said. "I want to hear from you on how we can make this better."
The National Governors' Association Center for Best Practices and the National Emergency Management Association are sponsoring the two-day summit, a forum for states to give input to the development of a national terrorism strategy.
Reno noted that the National Domestic Preparedness Office was created within the FBI in October to help coordinate such a national strategy and provide the states information on training, equipment and other issues.
Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore, a summit co-host, said existing police and emergency management systems work well, but "we simply need to build on what we have."
For example, governors should explore ways to share classified information with federal authorities, perhaps by giving select officials in each state proper security clearance, Gilmore said.
"Somehow, the information has got to flow, or we're groping in the dark," he said.
Gilmore also called for stronger laws governing the possession of biological and chemical agents and said sensitive information about U.S. gas and chemical facilities should not be as readily accessible on the Internet.
North Carolina Gov. James B. Hunt Jr., another co-host, said states need to educate people that terrorism doesn't just happen in other countries but threatens "all of us, from outside and in."

Load-Date: February 3, 1999


End of Document