Repeal of seaport law poses risks to residents, visitors
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 21, 2011 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Pg. 10
Length: 628 words
Byline: BRUCE GRANT, Special Correspondent
Body


BY BRUCE GRANT
Special Correspondent
Today, 10 years worth of successful security at Florida's 12 public seaports is under attack. Since 2001, we have had the most secure seaports in the nation thanks to legislation establishing mandatory minimum security standards. These standards -- and their tough enforcement -- have provided the best defense against crime, cargo theft, drug smuggling and terrorism. But Senate Bill 524 seeks to abolish them, undo all this good work and turn back the clock to a time when crime and drug smuggling were rampant at the ports.
The effort to secure our ports originated as a response to the high level of drug trafficking in Florida. In 2000, the 15th Statewide Florida Grand Jury concluded that Florida's commercial seaport gateways were virtually unlocked and open to contraband traffickers, money launderers, thieves and terrorists. So in 2001, the Legislature passed F.S. 311.12 requiring background checks for all workers on seaports and imposing statewide minimum standards at the ports. After the 9/11 attacks, Florida was able to quickly adapt the seaport security structure to include anti-terrorism protections.
Because federal law grants the U.S. Coast Guard only limited enforcement aimed primarily at protecting ports from seaborne threats, Florida standards have remained in force because they are tougher and more focused on landside criminal activity and terrorism -- a fact that the Coast Guard readily acknowledges. Since 2001, the Florida Department of Law Enforcement (FDLE) has enforced the standards with annual port inspections that have improved security, reduced crime and kept our citizens safe.
There has been a long-running battle between public officials who enforce the rules and port directors who seek to maximize profits. The ports view every dollar spent on security personnel, cameras, fencing and lighting as one less dollar for investment in the port's economic infrastructure. Yet law enforcement knows that strict security procedures and adherence to standards -- confirmed through inspections by an impartial law-enforcement entity -- ultimately provide our best protection.
Current law maintains a delicate balance of security and commerce. Yet, this is threatened by those who seek profit but are not accountable to the people of Florida for the tragic consequences of crime and terrorism that could ensue should we repeal our current procedures. God forbid that we suffer any regrettable incident in the future and look back to 2011 as the year we let our guard down.
Compliance with the security standards has caused no economic hardship for ports. The ports by their own admission have made record profits over the past years. In 2010, the Miami Customs District set total records for trade and expects to surpass $100 billion next year. The argument to get rid of the standards to increase profitability is nonsensical and disingenuous.
Even more puzzling is that the state would abrogate the responsibility for port security to the federal government. After all, Florida cares more about protecting its own citizens -- a core mission for state government -- than anyone in Washington. But with the standards gone and outside inspections nixed, the ports will have no watchdog to hold them to the high standards in place since 2001.
Repealing current standards will weaken security at our ports, allow criminal elements to once again gain control of the docks, and expose Florida's citizens and visitors to increased dangers.
Bruce Grant was the governor's chief adviser on port security from 2001-05 and 2009-11 in the Office of Drug Control. He is a retired Army officer and war veteran.
Copyright © 2011, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: March 22, 2011


End of Document