Repercussions From a Political Murder Play Out in a Spanish Village; Fiction
The New York Times 
May 2, 2019 Thursday 23:49 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOKS; review
Length: 697 words
Byline: Jennifer Croft
Highlight: In Fernando Aramburu’s novel “Homeland,” the Basque separatist movement spawns violence that shatters two families.
Body


HOMELAND By Fernando Aramburu Translated by Alfred MacAdam
“Homeland” is the story of two families in a Basque village. It toggles back and forth in time, illuminating the enmity between members of multiple generations and hinting at a once and future closeness. Although it hinges on a particular ekintza, or attack, by members of the paramilitary organization Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), its true protagonists are the matriarchs of these families, spiteful Miren and grief-stricken Bittori, as well as their daughters, Arantxa and Nerea. It is these women who make things happen. The men who kill and are killed are mere “jellyfish” in the wash of history.
Fernando Aramburu’s gift lies in the links between action and reaction: the moment Bittori understands she’s been snubbed on purpose at the village butcher’s when her husband has been marked as an ETA target, or the aftermath of the argument between Miren and Arantxa about the nature of the violence, when Miren’s husband, “staggering with sorrow, tried to stop his daughter and his grandchildren” from leaving the house (to no avail, as the mother and daughter won’t speak to each other for five years). What he doesn’t get into is cause and effect. And while the book overflows with tight, cinematic scenes, it remains static, almost dull.
It reads like a long catalog of victimhood, sparing none of its characters. Glimpses into the origins of their friendships, or the nature of their filial piety or their love, are few and far between. The question of Basque nationhood dominates every other question. Yet the novel also does not delve into the meaning of the nation, the history of Spain or the slide of the liberation movement into violent struggle and outright terrorism, preferring to hover over a few ordinary thugs whose adolescent impulses are channeled into the ekintza that shatters the bond between Miren and Bittori.
“Homeland” oscillates between a telenovela without intrigue and Dostoyevsky without moral inquiry. Arantxa suffers a stroke that leaves her incapacitated, and is deserted by her philandering husband (a telenovela standard); Nerea and her brother debate how to mourn their murdered father, never coming to any understanding of each other or themselves. No one feels too strongly.
Aramburu has enjoyed a successful career in Spanish, publishing a number of novels, short stories and a children’s book before arriving at “Homeland.” The translation is by Alfred MacAdam, a man with a similarly distinguished career. In many ways, the two are a good match. While translators cannot turn bad books into great ones, they can make good books mediocre. Here, the lackluster prose, while much clumsier and more confusing than the original Spanish, suits the desultory social landscape it describes.
Near the end of the novel, Nerea’s brother, Xabier, attends a meeting of the Victims of Terrorism in Basque Country Collective in San Sebastián. An unnamed writer gives a hopeful description of his latest literary project, and Xabier’s reaction seems to contain both the reason for “Homeland”’s existence and the reason it doesn’t really work:
“The writer spoke calmly. Xabier thinks his intentions are good, but he does not believe anything will substantially change because someone’s written a book. It seems to him that, until now, Basque writers have paid little attention to the victims of terrorism. The victimizers are far more interesting — their crises of conscience, their sentimental back stories and things like that. ”
Maybe, as a Basque writer, Aramburu hopes to remedy this dearth of attention to the victims of ETA. But “Homeland” is indeed less interesting than it could have been with more balance and more motion in any direction, more “things like that.”
Jennifer Croft is a writer and translator. Her novel, “Homesick,” will be published in September. HOMELAND By Fernando Aramburu  Translated by Alfred MacAdam 608 pp. Pantheon Books. $29.95. 
PHOTO: Fernando Aramburu (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ivan Gimenez FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
Basque Group ETA Disbands, After Terrorist Campaign Spanning Generations
Terrorism Is Over. Now Spain Needs Lasting Peace.
Learning From Terrorism Past

Load-Date: May 4, 2019


End of Document