REPORT FINDS US AIR SAFETY WANTING
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
May 17, 1990, Thursday


Copyright 1990 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U.S.; Pg. 6
Length: 291 words
Byline: Compiled from wire services
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Government officials say they're moving to boost airline security as recommended by a panel on the 1988 downing of Pan Am Flight 103, but they won't cancel a program to install bomb-detecting devices at airports around the world.
The report released May 15 sharply criticized the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and others charged with protecting US air travelers.
It called on the government to consider ''preemptive or retaliatory military strikes'' against terrorist enclaves in other countries to combat air terrorism.
''It's time to punish anyone we can prove took our aircraft down,'' said Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D) of New Jersey, a member of the President's Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism.
The report criticized the FAA, the State Department, and Pan American World Airways, and recommended major reforms. It marked a victory for families of the victims, who sought formation of the commission against what they called government indifference.
The panel called for a system to notify passengers of credible terrorist threats and said the government should take more seriously the possibility of terrorism in the United States.
The commission said the Lockerbie disaster, in which 270 people died, ''may well have been preventable.''
The report recommended ''a more vigorous US policy that not only pursues and punishes terrorists but also makes state sponsors of terrorism pay a price for their actions.''
The report called for ''planning and training for preemptive or retaliatory military strikes against known terrorist enclaves in nations that harbor them.''
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater would reacted with caution, saying only ''we certainly agree that we have to be as aggressive as necessary to fight terrorism.''


End of Document