Report: EMS lacks terrorism training, equipment
USA TODAY
March 11, 2005, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 568 words
Byline: Mimi Hall
Body

The emergency responders who provide medical care at disaster scenes aren't getting adequate training and don't have the proper equipment to respond to terrorist attacks involving explosives or chemical or biological agents, a report out today says.
Although they represent a third of the nation's first responders, emergency medical services (EMS) providers have received only 4% of the $3.38 billion the Homeland Security Department doled out for emergency preparedness in 2002 and 2003.
Without sufficient training and equipment, "when we have a major incident, we're not going to have an effective medical response -- and that's critical to saving life and limb," says Robert Bass, Maryland's EMS director. "You get what you pay for."
The report, "Emergency Medical Services: The Forgotten First Responder," is being released today by New York University's Center for Catastrophe Preparedness and Response. It also found:
 * More than half of the country's 900,000 emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and paramedics have received less than one hour of training in dealing with biological and chemical agents and explosives since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and 20% have received no such training.
 * Fewer than 33% of EMTs and paramedics have participated in a drill during the past year simulating a radiological, biological or chemical attack.
 * EMS received only 5% of bioterrorism grant money from the Department of Health and Human Services.
 * Six in 10 ambulance services received no federal funds to buy emergency preparedness equipment.
 * In 25 states, 50% or fewer of EMTs and paramedics had adequate equipment to respond to a biological or chemical attack.
Unlike police and firefighters, who are organized and know how to apply for and fight for federal funding, EMS providers are a disparate, unorganized group. Some are professional, and some are volunteers; some are based in fire departments, some are run by hospitals, some are private ambulance companies.
"We do get overlooked," Bass says. "We don't have a strong national lobby in part because EMS is delivered in different ways across the country."
Jay Bradshaw, Maine's EMS director, says there's "a lot of confusion about what resources are available."
The Homeland Security Department runs several grant programs for emergency responders. One is for high-risk urban areas; another is just for firefighters. The department's largest grant program is for overall emergency preparedness, and that money is doled out to the states, which then must decide how to spread it around among emergency responders.
When Congress asked for a report last year on how much of the money states were giving to EMS providers, Homeland Security found it was less than 4%. The department then sent a memo to state officials reminding them that EMS providers are eligible for the grants.
On 9/11, 2,500 EMS providers from 345 ambulance services responded to the World Trade Center attack, according to the New York State Department of Health, and eight EMS workers were killed.
Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, chairwoman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, will introduce a bill today that would create a federal committee to help guide EMS providers through the complex grant process and make sure federal preparedness money is well-spent. "EMS has been shortchanged for years," Collins said. "This alarming trend has to be reversed."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Mark D. Faram, U.S. Navy via Reuters; Responding to terrorism emergency: Medical personnel load a wounded person into an ambulance outside the Pentagon after the Sept. 11 attack near Washington.

Load-Date: March 11, 2005


End of Document