Report faults FBI, Army in Fort Hood shootings; Suspect known as 'time bomb' but was promoted and praised
USA TODAY
February 4, 2011 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 566 words
Byline: Gregg Zoroya
Body


A Senate investigation into a shooting spree at a Texas military base blamed the FBI and Army for failing to "connect the dots" that would have shown an Army psychiatrist had become an Islamic extremist.
Thirteen people died in the shooting at Forth Hood and 32 others were wounded. Maj. Nidal Hasan is accused of premeditated murder in the November 2009 attack.
"The evidence -- with clarity of hindsight -- just shouts out: 'Stop this guy before he kills someone,' " says Sen. Joe Lieberman, I-Conn., chairman of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, which produced the report.
"How did he get to that point to be able to stand up, shout out, 'Allahu Akbar,' and then kill 13 people?"
The report characterized Hasan as a "ticking time bomb" -- a description used by a military instructor and colleague before the shootings -- that could have been disarmed.
"Our painful conclusion is that the Fort Hood massacre could have and should have been prevented," Lieberman says.
Among the report's findings:
*Despite clear evidence that Hasan had become an adherent to violent Islamic extremism, he was neither disciplined nor discharged. Instead, he was promoted, and his performance reviews were "sanitized," with his obsession over extremists recast as counterterrorism research.
*Anti-terrorism investigators aware of e-mails between Hasan and radical Islamic cleric Anwar al-Awlaki did not share that information with the Army.
*The investigation into Hasan by anti-terrorism and FBI specialists was put on hold for months and then received only a few hours of effort before investigators concluded Hasan was not a threat.
Responding to the report, the FBI, Pentagon and Army say they are improving efforts to uncover internal threats, including enhancing the flow and sharing of information.
In its statement, the FBI also says it "agrees with much in the report" and acknowledges a need to accelerate efforts begun after 9/11 to become more proactive -- rather than reactive -- in countering threats.
The Senate report blasted the Army for failing to identify Hasan as a threat after his sympathies toward Islamic extremism became clear in a period from 2007 to 2009, during his medical residency at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C., and his post-residency fellowship at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, in Bethesda, Md.
Hasan's views disturbed colleagues and superiors, the report says. A presentation he wrote during his residency suggested that revenge could be a defense for the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
During his fellowship, Hasan wrote a second presentation that recited extremist views defending Osama bin Laden and arguing that anger at the United States was appropriate, the Senate report says. Colleagues who heard his presentation said he seemed to be justifying suicide bombers.
However, no action was taken, and his performance reviews described his comments as "praiseworthy and useful to U.S. counterterrorism efforts," the Senate report says. His academic superiors told investigators they had not been concerned.
He also was a poor academic performer, rated in the bottom 25% of both his residency and fellowship programs. His evaluations subsequently misstated his actual performance, the Senate report found. An officer who assigned Hasan to Fort Hood told officials there, "You're getting our worst."
Contributing: Kevin Johnson 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: February 4, 2011


End of Document