Report on terrorism drill shows problems, confusion
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
December 20, 2003, Saturday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P11A
Length: 519 words
Byline: Matthew Daly The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - The government's largest bioterrorism drill since the Sept. 11 attacks revealed widespread communications problems and confusion among emergency personnel, according to a federal summary on Friday.
The drill last May was overseen by the Department of Homeland Security, which wanted to assess the country's readiness to deal with multiple terrorist attacks. It began in Seattle with the simulated detonation of a radioactive "dirty bomb" and ended four days later in Chicago with a raid on the fictional terrorist group responsible for the chaos.
A detailed report on the drill is classified, but Homeland Security officials released a 15-page summary. In it, they noted emergency crews in Seattle had trouble determining where the radiological contamination had spread, which would be key to evacuating and treating people in a real emergency.
Chicago's drill centered on responding to a deadly plague released on the city. The exercise exposed a serious shortage of medical supplies and hospital rooms.
Still, the report called the drill a success, saying it "provided a tremendous learning experience" for Homeland Security and hundreds of state and local agencies that work with it.
Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge also hailed the results. The exercise posed a huge logistical challenge for an agency that was then only a few months old, Ridge said.
The report said uncertainty reigned during much of the drill, as officials weighed whether to raise the threat level of a specific area, declare an emergency or reopen public transportation systems.
"To the extent there were problems in those areas, communications issues were the likely cause," the report said.
Seattle Deputy Police Chief Clark Kimerer acknowledged the confusion, but said it was "not crippling by any stretch."
The goal of the exercise was to get very precise readings on the fictional plume, Kimerer said, but that proved difficult as officials waited for computer models to develop.
"On the other side of that, it didn't hamper decision-making in the field," he said.
Incident commanders made quick decisions - in most cases assuming the plume area was larger than it ultimately was, Kimerer said. "We'd rather do that than guess wrong and expose people to some risk," he said.
Chicago officials had a similar view. A total of 64 hospitals in Illinois participated in the drill, making it one of the largest mass casualty exercises ever undertaken.
The report said it was apparent there was a "lack of a robust and efficient emergency communications infrastructure," with the biggest problem handling the unexpectedly large call volume.
Still, Cortez Trotter, director of Chicago's Office of Emergency Operations, called the exercise a success.
"I think Chicago did well," he said.
The exercise, a follow-up to a drill three years ago in Denver and New Hampshire, cost about $ 16 million and involved more than 8,500 people from 100 federal, state and local agencies, the American Red Cross and the Canadian government.
Associated Press Writer Dennis Conrad contributed to this story.
On the Net:
Department of Homeland Security: www.dhs.gov 

Load-Date: December 20, 2003


End of Document