Reporters' Subpoenas Are Being Fought in the Case of a Lawyer Accused of Aiding Terrorism
The New York Times
June 15, 2004 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 748 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Three news organizations are fighting subpoenas issued to four reporters to testify at the trial of Lynne F. Stewart, a lawyer in New York accused of aiding terrorism.
   The subpoenas went to Esmat Salaheddin, a Reuters reporter based in Cairo; Joseph P. Fried, a reporter for The New York Times; George Packer, a freelance reporter who has written for The Times Magazine; and Patricia Hurtado, a federal court reporter for Newsday.
   The prosecutors want the reporters to confirm in court that Ms. Stewart made the comments they quoted her as making. In papers filed in federal court in Manhattan, the prosecutors said they would not question the reporters about other sources or about anything Ms. Stewart said that was not published. Newspaper articles alone cannot be used as evidence in a trial to establish facts, since they are regarded as hearsay.
   The prosecution argued that the reporters could not resist the subpoenas by invoking their First Amendment protections because they would not be questioned about confidential sources.
   Reuters, The Times and Newsday have called on Judge John G. Koeltl to cancel the subpoenas, saying they force the reporters to participate in the trial on the side of the prosecution, undermining their independence and neutrality.
   In a motion filed yesterday, Newsday objected vehemently to the subpoena to Ms. Hurtado because she is the newspaper's lead reporter covering Ms. Stewart's trial.
   ''The issue for us is that Patty is covering this trial and ought not to be called as a witness, period end of sentence,'' said Stephanie Abrutyn, the counsel for Newsday. She noted that if Ms. Hurtado were forced to testify she might have to stop covering the trial.
   Ms. Stewart has been the lawyer for Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman, a Muslim cleric who is serving a life sentence for conspiring to wage a terrorist war against the United States, which included the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center. Now she is accused of conspiring to help a group of his followers in Egypt to commit terrorism, and of lying to the government to conceal her efforts.
   Ms. Stewart has pleaded not guilty and promised a fight to defeat the charges, saying she has been persecuted because of her support for radical political causes. A hearing on the press subpoenas is scheduled for Friday, and opening statements in the trial are to begin on Monday.
   Mr. Salaheddin was called to testify to confirm an article he wrote in Cairo after Ms. Stewart called him by telephone in June 2000 to read a declaration from Mr. Rahman. The sheikh advised his followers in the Islamic Group, an Egyptian organization that had proclaimed its role in several terrorist attacks, to abandon a cease-fire it was observing. Mr. Salaheddin was served with the subpoena while on a visit in Washington last November.
   Mr. Salaheddin's lawyer, David A. Shulz, said that if Mr. Salaheddin is forced to travel to New York to testify for the prosecution, he may be seen in Egypt as working for the United States government, which would cripple his ability to work as a reporter in that volatile country.
   Mr. Fried has been called to confirm comments attributed to Ms. Stewart in a June 28, 1995, Times article in which he described her as a ''radical at heart.'' In the piece, which appeared five years before the events in which she is accused, she is quoted as saying, ''I don't believe in anarchistic violence but in directed violence,'' explaining her support for revolutionary movements battling governments she deemed oppressive.
   In a longer profile in The Times Magazine in September 2002, Mr. Packer quoted Ms. Stewart as ruminating about the Sept. 11 attacks, saying that the United States had waged war around the world and should not be surprised when it was attacked at home.
   George Freeman, a lawyer for The Times, argued that Mr. Fried and Mr. Packer are protected by the First Amendment from testifying even about information that is not confidential.
   In support of the journalists' efforts, Ms. Stewart promised Judge Koeltl that she would testify, and would be available to describe her own political thinking. Michael E. Tigar, her lawyer, said in court papers that the subpoenas would ''warm the cockles of Joe McCarthy's heart.'' He said the excerpts prosecutors wanted to use were ''snippets'' that leave out passages that show Ms. Stewart ''has for more than 40 years stood up to repressive authority, as a lawyer and as a social and political activist.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Stewart                                                                       

Load-Date: June 15, 2004


End of Document