Report: Regional trauma system needed; Terrorism response: Task force's recommendations aim to provide guidance to local, state officials
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 14, 2002 Thursday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. b6
Length: 403 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MADISON
Body


Wisconsin should create a regional trauma system to increase the capacity to treat multiple victims in the event of a terrorist attack, according to a report released Wednesday.
The recommendation was one of 31 suggestions from Gov. Scott McCallum's terrorism task force designed to better prepare Wisconsin for an attack. The recommendations are meant to provide guidance to local and state officials for the terrorism preparation that remains, the task force said.
Ed Gleason, director of Wisconsin Emergency Management, said the governor's office can accomplish many of the group's recommendations, while other suggestions will require legislation.
Jim Doyle, who defeated McCallum in last week's election, will take over the governor's office Jan. 6.
"Hopefully, the new administration will be able to look at these things and this will be a blueprint for them," Gleason said.
Gleason and Health and Family Services Secretary Phyllis Dube presented the report to members of a special legislative committee looking at the public health system's response to terrorism and other emergencies.
Committee members agreed Wednesday to send Doyle a letter asking him to continue the terrorism task force after he takes office and to implement a standardized method for managing and deploying resources during an emergency. The task force included both recommendations in its report.
Doyle spokesman Thad Nation said the governor-elect, who did not participate in the task force, had not seen its report.
"Certainly we're interested in seeing it and Gov.-elect Doyle knows that this is an issue that he is going to have to continue to work very hard on," Nation said.
The task force also recommended:
* Using technology on state driver's licenses that can be read by a machine so law enforcement can better identify people.
* Preventing information that could jeopardize public safety from being released under the state's Open Records law.
* Ensuring health care providers know how to identify smallpox, anthrax and other infections that could result from terrorism.
* Modifying the state's interim plan for preparing and responding to bioterrorism attacks to reflect a regional response.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced two weeks ago that Wisconsin and Hawaii were the only two states unprepared to deliver medicine and vaccines in the event of a bioterrorism strike. Wisconsin officials have disputed the report.

Load-Date: November 14, 2002


End of Document