Report Faults Europe in C.I.A. Detainee 'Web'
The New York Times
June 8, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 942 words
Byline: By DAN BILEFSKY

International Herald Tribune
Dateline: BRUSSELS, June 7 
Body


Fourteen European countries worked with the Central Intelligence Agency in the secret transfer of terrorism suspects, and two of them -- Romania and Poland -- probably harbored secret C.I.A. detention centers, the Council of Europe contends in a report issued Wednesday.
  In its 67-page report, the Council, which enforces the European Convention on Human Rights, said it was disingenuous for Europe to portray itself as an unwilling victim of an operation led by the United States because European countries played an active role in transfers orchestrated by the C.I.A.
The United States ''created this reprehensible network,'' the report's author, Dick Marty, a member of the Swiss Parliament, said in the report. ''But we also believe to have established that it is only through the intentional or grossly negligent collusion of the European partners that the 'web' was able to spread over Europe.''
  But the report concedes that the Council has no hard evidence. 
  The report drew swift denials. Romania rejected it as ''pure speculation,'' while Prime Minister Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz of Poland dismissed it as ''libel.'' 
  ''These accusations are slanderous,'' Mr. Marcinkiewicz said. ''They are not based on facts.'' But he said he had heard of a few cases of secret landings by C.I.A. planes in Poland, saying that was ''natural'' in the global fight against terrorism.
  Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain said the report contained ''absolutely nothing new,'' while Spain's Foreign Ministry denied that the country had participated in prisoner transfers, also known as rendition.
  The report said seven countries -- Britain, Italy, Germany, Sweden, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Turkey -- could be held responsible for violating prisoners' rights to ''varying degrees.'' Others, it found, ''could be held responsible for collusion -- active or passive'' in the matters of secret prisons and transfers. It mentioned Poland, Romania, Spain, Cyprus, Ireland, Portugal and Greece.
  The report follows up similar accounts from the European Parliament and the Council itself.
  Tracing ''a global spider web'' of presumed prisons and transfer points, the report suggests that European involvement was deeper than previously surmised. Mr. Marty, a former prosecutor, describes an elaborate and organized system for the abduction and interrogation of terrorism suspects, consisting of several landing points, where civilian and military planes either stopped or refueled on their way to and from detention centers in Cuba, Afghanistan and Iraq.
  The report, however, puts the number of clandestine C.I.A. flights it contends stopped on European territory since Sept. 11, 2001, at far fewer than the 1,000 flights previously suggested by the European Parliament.
  It repeats accusations that Romania and Poland ran secret detention centers, saying there is ''now a preponderance of indications'' that the centers existed. It also contends that Britain gave the C.I.A. information about its citizens and residents that resulted in their being detained and moved to places where they were possibly tortured.
  The White House press secretary, Tony Snow, said in response to a question at a news briefing on Wednesday that ''the United States does not condone torture, does not practice torture.'' 
  ''Furthermore,'' he said, ''we will not agree to send anybody to a nation or place that practices torture.
  ''It's also important to remember again that international cooperation in the war on terror is essential for winning, and rendition is not something that began with this administration, and it's certainly going to be practiced, I'm sure, in the future.''
  In the report, Mr. Marty defended the conclusions he formed, despite lacking explicit evidence, saying, ''Even if proof, in the classical meaning of the term, is not as yet available, a number of coherent and converging elements indicate that such secret detention centers did indeed exist in Europe.'' He said his panel had done all it could, considering it lacked investigatory powers, including the right to subpoena documents.
  For the claim that Romania was a likely dropoff point for detainees, Mr. Marty cited as an example the flight path of a plane with the tail number N313P, which arrived in Timisoara, Romania, from Kabul, Afghanistan, on the night of Jan. 25, 2004. He speculated that it might have been carrying Khaled el-Masri, a German who said he was abducted by foreign agents in Skopje, Macedonia, and taken to Kabul. 
  ''Having eliminated other explanations, including that of a simple logistics flight, the most likely hypothesis of the purpose of this flight was to transport one or several detainees from Kabul to Romania,'' Mr. Marty said, offering no further explanation. Similarly, he said he believed that the Szymany airport in northeastern Poland was used for a rendition flight in 2003.
  Mr. Marty acknowledged that his evidence for the existence of secret C.I.A. prisons in Romania and Poland was circumstantial but said it was strong enough to justify further investigation. He relied primarily on flight logs provided by the European Union's traffic agency, Eurocontrol, witness statements by people who said they had been victims of abduction by the C.I.A. and judicial and parliamentary inquiries in various countries.
  The report said that Spain, Turkey, Germany and Cyprus provided ''staging posts,'' where rendition operations were begun, and that Britain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece were ''stopover points,'' where planes landed to refuel. It concludes that Italy, Sweden, Macedonia and Bosnia allowed the abduction of residents from their soil.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Dick Marty, a Swiss lawmaker and the author of the Council of Europe's report on the secret transfer of terrorism suspects. (Photo by Mal Langsdon/Reuters)Map of North America, Europe and Asia highlighting flight routes: A map released by the Council of Europe with the routes of flights it said transferred terrorism suspects.

Load-Date: June 8, 2006


End of Document