Reporter's Notebook; Absent From the Courtroom, bin Laden Is Everywhere at a Terrorism Trial
 The New York Times
February 25, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 718 words
Byline:  By ALAN FEUER 
Body


What if you held a terrorism trial and the main defendant never showed up? 
     That, in essence, is what is happening at the embassy bombings trial that is now being heard in Federal District Court in Manhattan. 
 Although four of the defendants named in the government's enormous indictment -- Wadih El-Hage, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, Mohammed Saddiq Odeh and Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali -- are in custody and appear in court each day, the testimony and exhibits presented so far have focused on a man who is nowhere to be found: Osama bin Laden.
Mr. bin Laden, the wealthy Saudi exile accused of leading the terrorist plot that led to bombings at two American Embassies in Africa in 1998, is believed to be hiding in a remote corner of Afghanistan. But he has still cast a ghostly presence over Courtroom 318 on Centre Street. His name has been invoked perhaps more often than anyone else's. His voice has been heard on videotape. He has managed to be both present and absent at the same time.
On Wednesday, Mr. bin Laden's face actually appeared in court for about 30 minutes. It led to a bizarre moment for the four accused.
The prosecution was playing a videotape of an interview that Mr. bin Laden gave to CNN in 1997, and there were the defendants, staring into their digital monitors at the image of Mr. bin Laden as he promised to wage holy war against the United States. Their legs were shackled beneath the defense table, as they are every morning by federal guards. Mr. bin Laden, however, could be seen on screen, fulminating against the West with a serene look in his eyes and a cup of hot tea in his hand.
In many ways, the prosecutors have chosen to marshal their heavy artillery in the case against Mr. bin Laden. They have asked witnesses to lay out the internal structure of his group, Al Qaeda, and they have elicited testimony about his international business holdings.
They have also read to the jury one of his fatwas, or decrees, in its 52-page entirety. The fatwa, titled "Declaration of Holy War Against the Americans Who Are Occupying the Land of the Two Holy Places," provided an illuminating glimpse into Mr. bin Laden's mind.
An excerpt: "The cause of the disease and its tribulation is the occupying American enemy, so all effort must be directed at this enemy; kill it, fight it, destroy it, break it down, plot against it, ambush it and, God the almighty willing, until it is gone."

Like Members of the Family
They say the Mafia is dead, but don't believe it. 
Despite references to camels, Islamic law and Afghan freedom fighters, the terrorism trial has somehow managed to sound a good deal like your average Brooklyn mob trial. There have been so many uncanny similarities, in fact, that some have quipped that Martin Scorsese has already been hired to direct the film.
For example, Al Qaeda could easily have borrowed its internal structure from La Cosa Nostra. Atop the pyramid sits the leader, Mr. bin Laden, who is sometimes called "the Big Boss." Under him is the Shura Council, a panel of trusted captains, who report to Mr. bin Laden and manage various crews.
According to a pair of witnesses who have testified so far, a devotee to Al Qaeda must swear the oath of bayat, a pledge to sacrifice one's life for the group. To become an official wise guy requires something similar -- swearing to omerta, or the Mafia code of silence.
Mobsters often have nicknames based on a striking part of their anatomy: Fat Tony, for example, or Jackie the Nose. Things are slightly different in Al Qaeda. Aliases are formed by combining Abu, Arabic for "father of," with the nation of one's birth. This leads to names like Abu Hajer al Iraqi and Abu Bakr al Sudani. The terrorism trial has even produced that most shopworn of gangland cliches: the disgruntled snitch. His name in this case is Jamal Ahmed Al-Fadl, and until 1996 he served as one of Mr. bin Laden's closest aides. 
Mr. Al-Fadl is no Salvatore Gravano, the hitman-turned-informant better known as Sammy the Bull. After all, Mr. Gravano admitted to murdering 19 men; Mr. Al-Fadl simply confessed to stealing $110,000 from his boss.
Still, Mr. Al-Fadl did admit under cross-examination last week that he once came up with a plan to have Mr. bin Laden "liquidated." Perhaps if he had known the word, he would have said "whacked." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 25, 2001


End of Document