Report on Gander probe inconclusive
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 13, 1990, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A
Length: 490 words
Byline: DAVID BALLINGRUD
Body


Another attempt to shed light on the government's role in the investigation of an air crash that killed 248 American soldiers has been frustrated by official silence.
 
    Last September, Reps. C. W. Bill Young of St. Petersburg and John Conyers Jr. of Michigan asked the General Accounting Office (GAO) "to assist in acquiring, reviewing and analyzing" documents relating to the crash.
 
    "We've been hitting brick walls every way we've turned," Young said at the time. "When you're having trouble getting to the truth, this is the kind of thing GAO does very well."
   The Dec. 12, 1985, crash of a chartered Arrow Air DC-8 at Gander, Newfoundland, killed 248 members of the Army's 101st Airborne Division and eight members of the aircraft crew. The troops were returning home from a peacekeeping mission in the Middle East.
 
    The Canadian Aviation Safety Board (CASB) investigated the crash for three years but was able to identify only a "probable" cause ice on the DC-8's wings. That finding was ridiculed by a four-member minority of the nine-member board, which said evidence clearly pointed to a fire or explosion aboard the aircraft before it crashed. The explosion or fire was probably the work of terrorists, the minority members said.
 
    Most frustrating to the families of the soldiers who died has been their inability to learn the extent to which the possibility of terrorism was ever investigated either by the Canadian or U.S.  government.
 
    The CASB and the U.S. government began discounting the possibility of terrorism the day of the crash, when, critics say, they could not have made such a judgment with certainty. Terrorism was discounted despite a claim of responsibility by the terrorist organization Islamic Jihad, despite Arrow Air links to the Iran-Contra affair and despite the obvious attraction of U.S. troops as a target.
 
    This week the GAO sent to Young and Conyers a noncommittal final report, in which it reports among other things, that the National Security Council did not respond to questions. Also contacted were the CIA and the Defense Intelligence Agency, the GAO reported. "Our review indicated that none of these agencies had any involvement in the investigation."
 
    GAO investigator Frank Bowen said queries were faxed to CIA offices, to no agent in particular. "We can't ask them specific questions. It's just not done that way. I'm not sure why, it's just the way we've always done it in the past." He then declined to answer any more questions.
 
    Young said he will question CIA representatives when they next appear before the defense subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee, on which he sits. "It's the only place in which I'm in a position to require an answer," Young said.
 
    Last October, almost a fourth of the House members sent a letter to President Bush complaining about the Canadian investigation and asking that Bush order one in this country. He has not responded.
 

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document