Report of Plot to Attack Jews Prompts Terror Alert in Prague
The New York Times
October 7, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 450 words
Byline: By CRAIG S. SMITH
Dateline: PARIS, Oct. 6 
Body


A report that there was a plot to attack Jews in Prague has set off a terrorism alert there, a Prague newspaper reported Friday.
  The Czech news media have been feverishly speculating on the nature of the threat since the government announced heightened security measures on Sept. 23, the first day of the Jewish New Year. The Czech interior minister, Ivan Langer, called the threat ''unprecedented in the history of the Czech Republic.''
The government has refused to characterize the threat further other than to say that information about it came from foreign intelligence services. 
  That has led some Czech news organizations to suggest that the terrorism alert was related to the arrest of three Norwegian men earlier in September on charges of plotting to bomb the United States and Israeli Embassies in Oslo. One of those men, a Norwegian of Pakistani origin named Arfan Qadeer Bhatti, had close contacts with a notorious ethnic Albanian gun and drug runner who operated for years out of Prague.
  The news of possible terrorism threats in both Oslo and Prague raise the possibility that Islamist terrorist plots, having been foiled by vigilant antiterrorism efforts in capitals like Paris and London, are turning to ''softer'' targets elsewhere in Europe where security is more lax.
  President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan alleges in his memoir, published in the United States last month, that in 2003 Al Qaeda planned to hijack planes from the national carriers of the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Croatia, Poland, Romania and Malta for use in a Sept.-11-style attack against Heathrow Airport near London ''because security at these airports and in their aircraft was lax.''
  The Czech newspaper Mlada Fronta Dnes reported Friday that an attack was supposed to coincide with Rosh Hashana, the Jewish New Year, during which many Israeli Jews visit the picturesque capital. The holiday was celebrated from sunset on Sept. 22 until nightfall on Sept. 26 this year.
  According to the newspaper, which cited unidentified Czech intelligence officials, ''Arab terrorists wanted to abduct dozens of people, hold them hostage, and, in the end, massacre all of them.''
  Government officials have declined to comment on the report. The newspaper quoted one unnamed minister as saying that an abduction plot was only an ''extreme'' possibility.
  The heightened security alert was followed by several anonymous bomb threats, which interrupted service on a Prague subway and forced the evacuation of a hotel, but proved to be false.
  Nonetheless, police officers bearing automatic weapons continue to patrol Prague's airport, train stations and the areas around the city's seven major synagogues, residents say.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 7, 2006


End of Document