Report details harassment that followed 9/11 attacks; Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights says concerns about terrorism are exposing innocent people to discriminatory treatment.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
February 23, 2007 Friday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7B
Length: 666 words
Byline: Jean Hopfensperger, Staff Writer
Body


Imani Jaafar-Mohammed, a Muslim lawyer from Woodbury, endured a neighbor throwing chunks of pork in her yard and yelling "terrorist!'' from his window.
Hyder Khan, an Indian from Bloomington, says he can't print out his airline boarding pass in advance because there is a name like his on a security list.
Dipankar Mukherjee, an Asian theater director from Minneapolis, says he has heard airline passengers request that they be moved so they don't have to sit next to him.
"When I used to travel back into the United States, people would say `Welcome home,'-'' said Mukherjee. "Now they say, `Step aside,' or `Please go to this room.'-''
The terrorist attacks of 9/11 still are casting a shadow on Minnesota's immigrant and Muslim community, according to a report issued Thursday by Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights. Racial and religious stereotyping continues to this day, as do overt acts of discrimination, the report said.
The 94-page report was based on interviews with more than 100 Minnesota immigrants. The events of 9/11 fueled changes in public attitudes toward national security and immigration that continue today, it said. Those changes were also aggravated by subsequent political campaigns targeting immigrants and the public debate over immigration reform, the report said.
"This was not meant to be a scientific study, but to detail history and real life experiences,'' said Robin Phillips, executive director of Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights. "We want to make sure that history and experience is included in the public policy dialogue.''
Mukherjee, who spoke at a news conference Thursday announcing the report, was most exasperated by how he was constantly pulled from airport lines during "random'' passenger checks. Once, after being released from one interview, he was pulled out of line again, less than an hour later.
The Department of Homeland Security, which oversees the Transportation Security Administration, has a policy strongly discouraging racial or ethnic profiling in law enforcement activities.
But immigrants are also targeted in unofficial ways, Mukherjee said. He recalled trying to get a receipt from a tow truck operator in Uptown last year. He said the operator yelled at him, "Why don't you first give me a receipt from the World Trade Center?''
Jaafar-Mohammed, meanwhile, said she and her husband had looked forward to their first home together in Woodbury. But the harassment from their neighbor reached the point that she feared for her safety. The Minneapolis attorney said she obtained a restraining order last year on the man, who eventually left their suburban neighborhood.
Harassment aside, federal policies to contain terrorism also continue to leave their mark, the report said. For example, some Muslims continue to worry whether their charitable donations to Islamic organizations could be construed as "material support'' to terrorists groups, which is prohibited by the Patriot Act. Islam requires its followers to donate 2.5 percent of their savings to charity.
Several incidents of alleged misconduct by the FBI are mentioned in the report. A Somali man employed by a Twin Cities school district says he received a visit from the FBI at his home a day after he inquired about bus rentals for a school event. One of the questions he was asked; "What do you think of Saddam Hussein?''
FBI spokesman Paul McCabe said he had not been informed about the incidents mentioned in the report, and that they would be impossible to verify without names, dates and places. The authors of report, however, offered confidentiality to those they interviewed.
If people have concerns about the FBI, they should contact the FBI or a trusted community organization, he said. "We will investigate,'' McCabe said.
Phillips said that the Minnesota Advocates is interested in learning about other experiences - good and bad - resulting from Sept. 11.  To report those experiences, or to view the report, go to www.mnadvocates.org.
Jean Hopfensperger - 612-673-4511

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: February 23, 2007


End of Document