Reporter Fought Subpoena in Leak Inquiry
The New York Times
October 10, 2014 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 580 words
Byline: By MATT APUZZO; Charlie Savage contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- When the Justice Department was hunting for government leakers in 2011, it said that Mike Levine, a Fox News reporter, must reveal his sources because the universe of people who knew the secret information -- analysts, prosecutors, agents, press aides and more -- was too vast to narrow any other way.
Court documents unsealed on Thursday reveal a lengthy court fight between Mr. Levine and the Justice Department over whether he could be forced to reveal his sources for an article about Somali terrorism. The government issued a subpoena, which was upheld by a judge, but prosecutors never called him before a grand jury.
The court documents show how the tremendous growth of intelligence and national security agencies after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks has undermined the government's ability to keep secrets -- and its ability to find leakers. More than five million people held security clearances last year.
The documents also offer new insight into the Justice Department's crackdown on reporters who cover national security, and their sources. Under Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., the government has brought criminal charges in eight leak cases, compared with three under all previous administrations combined. Mr. Holder now says he thinks that effort went too far at times.
James Risen, a New York Times reporter, recently lost a Supreme Court challenge to a subpoena forcing him to identify sources for his book ''State of War.'' Mr. Holder said this spring that ''as long as I'm attorney general, no reporter who is doing his job is going to jail.''
Mr. Holder recently announced his resignation and it is unclear what that means for Mr. Risen's subpoena.
In Mr. Levine's case, prosecutors were searching for the unidentified officials who revealed that prosecutors had secretly filed terrorism charges against a group of Somali-Americans in Minnesota. After the story was published, Judge James M. Rosenbaum, a federal judge in Minnesota, wrote a letter to Mr. Holder urging him to investigate.
Investigators reviewed more than 1,000 emails from government accounts and analyzed a year's worth of phone calls from Mr. Levine to F.B.I. officials, according to court documents. But Kevin Shirley, an agent with the Justice Department inspector general's office, said investigators still could not figure out who disclosed the information.
''The leaked information would have been (and witnesses believe was) disseminated throughout vast intelligence networks via frequent intelligence briefings and email blasts,'' Mr. Shirley said. He said the information was shared with federal agents, analysts, support personnel, press aides, senior officials in Washington, and state and local members of a task force.
In April 2011, according to court documents, Mr. Levine voluntarily spoke to investigators and told them that he could not recall who told him about the secret criminal case. He said the sources most likely came from a pool of five federal law enforcement officials, including press aides, all of whom Mr. Levine refused to identify. Even with that cooperation, however, the Justice Department said the pool of suspects was too great.
In July 2011, Judge Royce C. Lamberth, a federal judge in Washington, denied Mr. Levine's request to quash the subpoena. But the Justice Department dropped the matter in April 2012, according to Mr. Levine, who wrote about the matter in May for ABC News, where he now works. He did not testify before a grand jury.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/10/us/fox-news-reporter-fought-subpoena-in-leak-inquiry.html

Load-Date: October 10, 2014


End of Document