Report: Terrorism fell in '03
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 30, 2004 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A09
Length: 504 words
Byline: Ken Guggenheim ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


There were fewer international terrorist attacks last year than any other year since 1969, the State Department said yesterday, although it did not include most of the violence in Iraq.
Bush administration officials frequently refer to Iraqi insurgents as terrorists, but most attacks in Iraq were not considered international terrorism because they were directed at combatants, the report said.
"Increasingly, the line between insurgency and terrorism has been blurred by anti-coalition attacks that have included suicide car bombings at police stations, an Italian military police base and the headquarters of the International Red Cross," the State Department said in its annual report on terrorism.
The 181-page Patterns of Global Terrorism Report offered a country-by-country review of terrorist attacks and cooperation in fighting terrorism.
In its introduction, the State Department's top counterterrorism official, Cofer Black, cited Saudi Arabia "as an excellent example of a nation increasingly focusing its political will to fight terrorism." The kingdom has frequently been criticized by members of Congress for not doing enough to stop terrorism.
Black said attacks in Saudi Arabia in May and November "served to strengthen Saudi resolve."
Black also said al-Qaeda "is no longer the organization it once was. . . . Most of the group's senior leadership is dead or in custody, its membership on the run, and its capabilities sharply degraded." He said more than 3,400 al-Qaeda suspects had been detained worldwide.
In a news conference, he described Abu Musab Zarqawi, a Sunni extremist believed responsible for attacks in Iraq, as "a little bit of an independent actor," sharing al-Qaeda's goals but not requiring its direct guidance.
Of the seven nations designated as sponsors of terrorism, the report said Libya and Sudan "took significant steps to cooperate in the global war on terrorism." But Cuba, Iran, Syria and North Korea did not do enough to sever their ties to terrorism, it said.
Iraq technically remains on the list, because it can't be removed until it has a government in place.
According to the report:
There were 190 acts of international terrorism last year, compared with 198 in 2002 and 346 in 2001. It was the lowest figure in 34 years.
In those attacks last year, 307 people were killed, compared with 725 in 2002; 1,593 people were wounded, compared with 2,013 in 2002.
Thirty-five Americans died in 15 international terrorist attacks. The deadliest was a May 12 attack by suicide bombers in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, that killed nine U.S. citizens and 26 people overall.
Anti-U.S. attacks increased slightly to 82 from 77 in 2002. But they have declined sharply since the 219 attacks in 2001.
Asia had the highest number of attacks, with 159 people killed in 70 incidents.
The annual State Department report on terrorism found attacks declined last year. It did not include violence in Iraq. A9.
A House panel approves a bill aimed at protecting U.S. airliners from attack from shoulder-fired missiles. A9.

Load-Date: August 24, 2005


End of Document