Report Finds Flaws in Terrorist Watch List
The New York Times
March 18, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 400 words
Byline: By PHILIP SHENON
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The F.B.I. and other federal law enforcement agencies have sometimes provided outdated and inaccurate information to the government's main watch list for terrorism suspects, according to an internal Justice Department report released Monday.
  The report, by the department's inspector general, also found that the Justice Department had failed to coordinate efforts by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other agencies within the department to place suspects on the watch list.
  Spokesmen for the F.B.I. and the Justice Department acknowledged that there were weaknesses in the watch list program and, in statements released Monday, said they were working to correct the problems. ''We remain committed to working with the Department of Justice to increase coordination,'' said the F.B.I.'s chief spokesman, John Miller.
  The report offered some praise for the F.B.I., which oversees the governmentwide terrorist watch list through the bureau's Terrorist Screening Center, and said that bureau employees were using proper management techniques in most of the cases in which terrorism suspects were recommended for inclusion on the watch list. 
  The list was created after investigations into the Sept. 11, 2001,  attacks found that the government had no coordinated watch list of terrorism suspects.
  But the inspector general's report identified flaws throughout the process, including a repeated failure by the F.B.I. and its sister agencies within the Justice Department to update information about terrorism suspects after they were placed on the watch list, and to remove names from the list after it was determined that the suspects did not pose a threat.
  The report found that bureaucratic bottlenecks within the F.B.I. often delayed by up to four months the addition of suspects' names to the list.
  The inspector general's office said it had based its conclusions on a review of the more than 8,200 names that were added by the F.B.I. to the watch list from January 2005 through November 2007. The report did not say how many of those entries contained inaccurate or outdated information. It did say that while other law enforcement agencies within the Justice Department, including the Drug Enforcement Administration and the United States Marshals Service, had procedures for recommending names to add to the list, the sharing of that information was informal and often undocumented.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 18, 2008


End of Document