Representative says TRIA extension is a priority
Business Insurance
December 6, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 6
Length: 317 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Extending the federal government's terrorism insurance backstop program will be a priority for the House Financial Services Committee in the next Congress, according to one of the panel's key members.
The federal program, created by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, was designed to make terrorism insurance available while a private terrorism insurance market emerged.
But ''I believe the private market has not yet come back'' for terrorism insurance, said Rep. Paul Kanjorski, D-Pa., during a conference sponsored by the Consumer Federation of America. With the federal program slated to expire at the end of next year, Rep. Kanjorski said that extending TRIA is ''imperative'' for continued economic growth.
The committee approved legislation earlier this year that would have extended TRIA through the end of 2007, but the full House and Senate did not move on the matter before Congress adjourned. Risk managers and insurers have called for the extension of the program as quickly as possible, because some policies are already being drafted that would extend beyond the life of TRIA if the program is not extended.
The Washington-based CFA has been among the most vocal opponents of extending TRIA, holding that the private insurance market can adequately provide terrorism coverage in all but a handful of U.S. cities.
Rep. Kanjorski, who is the ranking Democrat on the committee's Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises, also said the committee would take up the issue of insurance regulation in the new Congress. He stressed, though, that he does not favor what he called ''nationalizing'' regulation, which has been a state responsibility for decades.
''Without Eliot Spitzer, a lot of things wouldn't have happened,'' Rep. Kanjorski said, referring to New York's attorney general, who is currently investigating insurance industry practices.

Graphic

 
Rep. Kanjorski

Load-Date: December 8, 2004


End of Document