Reps pass Anti-terrorism Bill into second reading
National Mirror
November 16, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 295 words
Dateline: Lagos 
Body


Lagos, Nov. 16 -- House of Representatives has passed into second reading a bill for an Act to make provision for the offences relating to terrorism, prohibit the financing of terrorism and consolidate all acts relating to terrorism and other related matters.
Also the bill seeks to checkmate terrorism and afford Nigerians the opportunity to join the committee of nations in the fight against terrorism.
It would be recalled that the Terrorism Act, 2011 did not contemplate the financing of terrorism in Nigeria which the amended Act of 2013 provided for.
Sponsoring the bill, Honourable Mohammed Monguno Tuesday at the plenary explained that the bill criminalises international terrorism, funds supporting the Officialterrorism and seizure of terrorist cash and property.
The bill contemplates dealing with charities linked to terrorist groups as well as request from foreign states and to foreign states on extradition of persons involved in terrorist activities.
Honourable Nnenna Ukeje (PDP, Abia State) in her contribution added that in ensuring the passage of the bill, treaties between Nigeria and other countries and the aspect regarding human right should also be considered.
Other members unanimously agreed that capital punishment be included in the bill as imprisonment for offenders was not enough to serve as deterrent.
However, the passage of the bill enables a single Act addressing all the concerns in the Acts and the new situations not contemplated beyond the present. It will also ease consultation and referencing in terms of terrorism law in the country.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from National Mirror. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com

Load-Date: November 15, 2016


End of Document