REPUBLICAN FIELD DISPLAYS BROAD VIEWS ABOUT EXECUTIVE POWER
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 30, 2011 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 889 words
Byline: CHARLIE SAVAGE, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


WASHINGTON -- Even as they advocate for limited government, many of the Republican presidential candidates hold expansive views about the scope of the executive powers they would wield if elected -- including the ability to authorize the targeted killing of U.S. citizens they deem threats and to launch military attacks without congressional permission.
As Republicans prepare to select their party's 2012 presidential nominee, Newt Gingrich, Jon M. Huntsman Jr., Ron Paul, Rick Perry and Mitt Romney have provided detailed answers about their views on executive power in response to questions posed by The New York Times.
The answers show that most of them see the commander in chief as having authority to lawfully take extraordinary actions if he decides doing so is necessary to protect national security.
Only Mr. Paul, the libertarian-leaning Texas congressman, argued for a more limited view of presidential power.
The views of the other four candidates who responded echoed in many respects expansive legal theories advanced by former President George W. Bush. In certain significant ways, they dovetailed as well with the assertive posture taken by President Barack Obama since taking office, such as his expanded use of drones to kill terrorism suspects -- including a U.S. citizen.
The answers come against the backdrop of a decade of disputes over the scope and limits of presidential authority. Because executive branch actions are often secret, and courts rarely have jurisdiction to review them, the views of the president -- and the lawyers he appoints -- about the powers the Constitution gives him are far more than an academic discussion.
Instead, in practice, a president's views can influence such momentous matters as whether and how the nation commits acts of warfare abroad, the rights of U.S. citizens at home and the ability of government officials to keep information secret from lawmakers, courts and the public.
Asked to describe circumstances under which the Constitution permits a president to order the targeted killing of a citizen who has not been sentenced to death by a court, Mr. Gingrich, Mr. Huntsman, Mr. Perry and Mr. Romney all said a president could order the killing of a citizen who joins an enemy force at war with the United States, at least under certain conditions.
"My preference would be to capture, interrogate and prosecute any U.S. citizen who has engaged in acts of war against the United States," Mr. Romney wrote. "But if necessary to defend the country, I would be willing to authorize the use of lethal force."
The Obama administration embraced similar reasoning as the basis for a Yemen drone strike this year that killed Anwar al-Awlaki, an American whom executive branch officials accused of being a terrorist operative.
Mr. Paul, by contrast, described the circumstances in which a president could order the extrajudicial killing of a citizen in one word: "None." Similarly, while Mr. Paul said a president should not order a military attack without congressional permission unless there was an imminent threat, the other four candidates agreed that a president could do so if he decided it was necessary.
An exception to that pattern was use of signing statements to claim a right to bypass new statutes -- often, provisions in bills that limit executive power -- that a president signs into law.
The three current and former governors among the candidates -- Mr. Perry, Mr. Huntsman and Mr. Romney -- each described circumstances in which he would use the device to raise constitutional concerns about legislation, with Mr. Romney outlining the most assertive version.
The two former House colleagues, Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Paul, said they would not issue such statements. (Mr. Gingrich has taken a more assertive view about constitutional disagreements with the judicial branch, saying presidents may lawfully ignore Supreme Court rulings.)
Two other Republican candidates, Minnesota Rep. Michele Bachmann and former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, did not answer the questions. Mr. Obama did not, either; his re-election campaign said he had "pursued policies that strengthen our security" while "upholding our laws and values," and suggested that he would debate such matters in greater detail after Republicans chose his opponent.
Presidential power has been growing since the early years of the Cold War and ratcheted forward under the Bush administration, which asserted sweeping theories of presidential powers to bypass statutory and treaty constraints, justifying a range of detention, interrogation and surveillance policies. As a candidate, Mr. Obama accused Mr. Bush of undermining the Constitution.
After taking office, Mr. Obama ordered strict adherence to anti-torture rules; justified his counterterror policies as authorized by Congress and consistent with international law, rather than invoking inherent powers as commander in chief; and sought to handle terrorism cases arising on domestic soil exclusively through the criminal justice system, rather than the military.
Still, Mr. Obama has outraged civil libertarians by keeping in place the outlines of many Bush-era policies, such as indefinite detention and military commissions for terrorism suspects. And in the Libya air war and the targeted killing of Awlaki, he went beyond Mr. Bush's executive-power record.

Load-Date: December 31, 2011


End of Document