Residents stick to routines; Threat of terrorism still prompts vigilance
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
October 14, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: NEWS; Pg. B8
Length: 390 words
Byline: Steve Silverman and Jennifer Tofanelli
Body


Area residents vowed to continue their normal routines Saturday - though with added vigilance for terrorist acts - a day after a rash of false alarms swept Central Illinois.
After the FBI put out a general alert Thursday about possible terrorist attacks, Bloomington Junior High School was evacuated due to an unfounded bomb threat Friday, and on the same day, courthouses in McLean, Woodford, Livington, DeWitt, Logan and Champaign counties were searched in response to vague warnings.
While Morton resident Sharon Brubaker said she won't let fear of terrorism alter her life, she's giving closer scrutiny to what's going on around her.
"I wouldn't say that I'm apprehensive, but I'd say I'm much more alert to my surroundings, I pay more attention to people and what they're doing," she said.
Another Morton resident, Terry Randolph, said that although concerns about terrorism are justified, he won't be intimidated into changing his lifestyle.
"I think everyone has the right to be concerned and should be concerned, but as far as changing my daily acts and doing anything differently, I guess I couldn't let myself give the terrorists the satisfaction," he said.
Leticia Mendoza of Normal said she hasn't responded to headlines about bomb threats and anthrax scares by becoming more suspicious in her daily activities, but she's debating whether to take her two children trick or treating on Halloween.
Such fears of terrorism didn't discourage Jim and Donna Bell from taking a recent trip to Mexico. The Bloomington couple said they had no reservations about flying, but can understand how others might be apprehensive about air transportation since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"These incidents have aroused a lot of fear in people, especially younger people, because no one knows what to expect next," said Jim Bell, who owns a local Internet marketing business with his wife.
Normal Police Sgt. Kerry Lonbom said along with most residents, the entire department is at a heightened state of awareness. Lonbom said that people should take advantage of the situation by getting to know their neighbors and getting more involved in their community to help ensure safety.
Bloomington Police Sgt. Jim Cox said residents should stay alert for suspicious objects, and report anything unusual to the police rather than investigating it themselves.

Load-Date: October 18, 2001


End of Document