RESIGNATION
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 31, 1998, Monday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 358 words
Body


The administration periodically asserts its determination not only to defeat international terrorism but to enforce Iraq's compliance with the consequences of its shellacking in the Gulf War. From time to time the United Nations condemns terrorism and criticizes Saddam Hussein's obstreperousness.
Bulletin: On Wednesday, an American inspector authorized to investigate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction quit. William Ritter said he resigned because the U.S. and the UN had transformed the inspection program into a "farce." He described the approach as "a surrender to Iraqi leadership" i.e., as a surrender to the Saddam who is winning through defiant diplomacy what he lost on desert battlefields. Principle motivated Ritter's resignation.
What is going on? Do the United States and the United Nations mean what they say? Or are their threats idle, their public words not to be believed?
Bulletin: In a story headlined, "U.S. Tried to Halt Several Searches," Thursday's Washington Post reported: "The Clinton administration has repeatedly intervened since last fall to delay or prevent intrusive weapons inspections in Iraq by United Nations teams, according to knowledgeable American and diplomatic sources. The interventions included at least six occasions, beginning in November, 1991, in which Secretary of State Madeleine Albright or other top administration officials sought - with success in each case but one - to persuade chief UN inspector Richard Butler to rescind orders for surprise searches for weapons of mass destruction or to remove a controversial inspector from Iraq."
A "controversial inspector" presumably describes an effective one. The story also explained how the U.S. and Britain spiked the UN's "most successful new inspection technique." The administration that talks tough when speaking to the American people gives Saddam the soft- soap.
The rhetorical deceptions target not Saddam but the American citizenry. The abject fear of confronting Iraq suggests promises to prosecute the war against terrorism are empty, too. This administration's craven policies obstruct international justice. All things indeed flow into one.

Load-Date: September 3, 1998


End of Document