Resist efforts to dilute federal anti-terrorism law
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 10, 2000, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; LETTERS; Pg. 17A; LETTER
Length: 1823 words
Body


Re: Shedding light on secrecy and civil rights,
May 23.
Once again we must express our dismay regarding Times staff writer Susan Aschoff's one-dimensional and incomplete coverage regarding efforts to dilute the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, especially as it relates to Mazen Al-Najjar, who has been jailed as a security risk. We are appalled that Aschoff has failed to include the position taken by our local B'nai B'rith and Promoting Responsibility in Middle East Reporting, two organizations that have been involved in this issue from the outset.
While we do not wish to rehash the arguments concerning Al-Najjar, we do wish to state our position regarding the Anti-Terrorism Act. Although we acknowledge discomfort with the need to use so-called "secret evidence," we remain unalterably opposed to efforts to dilute the law. These are unusual times, and we are dealing with diabolical terrorists such as Osama bin Laden. We must not compromise the efforts of our law enforcement agencies.
LETTERS
Finally, it is the duty of our government to protect its citizens. We urge our fellow citizens to tell our congressional representatives that they support an Anti-Terrorism Act that allows our law enforcement agencies to do just that.
Norman N. Gross, president, Promoting
Responsibility in Middle East Reporting; vice president,
Tampa Bay B'nai B'rith, Palm Harbor
Our safety should come first
Re: Release of secret evidence ordered, June 1.
Mazen Al-Najjar, labeled "a security risk" by our law enforcement agencies, has overstayed his student visa. Moreover, he has been residing here for years and never applied for renewal of his visa. Certainly he has associated with leaders of the Islamic Jihad, a terrorist group responsible for the death of Americans. The judge in the case conceded this fact.
Al-Najjar was born in Gaza, now under control of the Palestinian Authority. Since both he and his wife have been ordered deported, why has he not been put on a plane and returned to Gaza? What has Al-Najjar done to deserve preferential treatment by the United States?
In times like these when we are advised that we are not prepared for the biological warfare threat from terrorists, we need not allow the likes of Mazen Al-Najjar to manipulate rights to which he is not entitled as one who should not be here anyhow. Certainly our safety takes precedence over the rights of a questionable alien under deportation orders.
Sol Cohen, Palm Harbor
A questionable cause
In the case of Mazen Al-Najjar, I noticed that more than one reporter on your staff has taken up the cause.
"Oh, gee." He just happened to work for a "think tank" linked to terrorists - now one former member is the head of a terrorist organization.
I say, God Bless America - our land. The glib words of your reporters and these people about our government would, in the countries of these terrorists, earn not literary awards but the loss of limbs or heads. What are your reporters waiting for? Some attack on our citizens or catastrophe in our country or any place in the world?
Louis Fineberg, St. Petersburg
Use of secret evidence is un-American
 Re: The continuing detention of Mazan Al-Najjar.
While I am not a supporter of most Arab or Palestinian causes and terrorist activities and feel a lot of the world's problems stem from the mess in the Middle East, I must take exception to the continued detention of Al-Najjar.
To keep a man locked in jail without bail on "secret evidence" makes me want to gag. My copies of the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights say nothing about "secret evidence."
The use of "secret evidence" is something I expect out of Communist China, North Korea, Iran, Iraq and the old Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, not something Americans do.
Either try this man, convict or deport him. To do anything else is un-American. To do otherwise makes me feel dirty and it's not in keeping with the American way.
Charles H. Eure, Gulfport
Civil liberties are in danger
Re: Anti-terrorist measures, editorial, June 9.
Thanks for your excellent editorial pointing out the danger to our civil liberties through more anti-terrorist legislation.
In my opinion, 90 percent of the population is asleep at the switch - or too busy shopping for their next super SUV or other titillating toys. In the absence of a legitimate enemy to fight, we are bent on increased control over the masses in the name of terroristic threats. As that once famous Okefenokee Swamp resident, Pogo, used to say, "We have met the enemy and he is us."
The "kill a fly with a sledgehammer" mentality is too much with us for our own good.
Paul Rekstad, Brooksville
Rules seem to change for Palestinians
 We appreciate Susan Aschoff's May 23 article Shedding light on secrecy and civil rights and her other articles on this issue. After reading this article, we feel compelled to respond on behalf of Dr. Mazen Al-Najjar, a local Palestinian refugee who seems to be unconstitutionally incarcerated due to the Israel/Palestine quagmire and pressure by American Jewish organizations that support the use of secret evidence. We find commenting on this very difficult because any criticism of Jewish organizations is immediately dismissed as just being anti-Jewish.
  For years, we have been following the Israeli/Palestinian issues, and we will readily admit sympathy for the Palestinians who seem to have become the scapegoat for World War II Jewish losses in that they have had their homes and lands overrun by Jews from all over the world.
The use of secret evidence contravenes the U.S. Constitution. It is against our inherent belief of justice in which every person may face an accuser in legal actions.
According to Aschoff's article, the Anti-Defamation League and other Jewish organizations claim to have supported the civil rights of others, but it is obvious that when it comes to Palestinians, the issue becomes very subjective.
It is time that we stand up for our constitutional beliefs and abolish such outrageous laws that allow uncorroborated, secret statements to be used to incarcerate people in America.
Dr. and Mrs. James Rogers, Oldsmar
Two cases of rights denied
 Re: The wrongfully imprisoned abroad, June 2.
Columnist Mary McGrory explores the plight of Lori Berenson, a 30-year-old U.S. citizen who is serving a life sentence in a military jail in Peru.
Berenson was picked up on a bus in Lima by Peruvian security agents, tried in a secret military court and found guilty of aggravated terrorism. Her lawyer was not allowed to call or cross-examine witnesses. Rep. Carolyn Maloney, D-New York, says President Clinton should do everything he can "short of war" to rescue Americans wrongfully imprisoned abroad.
In a similar case, Mazen Al-Najjar, a resident of Tampa, was picked up by the FBI and has been held in a Bradenton jail for more than 1,100 days. He has not been charged with any crime. Bail was denied based on secret evidence that neither he nor his attorney have been allowed to see.
I think President Clinton should do all that he can to see that due process rights are observed in both of these cases. It would be embarrassing for the president to try to criticize the Peruvian justice system when our own justice system is guilty of similar abuses.
Joseph A. Mahon, St. Petersburg
We don't need cumulative voting
Re: Cumulative voting worth a try, by Martin Dyckman, June 1.
There he goes again. In search of ways of electing the candidates he prefers rather than the candidates the people prefer, Martin Dyckman now wants us to try cumulative voting.
Cumulative voting is a technique for promoting candidates and policies that appeal to the political fringes at either end of the spectrum. It is the kind of political system that generates splinter parties and one-issue candidates. It is the product of the same kind of political thinking that has led to the voting structures in countries like Italy and Israel, where political fragmentation leads either to endemic instability and revolving governments - or governments that are paralyzed by the enhanced power of fringe groups.
Our political system has developed in a different fashion. While minority parties and splinter groups have been an honored part of our history, eventually their adherents are accommodated within our two-party system - resulting in parties that must reach out for a broad consensus in order to attract voting support. And once in power, the parties must espouse policies and programs that muster the broadest level of support from all segments of the voting public - or see their power reduced in succeeding elections (remember the Republican Contract with America?).
It is not the absence of minorities in our political system that really troubles Dyckman - blacks and Hispanics are well represented in our Florida Legislature, after all. What really bothers him is that the people keep electing the wrong candidates, and, even worse, the people keep electing Republicans. That, Mr. Dyckman, is called democracy. It ain't broke, and it don't need your fixing.
Barry Augenbraun, St. Petersburg
A lynch-mob attitude
I resided in many states and communities during my more than 40 years of working, but never in a community with the lynch-mob attitude of Hillsborough and Pinellas counties with any matter involving sex. To make matters worse, the local news media jump on that attitude with all their might, completely forgetting impartial reporting of the news.
You have pointed out numerous times that Christopher Lee Allen was charged with committing lewd acts on young girls in South Carolina. Almost as an afterthought you add that he was tried and acquitted of those charges. But the damage has already been done. Once a finger is pointed, a person is ruined forever even if he is found innocent in court, primarily because the news media drag the name of the poor devil through the mud months or even years before a trial. The reporting of this kind of information should not be permitted until after a trial.
Harold Teague, Madeira Beach
Let court decide on guilt
Re: The headline, Parents baffled by breach of trust, May 30.
From where I sit, the only clear breach of trust was committed by your headline writer, who implied that there had indeed been a "breach of trust" by Christopher Lee Allen.
Surely whether Allen is guilty or not guilty of the charges against him is up to a court of law to decide. That determination is not up a St. Petersburg Times employee.
Irene L. Miller, St. Petersburg
Share your opinions
We invite readers to write to us. Letters for publication should be addressed to Letters to the Editor, P.O. Box 1121, St. Petersburg, FL 33731. They can be sent by e-mail to letters@sptimes.com or by fax to (727) 893-8675.  
They should be brief and must include the writer's name, address and phone number. Please include a handwritten signature when possible.
Letters may be edited for clarity, taste and length. We regret that not all letters can be published.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, DON ADDIS; A representative from the state of Florida says to a hairy shirtless executioner with tattoos in front of the press, "For the record, we resent the implication that our technicians are unqualified or incompetent! Right, thumbs?"

Load-Date: June 10, 2000


End of Document