Resolution on Libya Embargo: Barring Takeoff and Landing 'to Any Aircraft'
The New York Times
April 1, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;; Text
Length: 1316 words
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, March 31
Body


Following is the text of the Security Council resolution adopted today imposing air and arms embargoes against Libya and reducing the size of Libyan missions abroad. The vote was 10 in favor, none opposed and five abstentions from China, Cape Verde, India, Morocco and Zimbabwe.
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
REAFFIRMING its resolution 731 (1992) of 21 January 1992,
NOTING the reports of the Secretary General,
DEEPLY CONCERNED that the Libyan Government has still not provided a full and effective response to the requests in its Resolution 731 (1992),
CONVINCED that the suppression of acts of international terrorism, including those in which states are directly or indirectly involved, is essential for the maintenance of international peace and security,
RECALLING that in the statement issued on Jan. 31, 1992, on the occasion of the meeting of the Security Council at the level of heads of state and government the members of the Council expressed their deep concern over acts of international terrorism and emphasized the need for the international community to deal effectively with all such acts,
REAFFIRMING that, in accordance with the principle in Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter of the United Nations, every state has the duty to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in terrorist acts in another state or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed toward the commission of such acts, when such acts involve a threat or use of force
DETERMINING in this context that the failure by the Libyan Government to demonstrate, by concrete actions, its renunciation of terrorism, and in particular its continued failure to respond fully and effectively to the requests in resolution 731 (1992), constitute a threat to international peace and security,
DETERMINED to eliminate international terrorism,
RECALLING the right of states, under Article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations, to consult the Security Council where they find themselves confronted with special economic problems arising from the carrying out of preventive or enforcement measures,
ACTING under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. DECIDES that the Libyan Government must now comply without any further delay with paragraph 3 of Resolution 731 (1992) of Jan. 21, 1992;
2. DECIDES FURTHER that the Libyan Government must commit itself definitively to cease all forms of terrorist action and all assistance to terrorist groups, and that it must promptly, by concrete actions, demonstrate its renunciation of terrorism;
3. DECIDES that on April 15, 1992, all states shall adopt the measures set out below, which shall apply until the Security Council decides that the Libyan Government has complied with paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
4. DECIDES that all states shall:
a. DENY PERMISSION to any aircraft to take off from, land in or overfly their territory if it is destined to land in or has taken off from the territory of Libya, unless the particular flight has been approved on grounds of significant humanitarian need by the committee established by paragraph 9 below, and;
b. PROHIBIT, by their nationals or from their territory, the supply of any aircraft or aircraft components to Libya, the provision of engineering and maintenance servicing of Libyan aircraft or aircraft components, the certification of airworthiness for Libyan aircraft, the payment of new claims against existing insurance contracts, and the provision of new direct insurance for Libyan aircraft;
5. DECIDES FURTHER that all states shall:
a. PROHIBIT any provision to Libya by their nationals or from their territory of arms and related material of all types, including the sale or transfer of weapons and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary police equipment, and spare parts for the aforementioned, as well as the provision of any types of equipment, supplies, and grants of licensing arrangements, for the manufacture or maintenance of the aforementioned;
b. PROHIBIT any provision to Libya by their nationals or from their territory of technical advice, assistance or training related to the provision, manufacture, maintenance or use of the items in (a) above;
c. WITHDRAW any of their officials or agents present in Libya to advise the Libyan authorities on military matters;
6. DECIDES ALSO that all states shall:
a. SIGNIFICANTLY reduce the number and the level of the staff at Libyan diplomatic missions and consular posts and restrict or control the movement within their territory of all such staff who remain; in the case of Libyan missions to international organizations, the host state may, as it deems necessary, consult the organization concerned on the measures required to implement this subparagraph;
b. PREVENT the operation of all Libyan Arab Airlines offices;
c. TAKE all appropriate steps to deny entry to or expel Libyan nationals whohave been denied entry to or expelled from other states because of their involvement in terrorist activities;
7. CALLS UPON all states, including states non-members of the United Nations, and all international organizations to act strictly in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution notwithstanding the existence of any rights or obligations conferred or imposed by any international agreement or any contract entered into or any license or permit granted before April 15, 1992;
8. REQUESTS all states to report to the Secretary General by May 15, 1992, on the measures they have instituted for meeting the obligations set out in paragraph 3 to 7 above;
9. DECIDES to establish, in accordance with rule 28 of its provisional rules of procedure, a Committee of the Security Council consisting of all the members of the Council, to undertake the following tasks and to report on its work to the Council with its observations and recommendations:
a. To examine the reports submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 above;
b. To seek from all states further information regarding the action taken by them concerning the effective implementation of the measures imposed by paragraphs 3 to 7 above;
c. To consider any information brought to its attention by states concerning violations of the measures imposed by paragraphs 3 to 7 above, and in the context to make recommendations to the Council on ways to increase their effectiveness;
d. To recommend appropriate measures in response to violations of the measures imposed by paragraphs 3 to 7 above and provide information on a regular basis to the Secretary General for general distribution to member states;
e. To consider and to decide upon expeditiously any application by states for the approval of flights on grounds of significent humanitarian need in accordance with paragraph 4 above;
f. To give special attention to any communications in accordance with Article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations from any neighboring or other states with special economic problems which might arise from the carrying out of the measures imposed by paragraphs 3 to 7 above;
10. CALLS UPON all states to cooperate fully with the committee in the fulfillment of its task, including supplying such information as may be sought by the committee in pursuance of the present resolution;
11. REQUESTS the Secretary General to provide all necessary assistance to the committee and to make the necessary arrangements in the Secretariat for this purpose;
12. INVITES the Secretary General to continue his role as set out in paragraph 4 of resolution 731 (1992);
13. DECIDES that the Security Council shall every 120 days, or sooner should the situation so require, review the measures imposed by paragraphs 3 to 7 above in the light of the compliance by the Libyan Government with paragraphs 1 and 2 above, taking into account, as appropriate, any reports provided by the Secretary General on his role as set out in paragraph 4 of resolution 731 (1992);
14. DECIDES to remain seized of the matter.

Load-Date: April 1, 1992


End of Document