Responses to detainee ruling show sharp divisions
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 13, 2008 Friday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 603 words
Byline: By Mark Sherman THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Philip Dine of the Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau contributed to this report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Terrorist enemies or hapless innocents? Whatever the truth, the hundreds of foreigners held without charges at Guantanamo Bay have rights under the U.S. Constitution, the Supreme Court says.
And, considering that many have been imprisoned at the Cuban camp for six years, they should be able to exercise those rights quickly and ask civilian judges to force the government to justify their detention, the court ruled Thursday.
The court, though deeply divided, issued a strong rebuke to President George W. Bush's anti-terrorism policies. It was the third time the justices have repudiated the president on the detainees, though they still have not made it through the courthouse door.
"It's a total loss for the government," said former federal prosecutor Andrew McBride, who disagreed with the court's ruling.
Bush said he, too, disagreed and suggested he might seek yet another law to keep terrorism suspects locked up at the prison camp, even as his presidency winds down and Democrats control Congress.
Justice Anthony Kennedy, writing for the 5-4 high court majority, acknowledged the terrorism threat the U.S. faces - the administration's justification for the detentions - but he declared, "The laws and Constitution are designed to survive, and remain in force, in extraordinary times."
In a blistering dissent, Justice Antonin Scalia said the decision "will make the war harder on us. It will almost certainly cause more Americans to be killed." 
Bush has argued the detentions are needed to protect the nation in a time of unprecedented threats from al-Qaida and other foreign terrorist groups. The president, in Rome, said Thursday, "It was a deeply divided court, and I strongly agree with those who dissented." He said he would consider whether to seek new laws in light of the ruling.
Sen. Christopher "Kit" Bond, R-Mo., criticized the Supreme Court's decision, which he said gives "foreign terrorists the same rights as Americans."
"It is disappointing that the Supreme Court rejected precedent going back to World War II and chose to give foreign terrorists the constitutional rights and privileges of U.S. citizens," said Bond, who is vice-chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
But Rep. Ike Skelton, D-Mo., chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said the decision "will better protect American security and values."
"The Supreme Court has just disarmed the terrorists of one of their most powerful weapons against us. They can no longer claim that the United States is all talk when it comes to justice and the rule of law," Skelton said.
In the opinion, Kennedy said federal judges could ultimately order some detainees to be released, but he also said such orders would depend on security concerns and other circumstances. The ruling itself won't result in any immediate releases.
Roughly 200 detainees have lawsuits on hold in federal court in Washington. Chief Judge Royce C. Lamberth said he would call a special meeting of federal judges to address how to handle the cases.
Detainees already facing trial are in a different category.
Justice Department spokesman Peter Carr said Thursday's decision should not affect war crimes trials. "Military commission trials will therefore continue to go forward," he said.
The lawyer for Salim Ahmed Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's one-time driver, said he will seek dismissal of the charges against Hamdan based on the new ruling. A military judge had already delayed the trial's start to await the high court ruling.
---
Talk
STLtoday.com/current Do you agree with the ruling? Talk about it in Current Affairs.
Get more
STLtoday.com/links Read the court's opinion.

Load-Date: June 13, 2008


End of Document