RESPONDING, BUT NOT OVERREACTING
Idaho Falls Post Register (Idaho Falls, Idaho)
July 21, 1996


Copyright 1996 The Post Register
Section: Edit; Pg. B6
Length: 473 words
Byline: Gene Fadness
Body


We're still waiting to hear if the mid-air explosion of TWA Flight 800 off the New York coast Wednesday night was an act of terrorism. It's important not to jump to conclusions as was the case after the Oklahoma City bombing when Americans were quick to point figures at Arabs before learning it was our own brand of domestic terrorists.
However, there aren't too many explanations for such a destructive explosion on a sturdy aircraft, built to sustain engine failures and whole host of problems. If it was terrorism, Americans will certainly have to come to grips with the fact, if they haven't already, that we've entered a frightening new era.
It appears as if we don't go too many months without a major calamity resulting from terrorism, domestic or foreign. First the major incidents were a few years apart _ the bombing of the Marine barracks in Beirut in 1983, followed in 1988 when Pan Am Flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland.  Then, beginning with the bombing of the World Trade Center, terrorist events against the United States picked up. That was followed by the Oklahoma City bombing, two bombings in Saudi Arabia in November of last year and just last month and now _ possibly _ TWA Flight 800. And don't forget that federal agents may have prevented another act of domestic terrorism earlier this month when they arrested members of the Viper Militia in Arizona, allegedly training to blow up a federal building in Phoenix.
How can any government plan to fight against such random acts of violence?  It can start by remembering that overreaction can be as dangerous as failing to plan. Important liberties such as due process and freedom of speech must continue to be protected.
There can also be overreaction by enacting a host of new airline regulations and safety procedures at airports. It seems that enforcing those procedures already in place is probably the wiser step. Mary Schiavo, the former inspector general for the Department of Transportation, resigned just weeks ago, frustrated by the inability of the Federal Aviation Administration and private airlines to enforce current safety procedures. Her undercover investigators were able to circumvent airport security checks four out of 10 times! That's awful.
Finally, there must be more support _ morale wise and financially, if necessary _ for government agencies and their employees who find themselves literally in a line of fire: the FBI, the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms, the FAA, the Department of Transportation and related agencies.  Unfortunately, they seem to be the objects of attack more than anything else.  Some of that may be deserved, but the venom can go too far as to be destructive as Oklahoma City illustrated.
Nothing can unite us better than a common enemy and that enemy is terrorism, be it foreign or domestic.
Gene Fadness

Load-Date: July 22, 1996


End of Document