Responding to the Recent Spat of Right Wing Terrrorism
University Wire
June 12, 2009 Friday


Copyright 2009  via U-Wire
Length: 1834 words
Byline: By Kevin Gosztola
Body


-the terrorists---wanted, right? The
"terrorists" wanted us to battle them and get bogged down in war and we
did and we continue and in fact, the hope and change we voted for in
November is moving supplemental funding to continue these wars as we
speak so unfortunately the terrorists will continue to get what they
want.  
 
Terrorism is More Than Violence
 
You see, terrorism is not simply violence. It is not just an
anti-abortionist firing on an OB/GYN or a Muslim convert shooting two
U.S. soldiers taking a break outside of a recruitment facility or a
white supremacist attacking a celebrated museum.
 
Terrorism includes the effect after the violence is committed. It
includes the changes in society and the shifts in the consciousness of
the people who wake up and go to sleep within the borders of that
society on a daily basis.
 
Terrorism did not begin on September 11th. Yet, many
American accepted the notion that we now live in a post-9/11 world.
And, why do some believe we live in a post-9/11 world?
 
Why doesn't anyone believe we live in a post-8/7 world? That's the
date when two U.S. embassies were bombed in Kenya and Tanzania.
 
Why doesn't anyone believe we live in a post-4/19 world? That's the
date when Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols set off a car bomb killing
168 people in Oklahoma City.
 
Why doesn't anyone believe we live in a post-2/26 world (when the
World Trade Center basement garage was bombed by militant Islamists), a
post-12/21 world (when a New York-bound Pan Am Boeing 747 exploded from
a terrorist bomb), or a post-11/4 world (when Iranian radical students
seized a U.S. embassy and took 66 people hostage)?
 
Could it possibly be because after each of those incidents Americans
returned to their everyday lives in the same way that we all have gone
back to business as usual after the recent attacks over the past 10
days?
 
Why Not Terror Suspects?
 
And why is it that those who commit acts of violence like Scott
Roeder and possibly James Von Brunn are charged with murder instead of
terrorism? Why do we react and interpret those acts differently than
terrorist attacks committed by members of al Qaeda?
 
Scott Roeder, prior to the act, had connections with Operation
Rescue and a history of vandalism (gluing the doors of abortion clinics
shut). The organization, Operation Rescue, whose public face is Randall
Terry, indoctrinates people to become foot soldiers aimed at bringing
God's law to America. Its members would tacitly condone the result of
clinic bombings and attacks on doctors protected by the rule of law and
they would hardly work to distance themselves from militant pro-life
organizations like the Army of God.
 
James Von Brunn, a hero among pro-White activists, is celebrated
for the act of "direct action" he committed against the Federal Reserve
in the 1980s, which he hoped would "deal with the banking cartel that
controls and destroys so much of our lives." (This according to a
posting on a message board over at Stormfront.org, a website whose
members, prior to this action, considered Brunn a "white racialist
treasure.") 
 
Al Qaeda, Army of God, Stormfront ---Aren't these all enormously
ideological organizations which find it acceptable to inflict terror on
a mass population of people through acts of violence?
 
Where do our nation's politicians fit into all of this? What is the
politics of hate and how have politicians failed to properly open a
conversation aimed at helping a public understand terrorism?
 
Does the GOP Bear Any Responsibility?
 
First off, no matter how much the GOP would like us to think it is
not connected to recent acts of right wing terrorism, the public should
not accept their argument. Republicans have allowed their party to
devolve into a sideshow devoid of any real leaders.
 
The recent nomination of Sonia Sotomayor makes it difficult to
believe that Republicans have nothing to do with the presence of hatred
in America.
 
Newt Gingrich twittered, "White man racist nominee would be forced to withdraw. Latina woman racist should also withdraw." 
 
Since sending that message out on Twitter, he has retracted the word
"racist" and replaced it with "racialist." And, he has even publicly
called Sotomayor a Latina supremacist.
 
Retired congressman Tom Tancredo equated Sotomayor's membership in a national civil rights group, La Raza, to a membership in the KKK. 
 
Charles Krauthaummer, a syndicated columnist and contributor to the
FOX News channel, thinks Sotomayor is a woman who has endowments which
make her think she is superior to a white judge. He would like
Americans to believe like Gingrich does that Sotomayor is a Latina supremacist, a person who believes her ethnicity gives her superior entitlements. 
 
Rush Limbaugh has discussed Sotomayor in connection with David Duke. 
 
And, Michael Steele said, "God help you if you're a white male coming before her bench." 
 
This is the flip side of white supremacy---you cringe when it looks like other ethnicities or races might eclipse you in power.
 
All of this would be meaningless except within the party these are
the people whom Republicans consider to be "leaders." And since these
are the people the public most often hears from on the news, this isn't
fringe right thinking anymore---it can now be considered mainstream.
 
A recent poll
indicates how vacuous the party has become---Around half of Republicans
and Republican-independents, when asked, failed to come up with a
single name when asked who the party's spokesperson is and those who
did name names said Rush Limbaugh, Newt Gingrich, Dick Cheney, John
McCain, and George W. Bush.
 
The two "leaders" who polled highest are arguing that a Supreme
Court nominee will subject us all to a harsh set of values that she
possesses because she is a Latina.
 
Such are comments are a symptom of hatred and racism---the very kind
of hatred and racism that leads depleted and drained men to lose
control and commit acts of violence all so they can "protect"
themselves or the ideas they cherish and hold.
 
And without leadership, "crazy right wing myths"
like Obama aims to create a master race through population control,
he's created his own version of Hitler Youth, and Obama wants to take
our guns away are all able to rise to the top. 
 
Spinelessness When Faced With Hate & Hysteria
 
As for the Democrats, their role in this starts with Obama and works
its way down the totem pole. Democrats have not been influential or
outspoken enough.
 
Throughout Barack Obama's campaign for the presidency, the party
often chose to simply ignore and let the public decide how to react to
the hate speech being reported at McCain-Palin campaign rallies. Were
they correct in doing so?
 
The Editor & Publisherreported in November of 2008 that racist incidents were happening all across America.
 
The worst part of the report is that it not only included
reports of people voicing racial anti-Obama epithets but also included
stories of police officers engaging in acts of racism and hatred too.
"In Durham, N.C., two officers have been accused of making
derogatory anti-Obama remarks on their MySpace pages. Police Chief Jose
L. Lopez Sr. said in a telephone interview with The News & Observer
in Raleigh, North Carolina, "It wasn't a racial slur, but we're still
investigating it."...
...AP reports today: "While the world watched a Grant Park
celebration heralding the election of the first black U.S. president,
some white Chicago police officers committed hate crimes against black
residents cheering Barack Obama's victory elsewhere in the city,
attorneys alleged Thursday." Lawsuits have been filed."
Additionally, Obama had many chances to address the death threats,
hate speech, and racist attacks that were being fired at him. He did
not, and in fact, chose during the third presidential debate to downplay McCain-Palin's whipping up of hate and racism on the campaign trail. 
 
In the same debate, he also repeated a criticism of Democratic
Representative John Lewis who, as Obama described, "made a statement
that he was troubled with what he was hearing at some of the rallies
that your running mate was holding, in which all the Republican reports
indicated were shouting, when my name came up, things like "terrorist"
and "kill him," and that you're running mate didn't mention, didn't
stop, didn't say "Hold on a second, that's kind of out of line."
 
Democrats have allowed right wing fear to erode our civil liberties
and the human right to due process. They have allowed a debate on
whether some humans who are more dangerous than others should be kept
in detention indefinitely. 
 
And, every time we justify abuse and torture of terror suspects,
every time we subvert the rule of law in the name of terror, we as a
people let the enemy control us. We let that which we despise and hate
enter us and infect our body and soul.
 
Conclusion
 
From the campaign trail to the summer of 2009, the wave of
radicalization has been largely ignored and downplayed. A rightwing
terrorism report has come and gone. And, some of us continue onward
fearing that Obama will move detainees at Guantanamo to prisons in our
backyards because he would like to bring to an end one of the worst
travesties in our nation's history.
 
If you recall, Obama said during his Inaugural Address, "That
we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood. Our nation is at
war, against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred."
 
What Americans thought of when they heard that was Al Qaeda and
other Islamic extremists who hate America. But, we must reassess our
thinking on violence and hatred in the world. Whites have had just as
much (if not more) to do with acts of violence and hatred than Muslims
ever have.
 
We could fight a "war on terror" that involved going after rightwing
terrorism, those who incite racism, hate, and violence. But, I suppose
the government response would be something tantamount to martial law or
a further roll back of civil liberties that we saw commence after
September 11th.
 
Something about fighting domestic terrorists just doesn't allow for
the spread and dominance of empire that terrorists from the Middle East
make possible. They don't quite allow for the same level of war
profiteering, don't help us become united as a nation, and as evidenced
by recent events, don't really make us afraid of much at all.
 
But then is there really anything for us to be afraid of? Is the
jury still out on this "war on terror" or can we begin to call it what
it is---a phony war of terror?
 
In closing, during a summer with a probability of heightened levels
of civil unrest and domestic terrorism by Americans who have been
afflicted and broken mentally if not physically by the economic
recession, we owe it to ourselves to contemplate the wilding of
Americans, we owe it to ourselves to investigate and ask what creates
this beast within, we owe it to ourselves to do what we collectively
have not had the courage to do up to this point.
 
We owe it to ourselves to further define terrorism, examine the
semantics, and decide if we wish to let a percentage of the world's
population---those filled with racism and hate---define our lives.
(C) 2008 via UWIRE

Load-Date: June 12, 2009


End of Document