respect the riot Fighting ISIL takes time, not bombs
The Breeze: James Madison University
February 22, 2015 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 573 words
Body


Every few weeks or so, The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant reminds us of its savagery and barbarism by publicly and cruelly executing individuals whom they've held captive.
Just in the past few weeks, ISIL beheaded Japanese journalist Kenji Goto, followed by the barbaric burning of Jordanian pilot Moaz al-Kasabeh. The pilot's death came after a failed negotiation between the Jordanian government and ISIL over Sajida al-Rishawi, an Iraqi convicted terrorist who was held in Jordan.
Most recently is American hostage Kayla Mueller's death in an airstrike targeting ISIL, as well as the kidnapping and beheading of 21 Egyptian Copts in Libya. ISIL also attacks people in the Middle East as part of its campaign to gain territory, taking over whole villages and cities in Syria and Iraq.
The question many people may be asking is how such an organization can be defeated. The U.S. has been at "war with terrorism" since the signing of the Authorization for Use of Military Force in September 2001, and it seems that the world isn't any safer as a result.
Is terrorism something the U.S. can defeat through military action? Or will it take more than airstrikes and billions of dollars in defense spending to defeat what seems to be a growing ideology?
It'll take patience and years of dedication to defeat such a phenomenon. I like to compare terrorism to other societal plagues such as drug use, poverty and sexual exploitation. For example, defeating and tackling the problem of poverty does not include killing the poor, nor does solving drug addiction include killing off addicts. In the same way, society can't tackle sexual exploitation by getting rid of all industries that use sex to profit.
These problems need a cultural revolution in which education and awareness are prioritized by government and society. I believe that it's only through education and cultural awareness that we can tackle such problems and create solutions for the long term.
Similarly, terrorism is a problem that will need us to focus more on education and investing in areas in which terrorism is prevalent. If we already spend billions of dollars on our military and for defense, we can better use that money to effectively fight terrorism in ways that will actually make the world a safer place.
Killing terrorists and airstrikes might temporarily solve the problem, but it doesn't fight the root causes of terrorism, such as poverty and a lack of economic opportunities, failed states and the lack of proper education. Without doing so, terrorism and extremism will remain an ideology that will only gain momentum as America gives disenfranchised and less educated individuals in the Middle East more reason to feel as though the West threatens their lives.
The death of many innocent civilians in the region as a result of that war has been used as a recruitment call by terrorist organizations.
By continuing our fight in the same way it has been going for the past 14 years, we'll only be giving terrorists more material of which they can use anti-American sentiment to further their cause.
We'll be reinforcing the belief that there is a cultural war between the West and the East no matter how many presidents come out and say we aren't at war with Islam, creating a never-ending cycle of distrust between the Middle East and the U.S.
Nahla Aboutabl is a junior political science and international affairs double major. Contact Nahla at aboutanm@dukes.jmu.edu

Load-Date: January 16, 2018


End of Document