Response - 
Brock Press: Brock University
July 15, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS-AND-LIFE; Pg. 1
Length: 563 words
Byline: Emma Kirwin
Body


Eric Larocque 2983260 2nd Year HistoryThis is a response to Ron James, the author of an article in last week's paper entitled Questioning Canada's Mythical Moral Superiority. I would like to rebut what he wrote last week, not in the sense that my side is right, rather providing a somewhat intelligent opposition to what he wrote. I know he must think everyone wants to argue with him, might it be that liberalism is the majority in our part of Canada?
I start with his view on the greatest Canadian, Tommy Douglas. I do agree with him that MacDonald should have won, however, Douglas' contribution to our social programs, most notably health care, are indisputable. He was the first leader of the New Democratic Party; which although does not fit into the two party system of the United States, has become a somewhat powerful force in Canadian politics. Our healthcare system is one of the uniting factors, which provide Canada with a sense of self. Personally, the health care system here, although flawed in some respects, has saved my life twice. If I were in the United States, I would have paid about $500, 000 for my hospital bills. My family probably could have afforded it in the United States, but what of the people who cannot afford coverage? Are they just left to die? As well, the greatest Canadian was neither a military leader nor a great businessman because it shows what Canadians value..."Peace, order, and good government".
On his point of Trudeau, I feel very strongly about what he did for Canada and Canadian culture. Again on a personal note, my family lived in Montreal when the FLQ was commencing their attacks on English Canada. My father's best friend's father worked for the postal service and had his arms blown off by a terrorist attack. My father and my mother both supported Trudeau because of his stance on domestic terrorism. Trudeau helped Canada through being a strong leader in one of our country's most difficult times.
With respect to his point on Canada's involvement in America's war on terrorism and ultimately Afghanistan and Iraq, I have to say this: America disobeying the U.N.'s orders, and going to war with NO JUST CAUSE, is the complete opposite to what he thinks of as Canadian values. Canadian values being (according to Ron), Respect for Authority (unlike the U.S. going against U.N. authority), Hard Work (which I agree with), accountability (the United States is not taking the prerogative in admitting they did not find any weapons of mass destruction), and finally Law and order (the United States showing no respect for international Law). This is why most Canadians, and why the author should feel that what America did, and is still doing is wrong.
I do agree with him that Canada has no real distinct culture of our own. However, we have the potential to become a culturally sovereign state, without hurting our closest ally and friend, the United States. Our ability to choose what we want to do means that we do have our own voice. Canada is in crisis right now; we have no real sense of self. It is up to Canadians to decide if we want to follow the footsteps of our southern neighbor, or have a distinct Canadian culture. I think most Canadians would agree that although the United States has a lot of good qualities, it is not what we want to be. With this said, we shouldn't base our culture on "not being" another.

Load-Date: July 16, 2020


End of Document