Restraint Needed In Middle East,But Don’t Single Out Israel
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 14, 2006 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 14
Length: 513 words
Body


An escalating series of attacks and reprisals between Israel and its stateless attackers have led to a level of destruction that must be called war.
The provocative attacks on Israel that sparked the military operations were financed by Syria and Iran. The guerrillas who have been firing rockets into Israeli towns from Lebanon and Palestine represent no nation. The only description that fits them is terrorists.
Many nations are demanding that Israel act with more restraint, but no critic offers a way to deter the guerillas whose open goal is the destruction of Israel.
The United States was justified in its veto of a draft resolution in the United Nations that would have told Israel to stop its "disproportionate use of force" in the Gaza strip. The resolution ignored the terrorism that provoked the military response.
Israel is angry and frustrated. Its concessions have all backfired. As soon as Israel withdrew from Gaza and returned control to Palestinians, militants used it as a launching area for rockets. When Israel responded with artillery fire, hostilities only increased.
The kidnapping of an Israeli soldier was the breaking point. Israel invaded Gaza to find the soldier. Israeli missiles probably paid for by U.S. taxpayers blew up a Gaza power plant also paid for in part by U.S. taxpayers.
Hezbollah fighters operating out of south Lebanon, on territory Israel relinquished under international pressure, shot larger rockets at Israeli towns and kidnapped two more soldiers.
Israel responded by blockading Lebanon to stop the resupply of rockets. It invaded to find its soldiers. It bombed the runways at the Beirut airport and warned that "nothing is safe" in the whole country. Lebanon, which has never tried to rein in Hezbollah, called for a ceasefire. That does not appear to be what Hezbollah or Iran wants.
The White House correctly calls the Hezbollah aggression an "unprovoked act of terrorism." That's what the U.N. should call it.
How this fighting fits into the broader war on terror is increasingly clear. Iran cannot be trusted with nuclear weapons, which it might give its suicidal surrogates in Lebanon.
Russia, which has some influence over Syria and Iran, has been of no help. Moscow says that "all forms of terrorism are completely unacceptable," but it has been happy to accept whatever punishment terrorists inflict on Israel.
France is outraged at Israel. It calls the attack on Lebanon a "disproportional act of war." Israelis who never know when a rocket from Palestine or Lebanon will kill them in their homes won't feel better if a similar, proportional fear is instilled in their innocent civilian counterparts across the border. They want the attacks to stop.
President Bush is right to remind the world that Israel has a right to defend itself.
If more nations saw it that way, Lebanon might decide to police its Hezbollah outlaws, Palestine might discourage its Hamas fighters, and Iran might stop trying to incite a regional war.
Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

OUR OPINION

Graphic

 
.

Load-Date: July 15, 2006


End of Document