Restraint urged on anti-terrorism proposals Wiretaps, tagged explosives raise civil-liberties concerns
USA TODAY
July 31, 1996, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 557 words
Byline: Tony Mauro
Body


Civil libertarians and conservatives are suggesting a go-slow
approach to the latest anti-terrorism measures proposed by President
Clinton and congressional leaders.
This skepticism -- along with outright opposition to some features
-- may doom some of the more controversial parts of the bill from
being approved before Congress recesses for a month Friday.
The American Civil Liberties Union and some Republicans object
to proposals that would expand government wiretapping powers,
while the National Rifle Association opposes proposals that would
add chemical markers to black powder and smokeless powder used
by gun owners and bomb makers alike.
"Knee-jerk reactions to tragedies like the Olympic bombing are
the wrong way to do legislation," says Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga.,
who opposes both measures.
Clinton's proposals were largely "off-the-shelf" leftovers that
were dropped from the last anti-terrorism bill passed in April.
That bill included measures aimed at making it easier to deport
foreigners suspected of involvement with terrorism. It was also
attacked for restricting civil liberties.
"When we had time for reasoned debate, these provisionswere dropped,"
says Georgetown law professor David Cole, who advised civil liberties
groups on the anti-terrorism law. "Now that we're in the frenzy
of the moment, the president wants them back in."
Cole expects some of the previously rejected measures to pass:
"It's certain that civil liberties will be diminished in the
next few weeks. What's a mystery is whether we'll end up any safer."
Probably the most controversial of the latest White House proposals
would make it easier for law enforcement agencies to get permission
for so-called "roving" wiretaps on more than one telephone belonging
to a criminal suspect. The White House says the power is needed
to deal with increasingly sophisticated use of mobile and cellular
phones.
Currently, police or the FBI need to prove to a judge that the
target is attempting to evade surveillance by switching phones
before they can tap multiple phones. The proposal eliminates that
hurdle.
Another Clinton proposal would make it easier for law enforcement
to wiretap a terrorism suspect on an emergency basis without court
permission for 48 hours. Emergency wiretaps are already allowed
in cases involving organized crime or national security, but Clinton
would add terrorism as a specific category.
"Wiretapping is already at record levels," says Gregory Nojeim
of the ACLU. "It's ironic that they are looking for more wiretap
authority when in fact wiretaps are rarely used in bomb investigations."
Other provisions would make it easier for police to obtain hotel
and telephone records and to use federal racketeering laws against
terrorists. Those laws enable the government to seize the assets
of suspected terrorists.
Another area of opposition surrounds the proposal for a $ 25 million
study that would lead to the addition of markers, or "taggants,"
to commercially available gunpowder.
The NRA has taken no stand on tagging commercial explosives or
the fertilizer products that were used in the Oklahoma City bombing,
says spokesman Tom Wyld. But Wyld says taggants have been shown
to "destabilize" gunpowder, creating a "significant threat"
to the safety of legitimate users.
Taggants are powder-sized particles with a distinctive pattern
of colors to help police identify its manufacturer.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP; Barr: 'Knee-jerk' reactions are wrong

Load-Date: July 31, 1996


End of Document