Retaliation against terrorists must be just and effective
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
August 26, 1998, Wednesday


Copyright 1998 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A12
Length: 301 words
Body


Because retaliation is the best weapon against terrorism, targeting known terrorists wherever they are is justified.
But retaliation must be precise and effective, a deterrent against future terrorism.
It must be based on credible evidence the terrorists singled out for destruction are a threat to the United States.  And retaliation must never be a political gesture.
It seems that Thursday's cruise missile attacks on a suspected terrorist training camp in Afghanistan and a chemical factory in Sudan were for good reason.
However, Tomahawk missiles are indiscriminate in causing devastation.  When the United States retaliated against Libya in 1986, fighter bombers were used in sustained attacks and caused massive damage to Moammar Gadhafi's terrorist organization.
As President Clinton explained, the missile raid was timed to disrupt a "gathering of key terrorist leaders" at the Afghanistan camp site.  But national security adviser Samuel R. Berger said U.S. officials were not after Osama bin Laden, the terrorist leader suspected of sponsoring the recent bombings of two American embassies.  Indeed, bin Laden has survived the raid.
There is no consensus on whether using military might is the best way to stomp out international terrorism.  Tracking down terrorists and bringing them to justice may take more time but seems more effective.
Violating the territories of two sovereign nations is no small matter, and Washington will be criticized for its action.  However, when terrorists such as bin Laden declare war on America, the United States has every right to defend itself.
The success of Thursday's missile attack will be determined by the long-range results.  However, the sad irony of Clinton's presidency is that his motives will be viewed with skepticism even when he does the right thing.

Load-Date: August 28, 1998


End of Document