RETALIATIONS FOR TERRORISM: DO THEY DETER OR PROMPT ATTACKS?< THE TARGETS ARE TEMPTING. BUT EXPERTS DISAGREE ON THE EFFECTIVENESS.< "I WOULD HAVE SECOND THOUGHTS," SAID ONE EX-CIA OFFICIAL.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
AUGUST 8, 1996 Thursday SF EDITION


Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A14
Length: 1025 words
Byline: Michael E. Ruane, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The targets may be tempting - Iran's port and missile facilities on the Persian Gulf island of Abu Musa; its new nuclear reactor at Bushehr; its oil fields, or terrorist training camps in the interior.
The act might be fulfilling - vengeance for Americans killed in terrorist attacks at Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia, for example, or in TWA Flight 800, should Iran be found culpable in either disaster.
Some terrorism experts argue that retaliation serves the important purpose of deterrence.
But retaliation - against Iran or any other nation found to be involved in the recent attacks on Americans - could be hazardous, could bring a new round of tit-for-tat calamities to vulnerable Western societies, and may accomplish little in the long run.
"I would have second thoughts about [retaliation,]" Vincent Cannistraro, the CIA's former counterterrorism chief who helped investigate the 1988 bombing of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.
He said he believed the Lockerbie bombing, blamed on two Libyans, was revenge for U.S. air strikes against Libya in 1986. The strikes were in retaliation for a Libyan terrorist attack in Berlin 10 days before that killed two American GIs.
'VERY VULNERABLE'
"We in democratic societies are very vulnerable," said Cannistraro, a security consultant in Virginia. When strike leads to counterstrike and beyond, anyone can be a target, he said.
"That's the problem. The poor innocent people are the ones that pay the price. It's not the president that's shot, not the national security adviser. It's some kid coming home for Christmas on a civilian airliner."
Eileen Monetti of Cherry Hill, whose son, Rick, was killed aboard Pan Am 103, said of retaliation: "Having innocent people die in return for my son's death is to me morally repugnant. One person's death does not obliterate another's."
Besides, she said, she worried that "you'll probably go over and kill some poor sheep farmer who doesn't have anything to do with politics."
* With a Pentagon report on the Khobar Towers attack due out next week, the issues of terrorism and retaliation have been increasing the tension between the United States and Iran.
Defense Secretary William Perry hinted last week at Iran's possible involvement in Khobar Towers, and Tuesday described the local military threat from that country as "increased . . . and . . . still growing."
In Congress, there have been calls for attacks on purported Iranian terrorist training camps. Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.) has said that if the Khobar Towers bombing was state-sponsored, it was "an act of war."
And President Clinton on Monday signed into law a bill that penalizes non-U.S. firms that invest in oil and gas projects in Iran.
But the State Department's former ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism, L. Paul Bremer 3d, said yesterday that "terrorists are not often deterred by words" and that the military option might need to be exercised.
POTENT MISSILES
Military deeds, though, can be complex and dangerous, even if the United States has the power to perform them in the Persian Gulf area.
Scores of Air Force jets are flying from bases in Saudi Arabia. In addition, an aircraft carrier battle group, which includes ships and submarines armed with cruise missiles, and other vessels loaded with more jets, helicopters and 2,000 Marines, is cruising in nearby waters.
The Pentagon has been closely watching an Iranian military buildup in the Persian Gulf for more than a year.
Iran is believed to have potent Chinese-made antiship missiles and small fast attack boats. It also recently purchased Kilo-class submarines from Russia and reportedly has been bolstering forces on Abu Musa and other islands near the narrow Strait of Hormuz at the entrance to the Gulf.
Any of these, or the nuclear reactor being built up the coast at Bushehr, could be on a potential U.S. target list, said Kenneth Katzman, a expert on Iran with the Congressional Research Service.
* It can be hard to find the ultimate culprit in an attack, and to determine whether any foreign country played a role.
The 1986 Berlin bombing, for example, was led by a Lebanon-born Palestinian who was found to be working for Libya. The suspects in the Lockerbie bombing for years were incorrectly believed to be linked to Iran, rather than Libya.
"Terrorism is designed deliberately to obscure evidence and especially these days to muddy the trail not only to which terrorist group is behind it, but whether there is a state sponsor or backer," said Bruce Hoffman, director of the Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence at St. Andrews University in Scotland.
In addition, he said, retaliation also can be morally and politically murky.
"In some respects retaliation against terrorism is not that dissimilar from the act of terrorism itself," he said.
"It's violence for effect. It's designed to send a message. It's not so much directed against the targets of the attacks as much as against another audience, usually another government. It's spectacular. It's dramatic. It's cathartic. It's all the things we say terrorism is.
"I'm not advocating not retaliating," Hoffman said. "Governments have an obligation to protect their citizens. But it doesn't end terrorism. It conceivably may expand the conflict. As long as we're prepared for that. And once you do it, what do you do next?"
But others believe arguments about vulnerability are weak.
"This is an argument of despair and defeat," said Bremer, the former counterterrorism ambassador, who is managing director of the consulting firm Kissinger Associates in New York. "Somebody who says that is basically left with nothing to do."
He argued that the attacks on Libya did have beneficial effects.
"They did two things. They made an immediate impression on the Libyans. They made an even more important impression on our allies that we were deadly serious about this matter and that they had better get on board, and they did.
"I don't say that every day the most important thing we do is military," he said. "But unless we have a realistic prospect of taking action against terrorist states we are depriving ourselves of what is the most important tool in our kit."

Load-Date: October 28, 2002


End of Document