Retaliation to terrorism vowed
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 5, 1996, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 431 words
Body


SUMMARY: U.S. legislators say "we should send a message," but Iran says pointing fingers will give a "breathing space" to terrorists to escape justice.
WASHINGTON - Lawmakers from both parties voiced support for forceful retaliation against whoever is responsible for terrorist attacks against the United States, even if a foreign country such as Iran was behind them.
"We are the most powerful nation in the world, and the message we should send to Syria and Iran and similar countries is, you mess with us and you will be severely damaged," said House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., on Fox's "News Sunday."
An Associated Press report
Gingrich referred to suspicions that Iran was behind the June 25 bombing that killed 19 U.S. servicemen at Dhahran in Saudi Arabia and to a USA Today report last week that Iran operates terror training camps.
"We do know that Iran supports terrorism around the world … and I think the United States government has an obligation to lay out the case against Iran, convince our allies to go to the U.N. and if necessary to take decisive action," said Gingrich.
He said the United States should rebuild its capacity for "human intelligence" so it could penetrate terrorist groups. Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said on ABC's "This Week With David Brinkley" that if Iran was behind the bombing, "we're going to have to get tough."
And Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, said that if the Dhahran bombing was state-sponsored, "it's an act of war."
White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta said whoever is behind the bombing "will be held accountable."
Speculation about Iran's involvement in the Dhahran attack came Friday from Defense Secretary William Perry, who told National Public Radio that Tehran was "possibly" behind it.
But on Saturday, the secretary toned down his comments, saying he was referring to Iranian statements about intending to target Americans.
Iran reacted angrily to Perry's remarks.
Its foreign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, called on the U.N. to act against the "potentially dangerous consequences of this irresponsible and threatening behavior of the Washington administration," according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency.
Velayati's deputy, Javad Zarif, said on CNN's "Late Edition" that it has become "a rather normal business" to accuse Iran of terrorist attacks.
"Terrorists have a free ride because they believe that if after each incident all the fingers will be pointed at Iran … (they will have) a … breathing space … to escape justice," said Zarif.

Load-Date: August 6, 1996


End of Document