Retired diplomat: Americans should start caring; Somalia: World's poorer nations are a breeding ground for terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
February 28, 2003 Friday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a3
Length: 431 words
Byline: mailto:mbragg@wcinet.comMARY RAE BRAGG  
Body


Ravaged by political upheaval, war and natural disasters for more than 30 years, Somalia is one of Africa's nations that could serve as a breeding ground for terrorists, a retired career diplomat said Thursday in Dubuque.
"As long as we have a Third World with unemployed, poverty-stricken people, these people will remain a recruiting ground for one kind of terrorist or another," said Peter Bridges, American Ambassador to Somalia from 1984-86.
Bridges was in Dubuque to speak on Africa and the War on Terrorism at a dinner meeting of the Dubuque Area Committee on Foreign Relations, held at the Dubuque Golf and Country Club. Prior to his speech, Bridges visited with students at Clarke College and East Dubuque High School.
In an interview with the Telegraph Herald, Bridges said he told the students to be careful in applying the word "war" to America's struggle against terrorists, particularly when nations such as Italy have learned to live with terrorism without succumbing to fear.
Bridges said there are no instantaneous solutions to the situation in Somalia, but there might be hope for its economic future in oil production and tourism, if the nation could become politically stable.
Testing indicates there might be oil in rock formations extending under the Gulf of Aden from Yemen to northern parts of Somalia, Bridges said. And the coastline along the Indian Ocean is known for its beauty.
But in a nation where the average woman has seven children, they cannot hope to provide jobs for everyone without addressing the population boom, Bridges said.
The vast majority of Somalis share a common language, culture and the Muslim religion, but, "Clan warfare is always a problem," Bridges said.
He admitted that people are right when they say terrible things can happen in Africa and it won't affect the United States very much.
"We can afford economically and strategically not to care," about Africa, Bridges said, but he added, "Humanitarian reasons should count for something."
The Organisation (sic) for Economic Cooperation and Development recommends that affluent nations should be spending seven-tenths of 1 percent of their budgets on foreign aid, Bridges said. Currently, the United States spends about one-tenth of 1 percent.
Americans and their government in general don't pay enough attention to Africa or any developing nations, as evidenced by how little geography is taught in school and the lack of media coverage, he said
"There can be great amounts of suffering and if the press isn't there, nobody in Dubuque or Detroit is going to know much about it," Bridges said.

Graphic

 
Mug - Peter Bridges

Load-Date: February 28, 2003


End of Document