RETIRED OFFICER GIVES COMMUNITY ANTI-TERRORISM CLASS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 25, 2004 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 927 words
Byline: Diana Nelson Jones, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
Body


Three years ago, after pulling marathon duty coordinating security at the smoking ruins of the World Trade Center, retired Air Force Lt. Col. Mike Licata found an answer in his angst over what more he might do in the aftermath of 9/11.
 The result was a passive plan to fight terror. He so believed in his idea that he took a leave from teaching high school students, "where my heart lies," he said, to convince others.
 A native of Queens, N.Y., who spent 20 years in the military, part of it in the Middle East, the 46-year-old Licata developed a curriculum and a company, the Community Anti-terrorism Training Institute. During a recent stop in Pittsburgh, he trained 65 people, including police officers, community activists and public officials, to be "cat eyes" in their neighborhoods and on the job.
The goal is to teach people to be more vigilant in their communities -- not as spies or by overreacting, Licata said, but by knowing instinctively when something is truly amiss rather than just quirky or unusual.
 "It dawned on me that, if there are terrorist cells in the United States," he said, "what if we had cells of good people?"
 Neighborhood leaders take this idea to their streets every day. To spot the suspicious in your neighborhood, you have to know your neighborhood and your neighbors. Being alert, noticing what's going on, talking to one another and having strong contacts with police help neighbors thwart crimes; it's what neighborhood block watches are all about.
 Licata, adamant that political bias stay out of the training, suggested a few suspicious situations they might look for.
 A red flag may go up if a neighbor who is overly secretive gets visitors bearing packages at odd times. If you had a chance to glance into that neighbor's apartment and saw there was no furniture but what looked like lab equipment, and if you glanced in as the landlord who always got that person's rent as cash, a call to local police and the FBI may not be rash.
 He advises citizens to know what the badge of the police in their city looks like. Fake police, fake clergy and fake utility workers are some of the ruses lookouts for terror cells might use, he said.
 Watch also for false fronts on ATMs; those contain the cameras of thieves. Some such scams have been known to support terrorist operations, he said.
 Dave Farley, the city of Pittsburgh's project director of Operation Weed and Seed, was promoting the dovetailing of community activism and homeland security when he learned about the C.A.T. Eyes program, which has worked with 1,000 agencies in the mid-Atlantic states. As a result, a federal Operation Weed and Seed grant has paid for Licata's training of public and nonprofit agencies. Others have to pay a fee that depends on the scope of the job, he said.
 Licata will train Weed and Seed teams locally through next spring here, as well as local members of the U.S. Coast Guard, Farley said.
 Licata has gotten no response from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in Washington or on the state level in New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania to his program: "We tried for the longest time to give it away [to them]," he said.
 Calls to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security went unanswered. Its Web site offers step-by-step anti-terror procedures. State offices of DHS also provide Web site advice to citizens.
 During the four-hour session at the Federal Building, Downtown, Licata emphasized that the typical image of a terrorist as Muslim is limited: "There's more to terrorism than 9/11," he said, citing domestic terrorists like the Ku Klux Klan, neo-Nazis and ideologues who attack abortion clinics and animal-testing laboratories.
 "After 9/11, I was scared the Arab-American community would be profiled," said Licata. "I've met so many nice friendly Arab people both in and out of the U.S. I've worked side by side with the Kuwaiti and Omani air force. I've had lots of Muslim people eating with me and enjoying my company and me enjoying theirs.
 "The guy who helped me get [CATI] set up, a computer guy, is Lebanese. He said, 'I escaped terror in Lebanon. Where am I going to run to now? I'm in America.' "
 It's that kind of fear that some workshop participants said is worrisome on a different level.
 Randy Strothman, a consultant to commercial revitalization efforts in Bloomfield, the Strip District, Mount Washington and Squirrel Hill, referred to "today's fear-laden America" as a vehicle for possible overreaction. The C.A.T. Eyes presentation, he said, was "fairly thoughtful … and less politically motivated than I expected. But I worry about neighbors turning in other neighbors.
 "Even if there is some cause for suspicion, does the person who is turned in automatically become a victim of the Homeland Security system? Are they put on a suspicion list, which, for example, prevents them from getting on their next flight?"
 Edward Pugh, executive assistant to state Sen. Jack Wagner, D-Beechview, took the training, in part to share with his neighborhood's block watch in Schenley Heights.
 "The information is elemental at this point," he said, "but I see great potential." Training alone won't help fight terror, however.
 "Repeating what you've learned is only the first step. People have to recognize their responsibility to be more engaged" with people in their community, starting with the simple decency of saying hello or making eye contact, he said. "From that open genuineness with which you deal with others, you can raise the bar."
For more information about the C.A.T. Eyes program, see www.cateyesprogram.com. 

Notes

Diana Nelson Jones can be reached at djones@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1626.  

Load-Date: October 30, 2004


End of Document