Retired firefighter plans to continue learning; Robert Young will train, teach, consult in retirement. BEAVERCREEK TWP./KETTERING
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 12, 2015 Thursday


Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2015 Cox Ohio Publishing. 
Section: SOUTH DAYTON; Pg. OZSD6
Length: 614 words
Byline: Diana Blowers Contributing Writer
Body


Robert Young learned early that “if you were going to be good at something, you need the training and education to do it.”
“I was taught by my parents that if you are going to do something ... be the best at it that you can be,” said Young, who retired in August as a lieutenant with the Beaver-creek Twp. Fire Department after 34 years of service. For the first 20 years he was also a volunteer firefighter/paramedic with Kettering Fire Department. 
Throughout his career Young continued his education and has numerous awards and honors to prove that he did his best. 
Not only was he a firefighter and paramedic but also he is an educator and a specialist in the fields of hazardous materials and weapons of mass destruction. 
The 1977 Kettering Fairmont West High School graduate knew by age 10 he wanted to be a firefighter and paramedic. 
“When I turned 18 years old I became a volunteer firefighter with the city of Kettering and found out that I loved the fire service and giving back to the public. I started Sinclair (Community College) that fall and eventually graduated with a degree in fire science technology.” 
He earned several certifications from the Ohio Fire Academy, including firefighter, fire instructor and hazardous materials technician. He later became an adjunct instructor for the Ohio Fire Academy. 
He earned his paramedic certification from Good Samaritan Hospital and graduated from the Cleveland State University’s Instructor Program. Young continues, in retirement, to teach part-time for Cleveland State University’s Center for Domestic Preparedness. 
The Kettering resident completed the Educational Methodology Program and the Fire Officers Leadership Program at the National Fire Academy. 
He earned a Weapons of Mass Destruction Technician certificate from FEMA’s Center for Domestic Preparedness and completed the United States Department of Homeland Security’s Advanced Incident Command Systems program. 
Young has been a member of the Dayton Regional Hazmat Team since it was formed in 1982 by Montgomery and Greene County fire departments. In retirement he serves on it in an advisory capacity. 
When the Hazmat team was formed there wasn’t a lot of organized training for emergency hazmat response. 
“Quite a few emergency responders were dying or getting injured at these incidents because of lack of knowledge,” he said, noting the training is important for protecting the public and the environment. 
“From 1995 to 1999, the world started seeing more acts of terrorism overseas and a few acts of terrorism on U.S. soil. It appeared very quickly that the methods of terrorism involved flammable, explosive, chemical, biological and radioactive materials, which all fit under the hazardous materials environment,” he said. 
“I have always tried to advance my knowledge, not just for hazardous materials response, but in every facet of the fire service,” he said, noting that fire service has changed over the years. 
“Fire service has turned into emergency services, which encompasses not just fire and rescue operations, but also advanced emergency medical services, hazardous materials response, multiple rescue disciplines, terrorism responses, public education, counselors and white-collar managers,” he said. 
Through it all, it has been a job that he loves and he plans to continue learning “so I can be the best at what I do.” 
He will continue in the field as a senior partner in Miami Valley Safety Systems, which does training, education and consulting for private chemical companies, industrial facilities and venders. The company specializes in training for Federal OSHA Regulations and Compliance. 
Contact this contributing 
writer at dsb@donet.com

Graphic

 
CONTRIBUTED PHOTOS" >Lt. Robert Young retired in August after 34 years with the Beavercreek Twp. Fire Department.Retired Deputy Chief Dana Brewer (left) presents retiring Beavercreek Twp. Fire Department Lt. Robert Young with a flag that flew over the fire station on his last day on the job.

Load-Date: November 30, 2023


End of Document