Retired Navy admiral invited to campus
The News: Murray State University
February 13, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 515 words
Body


Emily Shepherd
Contributing Writer
eshepherd2@murraystate.edu
Murray State's Presidential Lecture Series invited Admiral William McRaven to speak about his career and his connection to the University at Lovett Auditorium at 7:30 p.m. on Thursday, Feb. 13. 
McRaven will speak of his unique connection through his father to the University, which will be followed by a Q&A session.
McRaven is a retired U.S. Navy four-star admiral and the former chancellor of the University of Texas. During his time in the military, he commanded special operations forces at every level, eventually taking charge of the U.S. Special Operations Command. His career included combat during Desert Storm and both the Iraq and Afghanistan wars.
Brian Clardy, history professor, said McRaven's lecture will be significant because students will hear about the admiral's experiences in countering terrorism.
The speakers of the Presidential Lecture series are letting students know they too are global citizens and should have a vested interest in the outcome of the war on terror and any other mention of foreign policy in the United States.
McRaven commanded the troops that captured Saddam Hussein and rescued Captain Richard Phillips. McRaven is also credited with leading the Osama bin Laden mission in 2011.
Clardy said he clearly remembers the fear generated from first the terrorist attacks and how Osama bin Laden projected fear throughout the world.
McRaven has been recognized for his leadership so many times that in 2011 he was the first runner-up for TIME magazine's Person of the Year.
"When the story about the early part of the 21st century is written, and the story is written about how the United States responded to terrorism, Admiral McRaven is going to be a huge part of that chapter," Clardy said.
In 2015, the Admiral received the Intrepid Freedom Award for his distinguished service in defending the values of democracy.
"[Admiral McRaven] is a true American Patriot and he has a devout love for this country...I think the one thing we should be above all is grateful," Clardy said. "I thank a Veteran every chance I get."
William McRaven's father, Colonel Claude "Mac" McRaven, was a 1941 alumnus and a Murray State Athletics Hall of Fame football player and track star, as well as a decorated World War II fighter pilot.
"My father was so proud to have attended the school and always talked longingly about the Bluegrass State," McRaven said. "His life, and therefore my life, were shaped in so many ways by what he learned and who he met at Murray."
McRaven's father was inducted into the Murray State Athletics Hall of Fame in 1975. As a collegian, Claude scored nine touchdowns while gaining Honorable Mention Little All-America honors, as well as selections on the All-Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association and All-Kentucky Intercollegiate Athletic Conference teams in 1938.
McRaven has earned 31 badges of honor and written three books detailing the life lessons he and his men learned while overseas.
Clardy said the lecture will focus on McRaven's career and his service to the country.
Tweet

Load-Date: February 13, 2020


End of Document