Return Sen. Collins
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
May 16, 2008 Friday
All Editions


Copyright 2008 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A12
Length: 301 words
Body


This fall I'll cast my vote to re-elect Sen. Susan Collins. She has built a reputation as an independent-minded centrist who works effectively with both political parties to get the job done. In keeping with Maine tradition Susan Collins has resisted intense political pressure to follow the party line. Instead she has remained independent and has focused her attention on serving the best interests of Maine and its people.
Sen. Collins doesn't overpromise, and doesn't say what she thinks I want to hear just to get my vote. It would be easy, for example, to hold a press conference at a local gas station and whip up the crowd by suggesting our energy troubles are the result of price fixing, manipulation, rampant speculation and other unscrupulous behavior. Instead, her 10-point energy plan is an intelligent and practical proposal to address our short-term and long-term energy troubles.
She has refused to support President Bush's "stay-the-course" approach to the war in Iraq. She has also refused to support the "cut and run" approach proposed by her critics. We want the troops brought home, but done in a way that will minimize the loss of American lives, stabilize the region and reduce the spread of terrorism. Sen. Collins' 2007 proposal to make Iraq responsible for its own security is another intelligent and practical proposal to address these short-term and long-term goals. The proposal is supported by Senate Republicans and Democrats and would change the role of the U.S. military from combat to training, support and anti-terrorism.
Her independent and practical nature combined with her experience on the Senate Armed Services Committee and the Committee for Homeland Security makes her uniquely qualified to find common ground on these tough national security issues.
Lynn White
Hampden

Load-Date: May 16, 2008


End of Document