Revived Push for Terrorism Insurance Bill
The American Banker
June 14, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 American Banker, Inc.
Section: MORTGAGES; Pg. 11
Length: 988 words
Byline: BY ROBERT JULAVITS
Body


The news this week of a supposed plot to build a so-called dirty bomb has heightened concern about the lack of terrorism insurance and has led to a renewed push for Senate action.
After months of disagreement and foot-dragging, the chamber finally began debating an insurance bill Thursday. (See related story below.)
Commercial lenders and other real estate professionals say the problem has been steadily worsening as it becomes harder to secure financing and as existing properties lose their insurance one by one.
They also say that if the government does not fill the void created when insurers stopped offering coverage after Sept. 11, the recovery in commercial real estate -- as well as in the general economy -- will be slowed considerably.
For example, a recent study by the Bond Market Association said that more than $7 billion of commercial mortgage loans have been put on hold or canceled because of the expense and risk to property owners.
And both Moody's Investors Service and Fitch Inc. warned of potential downgrades on more than $9 billion of commercial mortgage-backed securities if the lack of insurance persists.
"It's more important than ever to get legislation passed," said Malcolm Griggs, a senior vice president and the director of risk policy for Wachovia Corp. "A federal backstop would introduce a level of rationality into the market so insurance companies could price for that risk, which they can't do today."
Mr. Griggs pointed out that a dirty bomb, which like a nuclear bomb or a nuclear plant meltdown is not covered by any private insurance, could render "several square blocks" unusable for decades. That would result in a near-total loss for the property owners, the holders of commercial mortgage-backeds, and the lenders that funded the affected building, he said.
The report Monday of the arrest of a man involved in the plot "brought home that this is not just an academic fear that people have," Mr. Griggs said. "It's a real threat."
Julie Rochman, the senior vice president of public affairs for the American Insurance Association, said that too many view the issue as about insurance. Rather, she said, the country's economic vitality is at stake.
The debate is about business in the United States and "our ability to recover" from an attack, Ms. Rochman said. She said that all the companies affected by Sept. 11 had been covered by terrorism insurance, and as a result the economy rebounded fairly well.
"If we are hit again -- and we're being told on a daily basis that something is coming -- the chances of us bouncing back … are substantially reduced because in all likelihood the next victims won't be adequately insured," Ms. Rochman said.
Clifton E. Rodgers, a senior vice president at the Real Estate Roundtable, agreed, and said that the process of commercial finance is threatened.
"Our whole method of financing assets is based on the collateral being insured," Mr. Rodgers said. A federal terrorism insurance bill is critical, he said, "because we could see liquidity -- not only to real estate but to a broad range of sectors that have uninsured collateral -- be affected by a lack of coverage."
The mechanisms that have put in place over the years to finance assets are dependent on insurance protecting the "ultimate value of the collateral," Mr. Rodgers said. Whether you are a bondholder or a bank, he added, "once you have the collateral unprotected, you have a heightened risk to anyone holding those loans."
Ms. Rochman of the AIA said, "You're not going to see bricks falling off of buildings, but you'll see bricks lying around that aren't being used." Not only are loans not being made, she said, but capital is being committed to managing risk through self-insurance -- money that could be spent "on more productive investments" that would create jobs and new business.
Approval of the legislation is "the top priority" among the commercial lenders represented by the Mortgage Bankers Association, said Kurt Pfotenhauer, the group's senior vice president of government affairs. "Sources of funding, particulalry those coming from the capitol markets will be squeezed, without Senate action on terrorism insurance."
Raymond G. Torto, a principal and managing director of Torto Wheaton Research, the econometric forecasting arm of CB Richard Ellis, said that even though most of the evidence of problems is still anecdotal, the government has to step in to reassure the commercial lending and real estate markets.
Mr. Torto and Ms. Rochman said that people still consider terrorism in terms of planes flying into skyscrapers but pointed out that the Florida building where anthrax was found is still not open for business.
"If we're only thinking about tall buildings in big cities, we're missing the point," Ms. Rochman said. Though both could be targets again, she added, "we don't know what kind of event is going to happen going forward."
Right now there is virtually no coverage for nuclear, biological, and chemical attacks, she said. People must begin to think about terrorism more "horizontally," she said, such as someone tampering with the water or food supply. "The liability and losses associated with that attack could be huge. Somebody has to pay all those losses."
Mr. Torto said that the government should not enter the insurance market indefinitely but include a sunset provision in the legislation. "We do need the government to step in and help on this problem in the short run, but I don't think we need to institutionalize it. We've got to keep open the option for the market to participate."
He said the most important function of the government in its role as the insurer of last resort would be to add psychological support to markets badly in need of it.
"This is not a market-driven issue," Mr. Torto said. "Terrorism is about fear. So as fear grows, this issue will grow."
 
Copyright c 2002 Thomson Media. All Rights Reserved. http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Griggs

Load-Date: June 13, 2002


End of Document