Review/Opera;
From an Episode of Terrorism, Adams's 'Death of Klinghoffer'
The New York Times
March 21, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Cultural Desk
Section: Section C;; Section C; Page 17; Column 2; Cultural Desk; Column 2;; Review
Length: 1037 words
Byline: By JOHN ROCKWELL, Special to The New York Times

By JOHN ROCKWELL, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: BRUSSELS, March 20
Body


Like "Nixon in China" but in more incendiary fashion, "The Death of Kling hoffer" transmutes contemporary history into operatic poetry. Unlike the earlier work by the team of John Adams, composer; Alice Goodman, librettist; Peter Sellars, director, and Mark Morris, choreographer, the new opera, which received its world premiere Tuesday night at the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie, has problems that need refinement. But the potential for eventual triumph is there.
The premiere attracted enormous attention. The audience was overflowing with critics -- they filled the foyer for an intermission reception, glowering at one another suspiciously -- from seemingly every corner of the Western world and, perhaps, the Middle Eastern world as well. And the work is guaranteed a wider public, since it was co-commissioned by five other opera companies. After seven performances here through April 2, it will travel over the next year to Lyons, France; Brooklyn (the American premiere is scheduled for Sept. 5 at the Brooklyn Academy of Music); Los Angeles; San Francisco, and Glyndebourne, England (or London under Glyndebourne auspices).
The subject of "The Death of Klinghoffer" is the seizure of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro in October 1985 by four Palestinian terrorists and the murder of a wheelchair-bound American Jew, Leon Kling hoffer.
The hatreds of Jews and Palestinians surface here and there, sometimes violently. But the opera as a whole, laid out in two acts of approximately 80 minutes each, deliberately cools passions into meditations from afar.
The action, which alternates choruses and solo declamations, sets the events into a cosmic context inspired by Greek tragedy, Bach's Passions and large-scale dance-dramas of the Orient. The chorus sings of ancient injustices in biblical imagery, of night and sand and heat, while the narratives combine recollection, interpretation and, only occasionally, present-tense immediacy.
In his music, sympathetically conducted Tuesday night by Kent Nagano, Mr. Adams has long since transcended Steve Reich-style Minimalist mannerisms. Such devices remain, but they are incorporated into a fabric that also encompasses neo-Romantic lyricism and sometimes pointed harmonic acerbity. The solo narrations, like those of most modern operas, cede principal melodic interest to the instruments. But they possess an introspective beauty of their own, particularly when enunciated by such sensitive singers as James Maddalena (the Captain), Sanford Sylvan (Klinghoffer) and Sheila Nadler (Marilyn Klinghoffer).
More unusual in Mr. Adams's score is his blend of conventional and electronic instruments and the amplification of all the singers and instruments, with microphones and loudspeakers embedded in the set and the balances constantly modified by the sound engineer, Jonathan Deans. At its best, this creates fascinating new sound-colors and invests the climaxes with powerful energy. At its worst, it muddles and harshens the texture.
After all the expectations, the actual production took a considerable time to gather momentum. The prologue and first act are predominantly contemplative, except for a more animated, if claustrophobically staged and mushily enunciated, scene of everyday life with the Klinghoffers' friends in New Jersey. What was intended as meditative and dreamy turns static and dreary. Everything looked and sounded unsure, from the cluttered constructivism of George Tsypin's unit set, steel girders and pipes ascending on high, to James F. Ingalls's glaring lighting to Dunya Ramicova's stubbornly workaday costumes.
Mr. Sellars, his head as usual buzzing with half-realized ideas, sought to reinforce the deliberate obfuscation of identity in Ms. Goodman's text, in which the laments of the Palestinians and Jews sound poignantly alike. But the result, in the first act, too often reduced everything to a faceless bustle.
Mr. Morris's choreography looked incongruously formalistic: neat little rows of dancers doing their balletic turns with little sense of emotional connection to the drama.
Mr. Adams's music, too, stuck too long in a bland lyrical mode, with the Monnaie chorus struggling but failing to articulate the English words clearly and the stage bereft of supertitles. Ms. Goodman reportedly opposes the use of titles, but their absence meant that her beautiful words were simply lost. If the first act was meant as lowering clouds, there were too many clouds and they lowered too long.
The second act, however, restored one's faith in this team's creative capabilities -- especially everything from Scene 2, itself subtitled "The Death of Klinghoffer," to the opera's end. Here, everything cohered into powerful drama. The use of rock-style concert projections, expanding every intimate expression on the protagonists' faces, enhanced the already vivid acting of Mr. Sylvan and of Eugene Perry and Thomas Hammons as two of the terrorists. (Other singers, like nearly all the principals taking two roles each, were Stephanie Friedman, Thomas Young and Janice Felty.)
Most of the soloists' words, more than those of the chorus, came across clearly and movingly. The use of dancer-doubles by Mr. Morris and Mr. Sellars (where the work of one stopped and the other began was vague, to the production's benefit) became suddenly potent, as did Mr. Sellars's use of ritualized gesture and movement. The opera attained its finest depths of feeling in the two final scenes for Mrs. Klinghoffer -- the first in which she heartbreakingly doesn't yet know that her husband has been shot and the second a bitter denunciation of what she sees as the Captain's complicity -- and Kling hoffer's farewell, an astonishing "aria of the fallen body" set in the score as a gymnopedie, or slow, hypnotic dance.
All is hardly lost for the first act, leaving the hope that the entire opera can succeed as potently as its final scenes. The joint commissioning process may form a progression akin to workshop development, . with the production and perhaps even the score undergoing tightening and focusing along the way. Last night's premiere brought warm, friendly but curiously curtailed applause. In a more pointed production, that applause could turn into ovations.

Graphic

 
Photo: Thomas Hammons, left and rear (in screen projection), in a scene from "The Death of Klinghoffer." (Martha Swope/"The Death of Klinghoffer")

Load-Date: March 21, 1991


End of Document