Review U.S. border security
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
December 31, 1999, Friday


Copyright 1999 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; EDITORIALS
Length: 425 words
Body


Among unsettling events connected with the beginning of the year 2000 is the threat of terrorist strikes on Americans at home or abroad. The nation is especially on alert following recent arrests at the Canadian border of two suspects linked to international terrorism and each other.
U.S. Customs agents arrested Ahmed Ressam after he entered Washington state. They charged him with trying smuggle explosives and timing devices from Canada. He is a suspected Algerian extremist who has lived in Montreal since 1994.
#CANADA.BRU31#
Five days later, Customs officials in Vermont apprehended Lucia Garofalo, a Montreal resident, after sniffer dogs seemed to detect traces of explosives in her car. Federal prosecutors say Ressam and Garofalo are members of the same cell of an Algerian terrorist organization.
This is hardly the first time terrorists have been intercepted trying to enter the United States from Canada. Since 1995, at least 14 terrorists have crossed the border.
Individuals and groups in Canada have been connected directly or indirectly with the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, suicide bombings in Israel, assassinations in India, the murder of tourists in Egypt and the 1996 truck bombing of a U.S. military base in Saudi Arabia.
"The largely untold truth is that Canada and terrorism do go together," David Harris, a former high-ranking officer in the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, told a U.S. congressional committee earlier this year.
One of the major problems with U.S.-Canadian security is the length of the world's longest nonmilitarized frontier. Outside official checkpoints lie hundreds of remote miles which are not always monitored.
Canadians complain that terrorists move both ways. Members of right-wing American militias and foreign extremists have crossed into Canada from the United States.
Americans have immediate reasons to question terrorist forays into this country, especially because we have kept that border as open as possible all these years. By comparison to the highly guarded Mexican border, the Canadian border is a sieve.
After the current concern about potential millennium-related terrorism passes, Congress would do well to conduct a more thorough investigation of the safety of the U.S.-Canadian border.
Further security steps that can be taken without unduly harming the political and economic relationship of the two countries should be taken. Both the United States and Canada are united against terrorists and should cooperate to restrict their movements across the border and inside the nations.

Load-Date: January 3, 2000


End of Document