Review: Cheadle shines in thought-provoking, tension-filled thriller
The Salt Lake Tribune
August 27, 2008 Wednesday


Copyright 2008 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: ENTERTAINMENT; Reviews; Features
Length: 371 words
Byline: By Sean P. Means The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


"Traitor" is a political thriller that builds tension with a slow, steady simmer - and a couple of crucial twists - while it lectures a bit nakedly about the pitfalls of the U.S. battle against terrorism.
Don Cheadle, giving his most thoughtful performance since "Hotel Rwanda," stars as Samir Horn, a Sudanese-born, Chicago-educated Muslim. When we meet the adult Samir, he's dealing explosives to some shadowy characters in Yemen when soldiers, aided by a pair of FBI agents working way outside their jurisdiction, bust up the deal. Samir lands in a Yemeni prison, where he becomes friends with Omar (Sa d Taghmaoui), a well-connected jihadist.
After a prison break and much conspiring, Omar brings Samir into the highest ranks of an Al-Qaida-like terrorist ring that's planning something big somewhere in the United States. Meanwhile, the FBI agents, Clayton (Guy Pearce) and Archer (Neal McDonough), are tracking Samir's movements while trying to get help from other agencies - including a CIA official (Jeff Daniels) with something up his sleeve.
The script - written by director Jeffrey Nachmanoff (who wrote the global warming thriller "The Day After Tomorrow"), based on an idea pitched by Steve Martin, of all people - is split between "24"-like procedural stuff and Samir's internal struggle to justify his actions. Cheadle particularly shines in these moments of soul-searching, as Samir tries to balance his respect for Omar, his belief in peaceful Islam and his duty (for reasons revealed in one of the film's plot twists).
The talk gets needlessly preachy, particularly when Clayton - easily the most culturally sensitive FBI agent ever - talks about Islam and seeking a more balanced way to battle terrorism. But the mix of high-minded politics and slowly ratcheting tension pays off as "Traitor" uses brainpower to generate thrills.
Sean P. Means can be reached at movies@sltrib.com or 801-257-8602. Send comments about this review to livingeditor@ sltrib.com.
'Traitor'
Where » Theaters everywhere.
When » Now open.
Rating » PG-13 for intense violent sequences, thematic material and brief language.
Running time » 114 minutes.
Bottom line » Don Cheadle's soulful performance fuels this tension-building terrorist thriller.

Load-Date: August 28, 2008


End of Document