REWORKED ANTI-TERRORISM BILL EASILY CLEARS SENATE
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
April 18, 1996, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 704 words
Byline: DAVID JACKSON DALLAS MORNING NEWS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate overwhelmingly approved a compromise anti-terrorism bill Wednesday despite Democratic criticism that it won't do enough to avert domestic attacks like the Oklahoma City bombing.
The vote was 91-8. (Sen. Russ Feingold, D-Wis., voted against the bill, while Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., supported it.) The measure makes it easier to deport foreigners suspected of terrorism and gives the FBI $  468 million for counterterrorism work.
The measure now goes to the House, which held up similar legislation for nine months. Some House members said a previous Senate version gave federal agents too many new wiretapping powers.
The Senate reluctantly agreed to keep those powers out of the final bill, which the House is also expected to approve. Senators said they wanted to pass something before Friday's first anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing, the worst terrorist act in the nation's history.
''On behalf of the families of the 168 victims, those who lost their lives in the Murrah federal office building, I appeal to you to pass this bill,'' said Sen. James Inhofe, R-Okla.
Sen. Don Nickles, R-Okla., said: ''This bill may not be perfect, but it is good legislation.''
President Clinton, who criticized the House-Senate conference committee bill as too weak, has not declared whether he will sign it into law. But aides have indicated Clinton will sign the compromise measure, calling it better than nothing.
The bill also permits a closed-circuit telecast of the Oklahoma City bombing trial, which has been moved to Denver. Supporters said the viewing would be restricted to survivors and relatives of victims.
''They want to be able to view the trial and not have to move their families to Denver,'' Nickles said.
During the Senate debate Wednesday, Democrats tried to send the bill back to the conference committee to restore wiretapping and other powers that were removed. Democrats also protested a provision that limits the legal appeals of death-row inmates, as well as another section that creates a commission to study federal law enforcement.
''I hope...that we will correct the mistakes that we made here today,'' said Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., who voted for the bill after leading efforts to change it.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said any changes to the conference committee's work would provoke the House into rejecting the anti-terrorism bill outright.
''It comes down to whether we want a bill or we don't,'' Hatch said at one point.
One debate revolved around ''multipoint wiretaps,'' which the Senate included in an initial bill it approved in June. Multipoint wiretaps would give federal agents the power to target specific suspects rather than a particular phone. The FBI has complained that, under current laws, suspects can easily evade wiretaps by switching phones, all too easy to do in the cellular age.
''It is the single most important issue that we are not putting in this bill,'' said Biden.
But during the past year, groups including the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Rifle Association argued that the government already has enough power to investigate people. They said the government might use new powers to harass unpopular but law-abiding groups, including gun owners.
Sen. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn., blamed the weaker bill on a ''strange, left-right marriage of fear...of the government.'' Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., said NRA pressure forced many Republican House members to favor the weaker anti-terrorism bill they passed last month.
''After the Senate passed a tough, effective terrorism bill, the NRA stepped in and prevented House action for months,'' Kennedy said. ''Then the NRA supporters in the House stripped the bill of key provisions to strengthen federal law enforcement.''
Tanya Metaksa, executive director of the NRA's Institute For Legislative Action, said this week her organization had worked to protect the constitutional rights of all Americans. Metaksa said the current bill was an effective compromise, and the NRA had no objections to it.
Hatch said he personally supported the new wiretapping powers, but too many of his Republican colleagues in the House had legitimate worries about excessive law enforcement power.

Load-Date: April 19, 1996


End of Document