Rice defends Bush on terrorism policy;
'This country simply was not on a war footing.'
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 9, 2004 Friday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 1095 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- In a historic public appearance before the independent commission investigating the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on America, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice strongly defended the Bush administration's policies and said "there was no silver bullet that could have prevented the 9/11 attacks."
Questioned sharply at times, Rice maintained her composure and never spoke harshly of Richard Clarke, her former chief counterterrorism expert, who criticized her and the White House in testimony before the same panel and in his book.
Responding to charges that the White House did not sufficiently address the danger of terrorism before the attacks on New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon that claimed about 3,000 lives, Rice said President Bush "understood the threat and he understood its importance."
The president wanted an approach that would eliminate the threat from Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network, which the United States holds responsible for the Sept. 11 disaster and earlier attacks on U.S. embassies in Africa, the USS Cole and a 1993 bombing at the World Trade Center.
AJC
"He told me he was 'tired of swatting flies,' " Rice said of the president.
An Aug. 6, 2001, memo to the president that said bin Laden wanted to strike inside the United States had come in response to Bush's questions, and was not a threat report, Rice said of the daily briefing memo.
Seated alone at a witness table covered in red cloth, Rice spoke for almost three hours. Dozens of cameras clicked and whirred as she raised her right hand and swore to tell the truth. Relatives of victims of the Sept. 11 attacks were seated in the front of the standing-room-only crowd.
Systematic problems
Rice emphasized the difficulty of combating terrorism inside the United States before the catastrophic attacks, because of legal restrictions and institutional forces that kept the FBI and CIA from sharing information.
"In looking back, I believe that the absence of light, so to speak, on what was going on inside the country --- the inability to connect the dots --- was really structural," she said.
The Bush administration had begun to address those problems, she said, but had not been in office long enough to put many changes into place. "We made them almost immediately after Sept. 11," Rice said.
Rice revealed little beyond what she previously had said in news interviews. And Commissioner John Lehman noted after the hearing that he and his nine fellow commissioners did not learn anything from her testimony, since they had spoken to her earlier in private for hours.
But "the American people needed to hear her," Lehman said.
Vice Chairman Lee Hamilton, a former Democratic congressman from Indiana, called Rice's appearance an "extraordinary occasion."
The principle of executive privilege traditionally keeps presidential advisers from testifying before Congress and its appointed bodies. The White House agreed to let Rice appear only after the commission agreed that doing so would not set any precedent.
Hamilton said he appreciated the tone of Rice's statement. "She was not in any way vindictive. She was constructive, it was factual, and I think it certainly advanced the understanding of the commission of the facts of the period that we're interested in," Hamilton told reporters afterward.
One contentious exchange
One heated exchange came when Richard Ben-Veniste questioned Rice about the August memo to Bush on al-Qaida. Known as the President's Daily Brief, it came during a period of heightened concern over possible terror attacks.
Rice told Ben-Veniste that she could not recall whether she had told Bush about the existence of al-Qaida cells in the United States and that she believed the FBI was pursuing those operatives.
"Isn't it a fact, Dr. Rice, that the Aug. 6 PDB warned against possible attacks in this country? And I ask you whether you recall the title of that PDB," Ben-Veniste, a former Watergate prosecutor, asked.
"I believe the title was 'Bin Laden Determined to Attack Inside the United States,' " she replied.
Rice disputed Ben-Veniste's characterization of the brief. It was not a warning but a "historical memo" prepared by the CIA in response to Bush's questions about al-Qaida, she said, and contained no specifics about attack plans.
The document is classified, and portions were declassified for the commissioners. Commission Chairman Thomas Kean, former Republican governor of New Jersey, called on the White House to declassify and release the full brief "because we feel it is important that the American people get a chance to see it."
The White House is considering declassifying the memo, a senior administration official said Thursday evening.
The 10-member National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States has a broad mandate to investigate and make recommendations. The commissioners are evenly split between Democrats and Republicans.
More than 1,000 people have been questioned in private sessions and public hearings. On Thursday, the commission said it met with former President Bill Clinton for more than three hours. "The commission found the former president forthcoming and responsive to its questions," according to a commission statement.
The next hearings are Tuesday and Wednesday on the topics of law enforcement and intelligence. The commission's report is due in July.
Warnings not explicit
In a 10-page opening statement, Rice said nearly all of the threat reports in the spring and summer of 2001 addressed al-Qaida actions outside the United States. Most of it, she said, was vague.
Rice read several examples of the "chatter" picked up in that period. One report referred to "unbelievable news coming in weeks," another said there would be "a very, very, very, very big uproar," while another said there would be attacks in the near future.
"Troubling, yes," Rice said. "But they don't tell us when, they don't tell us where, they don't tell us who and they don't tell us how."
She said the Bush administration was working to deal with terrorism in a concerted way. To that end, she said, she had brought in experts on Afghanistan, where the extreme Islamic Taliban ruled and sheltered al-Qaida, and on Pakistan, whose government was supporting the Taliban.
"America's al-Qaida policy wasn't working because our Afghanistan policy wasn't working. And our Afghanistan policy wasn't working because our Pakistan policy wasn't working," Rice said. "We recognized that America's counterterrorism policy had to be connected to our regional strategies and to our overall foreign policy."

Graphic

 
Photo: An audience that included people who lost loved ones on Sept. 11, 2001, listened Thursday to Condoleezza Rice's historic testimony. / KATIE McMAHON / Cox Washington Bureau; Photo: Condoleezza Rice / STEPHEN CROWLEY / New York Times; Photo: National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice testifies before the 9/11 Commission, calmly but emphatically rebutting critics. / KATIE McMAHON / Cox Washington Bureau; Graphic: WHAT SHE SAID
Q: So when Mr. [Richard] Clarke writes that the president pushed him to find a link between Iraq and the attack, is that right? Was the president trying to twist the facts for an Iraqi war, or was he just puzzled about what was behind this attack?
A: ". . . it's not surprising that the president would say, 'What about Iraq,' given our hostile relationship with Iraq. And I'm quite certain that the president never pushed anybody to twist the facts."
Q: Why didn't we respond to the [bombing of the USS] Cole? . . . Why didn't we swat that fly?
A: "We simply believed that the best approach was to put in place a plan that was going to eliminate this threat, not respond to an attack. . . ."
ON AJC.COM
  
* Read the full text of Rice's testimony before the commission.

Load-Date: April 9, 2004


End of Document