Rice testimony could help, hurt Bush campaign Security adviser will field questions from panel this week Analysis
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 6, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 474 words
Byline: KEN FIREMAN NEWSDAY
Body


WASHINGTON - National security adviser Condoleezza Rice's testimony to the 9/11 Commission this week will be a moment of both opportunity and risk for a Bush administration seeking to recapture the high political ground on the issue of terrorism.
White House aides hope Rice's high-profile appearance will reverse a slide in President Bush's approval ratings on terrorism, an issue central to his case for re-election.
Several recent polls have recorded this decline in the wake of former White House adviser Richard Clarke's charges that Bush did not treat terrorism as an urgent problem before Sept. 11 and then weakened the anti-terror campaign by invading Iraq.
The administration has also been plagued by an embarrassing series of policy reversals on issues ranging from the initial creation of the 9/11 commission, its request for a two-month extension to deliver its final report and whether to allow Rice to testify publicly and under oath. In each case Bush opposed the move only to relent under intense political pressure.
The White House was forced into another about-face Friday when it agreed to allow the commission to review Clinton administration documents on terrorism it had initially withheld from the panel.
Administration supporters expect Rice to be a highly effective witness in rebutting Clarke's accusations.
"The woman oozes expertise and sincerity," said former Republican National Chairman Rich Bond. "I'm glad the White House came around to allow her to say publicly what she's already told the commission privately. The old adage is, 'Get it out, get it out, get it out.' If the Democrats want to slap around an African-American woman, let them try."
But Rice can also expect close questioning - and perhaps not only from Democrats - over conflicts between her previous statements and records the panel has examined or testimony from other witnesses.
"The question is where there are differences, and we've got to explore those differences," said commission Chairman Thomas Kean, a Republican, last week. "We've got to try and clear up those discrepancies as best we can. Some of those questions may be important to the fact-finding of our report."
Kean also made it clear that, in the wake of Clarke's testimony, Rice would face many questions on the Bush administration's pre-9/11 counter-terrorism policies and what was and wasn't done to implement them.
That has the potential to refocus attention on Clarke's charges at a time when Bush would very much like voters to be thinking about other things, such as last week's better-than-expected job growth numbers.
Bush and his advisers certainly understood that risk before acceding to Rice's testimony. They concluded that they had no real choice, given the mounting demands for her to appear - and the central role that Bush's handling of terrorism plays in his campaign.

Load-Date: April 7, 2004


End of Document