Rice Is Challenged in Europe Over Secret Prisons - Correction Appended
The New York Times
December 7, 2005 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1278 words
Byline: By JOEL BRINKLEY
Dateline: BUCHAREST, Romania, Dec. 6 
Body


Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice was pelted with questions on Tuesday about covert prisons and a mistaken, secret arrest, as she grappled with what has become an incendiary issue in Europe. She declined to answer most of them in two European capitals. 
  Europe has been roiled by reports that the United States maintained secret jails for terror suspects in Europe, and by residual anger over the American practice of rendition, or secretly transferring terrorism suspects to the custody of third countries, including some outside Europe that routinely use torture.
The anger has made it harder for Ms. Rice to repair already strained relations with many European nations at odds with American policy on Iraq, like Germany, where she met in Berlin with the new chancellor, Angela Merkel, hoping for a fresh start. But the issue confronted her repeatedly. 
  Mrs. Merkel said at a news conference that Ms. Rice had admitted making a mistake when the United States abducted a German citizen, Khaled el-Masri, on suspicions of terrorism and held him in detention for five months. But aides to Ms. Rice scrambled to deny that, saying instead that Ms. Rice had said only that if mistakes were made, they would be corrected. 
  Mr. Masri filed suit in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., on Tuesday against the former director of central intelligence and three companies he charged were involved in secret flights carrying terrorism suspects. He has said he was tortured during his detention. He also said that on Sunday he was denied entry to the United States, where he hoped to file his lawsuit in person. 
  State Department officials confirmed that he had been denied entry, but said that he would be allowed into the country if he applied again. [Page A25.] 
  As Europeans continue to investigate whether torture or detention of terrorism suspects took place on European soil, Ms. Rice assured Mrs. Merkel that ''the United States does not condone torture.''
  ''It is against U.S. law to be involved in torture or conspiracy to commit torture,'' Ms. Rice said. ''And it is also against U.S. international obligations.''
  But the American definition of torture is in some cases at variance with international conventions, and the administration has maintained in recent years that American law does not apply to prisoners held abroad. 
  In defending the practice of rendition, American officials have said that they obtain assurances from the third countries that prisoners will not be tortured, but that the United States is limited in its ability to enforce the promises.
  The Central Intelligence Agency's inspector general found last year that the some aspects of the agency's treatment of terrorism detainees might constitute cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, as the international Convention Against Torture defines it. The United States is a signer of that convention, though with some reservations. 
  A legal opinion by the Justice Department, issued in August 2002, said interrogation methods just short of those that might cause pain comparable to ''organ failure, impairment of bodily function or even death'' could be allowable without being considered torture.
  The administration disavowed that classified legal opinion in the summer of 2004, after it was publicly disclosed. But a second legal opinion issued in December 2004, which defined torture more broadly, did not repudiate interrogation techniques that had been previously authorized. It remains unclear how many of those techniques are still in use by the C.I.A.
  Congress is debating an amendment, passed in the Senate last month, that would prohibit the abusive treatment of terrorism suspects. But the White House has urged that the C.I.A. be exempted from any such ban.
  In Romania, Ms. Rice signed a military cooperation agreement that would allow American forces to train with Romanian troops at the Mihael Kogalniceanu air base, which Human Rights Watch identified as a probable location of one secret prison. 
  Asked about the charge at a news conference, Traian Basescu, the Romanian president, vociferously denied that any such detention center existed and invited anyone who doubted that to come and see for himself.
  During the news conference in Germany, Mrs. Merkel spoke openly about matters the Bush administration deems secret, while Mr. Rice continued to speak elliptically. That produced some awkward moments. 
  Mrs. Merkel spoke openly of ''the issue of the C.I.A.'s overflights'' that apparently hold secret detainees going to or from secret jails elsewhere, while Ms. Rice refused to answer most questions and continued insisting that the prison issue and related issues were classified matters. 
  Mrs. Merkel then said Ms. Rice had admitted that the United States had mistakenly abducted Mr. Masri. 
  ''The American administration has admitted that this man had been erroneously taken and that, as such, the American administration is not denying that it has taken place,'' Mrs. Merkel said. 
  Ms. Rice said she could not talk about the case specifically, but added, ''Any policy will sometimes result in error, and when it happens we do everything we can to correct it.''
  Later, an aide to Ms. Rice, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified, said that ''we are not sure what was in her head'' when Mrs. Merkel spoke of the American admission of error in the Masri case. Ms. Rice did not discuss the case with her in any direct way, he and other aides insisted, even though the senior aide said, ''The American government has talked about this issue with the German government.''
  Mrs. Merkel said simply, ''We've talked about Mr. Masri.''
  Speaking of Mr. Masri and the issue of the detainees in general, Mrs. Merkel added, ''We can't go public about all the details, but at the same time we need to introduce a certain degree of transparency.'' 
  After the mistaken arrest was discovered, the United States asked Germany to keep it secret, and Germany complied. Asked about that, Ms. Rice said, ''Intelligence matters need to be handled sensitively.'' 
  Before leaving Washington on Monday morning, Ms. Rice issued a long, unapologetic statement on the secret-prison issue, which has become the subject of many investigations in Europe, while refusing to acknowledge that the prisons exist. 
  Aides said she was no more forthcoming in her talks with Mrs. Merkel.
  Asked about Ms. Rice's statement in Washington, Mrs. Merkel said it was ''a good basis on which we build,'' but added, ''As chancellor, I work under and adhere to German laws.'' She announced that the intelligence committee of the German Parliament would take up the Masri case.
  Even though aides to Ms. Rice said they realized that the secret-prison issue would dominate a good part of her trip, at times she has shown exasperation over the debate.
  ''We have an obligation to defend our people, and we will use every lawful means to do so,'' she declared in Berlin, adding that the public debate over the secret prisons ought to include ''a healthy respect for the challenges we face'' fighting terrorism.
  The questions on the secret prisons posed to her and Mr. Basescu here in Bucharest came from the American reporters traveling with her. The Romanians asked about the new defense agreement. It would allow 1,500 American troops to be stationed at the air base on a rotating basis to take part in joint exercises and training. About 100 of those servicemen would be stationed there full time. 
  Mr. Basescu greeted the new agreement with unbridled enthusiasm, saying it shows that ''the Romanian force has reached the potential that it can be a partner of the United States.''


http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's trip to Europe incorrectly paraphrased remarks by Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, at a news conference with Ms. Rice. Referring to the 2003 abduction and five-month detention of a German, Khaled al-Masri, by the United States on suspicion of terrorism, Mrs. Merkel said that the United States had admitted error in the case, not that Ms. Rice had admitted error.
Correction-Date: December 8, 2005

Graphic

 
Photo: Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Chancellor Angela Merkel yesterday after their talks in Berlin. The chancellor questioned the secretary about the American abduction of a German terrorism suspect. (Photo by Natalia Matter/Reuters)(pg. A25)

Load-Date: December 7, 2005


End of Document