Rice expresses regrets over Pakistani deaths
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 14, 2008 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A22
Length: 292 words
Byline: the associated press
Dateline: PARIS 
Body


Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice offered her personal regrets to Pakistan on Friday for the deaths of soldiers that the United States called partners in the battle against terrorism. The two nations remained at odds over whether the U.S. was to blame.
Pakistan agreed to join a U.S. investigation of Tuesday's bombing along the lawless Afghan border that Pakistan says killed 11 of its soldiers camped there. Both countries publicly pledged to continue their anti-terrorism cooperation.
Rice met with Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi in Paris and told him that the U.S. regrets the incident at the border.
It was part of a U.S. effort to smooth relations with an important ally now under new management. Civilian leaders chosen this year in Pakistan are less friendly to U.S. terrorism policies than former Army strongman Pervez Musharraf, whose power was diminished.
"We need to find out how and why it happened, what exactly happened, get to the bottom of it jointly and then figure out how to make sure we avoid this in the future," Assistant Secretary of State Richard Boucher said following Rice's meeting with Qureshi.
Defense Secretary Robert Gates had said Thursday that he invited Pakistan and Afghanistan to be part of a U.S. investigation into the clash on the Afghan border that led to American planes dropping bombs on insurgents who had staged an attack inside Afghanistan.
Qureshi said the attack was "uncalled for" during a briefing with French reporters before his meeting with Rice. He and Rice are in Paris for an Afghanistan fundraising conference.
The two nations agreed that they can share more information ahead of the generally secret U.S. terror-hunting operations, Boucher said. That was something Pakistan had sought.

Load-Date: June 14, 2008


End of Document