RICO DEBATED AS TOOL AGAINST VIOLENT CLINIC PROTESTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
December 9, 1993, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 509 words
Byline: MARY DEIBEL, SCRIPPS HOWARD NEWS SERVICE
Body


Abortion opponents who use ''any means necessary, including terrorism,'' should face punishment under federal anti-racketeering law, abortion rights advocates told the Supreme Court yesterday.
Lawyers for the National Organization for Women and the Clinton administration said nothing in the Racketeer-Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, known as RICO, justifies an appeals court ruling that the act requires an ''overriding economic motive'' that cannot be found in abortion clinic violence.
But Notre Dame law professor Robert Blakey, arguing for abortion foes fighting a RICO lawsuit, told the justices that the act does require economic motive on the part of the accused -- a motive missing in this case. ''This statute can be summed up in two words: illicit gain,'' said Blakey, who helped write the RICO statute in 1970.
Recalling how the law was drafted against a backdrop of anti-war protests that included a takeover of the Pentagon, Blakey said Congress was intent on RICO's not being invoked against social protest movements.
But Fay Clayton, the Chicago lawyer for NOW and two abortion clinics, insisted that Congress had a broader vision of the law and thus didn't include ''economic motive'' or ''illicit gain'' in the text of the law.
Clayton added that Congress did require an impact ''on business or property'' and that such an impact does exist in the bombings, arsons and other acts of violence alleged in NOW's lawsuit. ''This nationwide campaign of terrorism continues to cause enormous economic losses for our plaintiffs. Their goal is to force women's clinics out of business by any means necessary, including terrorism.''
Justice Antonin Scalia, the court's main champion of adhering to the law's text, suggested that its focus on a racketeering ''enterprise'' carries economic overtones, so ''you still have to have a commercial motivation.''
No, responded Justice Department lawyer Miguel Estrada. ''Pinning this on a (commercial) enterprise element would really cripple the role Congress thought RICO would play. … The economic motive is illusive and has little to do with the systematic, ongoing crime Congress was concerned with.''
The Clinton administration entered the case because an economic motive requirement would cut a swath through RICO, reaching well beyond abortion clinic violence. The administration insists such a requirement would void a key tool used to attack everything from official corruption to political terrorism, where economic motives are of little or no concern.
NOW's suit alleged that Randall Terry's Operation Rescue, Joseph Scheidler's Pro-Life Action League and other anti-abortion groups engaged in extortion through harassment, assault, destruction of property and other illegal acts. NOW is asking the right to go to trial to prove these allegations, but the Chicago-based 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals tossed out the suit on the grounds that RICO ''requires either an economically motivated enterprise or economically motivated predicate acts.''
A Supreme Court decision is expected by summer.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document