Ridge praises security progress, says more is needed
University Wire
July 25, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Daily Californian via U-Wire
Length: 538 words
Byline: By Regina Chen, Daily Californian
Dateline: San Francisco
Body


Since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the United States has improved its security remarkably and is still trying to find new ways to combat terrorism, said Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge, who spoke to about 600 audience members at a San Francisco hotel Wednesday.
Ridge praised his own department, which he said has been fighting a war on terrorism that "stretches from Afghanistan to Alameda County."
The United States, however, needs now more than ever a strong information network comprising the private sector, academic community and state and local governments.
U. California-Berkeley
"We cannot be Washington-centric," Ridge said.
Ridge touched on other issues during his speech, including the delicate balance between ensuring security while maintaining civil liberties.
About 200 protesters demonstrated outside the hotel, picketing with signs that read "Dissent is Not Terrorism" and "Stop Racist Roundups."
In response to the news of the deaths of Saddam Hussein's two sons just a day earlier, Ridge said it would bring stability to Iraq in the long-run and catalyze change in other countries in that region.
Ridge also responded to the allegations that President Bush's claim that Iraq was importing uranium from Africa were incorrect, saying the president only said what British intelligence found.
The White House has learned its lesson not to depend so heavily on foreign sources, Ridge added.
Ridge praised California for its "innovation and progress since Mark Twain's day" and called for the same spirit in developing technology to combat terrorism.
California has received about $ 250 million to date from the federal government to research ways to combat terrorism.
UC-managed Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory has been chosen as one of about three locations across the country to develop "cyber security" and, among other things, to "create a research network to support the department's mission," Ridge said.
Another way to strengthen relationships with universities is to reward academic community members who contribute to the deparment's technology and information development with Homeland Security fellowships and scholarships this coming academic year.
Some have criticized the increased security efforts, claiming civil rights have been compromised.
"The Bush administration is treating all opposition to its program as if it's suspect and terrorism," said Richard Bercker, a member of an international anti-war coalition, ANSWER (Act Now to Stop War and End Racism), who was protesting outside the hotel.
In response to an audience member who brought up similar concerns, Ridge said, "Balancing security and freedom is a problem we'll always have in this country."
Most of the audience applauded Ridge's efforts. One person jokingly requested that he run for California governor now that the recall election will actually happen.
"I got a better sense of who Tom Ridge is," said Bonnie Gaither, a Piedmont, Calif., resident who attended the speech. "I feel more confident that he is the right man and he has a sound grasp of what needs to be done. He understands that liberties are still considered when security is jeopardized."
(C) 2002 Daily Californian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 25, 2003


End of Document