Ridge plans to unveil terrorism alert system
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
February 23, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5A
Length: 844 words
Byline: Seth Borenstein Knight Ridder Newspapers
Body


WASHINGTON - Those vague domestic terrorism alerts from grim-faced federal officials haven't worked well, experts say, so the terror warning system is about to get an overhaul.
Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge is expected to unveil a new terrorism alert system in the next few weeks. His office is floating a four-step system whose alarms would be, in descending order, "Critical, serious, alert and ready," according to Peter Ward, interim chairman of the Partnership for Public Warning, a new nonprofit group in McLean, Va., promoting a better national alarm system.
The idea, said Homeland Security spokesman Gordon Johndroe, is "to have a system that is understandable."
It would be employed for "a cross-section of events and places," including all kinds of terrorism and, possibly, for natural disasters as well.
Police and disaster experts deplore the current sequence of four vague terrorism warnings, in effect continually since Oct. 11. Police and disaster experts say they're worthless.
"We use them as bad examples in class because they violate all of the guidance that we've come up with from disaster research," said Mike Lindell, director of the Hazard Reduction and Recovery Center at Texas A & M University in College Station, Texas. "They don't tell you what to do other than be vigilant. What's that? We don't know."
An alert system that keeps people perpetually on edge "contributes to complacency … You can only be alert so much," said North Carolina Emergency Management Director Eric Tolbert, president of an association of state disaster chiefs.
Now the question is how to devise warnings that work.
On Thursday the head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will meet with Ridge's staff to propose that the new warning system be broadcast over NOAA weather radios, said Don Wernly, chief of the agency's warning system.
The radios, which cost about $ 40, turn on by themselves to broadcast county-specific alerts. The same warning technology, said Ward, the public warning expert, could be put into wristwatches, cell phones and car CD players.
Next week, the nation's state disaster chiefs will meet in Washington to discuss, among other things, a better terror warning system. Ward's partnership wants to unify the varying disaster warning systems used for weather, volcanoes, nuclear power plant disasters, civilian terrorism and military preparedness.
They'd use the same terminology and, probably, the same four-step alert system.
Federal officials first have to figure out what they want the public to do, then devise a warning system that motivates them, said Dennis Mileti, co-director of the Natural Hazards Center at the University of Colorado in Boulder.
"You need to be clear about what you're saying, about where the risk is," Mileti said. For example, saying there's a flash flood warning for such-and-such creek and you should evacuate now just doesn't work, he said. But saying if you live on these roads, you should evacuate to north of Elm Street in 10 minutes, does work, he said.
(EDITORS: BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)
If officials can't make specific recommendations for the public to do something "it really becomes a case of why bother," said Jay Baker, a Florida State University professor who has studied public response to hurricanes for 30 years.
When Hurricane Frederic bore down on Florida's Panhandle in 1979, firefighters got people to evacuate by going door-to-door asking stragglers for names of next of kin.
When that didn't work, the firefighters told one straggler that they'd order a "size 7" body bag in advance for him, Baker said. That worked.
"If you want people to respond, you need people who get the warning to personalize their risk," said NOAA's Wernly. "When you're dealing with homeland security, it's going to be the same way."
(END OPTIONAL TRIM)
Experts agree that another key is that warnings be repeated often from many sources to be credible.
Former National Hurricane Center Director Neil Frank, credited for dramatically boosting hurricane awareness in America, said a good warning system involves three key groups of people: the experts who recognize the threats, the public officials who have to figure out what to do, and the media that communicates the threat to the public. It's crucial that the media and experts work together and trust each other, he said.
In the case of terrorism alerts, Frank continued, "There needs to be a much closer relationship between those who have the information and the media that passes it along."
(EDITORS: STORY CAN END HERE)
But one of the major problems with terrorism is that, unlike a hurricane, the threat is often not specific, Frank and others concede. Officials don't know where terrorists are going to strike or when. And if they do know and say it publicly, that tips off the terrorists, who could change their plans and not get caught.
Frank recommends that Ridge concede the uncertainty. "People can handle uncertainty a lot more than we give them credit for," he said.
---
(c) 2002, Knight Ridder/Tribune Information Services.
AP-NY-02-22-02 1853EST

Load-Date: February 23, 2002


End of Document