RIDGE: CAN'T BUY SAFETY;
HE'S ANXIOUS TO TAP TECHNOLOGY TO FIGHT TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
October 8, 2001 Monday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 15
Length: 742 words
Byline: JOHN M. BAER
Body


FORMER GOV. TOM Ridge, who today assumes the national post of chief of homeland security, says America's "war on terrorism" will cost billions of dollars but buy no guarantees against future terrorist attacks.
In candid remarks during an exclusive Daily News interview, Ridge also said terrorism is "a condition we're going to have to live with for some time."
But while seeming to set the bar low for success, Ridge also expressed confidence in government and said he's anxious to tap new approaches, such as far greater use of the nation's technology industry as an anti-terrorism ally.
"Technology has to be infused in homeland security," Ridge said.
The comments came in the first one-on-one interview Ridge granted since President Bush, in responding to the attacks of Sept. 11, named him to the new White House job Sept. 20.
The interview took place in the skies over Pennsylvania as Ridge returned to Harrisburg aboard a state plane after his final speech as governor to the Greater Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce on Friday. Ridge gave no clue that American-led air strikes on Afghanistan would begin so soon.
Asked if he has any idea what new national security efforts might cost, he initially said, "none," then added, "it begins with 'b' and ends with 's.' "
He said America is "at war." But when asked how we'll know if we're winning or if we win, he paused several seconds and said, "I'm not absolutely certain there'll ever be a time when government can guarantee it."
And when asked if a line in his farewell address to the Legislature last week, "We will be safe," was a promise or a wish, Ridge said it was an "aspiration, a goal . . . I think it would be foolish to deny the probability, perhaps even the inevitability, of further terrorist attacks in this country . . . This is a condition that
we're going to have to live with for some time, until we break the networks, not just Osama bin Laden, but other cells and other people who would put us in harm's way."
His comments, while sobering, reflect the straightforward style Ridge employed through six-plus years as governor, and were balanced by stressing commitment to the task and cooperation by the Bush administration.
"I spend a lot of time thinking about what I'm about to embark upon," Ridge said, "I think about it all the time. But I take great comfort knowing I'm part of a team that is committed and has been working very hard to make the country even more secure."
Ridge, 56, spent the last two weeks learning "the infrastructure" of intelligence and security already in place, and meeting with or talking to officials in many of the 40-plus agencies that now answer to his office.
Here's what he said will get immediate action:
* "Beef up local and state emergency responders" and determine whether all states should have "a baseline" of anti-terrorism preparedness.
* Stockpile medicines for biological attacks and "start the next generation of vaccines."
* "Unleash the technological creativity" of the nation for use in security-related areas.
He spent the weekend in security briefings in Harrisburg and heads to Washington today for an office in the West Wing, catty-corner to the president's chief of staff, Andrew Card.
Asked about operating in the charged political atmosphere of Washington, and specifically about the job security of high profile posts (CIA Director George Tenet, for example, has been fingered by some a possible scapegoat for the September attacks), Ridge said: "Hell, I imagine in three to six months there'll be people calling for me to leave my job. That's just the nature of Washington."
But he noted the president expresses confidence in those in office, adding, "I think you'll see the same team in place indefinitely."
And as to his own job, he acknowledged, "there is some peril associated with it, but not as much as a firefighter rushing back into the World Trade Center."
He said he expects "soon" to respond to countless broadcast and print requests for interviews.
And asked if he thinks about the distance he's traveled from Erie, Pa., where he grew up borderline poor, and his personal "story" - paperboy, golf caddie, highest eighth-grade average at St. Andrew's, debate team at Cathedral Prep, scholarship to Harvard, Dickinson law degree, Bronze Star in Vietnam, 12 years in Congress, twice elected governor - he said, "no, not really . . . There are millions of stories like mine."
"That's America's story." *
Send e-mail to baerj@phillynews.com  

Notes

AMERICA STRIKES BACK

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Former Gov. Tom Ridge and Gov. Schweiker salute the flag during the dedication of a veterans' memorial at Ft. Indiantown Gap yesterday.Associated Press

Load-Date: November 13, 2001


End of Document