Ridge reviews air-marshal training;
He praised technology he saw at an FAA center
in Atlantic County as useful against terrorism.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 26, 2003 Wednesday JERSEY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B07
Length: 356 words
Byline: John Curran ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: EGG HARBOR TOWNSHIP, N.J.
Body


Calling terrorism an ever-present threat, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge yesterday watched air marshals train to prevent hijackings and toured a laboratory where scientists develop equipment to detect explosives.
At the Federal Aviation Administration's William J. Hughes Technical Center in Atlantic County, Ridge boarded a wide-body jet and watched two air marshals foil a pair of would-be hijackers in a live simulation.
In the center's Transportation Security Laboratory, he heard technology director Susan F. Hallowell describe work on security screening devices that can pick up residue on explosives.
Ridge also got a tutorial on an X-ray machine that uses three-dimensional imagery to detect items in luggage that have been tampered with, and he watched marshals train in self-defense and target practice.
"The technologies I saw today," Ridge said, "could someday help us screen passengers more effectively while moving security lines more efficiently."
Before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the Federal Air Marshals Service had only about 30 people. Since then, the program has been expanded, although the government will not say how many marshals are on flights. Ridge said the government had no plans to extend the program to cargo flights.
He also said air marshals were a key to keeping the skies safe. "We're still the No. 1 target. We're still at war. Be vigilant," he said.
A report this week by the General Accounting Office said the program needed a more efficient system for tracking the hours marshals worked. It also recommended that officials make sure the program is not undermined by its transfer this month from the Transportation Security Administration to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
Ridge downplayed the findings, saying officials already had been working to address the problems.
Asked why the United States has not had a domestic terror attack since 2001, Ridge cited military successes in Afghanistan and Iraq, the freezing of terror networks' financial assets, and the arrests and elimination of key leaders.
"The rest," he said, "may be a little divine intervention and a little luck."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
MARY GODLESKI, Associated Press
Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge (right) tours the William J. Hughes Technical Center in Egg Harbor Township, N.J. He saw a simulated hijacking attempt and experimental bomb-detection gear.

Load-Date: August 18, 2005


End of Document