Ridge departure opens room for improvement
University Wire
December 1, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Daily Kent Stater via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 320 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Daily Kent Stater; SOURCE: Kent State U.
Dateline: KENT, Ohio 
Body


Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge stepped down Tuesday in a move that is sure to have many liberals jumping in the air and kicking their heels. Ridge has been called a strong leader by some and a member of Satan's army by others (aka the editorial board).
Ridge's primary job was overseeing the creation of the color-coded terrorism system. During Ridge's reign of terror, he moved the threat level from yellow to red (or elevated to high) five times.
As usual, news networks offer nothing but praise for Ridge after he announced his retirement. CNN only questioned his decisions in one paragraph, where it said, "But many outside observers say the department is falling short of delivering what it should and could. Some outside analysts also felt that Ridge lost a number of important battles."
We on the editorial board look at Ridge differently. He raised the terror alert at odds times, sometimes when there was something else going on in the government that could be viewed as negative. He implemented a strict policy that openly discriminated against Middle Eastern-looking individuals. Don't believe it? Ask someone who looks like he or she could be Muslim or from the Middle East. Ask him or her what it is like to board a plane.
Many say the department has not done enough to stop terrorists. Democrats have said the department has been given plenty of money, but it has not stopped the threat. The question here is, is it possible to stop all threats of terrorism or even most of them? Of course not. Just walk around campus into empty bathrooms or lecture halls. If you really wanted to, you could easily kill a few hundred people.
The best way to prevent terrorism is to be a positive force in the world. The terrorism alerts only cause hysteria. They will never prevent anything. We need to start using common sense and appoint a new secretary that will use his or hers.
(C) 2003 Daily Kent Stater via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 1, 2004


End of Document