Ridge enters terrorism fight today at Cabinet level
USA TODAY
October 8, 2001, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 354 words
Byline: Mimi Hall
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- A jittery nation will be watching Tom Ridge today when he is sworn in as the director of the Office of Homeland Security and moves into his office in the West Wing of the White House.
The former Pennsylvania governor and close friend of the president will begin his first day on the job by attending the 7:30 a.m. senior staff meeting, even before President Bush swears him in to the new post at an 11 a.m. ceremony in the East Room.
White House aides say Ridge, who assumes the Cabinet-level post a month after the terrorist attacks and a day after the United States began bombing Afghanistan, will have a staff of about 100 and authority over 40 federal agencies and departments that gather intelligence and respond to disaster.
He also begins his work at a time when FBI and CIA officials are warning of retaliatory terrorist attacks against Americans at home and abroad.
In his speech to Congress on Sept. 20, Bush announced the new post, and said state and federal responsibility for the nation's security will be "coordinated at the highest level" under Ridge.
He said Ridge, 56, will report directly to him.
Since then, several members of Congress have expressed concern that Ridge will not have the authority to control a vast array of federal agencies, many of which engage in backbiting as they try to claim power and place blame.
On Sunday, Sen. Richard Shelby of Alabama, the ranking Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee, said Ridge's power should be authorized by Congress so that he'll have the necessary clout and control over agency spending to do the job.
"He's got a lot of ability, and he's got the voice of the president and the hand of the president," Shelby told ABC's This Week. "But he's got to have a lot of power and a lot of authority. I believe he's going to have to have statutory authority."
The White House maintains that's not necessary.
Senate confirmation "is not a necessary prerequisite for a government official to do a good job on behalf of the president and on behalf of the war against terrorism," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said Friday. "There is no need for it."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Paul Vathis, AP; Ridge: Will have authority over 40 federal agencies and departments.

Load-Date: October 8, 2001


End of Document