RIFLE RANGE OWNER GETS TRANSFER TO NEWARK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 2, 1993, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: STATE,
Length: 597 words
Byline: TIM REEVES, POST-GAZETTE HARRISBURG CORRESPONDENT
Body


Kelvin E. Smith, the man whose secluded Perry County rifle range was visited several times this year by suspected Muslim terrorists from the New York City region, has been transferred from Harrisburg to Newark, N.J. by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
His attorney charges that the move is punitive and unwarranted.
Smith, 39, the Fish and Wildlife Service's lone agent in Harrisburg, has not been charged with any link to the terrorists. Yet he was ordered yesterday to turn in his keys to the Federal Building in Harrisburg, pending reassignment to Newark.
A Fish and Wildlife Service spokesman said the transfer was not punitive, nor linked to any terrorism investigation, but rather because ''It's impossible for (Smith) to get anything done'' in Harrisburg because of the attention surrounding the story.
But Smith's Harrisburg attorney, Joshua Lock, said the Fish and Wildlife Service was punishing Smith unfairly, assuming that because Smith was a Muslim, he somehow was linked to the accused terrorists who visited his rifle range.
''The government finds it easier to sacrifice his rights than to stand by a loyal employee and a patriotic American who happens to find himself, through no fault of his own, stigmatized by casual associations,'' said Lock.
Smith owns a 35-acre wooded property in the heart of rural Perry County, where he operates a rifle range and survival-training facility.
Smith, who moved to Perry County from New York City in 1986, advertised his facility primarily in Muslim mosques in the New York City area.
FBI agents searched his property Saturday in connection with their investigation into terrorism by Muslim fundamentalists in New York City. They were accompanied by Navy divers, who homed in on a pond on the lot.
Nothing was confiscated during the raid, and no charges were filed against Smith.
Through his attorney, however, Smith has volunteered that several of the accused terrorists did patronize his rifle range this year. Lock said Smith identified the suspects from photographs published in The New York Times after their arrest.
One of the suspects was charged in the February World Trade Center bombing. Two others were charged with plotting to blow up the United Nations and other New York City landmarks, and to assassinate several prominent public officials, including U.S. Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato, R-New York.
Smith has said through Lock that he had no inkling the men were hatching any terroristic plot. He said no explosives were used during their visit; the men simply fired the shotguns and conventional rifles that Smith provides for his patrons.
Spence Conley, regional spokesman for the Fish and Wildlife Service, said Smith remained an employee in good standing. He also said the FBI did not order or request that Smith be transferred to Newark, which is close to the New York City-based investigation.
Both Lock and Conley said Smith was going to take some vacation time before reporting for work in Newark. Conley said Smith told the service he would report next week.
But Lock said Smith was reluctant to leave his family of 10 children, fearful of violence against them, either by allies of the accused terrorists, because he was cooperating with authorities, or by locals incensed by the strange revelations of terrorist visitors in Perry County.
''The bottom line is that, although there were several intended victims of this most recent plot, there is only one actual victim, and that is Kelvin Smith,'' he said.
The Fish and Wildlife Service, Lock said, is catering to the ''Islam-phobia that seems to be sweeping this country.''

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document