RIGHTING A WRONG; 'SOURCE CODE' TAKES A SCIENCE FICTION LOOK AT FIGHTING TERRORISM
The Taos News (New Mexico)
April 7, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 The Taos News All Rights Reserved
Section: TEMPO; Pg. Z-37
Length: 585 words
Byline: RICK ROMANCITO
Body


Review by Rick Romancito
There was a pleasant surprise awaiting anyone who expected "Source Code" to be just another run-of-the-mill sci-fi adventure, at least as outlined by its trailers. Luckily, the makers of those ads paid heed to the intricately woven plot and decided to show just enough to get people in the door, curious to see if their suspicions would be confirmed.
The strategy worked because, once the film began to unfold, something rather unusual happened -- at least for hardened sci-fi fans. It was good, and involving and pretty satisfying all the way to the slightly wistful ending.
The trailers showed a movie that seemed like an "Inception" meets "Avatar" meets "The Matrix" knock-off, which is exactly what some critics assumed right off the bat. The reality was a lot more fun.
The film directed by Duncan Jones from a script by Ben Ripley centers on Capt. Colter Stevens (Jake Gyllenhaal), a U.S. military helicopter pilot, who awakens in strange circumstances. He finds that he now mysteriously inhabits the body of a man who is on a commuter train headed to Chicago. Seated in front of him is a pretty young woman named Christina Warren (Michelle Monaghan), who appears to be the man's girlfriend. Immediately, he begins taking in his surroundings, trying to make sense of where he is. Then, eight minutes later, a terrorist bomb detonates and the train and all of its passengers, including Christina and the man that Jake inhabits, are killed.
Moments later, Colter awakens again, but now he is himself. He is wearing military fatigues and appears to be in a kind of space capsule, in a pilot's seat, belted in. The last thing he remembers before being on that train was flying a mission in Afghanistan. In front of him is a video screen on which a woman dressed in a military uniform, is speaking to him. This is Colleen Goodwin (Vera Farmiga). She informs Colter that he is on a very special mission. His consciousness was sent to that scenario as a means to find out who the bomber was, because that incident was merely a prelude to an even worse disaster yet to happen. If he can't, thousands more may die.
Colter is then told he has to go back and relive those last eight minutes, and this time to look harder to try and find out who the bomber might be. Before he can object, he is back on the train, only now he is a bit more familiar with how those eight minutes will unfold. The film is structured in a way that allows the audience to know, little by little, the nature of Colter's mission, how he got into this situation and what is ultimately expected of him as each pass through those eight minutes is revealed. We also learn what "source code" is in this context (generally it is text written in a computer programming language), but, most of all, we also learn that Colter is not being sent back in time.
I know, that last part is what a lot of folks were expecting and because it isn't and because it offers an even stranger twist, we're left sitting on the edge of our seats wanting to know how this will all resolve. Any movie that doesn't let on what the ending will be like has more than done its job. It's a standout.
"Source Code" is rated PG-13 for some violence including disturbing images, and for language. It is showing at the Storyteller Cinema, 110 Old Talpa Cañón Road. Call (575) 751-4245 for show times or visit online www.storytellertheatres.com.
"Cinemafile" reviews are based upon opening weekend screenings. Check current listings for possible schedule changes.

Graphic

 
See pdf's for exact rendition, caption, graphics and photographer info.

Load-Date: April 8, 2011


End of Document