Rights groups detail 'Kafkaesque' U.S. detentions
USA TODAY
June 27, 2005, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 448 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- The government detained at least 70 men, all but one a Muslim, as material witnesses and abused their civil rights in a largely secret operation launched by the Justice Department after the Sept. 11 attacks, Human Rights Watch and the ACLU allege in a report out today.
The civil rights groups say that in many cases the detainees were not told why they were arrested and did not get immediate access to lawyers, and that the Justice Department often would not confirm whether they were being held.
Federal law allows the government to temporarily detain people who are suspected of having knowledge of a crime to ensure they testify. But the report accuses the government of operating in "a Kafkaesque world of indefinite detention" for many people who were never linked to terrorism.
Of the 70 men identified in the report, 42 were released without any charges filed. Seven were charged with terrorism-related offenses. At least 13 received apologies from the government for being wrongfully detained, says the report, which relies heavily on interviews with witnesses, their lawyers and available court records.
"Muslim men were arrested for little more than attending the same mosque as a Sept. 11 hijacker or owning a box-cutter," it says.
Justice Department spokesman Kevin Madden said that the department has not seen the report and that he would not comment on its identification of the witnesses.
Madden referred instead to congressional testimony of Chuck Rosenberg, chief of staff to Deputy Attorney General Jim Comey.
Rosenberg said last month in written testimony that a judge approved every arrest. Under the law, judges are to supervise detentions, and prosecutors must give biweekly reports to support continued detention.
However, Jamie Fellner, director of Human Rights Watch's U.S. Program, says judges failed to aggressively question prosecutors about the need for detention.
The report gives one of the most exhaustive reviews of the use of the material-witness law in domestic terrorism investigations.
Among the witnesses the report identifies are Oregon lawyer Brandon Mayfield and Virginia physician Tajammul Bhatti.
Mayfield was detained for about two weeks in spring 2004 after train bombings in Madrid. He was released after the FBI acknowledged that it misidentified a fingerprint lifted at the bomb scene.
Bhatti was held for about a week in 2002. The report says that the government used evidence recovered during a secret search of his apartment to get a material-witness warrant. It says the evidence included a New York Times story on Bhatti's computer about a man suspected of exploring a "dirty bomb" attack. Bhatti was released without being charged.

Load-Date: June 27, 2005


End of Document