Rights at issue in terror cases
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
February 14, 2010 Sunday


Copyright 2010 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 467 words
Byline: The Washington Post
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department and the FBI will consult with the intelligence community on information about terrorism suspects arrested in the United States before deciding whether to read them their Miranda rights under a plan under review in the White House, according to senior administration officials. 
The proposal follows a controversy over the handling of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, who is accused in the attempted Christmas Day bombing and who was read his constitutional rights 10 hours after his arrest. 
Republicans said the decision to give Miranda rights to Abdulmutallab has cost the Obama administration valuable intelligence. 
"We are analyzing lessons learned (in the Detroit Christmas Day case) with the goal of ensuring that full information from across the government is available to law enforcement personnel on the ground as they conduct interrogations -- and make decisions on how to handle terrorist suspects," a senior official said Friday. 
He requested anonymity because the new procedures, which arise from a review ordered by President Obama, have not yet been approved. 
"The final decision about Miranda and other law enforcement decisions will continue to lie with the FBI and Department of Justice," the official emphasized. 
Some law enforcement officials have expressed concern that public pressure is pushing the White House to establish new standards based on the Detroit incident, even though the nature of the case might be unique 
One senior law enforcement official pointed out that authorities had immediate access to Abdulmutallab's passport and to background information on him. The data, though, had been entered only recently into the Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment database maintained by the National Counterterrorism Center. 
"But what if that person has a false passport and fingerprints are not in our files?" the official said, noting that it takes time just to get an identification and that U.S. law sets tight time rules for when someone who has been arrested must appear before a judge. "How can you have meaningful consultation (within government agencies) when you don't have a good handle on facts and when the clock is ticking?" 
Republican lawmakers have criticized the administration for not consulting the heads of U.S. intelligence agencies before FBI agents read the 23-year-old Abdulmutallab his Miranda rights. 
Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., ranking member of the Judiciary Committee, said he doesn't believe new administration protocols will solve the problem of the treatment of terrorism suspects. 
"This attempt to finesse it is not going to fix it," he said. "A captured high-value al-Qaida member should be immediately placed in military custody and should be immediately interrogated vigorously in a sustained interrogation." 

Load-Date: February 14, 2010


End of Document