Rights Group Says Egypt Used Torture in Terror Case
The New York Times
December 12, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 399 words
Byline: By ROBERT F. WORTH
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon 
Body


An American human rights group issued a report on Tuesday accusing the Egyptian government of using torture and false confessions in a recent high-profile terrorism case. 
  The report, by Human Rights Watch, said the Egyptian authorities had little or no evidence when they charged 22 men with a dramatic terrorism plot last year, and that the men were beaten and tortured with electricity and cigarette burns before confessing. There are indications that even the name of the group the men supposedly belonged to -- the Victorious Sect -- was concocted by security agents, according to the report. 
  Attempts to reach Egyptian security officials for comment were not successful.
  The case drew considerable attention when it was first announced in April 2006. The Egyptian authorities said they had uncovered a plot to blow up oil pipelines, kill Muslim and Christian religious figures and tourists, and acquire land for a terrorist training camp. 
  But within months, prosecutors dismissed all charges against the 22 men arrested in the case, and ordered their release. Ten of them  remain in jail, the report says. 
  The arrests may have been intended to help justify the renewal of Egypt's emergency law, which came shortly afterward in 2006, said Joanne Mariner, the terrorism and counterterrorism director at Human Rights Watch. The men arrested were young and had conservative religious views, like many of those arrested in such cases, she added. 
  The emergency law, which has been in place for decades, allows for trials of civilians before military tribunals and special state security courts that lack basic due-process protections. Other human rights groups have often criticized the law and Egypt's record on detentions and torture. 
  ''There have been a lot of other arrests based on association as opposed to real evidence, and in that sense this is a paradigmatic case,'' Ms. Mariner said. ''But this was an important one because of the profile the government gave it.'' 
  Human Rights Watch did not interview any of the 22 men arrested, according to the report, either because the men were not available or because they feared repercussions. Instead, the report's conclusions about torture were based on interviews with other prisoners who were jailed with them for long periods. Government officials refused to meet with Human Rights Watch or provide information, the group said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 12, 2007


End of Document