Right to know vs. threat from terrorism Information about toxic chemicals conflicts with security concerns about attack on plants plants plants
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
September 08, 1998, Tuesday tuesday tuesday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A P1A P1A
Length: 1064 words
Byline: Seth Borenstein KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS newspapers newspapers
Body


WASHINGTON - The public has a right to know about potential disasters
from dangerous chemicals used nearby. But terrorists shouldn't have
access to the same information. This week, those two positions are
expected to collide in a showdown here between environmentalists and
security experts.
The Environmental Protection Agency, following a right-to-know law,
plans to put worst-case disaster scenarios for 66,000 plants that use
chemicals on the Internet next year. The information includes details details details
on what chemicals at a site would do the most harm, how many people
might be hurt by a disaster and how widely toxins could spread.
The FBI and the chemical industry worry that providing the information
on the World Wide Web is an invitation for terrorist attacks.
The EPA's current plans could triple the risk of terrorist strike on
one of these plants, according to Tom Kerry, a risk management
consultant hired by the environmental agency and then hired again by a
chemical industry group opposing the measure. In response to such
concerns, the EPA already has modified its Internet plan to include
some barriers to make the information less useful to potential
terrorists.
The chemical industry says that's not enough and that the EPA "is
asking for trouble." It wants to make the information available to the
public on paper copies and only through local emergency planning
officials.
FBI spokesman Paul Bresson said his agency is now trying to work with
the EPA on the issue: "There are always concerns about the bad guy out
there having a road map and how to find material that potentially
could be used to create a terrorist act."
But if the EPA doesn't put the information on the Internet itself,
environmental groups are talking about posting it on the Web
themselves.
"If EPA doesn't do it, it is certainly possible other folks can do
it," said Lois Epstein, senior engineer for the Environmental Defense
Fund. "We could take the EPA stuff and combine it with health
information that the EPA might never do."
The issue will come to a head Wednesday when a special EPA advisory
subcommittee will hear arguments both from environmentalists and
security experts as it tries to come up with a recommendation for
distributing the information safely.
Jim Makris, director of the EPA's Chemical Emergency Preparedness and
Prevention Office and the bureaucrat who will make the final decision,
said he worries that if he makes the wrong decision, some child in a
classroom near an industrial plant won't know what to do in case of a
chemical accident. But he's also worried that if he makes the wrong
decision, a terrorist will be able to download a list of targets.
"That's why we're dancing on the end of the pin," Makris said.
Steve Horwitz, who works at Alice's Restaurant in Wilmington, Del.,
amid many chemical companies, said he does want to know what chemicals
are being used around him and what would happen in case of disaster.
But he doesn't want a terrorist to know what might be good places to
hit.
"That's the only problem with letting people know," Horwitz said.
"That's a tough scenario to deal with."
In the 1980s, when the EPA first made public the information on toxins
released regularly by local plants, it created a flurry of paperwork,
Makris said. He figured the Internet would eliminate that problem.
Since the EPA's release of that basic information, accidental toxic
releases have been reduced by half, Epstein said. EPA officials hope
that releasing this latest worst-case disaster information will reduce
the danger of chemical catastrophes.
The Environmental Defense Fund already puts that toxic release
information as a scorecard (www. 
scorecard.org) on the Internet and will talk to the subcommittee
Wednesday about its site. Other environmental groups have similar Web
sites, saying people have a right to know about potential accidents
that could hurt or kill them.
When officials in the chemical industry raised objections to the plan
to put the new information on the World Wide Web, Makris said he felt
it was "step 63" in the chemical industry's foot-dragging.
Not so, said Jeff Van, spokesman for the Chemical Manufacturers
Association.
"We support making the information public; how you make it public is
an issue," Van said. "What we have been asking and pleading for, for
years, is 'will you please get the experts involved?' We are not the
experts in terrorism, nor is the EPA. The EPA tried to pull one over
on the bureaucracy."
Kerry, a consultant to the Virginia-based Aegis Research Corp.,
studied the EPA's original plan and said it would increase the
terrorism risk sevenfold. The risk wouldn't be from local terrorists,
who would know where plants are, nor from state-sponsored
international terrorists who can find out the information anyway,
Kerry said.
Kerry said his biggest concern was the "itinerant terrorist, one that
may not have this in mind and finds it on the Net and says 'Gee, this
is something I can do.' What it does is create an opportunity."
In response to such criticism, the EPA came up with what it calls
electronic speed bumps to limit the amount of access to the
information on the Web. Information on the 66,000 sites could be
downloaded only one site at a time and only 1,000 sites could be read
at one sitting. The agency also is trying to limit targeting by only
allowing the information to be searched by location, chemical or
company - not by amounts or level of hazard.
Kerry said those devices would only mean the terrorist risk would
increase threefold instead of sevenfold.
"Speed bumps have never stopped anybody, not even a high school
driver," said William Lash III, a research fellow at the Center for
the Study of American Business at Washington University in St. Louis
who has studied the issue.
Jacqueline Warren, an environmental attorney on the special
subcommittee, said the chemical industry's alarm raises other
concerns.
"If these things are really that risky that they don't want anybody to
know about it, it seems to me that they should take steps to reduce
the risks rather than shoot the messenger," Warren said. "The risks
[to terrorist attack] remain whether they tell or not. It's not the
information availability that increases the risk."
Subcommittee member Irv Rosenthal, a senior research fellow at the
Wharton School's Risk Management and Decision Processes Center, said,
"this is a public policy issue that ought to be referred to the
Congress." congress." congress."

Load-Date: September 8, 1998


End of Document