RIMS establishes PAC to boost lobbying clout; Risk managers seek more leverage in D.C.
Business Insurance
April 11, 2011


Copyright 2011 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 1; Vol. 45
Length: 727 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


The Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. has established a political action committee in an attempt to strengthen its voice on Capitol Hill.
New York-based RIMS' RISK PAC will contribute to candidates for the U.S. House and Senate "who will help advance the discipline of risk management," said Terry Fleming, chairman of the RISK PAC Trustees Committee and immediate past president of RIMS.
Mr. Fleming noted that several short- and long-term risk management issues confront lawmakers, including reauthorization of the federal terrorism insurance backstop program before it expires in 2014.
Outside observers praised RIMS' move, saying that establishing and funding a political action committee is an essential part of doing business in Washington.
Mr. Fleming said RIMS had been looking at the idea of creating a PAC for a while, after a survey of members several years ago generated a "fairly significant response from people who would donate" to a PAC.
"We look at it as the logical next step in our lobbying efforts and as another tool in our toolbox," said Mr. Fleming, who also is director of the division of risk management for Montgomery County, Md., in Rockville.
RIMS began bolstering its federal legislative efforts more than a decade ago, when it began holding its annual RIMS on the Hill legislative conference in Washington. This year's event is slated for June 12-14.
Mr. Fleming said RIMS still is doing the necessary legal background work to proceed with the PAC and has not yet begun raising money.
"We hope to have it in place by the time of the annual conference in Vancouver the first week in May," said Mr. Fleming "We'll be having a booth at the conference and we'll be doing a reception for interested people at the conference."
He noted that only RIMS members and senior staff will be eligible to donate to the PAC.
As a nonprofit organization, RIMS is not allowed to donate money itself, but it is allowed under federal law to create a sister organization to do so, he said. RIMS PAC will operate a segregated, separate fund from RIMS.
Mr. Fleming pointed out that RIMS has several issues before Congress, "and we're hoping this new tool will give us more traction on Capitol Hill. We want to help elect congressional candidates who will advance the discipline of risk management."
RIMS won victories in the past Congress with creation of the Federal Insurance Office and the inclusion of the Nonadmitted and Reinsurance Reform Act in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. He said RIMS continues to support an optional federal charter for insurers and brokers.
RIMS is working with Congress on the Medicare set-aside issue and supporting a measure that would allow risk retention groups to offer property and liability coverage to their members, he said.
In addition, RIMS continues to oppose efforts to subject certain offshore reinsurance transactions to new taxes.
Mr. Fleming stressed that RISK PAC will affect long-term issues as well.
"In 2014, we'll be faced with TRIA all over again. We want to be well-placed and up and running to have an impact on the issue," he said, referring to the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 and its successors that set up and maintained the federal government's terrorism insurance backstop.
A pair of veteran Washington lobbyists hailed RIMS' creation of the PAC as a politically sophisticated move.
"RIMS is well-represented in Washington to begin with, but a political action program is a needed advocacy tool for every organization," said Joel Wood, senior vp at the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington. "There are thousands of professional associations in Washington and we all compete with one another for the attention of Congress.
"The old line is, 'If you're not at the table, you're on the menu,' so I hope they're very successful," Mr. Wood said. "With all of the risk management issues before Congress, I think their voice will be magnified by a vibrant political action program."
"I think it's an essential component to doing business in Washington D.C., today," said Peter A. Lefkin, senior vp-government and external affairs in Allianz of America's Washington office. "Political access is absolutely essential to getting your message across as legislators are bombarded with many competing demands for their time and attention, and a PAC facilitates this."

Load-Date: April 14, 2011


End of Document