Rising above fear
USA TODAY
July 28, 2005, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; Debate
Length: 316 words
Body

If built to its planned 115 stories, Chicago's twisting Fordham Spire would soar to 1,458 feet and claim the title of the nation's tallest skyscraper. According to news reports, concerns about the project focus on securing financing, luring enough retirees to move into the city and overcoming neighborhood protests.
Largely absent: fear of terrorism.
That fear was so vivid in Chicago after the 9/11 attacks that authorities emptied the 100-story John Hancock Center, just as a precaution. As the World Trade Center towers smoldered, developers across the country postponed or cancelled plans for skyscrapers. On Sept. 19, 2001, a USA TODAY story carried this observation: "The future of the skyscraper as an American landmark may be teetering."
Apparently not.
Skyscrapers remain symbols of American achievement and striving. Today, a leading voice of concern over high-rise terrorism comes from Donald Trump, who is building a slightly shorter condominium tower in downtown Chicago and appears to dislike all the attention being drawn to the Fordham Spire.
Trump aside, condo builders say buyers' main concern is nailing down a unit on the highest possible floor. Chicagoans appear excited about reclaiming the city's glory as a builder of striking skyscrapers, such as the John Hancock Center and the 110-story Sears Tower.
Today's post-9/11 skyscraper builders are using a heavily reinforced concrete core and redundant emergency exit systems. But the unique design of Fordham Spire, by Spanish-born architect Santiago Calatrava, appears to sacrifice nothing in creativity.
Calatrava's proposal reflects several hopeful trends within the USA, including the revitalization of some cities by empty nesters returning from the suburbs and a vibrant economy that makes condominium projects viable in many cities. Most hopeful, however, is the desire for great architecture trumping the fear of terrorism.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, Color, Fordham Spire building designed by Santiago CalatravaFordham Spire building designed by Santiago Calatrava

Load-Date: July 28, 2005


End of Document