Roadside bomb attack misses Afghan vice-president, but kills 10
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 10, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 445 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The bomb attack on the Afghan vice president's convoy on Wednesday morning killed 10 people and injured more than a dozen people and left.
The Presidential Palace in a statement condemned the attack on First VP Saleh's convoy and said that such attacks can not weaken the strong will of the people for peace, and that the security and defense forces will continue to fight terrorism.
The bombing came as Afghan officials and the Taliban prepared to begin their first formal talks. "Unfortunately, 10 civilians, mostly people who were working in the area, were killed, and 15, including a number of the first VP's bodyguards, were wounded", Tareq Arian, spokesman for the ministry, told reporters at the scene.
A witness to the explosion said he was driving past the location on the way to a clinic when the bomb detonated. "There's no ambulance, and even the police haven't arrived yet".
Saleh, a former intelligence chief and an outspoken Taliban critic, has survived several assassination attempts, including one on his office previous year ahead of presidential elections that killed 20 people. Speaking after the blast on Wednesday, he vowed to continue his political work.
The peace talks will be held in Qatar's capital, Doha.
Matt Hancock blames British public for shortfall in coronavirus testing capacity
The rule is applicable to people in private homes, indoor and outdoor spaces, pubs, restaurants, houses of worship and cafes. People there should not meet people from more than four other households in total whether indoors and/or outdoors.
Mr Saleh appeared in a video on his social media accounts soon after, saying he had sustained a minor burn on his face and an injury to his hand in the attack.
"The terrorists and their foreign backers can not undermine the people's strong faith in peace, democracy and the bright future of our country", Ghani said in a statement.
Taking to Twitter to condemn the attack, External Affairs Ministry Spokesperson Anurag Srivastava said India stands with Afghanistan in the fight to eradicate "terror infrastructure and sponsors" for enduring peace in that country.
The Taliban have been emboldened by a deal with Washington in February that paved the way for the withdrawal of foreign forces and the release of 5,000 militants in a prisoner exchange. No group immediately claimed responsibility for the incident, with the Taliban in a statement denying their involvement.
The so-called Islamic State group has also launched numerous high-profile attacks in Afghanistan in recent years. United States peace envoy Zalmay Khalilzad is in Qatar, where the Taliban maintain a political office, trying to get the negotiations started.

Load-Date: September 10, 2020


End of Document