Roadside bomb kills 15; mostly women, girls
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 29, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 292 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Fifteen civilians, including seven women and six children, were killed and two others wounded after a roadside bomb explosion struck a vehicle in Afghanistan's northern Kunduz province on Wednesday, a provincial government spokesman said.
He says six women, six girls and two infants died in the explosion, as well as the male driver.
Quoting Noor Agha Faizi, Sar-e-Pul police spokesman, TOLO News He said the explosion took place when the "Taliban tried to move a auto full of explosives to the center of the province".
The militants were reportedly carrying explosives in the vehicle and were stopped at the checkpoint in the morning of November 28. Faizi said that they had apparently detonated explosives remotely after escaping, although an investigation is ongoing.
Zabihullah Mujahid, a spokesman for the hardline Islamist insurgent group, said on Friday they were "ready to restart the talks".
Giuliani role in Ukraine scandal deepens
Costello declined to comment on what directions Trump had given Giuliani on Ukraine, citing attorney-client privilege. But, you know, Rudy has other clients other than me. "If you could speak to him that would be great".
The Interior Ministry blames the Taliban for the two attacks.
A statement from the office of Afghan President Ashraf Ghani said U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Mark Milley met with Ghani inKabul on Thursday and reassured him the U.S. remained committed to fighting terrorism.
Trump canceled peace negotiations in September after the militant group claimed responsibility for an attack inKabul that killed 12 people, including an American soldier.
Afghan security forces stand guard during a fight against Taliban fighters in Kunduz,Afghanistan. U.S. -Taliban peace talks collapsed in September.

Load-Date: November 29, 2019


End of Document