Road map threatens peace
USA TODAY
May 1, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 421 words
Byline: Morton A. Klein
Body

Today's debate: Israeli-Palestinian conflict
Opposing view: Palestinian state would endanger Israel, hurt anti-terrorism efforts.
While the Bush administration ended the Iraqi terrorist state, its "road map" will create a Palestinian Arab terrorist state, a mini Iraq. This will endanger Israel and undermine America's war against terrorism.
Granting statehood does not guarantee peace. Syria, Iran and North Korea are sovereign states. That hasn't made them peaceful. No wonder a recent poll found that by 71% to 13% Americans oppose creating a Palestinian Arab state.
The road map also imposes an un-American policy of ethnic discrimination by halting Jewish construction in the disputed Judea-Samaria territories while not limiting the much more widespread Arab construction in those areas.
The 1993 Oslo accords failed because the Palestinian Arabs refused to give up terrorism and their goal of destroying Israel. The Palestinian Authority (PA) shelters terrorists (including killers of Americans), names streets and schools after them (including naming a square after Ali al-Na'amani, the Iraqi suicide bomber who killed four GIs), allows terrorists to keep their training camps and tens of thousands of weapons and promotes a culture of anti-Jewish and anti-American hatred in its media, schools and summer camps. And since 2000, the PA itself has been organizing most of the terrorism.
The new PA prime minister, Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), has been Yasser Arafat's senior deputy since the 1960s. Abbas declared March 3 that "the intifada must continue and it is the right of the Palestinian people to resist and use all possible means." His statements that he "opposes terrorism" -- just like Arafat's similar statements -- are meaningless because the Palestinian Arabs regard the murder of Israelis as "legitimate resistance," not terrorism. Abbas also denies the Holocaust and wrote a book disputing that the Nazis murdered 6 million Jews.
The road-map plan would force Israel back to the indefensible 1967 borders, leaving it just 9 miles wide at its mid-section -- about the width of Washington, D.C. A Palestinian Arab state would then be created next door, a mini Iraq based on a culture of hatred and violence that would be within easy striking distance of Israel's major cities and airports. This would endanger Israel and undermine the war against terrorism by sending a message to terrorists everywhere that violence will reap political concessions.
***
Morton A. Klein is president of the Zionist Organization of America.

Load-Date: May 1, 2003


End of Document