Romanians' global gathering focuses on terror
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 1, 2003 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Gwinnett;
Length: 414 words
Byline: RICK BADIE
Body


The chance of Romania joining NATO was the hot topic at last year's gathering of the World Romanian Council.
Now that the alignment appears within reach, speakers and attendees at this year's gathering are turning their attention toward another global concern: terrorism.
The Lilburn-based council, an umbrella organization for Romanian groups nationwide, is hosting its annual conference this weekend at the Holiday Inn Select on Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. The 2003 theme: "Heritage and Unity Day for Peace and Understanding Against Terrorism."
AJC
"Romania was the first country in Europe to join the United States against terrorism --- after Great Britain, of course," said Smaranda Livescu, a council founder who serves as its secretary general. About 11,000 Romanians live in metro Atlanta, mostly in Gwinnett County.
"Romania is a key point in Europe," the Lilburn woman said, "and with Romania opening its land to America, it changes the balance of power in that part of Europe. We are right there between Russia and the rest of the world."
Romanian officials allowed U.S.-led coalition troops to set up shop in the country in the war against terrorism. The United States may establish permanent military bases there. Romania, meanwhile, is one of seven east European micropowers that have been invited to join NATO next year.
The conference continues at 11 a.m. today. A highlight will be the keynote address by council President Mircea Popescu, an electrical engineer who lives in Costa Mesa, Calif. Popescu said he'd talk about Romania's promising bid to join NATO, a move Romanians support wholeheartedly and one that's been blessed by the U.S. Congress.
"Romania has been a good alliance for the United States in this battle against terrorism," Popescu said. "I hope the United States will have a permanent military base in Romania. It would be a strong position for the NATO troops."
An estimated 300 people from around the world had been expected to attend this year's conference. But the threat of terrorism and the difficulty of obtaining travel documents caused some attendees to back out, said Livescu, who also oversees the Romanian American Cultural Center of Atlanta.
"They are not traveling," she said, "and some of the consulates won't [grant] them the visas to come here. We received e-mails and calls from speakers and researchers in Germany and other countries that they are not coming. Our attendance has has been reduced because of this strange world we live in."

Load-Date: June 1, 2003


End of Document