Ron Johnson hits Russ Feingold on terrorism in new TV ad
The Daily Cardinal: University of Wisconsin - Madison
July 19, 2016 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 622 words
Byline: MARK SOMMERHAUSER msommerhauser@madison.com,
Body


As terror attacks continue in the U.S. and abroad, Wisconsin's two leading U.S. Senate candidates are trading barbs on who is better-positioned to keep American safe.
Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson is going after his rival, Democrat Russ Feingold, with a TV ad that depicts him as weak on terrorism. The ad hit airwaves the same day Johnson, R-Oshkosh, spoke about fighting terrorism at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland.
Feingold, D-Middleton, launched his own TV ad Monday highlighting his plan to combat the Islamic State, or ISIS, terror group. The Feingold campaign responded Tuesday to Johnson's attack by accusing the first-term senator of pointing fingers "to distract from his own failed record as chairman" of the Homeland Security committee.
The Johnson ad, "Lone Wolf," centers on Feingold's voting record during his three terms in the U.S. Senate from 1993 to 2011. Republicans previously targeted Feingold on national security, but the new ad is the strongest evidence yet that Johnson will make the issue central to his case for voters to give him a second term.
The ad links Feingold to President Barack Obama's foreign policy, which recent polls show is unpopular.
An initial version of the Johnson ad was scheduled to air last week. The campaign suspended the ad last week after the terror attack in Nice, France, though it briefly aired in certain markets anyway.
A revised version of the ad is narrated by Johnson and includes Nice on a list of recent terror attacks.
It slams Feingold for casting the lone vote against the USA PATRIOT Act, without mentioning the act by name. Instead, Johnson says: "When Congress gave law enforcement the tools to help stop international terror, only one senator voted no: Russ Feingold."
The ad also hammers Feingold for opposing military funding measures.
"Now he's asking you for a fourth term? The world's simply too dangerous for that," Johnson says.
The Feingold campaign said Johnson wants to distract from the fact that he has "failed to offer any real plan to defeat ISIS and keep Americans safe."
"Russ is the only candidate in this race who has put forth a specific and comprehensive plan that takes advantage of all of our resources to combat terrorism," Feingold spokesman Michael Tyler said in a statement.
Johnson said it's time for the U.S. to take a more active role in Syria and address the root cause of the refugee crisis there.
Feingold's terror plan calls for using special military operations to target Islamic State, or ISIS, leaders - a strategy already being employed by the Obama administration. It also calls for cutting off ISIS funding by targeting its oil sales and improving intelligence of its activities in Syria and Iraq.
Feingold, D-Middleton, famously was the only senator to vote against the USA PATRIOT Act, which dramatically expanded federal anti-terrorism surveillance powers, shortly after the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Feingold argued the measure violated Americans' civil liberties.
The Johnson ad is part of a seven-figure ad buy that will air statewide on TV and online, according to Johnson's campaign.
While outside groups have aired ads attacking Feingold, Johnson, until now, has used his campaign treasury to run positive ads about his own background in manufacturing.
His choice to go on attack against Feingold could mark a new phase of the campaign. Johnson, R-Oshkosh, consistently has trailed Feingold in polls - in some, by large margins - though there are indications the contest has tightened.
Feingold frequently has criticized Johnson during the campaign through ads and other communications highlighting Johnson's positions on student debt, Social Security and the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document