Rowley to leave FBI at year's end;
Minneapolis agent says counter-terrorism officials are confronting a deluge of intelligence data.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 9, 2004, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 13A
Length: 647 words
Byline: Greg Gordon; Staff Writer
Dateline: Washington, D.C.
Body


Minneapolis FBI agent Coleen Rowley disclosed Wednesday that she will retire at year's end, even as she warned that counter-terrorism agents now are being swamped with intelligence data and have "too many dots" to connect.
     Rowley also questioned the need for an intelligence "czar," a central recommendation of the 9/11 commission.
     She said the bureau's dramatic shift to focus its resources on terrorism has resulted in "a huge pendulum swing … from the mistakes of overcomplacency before September 11. Now we're perhaps embarking on what I call the uncharted waters of massive intelligence collection."
   "That changes the problem, and it also changes the mistakes and the errors that are being made now," she told a panel for the nonpartisan Eisenhower Foundation.
     During an interview, Rowley said she notified her superiors this week that she will retire from the bureau at the end of the year. An agent of nearly 24 years, she becomes fully eligible for her pension when she turns 50 on Dec. 20.
     Rowley said she advised FBI officials that while she believes "in the mission of catching the bad guys," she wants to do it "in a more effective way."
     "I want to talk about integrity and ethics and, hopefully, dissuade people from being the bad guys," she said.
     "Civilizations fall not because of external attack, but because of internal rot," Rowley said. "We have seen a lot of internal rot."
     Rowley gained fame in 2002 with her accusations that FBI headquarters bungled a chance to thwart the Sept. 11 attacks when it blocked Minneapolis agents from obtaining a warrant to search the possessions of jailed terrorism suspect Zacarias Moussaoui.
     FBI Director Robert Mueller promised she would face no retaliation, and Rowley has obtained FBI permission to speak and publish articles about civil liberties, ethics and integrity. She has traversed the country, talking to the American Civil Liberties Union, nuclear power plant security officials, accountants, health care compliance officers, church groups, college students and NASA officials.
     Not everyone has welcomed her comments. She provoked criticism from former FBI agents for a 2003 letter to Mueller warning that the pending U.S. invasion of Iraq could heighten the threat of terrorism in the United States.
     But Ray McGovern, a retired CIA officer who joined her on Wednesday's panel, said: "If it weren't for Coleen Rowley, there would be no 9/11 commission . . . The whole thing would have been covered up."
     Rowley praised many of the commission's recommendations, but said its call for a national intelligence chief "is not really a solution. … Tell me the last time a czar stopped anything."
     She said most acts of terrorism have been thwarted by "a lowly customs inspector or a New Jersey trooper" or flight attendants and passengers who overpowered attempted shoe-bomber Richard Reid.
     Rowley said the FBI and other intelligence and law enforcement agencies now share information effectively - maybe too much.
     She noted that FBI switchboards light up each time the government issues a terrorism alert, bringing a flood of "information and dots that should be looked at."
     "But everyone is afraid that we might miss that one lead," she said. "So we are no longer allowed to exercise discretion at all with regard to what we look into. We didn't have very many dots before 9/11. Now, if anything, the problem may be too many dots."
     Rowley's appearance was timed with the release of an Eisenhower Foundation book chronicling alleged U.S. failures in domestic and foreign policy. She contributed a chapter on civil liberties in which she warned that "the dangers of a '1984' future for America cannot be overstated" given the government's ongoing and proposed surveillance efforts aimed at stemming terrorism.
     Greg Gordon is at ggordon@mcclatchydc.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: September 10, 2004


End of Document