Rowley tosses her hat into ring;
The former FBI whistle-blower likely to face competition for the DFL nod.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 7, 2005, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 473 words
Byline: Dane Smith; Staff Writer
Body


Former FBI agent Coleen Rowley, who in 2002 landed on the cover of Time magazine after her whistle-blowing critique of the agency's pre-9/11 security lapses, formally announced Wednesday that she will seek the DFL nomination to run against two-term Republican congressman John Kline in 2006.
Rowley, who opposed going to war in Iraq, said she would run on the themes of "ethical decision-making," "independence from partisan dogma," and balancing security needs with civil liberties, which she said the Bush administration has damaged by overreacting in the war on terror.
Acknowledging that she voted mostly for Republicans until 2000, Rowley faulted Kline for voting "in almost total lockstep" with President Bush, and for backing foreign and domestic policies that she said have become increasingly radical and dangerous rather than conservative.
"We must reclaim a foreign policy ethic that restores America as first among equals and shakes off this terribly distorted image of America as the Lone Ranger, shooting from the hip," Rowley said from the driveway of her home in Apple Valley. About 100 supporters were on hand to cheer the campaign's start.
State Republican Party officials said Rowley was out of touch with voters in the Second District on fighting terrorism. The district is fairly reliable GOP territory and includes southern Twin Cities suburbs and farmland reaching almost to Owatonna and Rochester.
"It's incredible that Coleen Rowley criticized the Bush administration for taking a 'no-holds-barred' approach to fighting terrorism," said state GOP chairman Ron Carey in an e-mail. "Voters in the Second District expect nothing less than a no-holds-barred approach to fighting terrorism."
Rowley was a lawyer in the Minneapolis FBI office when federal agents arrested Zacarias Moussaoui in August of 2001, the only person charged in the United States in connection with the 9/11 attacks. She became a national celebrity with memos and testimony documenting shortcomings in the nation's anti-terrorism defenses. She ended up being listed as one of Time Magazine's "Persons of the Year" in 2002.
DFLer Teresa Daly, who was defeated by Kline in 2004 56 percent to 40 percent, said she is leaning toward running again. If so, she would face Rowley for the party's nod.
Dane Smith is at rdsmith@startribune.com.  
THE ROWLEY FILE
Early years: Born Dec. 20, 1954, in Fort Belvoir, Va. Family moved to New Hampton, Iowa, where she grew up.
Education: B.A. in French from Wartburg College, Waverly, Iowa, 1977; law degree from the University of Iowa, 1980.
Career: FBI from 1981 to 2004. Was a special agent in Omaha and Jackson, Miss. Served for six years in the New York City office. Temporary duty in Paris and Montreal. Transferred to Minneapolis in 1990.
Family: Ross, stay-at-home husband; three daughters and one son; one grandchild.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 7, 2005


End of Document