Rudy Giuliani; Plans to make move in middle innings
USA TODAY
December 31, 2007 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 424 words
Byline: David Jackson
Body


CLIVE, Iowa -- Rudy Giuliani says running for president is like playing a baseball game: "You're not going to win in the first inning or the second inning."
As Iowans prepare for the nation's first presidential contest Thursday, Giuliani is emphasizing his experience as mayor of New York City and his ability to handle issues such as terrorism.
"Presidents are generally selected for executive experience," he told USA TODAY, citing former governors George W. Bush, Bill Clinton and Ronald Reagan. "I've had as much or more foreign policy experience than most people who've been selected as president."
Giuliani said he has dealt with terrorism and other international issues as mayor and at the Justice Department, as the top federal prosecutor for part of New York. Those jobs also gave him the executive experience needed for the White House, he said.
Polls indicate Giuliani could finish as low as fifth in the Iowa caucuses. Although he leads some national polls, Giuliani also lags in the early contested states of  New Hampshire and South Carolina.
Giuliani is focusing more on the Jan. 29 primary in Florida as well as Feb. 5 contests in New York, California and other big states -- a unique strategy for a uniquely compressed campaign schedule.
"There's never been a schedule like this before," Giuliani said Saturday.
Giuliani is trying to keep Iowa voters interested by stressing his performance after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
When Giuliani calls terrorism the campaign's biggest issue, he cites it "in its various forms." That includes the Iraq war, tensions with Iran and last week's assassination of Pakistani opposition leader  Benazir Bhutto. He added that if you include "homeland security and all the things that are attached to it," it's by far the biggest issue.
The supporter of abortion rights and gay rights also has to face social conservatives who are a major force in the Republican Party. Giuliani downplayed that as a potential problem, saying many conservatives back him "because they think our social views are similar enough" and agree with him on national security and keeping taxes low.
The bigger goal, he said, is convincing enough Republicans that he would be the best president and the best nominee to face a Democrat. "The challenge is convincing people that you're the one that can win the election," he said.
But will he make it to the end of the nominating game? "I never make predictions," he said, adding he's confident about coming back in the middle innings. "A lot of good teams do," he said. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, David Karp, AP

Load-Date: February 13, 2008


End of Document