RUDY 9-11 AD RILES MCCAIN
Daily News (New York)
December 28, 2007 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 10
Length: 334 words
Byline: BY CELESTE KATZ in Des Moines and RICHARD SISK in Fort Lauderdale DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body


BENAZIR BHUTTO'S death at terrorists' hands came as White House hopeful Rudy Giuliani circled back to 9/11 as his prime campaign theme, unveiling a national TV ad trumpeting his Ground Zero performance.
Giuliani's assertion that his 9/11 experience enables him to tackle national security issues drew a sharp rebuke from GOP rival John McCain, a Vietnam War prisoner and veteran senator.
"You look at terrorism and what terrorism can do and you can appreciate that a little better," Giuliani told reporters in Florida, brushing off suggestions that he is overplaying his 9/11 experiences.
"It is part of my life that helps define me," added the ex-mayor.
Giuliani said Bhutto's death "means we have to be on offense" against Islamic terrorism. He said President Bush should consider sending more troops to Afghanistan to stabilize the region.
In his new ad, which invokes national unity with images of firefighters at Ground Zero, Marines on Iwo Jima and a space shuttle lifting off, a determined Giuliani says, "When you try and come here and kill our people, we're one and we're going to stand up to you and we're going to prevail."
At an Elks lodge in Iowa, McCain challenged Giuliani's claims that 9/11 qualified him to direct U.S. foreign policy.
"I think he did a great job post-9/11," said McCain. But he insisted Giuliani's performance after the terror attacks was not "the credential to address national security issues. It has very little to do with national security issues.
"As far as I know, Mayor Giuliani's never been to Iraq," McCain said in a criticism he has leveled at other GOP candidates. "I'm not saying he is without credentials. I'm saying I'm the one with the most credentials and the most experience and the most judgment."
McCain said he'd "hate for a tragedy like this one to affect anybody's campaign," but noted his campaign theme has been "that I'm the one with the experience, the knowledge and the judgment. So perhaps it may serve to enhance those credentials."
ckatz@nydailynews.com

Load-Date: December 28, 2007


End of Document