Ruling bars support, advice for terror groups
USA TODAY
June 22, 2010 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 609 words
Byline: Joan Biskupic
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Supreme Court on Monday upheld a law that makes it a crime to provide "material support" to designated foreign terrorist groups, even when the support involves training or advice on humanitarian activities.
The 6-3 decision marked the first time the high court had looked at restrictions on free speech in U.S. anti-terrorism policy since the 9/11 attacks. Monday's decision strengthens the hand of government to block any form of support, no matter how peaceful or seemingly benign, to foreign terrorist groups.
The majority emphasized that it was endorsing restrictions on coordinated work with foreign terrorist groups but not on any independent work a humanitarian organization might do on its own.
Chief Justice John Roberts, writing for the majority, highlighted the government's interest in combating terrorism and said support that promotes peaceful conduct can nonetheless further dangerous activities. "Such support frees up other resources within the organization that may be put to violent ends," Roberts wrote, joined by John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito.
Stevens, a liberal who often breaks from the Roberts-led conservative majority, did not write a separate opinion. The last remaining World War II veteran on the bench, Stevens has been a strong critic of U.S. anti-terrorism detention policies. Unlike the detention cases, Monday's dispute involved the First Amendment. Two decades ago, in another speech case, Stevens similarly separated himself from his liberal colleagues in voting to uphold a ban on flag burning.
The lead challengers to the disputed 1996 law were the Los Angeles-based Humanitarian Law Project and its president, longtime civil rights advocate Ralph Fertig. They seek to help the Kurdistan Workers' Party, a militant separatist group in Turkey known as the PKK, with peaceful activities such as bringing human rights complaints to the United Nations.
Dissenting justices said the activities involve advocacy usually covered by the First Amendment. Justice Stephen Breyer, joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor, said the majority should have insisted the government show evidence of a link between the challengers' work and any dangerous activities of the PKK.
"There is no need to interpret the statute to apply to the activities in question when they are engaged in innocently," Breyer said as he took the rare step of reading part of his dissent from the bench Monday.
The law subjects anyone who provides material support, including "training," to up to 15 years in prison.
Georgetown University professor David Cole, who represented the challengers, said the ruling allows "the government to make human rights advocacy and peacemaking a crime."
Solicitor General Elena Kagan, President Obama's nominee to replace the retiring Stevens, had argued the case for the Department of Justice. The department had no comment on the ruling.
Former president Jimmy Carter, whose center advocating human rights had sided with the challengers, expressed disappointment in a statement that said the law "inhibits the work of human rights and conflict resolution groups."
However, the Anti-Defamation League, which monitors groups such as the PKK, praised the ruling.
First Amendment experts said the decision is unlikely to have major consequences beyond disputes over terrorism law. Erwin Chemerinksy, dean of the University of California-Irvine law school,  predicted the ruling will not be used far beyond the anti-terrorism context "because of Chief Justice Roberts' stressing the need for connection to a foreign entity" for the law to apply. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP
PHOTO, B/W, Getty Images

Load-Date: June 22, 2010


End of Document