RULING ALLOWS EXTRADITION OF TERROR SUSPECTS; EUROPEAN COURT EASES PROCESS THAT WOULD LET BRITAIN SEND 5 TO U.S.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 11, 2012 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2012 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-3
Length: 843 words
Byline: Alan Cowell and John F. Burns, The New York Times
Body


LONDON -- The European Court of Human Rights ruled Tuesday that Britain could legally extradite five suspects wanted in the United States on terrorism charges, including Abu Hamza al-Masri, an inflammatory former mosque cleric accused in a range of unprosecuted anti-American plots that date back 14 years.
In a precedent that eases extradition of terrorism suspects -- an issue that has surfaced repeatedly since Britain relaxed procedures after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in New York and Washington -- the court ruled that the defendants' human rights would not be violated by their incarceration in a maximum-security U.S. prison.
Although the court said the defendants could not be extradited before further legal procedures were completed -- including further objections by rights activists, which could delay their transfer to America for months -- the ruling was nonetheless viewed as one of the most important court decisions on the prosecution of terrorism suspects since the Sept. 11 attacks.
"Detention conditions and length of sentences of five alleged terrorists would not amount to ill treatment if they were extradited to the USA," the judges said.
Much attention centered on Mr. Masri, a one-time preacher at London's Finsbury mosque when it was regarded by British security services as a hotbed of radicalism. Before the Sept. 11 attacks, the preacher described himself as al-Qaida's chief representative in Britain. Abu Hamza al-Masri is the pseudonym by which Mustafa Kamal Mustafa is most widely known.
Before Tuesday's ruling, lawyers acting for him said they would argue at the European court, based in Strasbourg, France, that the prospect of a U.S. prison term of 50 years or more for their client would be a breach of his human rights.
Based on charges filed in the United States, The Associated Press reported, Mr. Masri and four other suspects could get lifelong jail terms in the United States without parole in maximum-security conditions, including concrete furniture, timed showers, tiny cell windows and no outside communications.
But the court ruled that it would be legal for Britain to extradite all five. It postponed a ruling in a sixth case while awaiting further detail about the suspect's psychological condition.
The six suspects had been indicted in the United States between 1999 and 2006 on charges relating variously to hostage-taking in Yemen and attacks on U.S. embassies in East Africa. Mr. Masri faces 11 counts relating to hostage-taking in 1998, calling for holy war in Afghanistan in 2001 and participation in an attempt to establish a militant training camp in Bly, Ore., between June 2000 and December 2001.
In the hostage-taking episode, U.S. prosecutors say, the 16 victims, all tourists, included two Americans. Four hostages -- three Britons and one Australian -- were killed and several others were wounded when the Yemeni army tried to rescue them.
Britain considers Mr. Masri to be an Egyptian citizen, but he maintains that he has lost his status as an Egyptian national. He is now serving a seven-year sentence in Britain for inciting racial hatred and urging followers to commit murder.
Mr. Masri is a distinctive figure, with one eye and a steel hook in place of his right hand, a result of injuries sustained in what he has described as land-mine explosions while fighting the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. The European court said Tuesday that U.S. authorities would consider his detention in the supermax prison "impossible because of his disabilities," notably the "amputation of his forearms."
European anti-terror investigators regarded the mosque at which he preached as a focus of jihadism. Both Richard Reid, the so-called shoe-bomber, and Zacarias Moussaoui, accused of being the 20th hijacker in the Sept. 11 attacks, are reported to have attended it before their arrests.
Another defendant, Babar Ahmad, 37, a computer expert accused of being a fundraiser for terrorist causes, has been held in prison in Britain without a trial for almost eight years.
The European judges also ruled that three others -- Syed Talha Ahsan, Adel Abdul Bary and Khalid al-Fawwaz -- could be extradited once legal processes were completed. The sixth suspect, whose case was postponed, was identified as Haroon Rashid Aswat and is accused of being Mr. Masri's co-conspirator.
Mr. Bary and Mr. Fawwaz were charged with multiple murders in the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Nairobi, Kenya, which killed more than 200 people. Mr. Ahsan, like Mr. Ahmad, is charged with providing support to terrorists and conspiracy-related offenses.
The outcome announced Tuesday contrasted sharply with a ruling by the same European court in January that Abu Qatada, a radical Islamic preacher regarded as one of al-Qaida's main inspirational leaders in Europe, could not be sent from Britain to his native Jordan because his trial there would be tainted by evidence obtained by torture.
The preacher, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Mohammed Othman, was later freed on strict bail terms in February.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Abu Hamza al-Masri

Load-Date: April 11, 2012


End of Document