Ruling in Embassy Bombing Case Leads to Mixed Views of Suspect's Fate if He Is Acquitted
The New York Times
October 8, 2010 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 809 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


When a federal judge barred prosecutors on Wednesday from using a crucial witness in the first civilian trial of a former Guantanamo terrorism detainee, the ruling -- widely perceived as a major setback for the government -- contained an unusual observation.
It was, in a way, a polar opposite to a get-out-of-jail free card: even if the defendant, Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, is acquitted, his status as an enemy combatant will probably allow his return to military custody, to remain locked up, said the judge, Lewis A. Kaplan of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Judge Kaplan did not elaborate on his view, but his comment has stirred debate as to why he made the statement, whom he was addressing, and whether it would undermine or bolster the idea of trying detainees in federal court.
''This makes me wonder why the government is bothering to try Ghailani,'' Jack Goldsmith, a senior Justice Department lawyer in the Bush administration and now a law professor at Harvard, wrote in the Lawfare blog.
With all of the legal and political difficulties in holding such a trial, he added, ''it can hardly bring the hoped-for legitimacy benefits if the government and the judge publicly agree that the defendant, if acquitted, will remain behind bars indefinitely.''
But Joshua L. Dratel, a defense lawyer who has handled terrorism cases in federal courts and at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, said the judge seemed to want to reassure people who might worry that strictly adhering to constitutional principles, as the judge did in barring the prosecution witness's testimony, could lead to a terrorism suspect's walking free.
''Judges often feel the need to respond to controversial issues,'' Mr. Dratel said, ''and to be transparent and maintain confidence that the judicial system is not being insensitive to public concerns.''
Ever since Mr. Ghailani last year became the first detainee to be moved into the civilian judicial system, his case has been seen as significant because it raised challenging legal issues that could resurface if the Obama administration was to bring other detainees, like the self-described 9/11 mastermind, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, into the civilian system for trial.
The acquittal issue tugs at obvious public safety concerns as well as at tenets of justice and fair play.
Robert Chesney, a professor who specializes in national security law at the University of Texas, said the judge understood that part of the analysis of the Ghailani case would be ''what happens if this guy walks free?''
''And he's pointing out that that's not necessarily what's at stake here,'' added Professor Chesney, who served as Judge Kaplan's law clerk more than a decade ago.
Mr. Ghailani faces a trial on charges that he conspired in the 1998 bombings of two United States Embassies in East Africa, which killed 224 people and wounded thousands. After those attacks, the authorities say, he trained with Al Qaeda, and later became a bodyguard to Osama bin Laden. (Mr. Ghailani does not face charges for those activities in the federal case.)
Captured in 2004 in Pakistan, he spent nearly five years in C.I.A. jails overseas, where his lawyers say he was tortured, and at Guantanamo. It was while in C.I.A. custody that he disclosed the existence of the witness, who prosecutors say sold him the TNT used to blow up the American Embassy in Tanzania.
Some lawyers said a decision by the government to return Mr. Ghailani to military custody, if he were acquitted, could make his civilian trial seem meaningless.
''It does create a suggestion of a kind of show trial as opposed to a true adjudication of the issues,'' said Anthony S. Barkow, a former federal terrorism prosecutor in Manhattan who runs a center on criminal law at the New York University School of Law.
After Judge Kaplan issued his ruling on Wednesday, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. was asked at a news conference in Washington whether the government might now be considering returning Mr. Ghailani to military custody. Mr. Holder replied, ''We intend to proceed with this trial.''
The trial's start has been delayed until Tuesday.
The acquittal issue was raised in November after Mr. Holder announced his decision to bring Mr. Mohammed and four other 9/11 detainees to New York for trial. Appearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee, the attorney general was pressed by several Republicans on the question.
Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina asked whether if by a fluke a terrorist was ''somehow acquitted,'' could he be legally held as an enemy combatant?
''I certainly think that under the regime that we are contemplating, the potential for detaining people under the laws of war, we would retain that ability,'' Mr. Holder said.
It was at that appearance that Mr. Holder also said he had told prosecutors that ''failure is not an option.'' He added, ''These are cases that have to be won.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 8, 2010


End of Document