RUMSFELD'S ANTI-TERRORISM MESSAGE FINDS OPEN EARS IN ETHIOPIA, ERITREA;
 2 NATIONS' LEADERS EXPRESS EAGERNESS TO COOPERATE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 11, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A13
Length: 463 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA
Body


The United States is committed to a long-term partnership of fighting terrorism in the Horn of Africa, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Tuesday. Leaders of Ethiopia and Eritrea pledged support but struck no new deals on U.S. access to bases.
Rumsfeld said he did not come to the region to negotiate the use of military bases for U.S. forces. But he left open the possibility that the United States eventually would expand its presence.
The sea lanes in the region, where the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden meet, are increasingly important because they are used for commercial shipping and to move U.S. war materiel to the Persian Gulf, where U.S. forces are building up for a possible attack on Iraq.
Rumsfeld was to fly today to Djibouti, which borders Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia near the Gulf of Aden. He was to visit hundreds of American troops stationed at Camp Le Monier, a French air base that has become the headquarters of a U.S. anti-terrorist task force.
Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi told reporters after meeting with Rumsfeld that members of Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network were filtering into the area, increasing the threat of terrorist acts.
"Due to the migration of some of these people out of Afghanistan, things might have become a bit more serious in the Horn of Africa than it was earlier," Zenawi said in a joint appearance with Rumsfeld.
Zenawi, who discussed the war on terrorism with President George W. Bush at the White House on Thursday, stressed his government's eagerness to work with the United States.
"I want to underline the fact that in the global fight against terrorism, Ethiopia is not going to be haphazard," he said. "Whatever it takes to fight terrorism, we will do."
Throughout the opening day of his visit to the Horn of Africa and the Persian Gulf, Rumsfeld stressed that he was not negotiating access for American troops, ships or planes.
"My visit here is not transactional," he said in Addis Ababa. "It was a relationship visit. It was not to ask for anything or to receive anything. It was to encourage that this important partnership we have in the global war on terrorism evolve and strengthen."
In the Eritrean capital of Asmara earlier in the day, Rumsfeld said: "I'm not here to put pressure on anybody. I'm here to demonstrate that the United States values what these countries are doing."
Eritrean President Isaias Afwerki blamed Sudan for much of the region's terrorist problem. He noted that bin Laden had taken refuge in Sudan until 1996, when he fled to Afghanistan.
Afwerki said that he was impressed by the U.S. commitment to fight terrorism over the long term and that his government had offered aid in many forms. Asked whether that included basing U.S. forces in Eritrea, he replied, "That is the least of it."

Notes

WORLD; A shorter version of this story appeared in the FIVE STAR LIFT edition on Page A13.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - "My visit here is not transactional. It was a relationship visit. .. . It was to encourage that this important partnership we have in the global war on terrorism evolve and strengthen." -- Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld; (NOTE: the following caption appeared with this photo in the FIVE STAR LIFT edition: Photo Headshot - (Defense Secretary Donald) Rumsfeld, Visits Ethiopia, Eritrea)

Load-Date: December 11, 2002


End of Document