Rumsfeld: 'Mixed' results on terrorism;
'Truly bold moves' may be lacking, memo says
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 23, 2003 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 525 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said his department may not yet have made "truly bold moves" as it tries to deal with the threat of global terrorism.
In a memo to four of his top assistants, Rumsfeld said it is not possible to change the Defense Department fast enough to successfully fight terrorism and that an alternative might be a new institution.
He also raised ideas, often through questions, for improving how it responds to this threat.
AJC
Among the points he made in the memo, dated Oct. 16 and first published Wednesday in USA Today, were:
 
* Results against Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network are "mixed, although we have put considerable pressure on them."
 
* "My impression is that we have not yet made truly bold moves, although we have made many sensible, logical moves in the right direction."
 
* "Today, we lack metrics to know if we are winning or losing the global war on terror."
Rumsfeld said Wednesday that he wrote it after hearing updates from combatant commanders and asking them questions.
"And I went back to the office and put it down in a memo and sent it to three or four of my closest associates," Rumsfeld said after a closed briefing on Iraq to U.S. senators at the Capitol.
Defense spokesman Larry Di Rita and others rejected a characterization of the memo as presenting a grim outlook.
"It was a memo about the global war on terror, trying to ask the kinds of questions that need to be asked, that any leader should be asking, and that other leaders in this government have been asking in Congress and the administration, about the big questions in the war on terror," Di Rita said.
Sen. John Warner (R-Va.), the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said he had read the memo.
"It seems to me to pose a constructive framework of questions," he said. "The same ones we're discussing among ourselves."
Much of the memo dealt with Rumsfeld's long-standing goal of transforming the military and raised issues that the secretary has discussed numerous times.
In at least one passage, the memo echoes words spoken March 30 by Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and one of those to whom Rumsfeld directed it.
"This is going to be a tough war, a tough slog yet," Myers said then on NBC's "Meet the Press."
In his memo, Rumsfeld wrote, "It is pretty clear that the coalition can win in Afghanistan and Iraq in one way or another, but it will be a long, hard slog."
The memo also was sent to Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz; Gen. Peter Pace, vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and Douglas Feith, undersecretary of defense for policy.
David Tucker, who worked in the Defense Department in the 1990s and is now a professor in the department of defense analysis at the Naval Postgraduate School in California, said his research on innovation in the military pointed up the difficulty Rumsfeld faces in accomplishing transformation.
"People tend to default to what they're used to. It's hard for people to think of new ways of doing things," Tucker said.
"And he has, from the very beginning, argued that he has to find incentives and ways to encourage people to do these things."

Graphic

 
Photo: Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld has raised the possibility of creating a new government entity to fight terrorism. / GERALD HERBERT / Associated Press

Load-Date: October 23, 2003


End of Document