RUMSFELD WANTS NATO TO CUT TROOPS IN BOSNIA TO FREE ARMIES FOR TERRORISM WAR ;
 HIS PLAN WOULD PULL 1,000 AMERICANS OUT OF THE BOSNIAN FORCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 19, 2001 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 366 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM
Body


Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld proposed Tuesday that NATO cut its forces in Bosnia by up to a third because their police work there has begun to strain armies needed to fight terrorism.
At a meeting dominated by the attacks of Sept. 11, Rumsfeld and NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson also urged alliance countries to work now to increase military spending to fight terrorism - "while these lessons are still fresh in the minds of people everywhere," as Rumsfeld put it.
His proposal to cut one-third of the NATO troops in Bosnia, about 6,000 of the 18,000, was designed as an extension of a British plan to restructure alliance forces there and in Kosovo and Macedonia under one command.
Americans make up about 17 percent - or about 3,100 - of the NATO troops in Bosnia. Rumsfeld's proposal would mean that about 1,000 of those would leave, a senior U.S. defense official said on the condition of anonymity. The Americans hope the reduction could be accomplished by next fall.
The United States is not proposing a reduction in the NATO force in Kosovo, the official said, but that might logically be something to consider in the future. NATO has 39,000 troops in Kosovo and Macedonia, 5,700 of whom are American.
"Civil security … is not an effective use of NATO's valuable military assets," Rumsfeld told defense ministers from the 19-nation alliance meeting in Brussels. It has put "increasing strain on both our forces and our resources when they face growing demands from critical missions in the war on terrorism."
Rumsfeld said NATO countries must improve their intelligence work, their precision weapons and especially their defenses against nuclear, chemical and biological weapons as they brace for possible future attacks .
He told fellow defense ministers that as "we look at the devastation they unleashed in the United States," we "contemplate the destruction they could wreak in New York, or London, or Paris, or Berlin with nuclear, chemical or biological weapons."
In Sarajevo, the office of Wolfgang Petritsch, the top international administrator of Bosnia, said Petritsch still counted on the NATO-led peacekeeping force. NATO's job is incomplete, said Kevin Sullivan, a spokesman.

Load-Date: December 19, 2001


End of Document