Rumsfeld says new agency needed to fight terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City, Utah)
October 23, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 369 words
Byline: By Thom Shanker New York Times News Service
Body


WASHINGTON -- Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld has told military commanders that the Pentagon is ill suited to combat terrorism and suggested that a new, more agile security agency may be needed to overcome the global threat.
"It is not possible to change DOD fast enough to successfully fight the global war on terror," Rumsfeld said in a memo dated Oct. 16, using initials for the Department of Defense. "An alternative might be to try to fashion a new institution, either within DOD or elsewhere -- one that seamlessly focuses the capabilities of several departments and agencies on this key problem."
In an unusually blunt assessment of the campaign against terrorism, Rumsfeld wrote: "We are having mixed results with al-Qaida, although we have put considerable pressure on them -- nonetheless, a great many remain at large."
In the memo, published on Wednesday in USA Today, he also said the United States, while successful in capturing many top Iraqi leaders, "has made somewhat slower progress tracking down the Taliban," who had offered sanctuary to al-Qaida before the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
Of the two major wars fought on his watch -- conflicts whose victories have evolved into complicated, bloody peacekeeping and reconstruction missions -- Rumsfeld wrote, "It is pretty clear that the coalition can win in Afghanistan and Iraq in one way or another, but it will be a long, hard slog."
During news briefings and congressional testimony, Rumsfeld often has admonished that the fight against terrorism will be lengthy and costly, with victory against a shadowy adversary difficult to define. He is known around the Pentagon for trying to provoke debate by asking pointed questions. But he and other senior administration officials rarely speak as bluntly in public as the defense secretary did in the internal Pentagon memo.
The White House defended the memorandum and Rumsfeld. Traveling with President Bush in Australia, the White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, said the memorandum was "exactly what a strong and capable secretary of defense, like Secretary Rumsfeld, should be doing."
Rumsfeld wrote that the document was a compilation of thoughts previously shared with regional combatant commanders.

Load-Date: October 24, 2003


End of Document