Rumsfeld warns of fund gap;
War on terrorism, Iraq buildup cited
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 6, 2003 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 415 words
Byline: GEORGE EDMONSON
Body


Washington --- Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told Congress on Wednesday that he will be back soon to request "a lot more money" to pay for the war on terrorism and the preparations for possible action in Iraq.
"We did not put money in this year for the global war on terrorism, nor did we put money in for the cost of the buildup to support the diplomacy with respect to Iraq," Rumsfeld told the House Armed Services Committee in testimony on the Defense Department's proposed $379.9 billion budget.
Rumsfeld pointed to the congressional rejection of last year's administration request for a $10 billion contingency fund, which some members of Congress felt would have had inadequate oversight. Rumsfeld also said the department could not predict possibilities with Iraq when the budget was put together several months ago.
AJC
The cost of the global war on terrorism is running at about $1.6 billion a month, and about $2.1 billion has been spent for actions related to Iraq, he said.
To cover those costs, Rumsfeld said, the department will come back to Congress "reasonably soon" with a supplemental request to the budget for the federal fiscal year 2004, which begins Oct. 1.
"The '04 numbers represented our best estimate at the time the budget was developed," Rumsfeld said. "It may well change over the coming period as we learn more about the demands of safety on a worldwide basis."
Comments and questions from Republicans and Democrats on the 61-member panel indicated that congressional consideration of the department's budget could be arduous. While nearly all praised Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard Myers, the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, who also testified, the issues that arose were wide and varied.
Some said the proposed level of shipbuilding was inadequate, while others questioned the wisdom of increasing the use of contractors. Other topics ranged from the possibility of using nuclear weapons to whether privatization of military housing was proceeding quickly enough.
In his opening statement, committee Chairman Duncan Hunter (R-Calif.) referred to a "defense budget hole carved out during the 1990s. . . . Thus, I am concerned that with the modest 4 percent increase proposed for this year and beyond, we are calling it quits before the job is done."
Rumsfeld told the committee that the budget plan, which was released Monday, is the Bush administration's first proposal to completely reflect its new defense strategies and policies enacted since the president took office.

Load-Date: February 6, 2003


End of Document