Rushdie's Publisher Assails 'Censorship by Terrorism'
The New York Times
February 19, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 785 words
Byline: By EDWIN McDOWELL
Body


A spokesman for Viking Penguin yesterday condemned ''censorship by terrorism and intimidation,'' and he coupled his remarks with criticism of the major bookstore chains that have pulled ''The Satanic Verses'' from their shelves.
He also said the publishing house is reprinting the novel, by Salman Rushdie, which has sold out across much of the United States.
''Unlike the major retailers,'' said the spokesman, who asked that his name not be used for reasons of personal safety, ''we have not pulled in our horns. We have never stopped publishing the book, and we are publishing it in relationship to changing demand, although demand is very difficult to gauge because of the action of the big retail chains.''
'Extra Dimensions' of Book
The spokesman added, ''Viking Penguin thought we had acquired, edited and published a literary book, and had no sense of the controversy that later emerged.''
Eight other publishers bid for the book, he said, and they apparently also did not know of ''the extra dimensions that would come to surround the book.''
The spokesman continued: ''That said, it is inconceivable to most of us in the West that a writer, and a distinguished writer at that, should not be able to express his ideas, and that publishers should not be permitted to publish them, booksellers not permited to sell them, and that readers should be excluded from the marketplace of ideas. If the present tendency continues, the Ayatollah will have prevailed. This is not censorship with respect to the First Amendment, this is censorship by terrorism and intimidation.''
 
Bush Is Asked to Respond
Muslim groups have said the novel defames the Prophet Mohammed, and on Tuesday Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran issued a death threat against Mr. Rushdie. On Friday, the Iranian President indicated that the threat could be withdrawn if Mr. Rushdie issued an appropriate apology.
Yesterday, Mr. Rushdie said he regretted the distress that his novel had caused to Muslims.
The Authors Guild and the National Writers Union demanded yesterday that President Bush publicly condemn the threats by Iran and warn that the United States will respond if any harm comes to an American citizen.
Describing the threats as a ''unique and horrifying license to murder,'' the 6,500-member Authors Guild asked President Bush in a telegram to issue a ''forceful statement'' saying ''this kind of monstrous behavior has no place in the international community.''
The telegram asked Mr. Bush to state that any attempt to threaten or harm American citizens involved with the book ''will be met by the full power of the American government.'' A White House spokesman said yesterday that the telegram had not been received.
 
Khomeini as 'Terrorist'
Daniel J. Boorstin, the historian and former Librarian of Congress, called for the Government to take a strong position. ''It says it's doing so much about terrorism,'' he said. ''Now that Khomeini has proclaimed himself to be a terrorist, our Government should respond publicly in the strongest terms.''
Dr. Boorstin said that when ''The Satantic Verses'' becomes available again, ''Everybody should buy a copy, as an affirmation of the freedom of the press in America and our unwillingness to be held hostage in our own country.''
The writers union demanded that the Government ''provide whatever protection is necessary'' for publishers, vendors and writers. It also announced that a demonstration will begin at 10 A.M. on Wednesday outside the Iranian Mission to the United Nations.
Alec Dubro, national president of the union, said the demonstrators will then picket outside the stores of the B. Dalton, Waldenbooks and Barnes & Noble chains to protest the decision to pull the Rushdie novel from their shelves.
Meanwhile, bookstores throughout the United States reported heavy demand for the novel, which has been virtually sold out for the last several days.
 
Koran Sells Briskly, Too
The controversy has generated so much interest in the Islamic religion that the Strand Book Store, at 828 Broadway in Manhattan, has sold more than 250 copies of the Koran, the sacred book of Islam, compared with 10 to 15 copies in a normal week.
At the St. Marks Bookshop, at 13 St. Marks Place in Greenwich Village, which sold out its copies of ''The Satanic Verses,'' Robert Constant said: ''The phone has been ringing off the hook. Almost everyone coming in the door wants a copy.''
Carolyn Orifel, a saleswoman at Spring Street Books, at 169 Spring Street in Manhattan, said the store received 100 requests for the book on Friday. ''The minute anyone says 'Do you have--,' we say, 'No,' '' she said. ''People don't believe us. They think we're hiding it in the back and selling it from behind the counter.''


End of Document