Russia catches a chill
USA TODAY
September 16, 2004, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 407 words
Body

Remember the Beatles song Back in the USSR? Thirteen years after that communist monolith collapsed, Paul McCartney might consider a new version.
Russian President Vladimir Putin moved this week to consolidate power. He wants to abolish elections for half the 450 seats in the parliament's lower house, the route taken by his most vocal opponents. And he wants to stop direct elections for the country's 89 governors. Instead, he'd choose them.
He has already stacked parliament with his supporters, in part by shutting down most independent media, thus denying political opponents fair coverage. His proposals appear certain to be enacted.
Putin's justification: More top-down control is needed to stop terrorism. He said he was jolted to action by the tragedy earlier this month, when at least 339 people died after gunmen from the separatist republic of Chechnya took over a school.
This is a familiar pattern. Strongmen use crises to gain more power. It is troubling for the U.S., too. Since the Soviet Union fell, bringing democracy to Russia -- and thereby security to the USA and Europe -- has been a cornerstone of U.S. policy.
Yet, President Bush waited until Wednesday to respond, saying he is concerned that Putin's move "could undermine democracy."
Where is the outrage?
It's lost in a dilemma that has echoes of the Cold War and immediate impact on the war on terrorism. What to do when the leader of a country the U.S. needs behaves in ways that go against its bedrock principles?
In the Cold War, the U.S. backed unsavory regimes in the interests of the greater struggle between capitalism and communism. Today, Putin has plenty of company. Take U.S. ally Pervez Musharraf, president of Pakistan. His dictatorial ways are questionable. But Pakistan is al-Qaeda terrorism central.
The U.S. needs Putin on a range of war-on-terrorism fronts, from hunting terrorists to keeping Russia's nuclear arsenals and weapons know-how out of terrorist hands.
Even so, short-term pragmatism can't trump longer-term U.S. interests. Democracy is in this nation's -- and the world's -- best interests. Dictatorships repress people. Al-Qaeda extremism is one product of that.
The U.S. has to push, or persuade, Putin to do the right thing. China is an example. The U.S. has rebuked the communist leadership over human-rights abuses while encouraging change by granting economic benefits.
Going back to the USSR can't be an option -- for Russia or anywhere else.

Load-Date: September 17, 2004


End of Document