Russian Cultural Honor For a Controversial Syrian
The New York Times
February 23, 2012 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 926 words
Byline: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN
Body


MOSCOW -- Amid the escalating violence in Syria and a diplomatic outcry over Russia's actions blocking intervention by the United Nations, President Dmitri A. Medvedev bestowed a prestigious cultural award on a Syrian writer and poet who has publicly applauded the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and expressed strong anti-Semitic views.
The writer, Ali Ukla Ursan, also known for close ties to Russia, was one of 11 foreign honorees to receive prestigious awards for their close ties to Russia at a ceremony last week at Mr. Medvedev's presidential residence.
''I want to present each of you with Russian Federation state decorations, decorations awarded in recognition of your great services,'' Mr. Medvedev said, according to a transcript posted on the president's Web site. ''Here today are people who have made a special and very valuable contribution to developing humanitarian relations and bring closer together everyone with an interest in Russia, its language, history and modern life.''
In accepting his prize, called the Pushkin Medal, Mr. Ursan, a former chairman and now adviser to the Syrian Writers Union, made pointedly political remarks. ''I thank Russia for its wise policies,'' he said, according to the transcript. ''I thank this nation for its decisive and steady position against aggression, terrorism and attempts to meddle in the internal affairs of other states and people in the context of a unipolar world.''
Throughout the nearly yearlong popular uprising in Syria and a lethal government crackdown, Moscow has thrown President Bashar al-Assad a lifeline, providing weapons and diplomatic support to help keep his government afloat.
In honoring Mr. Ursan, the Russian president lauded a writer who has displayed a tolerance for terrorism -- when aimed at the United States. On Sept. 25, 2001, Mr. Ursan described his reaction to the collapse of the World Trade Center buildings two weeks earlier. ''My lungs filled with air, and I breathed in relief as I had never breathed before,'' he wrote in Al Usbu Al Udabi a Damascus literary magazine.
A spokesman for Mr. Medvedev, Aleksei Pavlov, said the current political situation in Syria was not a factor in Mr. Ursan's selection for the prize, which he said was apparently made several months ago. ''He is a writer, not an arms seller,'' Mr. Pavlov said. He added that Mr. Ursan ''objectively'' deserved the award, based on his work developing partnerships between Syrian and Soviet and later Russian writers, as well as his work on numerous translations of Arabic and Russian literature.
Mr. Ursan did not immediately respond to an e-mail requesting comment and could not be reached by telephone.
Under Russian law, the president is responsible for approving nominations for the state awards, which are submitted by the Foreign Ministry.
Word that Mr. Ursan had been honored by Mr. Medvedev drew quick criticism from a leading Jewish organization in Russia, and from the Simon Wiesenthal Center, which combats anti-Semitism around the world.
''Our center was shocked,'' Shimon Samuels, the Wiesenthal Center's director for international relations, wrote in a letter to Mr. Medvedev. ''Ursan is an extreme opponent of peace, normalization or even contact between Syria and Israel or Israelis, having successfully contributed to sabotaging the 1999 peace talks between two countries. He is a conspiracy theorist and apologist for terrorism.''
Baruch Gorin, a spokesman for the Federation of Jewish Communities in Russia, said a representative of Rabbi Berl Lazar, the chief Hasidic rabbi in Russia, would voice consternation over the award to the presidential administration at a meeting this week of Mr. Medvedev's Committee of Multinational Relations. ''We hope that it is not more than a stupid mistake,'' Mr. Gorin said.
Mr. Ursan's 2001 commentary was featured prominently in a report and documentary by the Middle East Media Research Institute, a Washington group, on reaction in the Arab world to the 9/11 attacks.
''My soul was inundated by tremendous bitterness, revulsion, disgust towards the country that in the past half-century has racked up only a black history of oppression and support for the aggression and racism of the Nazi Zionists and for apartheid in South Africa,'' Mr. Ursan wrote.
He wrote about feeling momentary compassion for the innocent people ''under the ruins'' but said that he was ''overwhelmed'' by anger toward the United States and that the attacks should force American officials to rethink their policies.
Mr. Ursan has frequently spoken out against Israel and Jews. In the same magazine in February 2000, Mr. Ursan wrote: ''The covetous, racist and hated Jew Shylock who cut the flesh from Antonio's chest with the knife of hatred, invades you with his money, his modern airplanes, his missiles and his nuclear bombs.''
Valery N. Ganichev, the chairman of the Russian Writers Union, said Mr. Ursan was a well-regarded colleague who had visited Russia several times and also played host to delegations of Russian writers visiting Syria.
''Among other things, he was awarded for the constant creative and spiritual cooperation with the writers of Russia,'' Mr. Ganichev said. ''He visited our country many times. He knows Pushkin works very well.''
Mr. Ganichev said he was unaware of Mr. Ursan's anti-American and anti-Semitic writings and doubted that he would have praised the events of Sept. 11. But he quickly added: ''Actually, this is his own business. We are grateful that he was interested in the Russian culture. Politics is a different matter.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 23, 2012


End of Document