Russia, China urge lead role for U.N. in fighting terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 16, 2005 Friday
MISSOURI NORTH THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A11
Length: 275 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS 
Body


Russia and China called Thursday for the United Nations to take the lead in the global fight against terrorism. The nations' leaders spoke on the second day of a U.N. summit.
The demands for a bigger U.N. role underlined how central terrorism has become around the world since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
"There is a need to adjust this organization to the new historical reality," Russian President Vladimir Putin said. "Who else will take the role of coordinating and organizing this work but the United Nations?"
He was echoed by Chinese President Hu Jintao, who called for a new global security concept that puts the United Nations at "the core" of efforts to fight terrorism and settle disputes and conflicts.
Also, a U.N. treaty to fight global corruption got its 30th ratification and will go into effect in 90 days. The convention empowers countries to prosecute officials accused of stealing public funds. 
"This dream has become a reality," said Antonio Maria Costa, executive director of the U.N. Office of Drugs and Crime.
This summit was called for two main reasons -- to review progress toward achieving eight goals meant to improve the plight of the world's poor and to consider a raft of proposals to overhaul the U.N. itself.
Most of the speeches focused on those efforts.
Leaders generally expressed support for the draft document, which was expected to be adopted today, the summit's last day. But they said they were disappointed that some elements were left out, including Security Council reform and nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation.
A near constant refrain was that the United Nations should play a larger role in world affairs.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Russian President Vladimir Putin (left) said the United Nations must adjust to "the new historical reality."   His comments were echoed by  Photo - Chinese President Hu Jintao. 

Load-Date: September 17, 2005


End of Document