Russia seeking cause of crashes Terrorism suspected, but other possibilities are being investigated
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 25, 2004, Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 374 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


BUCHALKI, Russia - Russian emergency workers searched through heaps of twisted metal and tall grass today for clues about what caused two airliners to plunge to Earth almost simultaneously, killing all 89 people aboard and raising concerns of a terrorist strike. Officials said one of the jets sent a distress signal that may have indicated a hijacking.
Russia's main intelligence agency, however, said it had found no evidence of terrorism in initial investigations at the crash sites. The Federal Security Service, or FSB, said it was investigating other possibilities such as technical failures, the use of poor quality fuel, breaches of fueling regulations and pilot error, its press service told The Associated Press.
A Sibir airlines Tu-154 jet, carrying 46 people, took off from Moscow's newly redeveloped Domodedovo airport at 9:35 p.m. Tuesday and the other plane, a Tu-134 carrying 43 people, left 40 minutes later, according to state-run Rossiya television. The Tu-134 was headed to the southern city of Volgograd, while the other plane was flying to the Black Sea resort city of Sochi, where President Vladimir Putin is vacationing.
The planes disappeared from radar about 11:00 p.m., and by early this morning, the wreckage of both had been found - with no survivors. Domodedovo airport said in a statement that both planes "went through the standard procedure of preparation for flight ...(and) the procedures were carried out properly."
Uncertainty over the cause of the crashes came after Sibir said that it was notified that its jet had activated a hijack signal shortly before disappearing from radar.
Officials said the crew of the other plane gave no indication that anything was wrong, but witnesses on the ground reported hearing a series of explosions.
Putin ordered an investigation by the FSB, and security was tightened at Russian airports.
The FSB dispatched experts to the wreckage to determine whether explosions preceded the crashes, Interfax reported. Flight recorders from both planes were recovered, ITAR-Tass reported.
Officials had expressed concern that separatists in war-ravaged Chechnya might carry out attacks ahead of a regional election Sunday to replace the pro-Moscow president who was killed in a May bombing.

Load-Date: August 26, 2004


End of Document