Russian authorities eye terrorism as cause of 2 passenger jet crashes
Business Insurance
August 30, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 13
Length: 436 words
Byline: SARAH VEYSEY
Body


MOSCOW-Authorities investigating the nearly simultaneous crash of two Russian passenger jets last week have confirmed that traces of explosives have been identified in the wreckage of one of the planes.
The two jets, operated by Siberia Airlines and Volga Avia-Express, crashed minutes apart after leaving Moscow's Domodedovo International Airport Tuesday night. All 89 passengers and crew aboard the planes were killed.
Russia's federal security service said Friday that traces of explosives had been found in the wreckage of Siberia Airlines' Flight 1047. The Tupolev 154 jet was en route to Sochi when it disappeared from radar at about 11 p.m. local time. The plane crashed in a village near Rostov-on-Don, killing 38 passengers and eight crew members.
In a statement issued late last week, Siberia Airlines said that an explosive known as hexogen had been found in the plane's wreckage.
The day after the crashes, Domodedovo International Airport issued a statement noting that all routine preflight security checks had been carried out on the two planes before takeoff.
In its statement, Siberia Airlines said that, according to information from the Russian Unified System of Air Traffic Control, its Tu-154 plane sent out a hijack alarm shortly before it vanished from radar.
The extent of insurance losses arising from the disaster-and the question of whether some will be borne by Russia's terrorism pool-won't be known until the investigation is complete, sources said.
Siberia Airlines has civil liability insurance underwritten by Moscow-based Ingosstrakh Insurance Co.
In addition, the airline said that it has hull and liability coverage from Moscow-based aviation insurer AFES Insurance Co. The value of its jet, which was built in 1982, was not disclosed.
Coverage information for the other aircraft, a Volga Avia-Express plane en route to Volgograd, was not available. The Tupolev 134 jet was carrying 35 passengers and eight crew members when it crashed near Tula.
Sources said it is too early to determine whether some of the losses from the crashes will be covered by Russia's Terrorism Risk Insurance Pool. The pool was set up by six domestic insurers in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States.
A spokeswoman for Ingosstrakh, which was one of the pool's founders, said that it won't be possible to determine whether the pool will be tapped until the official investigation into the crashes is complete.
A Russia-based insurance broker said, though, that the pool may not be activated regardless of the official findings, and that the government may instead provide compensation.

Graphic

 
Russian authorities inspect the wreckage of a Tupolev 154 jet that crashed on Aug. 24 in Globoky, a village near Rostov-on-Don.

Load-Date: September 1, 2004


End of Document