Russian intelligence officers charged over Novichok poisoning in Britain
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 9, 2018 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 640 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The Russian foreign ministry said Wednesday that it did not recognize the names Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov. The prosecutors said that the U.K.is not askingMoscow to extradite the men because Russian law forbids extradition of the country's citizens.
British Prime Minister Theresa May said on Wednesday that the two suspects behind the poisoning of Sergei Skripal and his daughter work for Russia's military intelligence.
Assistant Commissioner Neil Basu of London's Metropolitan Police - Britain's top counter-terrorism officer - said the two suspects were believed to be in their 40s.
May told MPs the pair "are officers of the Russian military intelligence service, also known as the GRU", adding the attack had been sanctioned from higher up.
Russian Federation is expected to refuse to extradite the duo to face attempted murder charges in Britain - claiming it has nothing to do with the attack.
"The GRU is a highly disciplined organisation with a well-established chain of command. So this was not a rogue operation", she told parliament.
"We have full confidence in the British assessment that the two suspects were officers from the Russian military intelligence service, also known as the GRU, and that this operation was nearly certainly approved at a senior government level", the statement said, adding that the countries urged Russia to provide "full disclosure of its Novichok program".
Russian President Vladimir Putin, himself a former KGB spy, said earlier last month Mr Skripal would have been dead if he was attacked with a weapons-grade agent.
"It left four people fighting for their lives and one innocent woman dead".
Sergei Skripal, the former Russian spy, and his daughter collapsed in downtown Salisbury after being exposed to the poison on Skripal's front door on March 4, police said.
Nicki Minaj Features in New BTS Music Video 'IDOL'
South Korean K-pop group, BTS , have released a surprise new video for their new song, " Idol ", featuring rapper Nicki Minaj . It's also a peaceful response to people who tried categorizing boys and their music in certain categories.
But a fake perfume bottle containing Novichok was picked up weeks later by a local man, Charlie Rowley, who give it to his girlfriend, Dawn Sturgess.
Police believe Ms Sturgess and Mr Rowley were not deliberately targeted, but were in fact victims of recklessness in how the nerve agent was disposed of after the attempted assassination of Mr Skirpal.
Prosecutors will not be applying to Russian Federation for the extradition of the two men, but a European Arrest Warrant has been obtained.
They also released images of them captured at Salisbury train station on March 3 in what they allege was a reconnaissance mission.
Russian Federation has highlighted what it considers are two inconsistencies in the UK's claim thatMoscow was behind Novichok poisonings on English soil.
Scotland Yard's Assistant Commissioner Neil Basu, the head of United Kingdom counter-terrorism policing, said on Wednesday he "continues to make good progress but remains off work".
Security cameras filmed the suspects near Skripal's house, and traces of Novichok were found in their London hotel room.
The offences include conspiracy to murder Sergei Skripal; the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal, Yulia Skripal and police officer Nick Bailey; the use and possession of Novichok contrary to the Chemical Weapons Act; and causing grievous bodily harm with intent to Yulia Skripal and Detective Sergent Nick Bailey.
The Kremlin says Russia is not investigating the two men that Britain has named as suspects in the nerve agent attack on a Russian ex-spy.
Mr Basu said: "We don't yet know where the suspects disposed of the Novichok they used to attack the door, where Dawn and Charlie got the bottle that poisoned them, or if it is the same bottle used in both poisonings".

Load-Date: September 9, 2018


End of Document