Russia sees terrorism at home
University Wire
September 10, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Daily Mississippian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 603 words
Byline: By James Kutkowski, Daily Mississippian; SOURCE: U. Mississippi
Dateline: OXFORD, Miss. 
Body


This is not designed to make light of the murders of 3,000-plus innocent Americans on Sept. 11, 2001, but instead to point out that the danger of terrorism still exists in the world and threatens not only our allies but also our opponents.
Over the course of 2004, Spain, Israel and Russia have felt the impact of Islamic Fundamental terrorists.
In Israel, terrorism is nothing new because of their shared border with Palestine, a terrorist state determined to destroy them. Israel's response has been to build a wall to protect themselves against suicide bombers.
The wall is working on two fronts, first and foremost, suicide bombings have decreased in areas where construction is complete, and secondly, thumbing their nose at the U.N. who is diametrically opposed to Israel protecting itself and most likely Israel's existence.
Spain's national elections were changed drastically by bombings in their subway system. A shell-shocked electorate voted out the incumbent and elected a leader who was against the war in Iraq. This taught terrorists that they can affect national elections if they time their attacks carefully.
This is why our nation went on high alert during our presidential conventions and why the threat level is likely to be elevated as the November elections near.
Now Russia has been attacked by terrorists, and although they were not initially thought to be linked with al Qaeda, it is becoming increasingly more apparent that Abu Omar As-Seyf, one of Osama Bin Ladin's inner circle, has been financing the recent attacks in Russia.
Two weeks ago more than 90 people were murdered in hijacked planes that crashed simultaneously. It has yet to be determined whether there was more to the hijacking than just to crash the planes.
It is possible that passengers on those planes realized this was another "9-11" type scheme and forced the planes to crash. It is also possible that the Russian government shot the planes down once the hijacking was discovered.
Last week, a beleaguered Russian government stood helpless as a school was taken over by Islamic terrorists and, so far, more than 350 people are dead. Clearly the Russian government needs to take control of this situation quickly, but how?
Had it been 2002, Russia may have had help from the United States, but this is not 2002. While Israel was busy building its wall of brick and stone, Russia was creating a wall of its own by siding with Germany and France in the U.N.'s opposition to the war in Iraq.
Now that Russia has been attacked in its own borders, its opinion on pre-emptive strikes against terrorist and terrorist sponsoring nations, like Chechnya, is likely to change.
If some mending of relations is done, Russia can still be welcomed back into the war on terror. Russia has now had its 9-11, and what Senator John McCain describes as the hinge in world history has opened the door to an opportunity for cooperation among rivals.
If there is one thing history will record, it is that George W. Bush, Tony Blair and Vladimir Putin have made unpopular decisions because they believed them to be the best decisions for their respective nations.
Given their records, it is feasible that all would be willing to swallow their pride and mend the rift that has grown between our nations.
If that happens, Osama Bin Ladin and his band of worthless murderers have made the strategic decision that could end their very existence. They will have succeeded in reuniting the United States, Great Britain and Russia in the pursuit of one thing they can all agree on, the obliteration of al Qaeda and Radical Islam.
(C) 2003 Daily Mississippian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 10, 2004


End of Document