Russia ousts U.S. 'secret agent recruiter'
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
May 15, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 446 words
Byline: THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


MOSCOW - An American diplomat was briefly detained by Russia's State Security Service and ordered to leave the country because he is accused of trying to recruit a Russian officer to work as a U.S. agent, Moscow officials said on Tuesday. 
Russia's Foreign Ministry posted a statement on its Web site, declaring Ryan C. Fogle is now persona non grata. 
Fogle was listed as the third secretary in the political section at the U.S. Embassy. He must leave Russia quickly, the Foreign Ministry said. 
Catching a foreign intelligence officer red-handed, the statement continued, raises serious questions about relations with the United States - despite a recent, friendly meeting in Moscow between Secretary of State John F. Kerry and President Vladimir Putin. 
"While our two Presidents have reaffirmed their willingness to expand bilateral cooperation, including between intelligence agencies in the fight against international terrorism," the statement said, "such provocative Cold War-style actions do not contribute to building mutual trust." 
Fogle was detained Monday night or early Tuesday morning, reportedly while in the act of trying to recruit the unnamed Russian.  
On Tuesday, Fogle was turned over to U.S. Embassy officials. The Federal Security Service said Fogle's listed U.S. diplomatic post is a cover and alleged that Fogle is a CIA officer. 
In the hours after Fogle's arrest, government-controlled media sites in Russia posted photos of rudimentary disguises, cash and a letter full of instructions that he allegedly was using to try recruiting  secret agents. The letter, written in Russian, offers up to $1 million annually for a long-term relationship that provides good information; it also has instructions on how to open a Gmail account from an Internet cafe or coffee house. 
The paraphernalia - including two madcap wigs (one dark, one with blond streaks), two pairs of sunglasses, a pair of regular black-framed glasses, a cigarette lighter, a small knife with a serrated blade, a Moscow map and a compass - seemed anachronistic, experts said, and oddly reminiscent of a novelty store or "Get Smart," the 1960s-era U.S. television sitcom that spoofed secret agents. 
"Who uses a compass these days?" asked Mark Galeotti, a New York University professor who studies Russian security affairs. "This would be a phenomenal breach of tradecraft. This isn't what they teach you at the CIA." 
Fogle was snatched and splashily identified just as the FSB and FBI have been talking about overcoming their mutual mistrust and improving their cooperation in terrorism investigations, in the wake of the Boston Marathon bombing and before the February Winter Olympics at Sochi. 

Load-Date: May 17, 2013


End of Document