Russians keeping up the pressure on Chechens;
 Washington wants Moscow to negotiate, but the Kremlin says crushing terrorism comes first.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
October 30, 1999, Saturday,
Home Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 9A
Length: 668 words
Byline: Ruslan Musayev, Associated Press
Dateline: Grozny, Russia
Body

Russia launched wave after wave of fierce strikes on Chechen cities and a major rebel stronghold Friday as a U.S. official in Moscow urged a peaceful solution to the conflict.
At least 50 refugees trying to flee the intense assaults in the breakaway republic were killed. Many more were wounded when a Russian jet fired a missile at a convoy of vehicles heading toward the neighboring Russian republic of Ingushetia, Chechen officials said.
Witnesses said the jet dived at the convoy near the town of Samashki. The jet launched at least one missile, setting cars and trucks ablaze.
AJC
Mikhail Margelov, a spokesman for the Russian information center, said planes did not bomb trucks carrying refugees, the Interfax news agency reported.
He said aircraft fired at trucks that were shooting at them with machine guns near Shami-Yurt, about six miles east of Samashki, the agency said.
The intense strikes on Chechen cities underlined Russia's determination to press ahead in its campaign to wipe out Islamic militants in Chechnya despite Western concerns.
Chechnya is officially part of Russia, but Russian troops failed in the mid- 1990s to put down a rebellion, and the chaotic republic had been virtually independent until Russian forces intervened again in recent weeks.
In the Russian capital, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott told Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov that the United States hopes Russia will ''turn to political levers as soon as possible'' and ''find a way to minimize civilian casualties.''
Russia says its campaign is aimed only at Chechen-based Islamic militants. The militants twice invaded Dagestan this year and are blamed for apartment bombings that killed some 300 people in Russia in September.
But there have been widespread reports of other civilian casualties --- a rocket attack on Grozny's central market last week killed at least 150 people.
''We are struggling against the sources of terrorism on Russian territory, '' said President Boris Yeltsin's spokesman, Dmitry Yakushkin, according to the Interfax news agency. And no one has the right to interfere in Russia's internal affairs, he reportedly said.
Adam Gireyev, a Chechen who fled to neighboring Ingushetia on Friday, said a Russian helicopter fired on a crowd in the southwestern town of Achkoi- Martan on Friday after residents threw firebombs at Russian vehicles.
No casualty figures were immediately available for Friday's fighting, which included an intense strike on the rebel stronghold of Bamut, in Chechnya's southwest, along with airstrikes on Gudermes and the capital, Grozny.
Russian troops had Gudermes, the republic's second-largest city, cut off from the north and east. The troops believed there were still about 200 militants left inside, said Defense Ministry spokesman Gennady Alyokhin.
Unlike the 1994-96 Chechen war, the current campaign has widespread popular support in Russia.
The Russian Defense Ministry said 107 Russian servicemen had been killed in Chechnya since federal forces entered the territory in late September. The Russians claimed to have killed about 1,500 militants. Chechen President Aslan Maskhadov said Thursday that 3,625 Chechens had been killed.
The British Embassy continued to await word from Russian officials on the fate of two Western journalists arrested Thursday along the border between the Russian region of Ingushetia and Chechnya.
Times of London reporter Anthony Lloyd of Britain and free-lance photographer Tyler Hicks, a U.S. citizen, were arrested by Russian police as they tried to cross the border. The ITAR-Tass news agency said they were arrested for not having press accreditation cards.
A major crossing point along the border remained closed, stranding thousands of fleeing refugees. Some 173,000 have fled to Ingushetia so far.
A traffic jam of some 5,000 cars stretched some two miles on the Chechen side of the border, although officials let several vehicles with injured people across.

ON THE WEB: Coverage of the conflict in Chechnya:
> www.ajc.com/links/ 

Load-Date: October 30, 1999


End of Document