RUSSIANS LOSING FAITH IN LEADERS;
FEW BELIEVE GOVERNMENT CAN OR WILL STOP TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 15, 1999, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 923 words
Byline: COLIN MCMAHON, CHICAGO TRIBUNE
Dateline: MOSCOW
Body


The bombings that have rocked Russia over the last two weeks have done more than level apartment houses and kill scores of people. They also have dealt another blow to the Russian people's already battered confidence in their leadership.
As the death toll rose yesterday to 118, including 12 children, from Monday's blast at a Moscow apartment building, Muscovites expressed doubts that officials have either the will or the ability to prevent further terrorist attacks.
Some Russians even suggested that the authorities might be involved in the spate of bombings that have killed at least 277 people.
Authorities say they know who is responsible.  They blame warlords from the breakaway republic of Chechnya, saying the terror campaign is tied to the fighting between Islamic separatists and Russian forces in the southern republic of Dagestan.
Police said yesterday that three people suspected of being linked with the blasts had been detained. Two of the detainees owned compa nies with offices on the ground floor of one of the destroyed buildings.
Police released sketches and photographs of three other men suspected of involvement in the bombings, including a man who allegedly rented space in both apartment buildings.
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin addressed a closed session of the lower house of parliament, the State Duma, which convened to discuss the Moscow bombings and the Dagestan fighting.
"It is time to recognize that terrorism has become Russia's national problem," Putin told the lawmakers, according to Russian news agencies. "It is obvious to us that both in Dagestan and in Moscow we are dealing not with independent fighters, but rather with well-trained international saboteurs."
The prime minister called for a "quarantine" around Chechnya to cut off a route for weapons and Islamic militants. He also suggested applying "tough economic sanctions" against the territory.
He said Chechen authorities must hand over the "bandits" to Russia. "Otherwise, we shall ruthlessly eliminate the bandits every time they cross the Chechen administrative border," he said.
Chechen rebel leaders named by Moscow deny complicity in the bombings. "We would not like to be akin to those who kill sleeping civilians with bombs and shells," Chechen field commander Khattab said yesterday.
Government officials in Chechnya, which claims independence from Russia as a result of its 1994-96 separatist war, also have condemned the attacks.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin has ordered security tightened across the country, particularly at nuclear power plants, oil depots and other critical installations.
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov, meanwhile, has imposed a clampdown of his own. Nonresidents are being told that they must re-register with city officials to stay in Moscow. Police and Interior Ministry troops are increasing foot patrols and stepping up searches of vehicles entering the capital.
Yesterday, police checked the identity papers of train passengers heading to Dagestan, though security seemed about normal at other rail stations. Police also waded through open-air markets, demanding the documents of vendors.
People from the Caucasus - the mountainous region of southern Russia that is home to Chechnya, Dagestan and several other volatile republics - dominate the work force at many of Moscow's markets. Darker-skinned than the average ethnic Russian, they complain of being singled out for harassment.
The bombings began Aug. 31 with an explosion in the Manezh shopping mall near the Kremlin that left one person dead and about 40 wounded. On Sept. 4, a blast killed 64 people at a residence for military families in the Dagestan city of Buinaksk. A week ago, 94 people died in the bombing of a nine-story apartment building in southeast Moscow. Monday's incident occurred about four miles away.
Luzhkov has exhorted residents to report any suspicious activity. But many Russians would rather avoid police than try to work with them. They fear that police will exploit the situation to find some kind of infraction and demand a bribe.
"My point of view is that we have to fight against the authorities in this country, not with them," said Alexandra, a retired store clerk.
Alexandra, called the bombings "part of a war for control - of power, of capital.
"Look for those who will profit most," she said, echoing a maxim that was a favorite of Lenin's, "and you will find those responsible."
This mix of anxiety, distrust and cynicism in the Russian general populace complicates the government's efforts to enlist citizen cooperation in fighting the bombing campaign. Beyond that, it demonstrates anew that average Russians have little faith left in the people and institutions responsible for order and stability.
"There are so many possibilities as to who is behind the attacks that it is impossible to say for sure," said Elena, a 46-year-old schoolteacher. "But one has to think that they were ordered at the highest levels."
Many Muscovites blame the bombings on the struggle for political power in Russia, deepening now as the nation prepares to vote for a new parliament in December and a new president next summer.
"People feel they have no influence over what goes on in the country," pollster Yuri Levada told the Moscow Times. This alienation from politics, Levada said, fuels the conspiracy theories.
For months, political rivals have warned that the Kremlin is planning to declare a state of emergency as a way to cancel the elections. Yeltsin and his advisers dismiss the charges.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
PHOTO 2, PHOTO: MIKHAIL METZEL/ASSOCIATED PRESS: A POLICE OFFICER FOLLOWS MEN; BEING QUESTIONED YESTERDAY AT A MARKET IN MOSCOW, WHERE RIOT TROOPS CHECKED; DOCUMENTS FROM VENDORS AND SHOPPERS.; PHOTO: Vladimir Suvorov/Reuters: Women weep yesterday as rescue workers; continue to search the rubble at the site of an explosion that destroyed an; eight-story block of flats on Monday in Moscow.

Load-Date: September 17, 1999


End of Document