Rutgers panelists combat 'Islamophobia'
University Wire
December 12, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Daily Targum via U-Wire
Length: 526 words
Byline: By Marissa Graziadio, Daily Targum; SOURCE: Rutgers
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J. 
Body


In recent polls, one out of five Americans said the civil liberties of Muslims should be restricted for security reasons.
In 2004, there were more than 1,500 civil rights complaints from Muslims, and from 2005-06, there was a 25.1 percent increase in complaints, said Afsheen Shamsi, the director for Community Relations at the New Jersey chapter of the Council on American Islamic Relations. The council is the largest Islamic civil rights group in the nation with 33 chapters across American and Canada.
"Terrorism: The Manipulation of Fear and the Emergence of Islamophobia," was presented by Rutgers University group Ubuntu, in association with the Islamic Society of Rutgers University, SALAM, the Muslim Student Association at Rutgers and Hillel, last night in the Multipurpose Room of the Rutgers Student Center on the College Avenue campus.
A panel of speakers presented issues concerning acts of terrorism, the stereotyping of Islam and of fear perpetuated by American media to a crowd of about 75 students, faculty and staff.
Panelist Hamid Abdejaber, former chief of the Middle East Radio Unit at the News and Media Division of the Department of Public Information at the United Nations, said the root causes of terrorism are frustration, extremism and despair. Abdejaber said when people are stricken with poverty, famine, a lack of education and a lack of health care, some are willing to commit violent acts.
Shamsi focused on the rising trend of Islamophobia, which is the phenomenon of prejudice against and fear of Muslims.
Experts say negative attitudes about Islam come from media and political figures calling Muslims "crazed fanatics" and calling Islam a terror organization, Shamsi said. Elected officials and presidential candidates all too often pair the term Islam with the word radical. This creates bias and discrimination that have now become the accepted form of institutionalized racism, she said.
American Mosques were chemically bombed and Islam centers were vandalized following the anti-Muslim words in political speeches, Shamsi said.
Shamsi said she wanted to debunk the myths and the preconceived notions many people have of Muslims and Islam.
A way to eliminate Islamophobia, she said, is by reporting and speaking out against racial profiling, educating journalists about using terms like "fundamentalist," which has a negative connotation, and the campaigning at synagogues, churches and places of other religions in order to help demystify Islam and Muslim beliefs.
"There is a tendency to romanticize forms of violent resistance," said Professor Stephen Eric Bronner. "I've seen enough Che Guevara T-shirts to last me a while."
Bronner said terror is a short-term solution without ends, and it always stands opposed to humanitarianism. The media perpetuates fear, but viewers should think more carefully and logically about the information they get, he said.
"Thirty thousand bombs were dropped in the first week of the invasion of Iraq. You're telling me to believe that only 150 people were killed?" Bronner said. "That's what you call suspending belief. It's this kind of thing that is key."
(C) 2007 Daily Targum via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 12, 2007


End of Document