Ryan seeks millions to fight terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
November 15, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: NEWS; Pg. A5
Length: 476 words
Byline: Kurt Erickson
Body


SPRINGFIELD - As the clock ticks on efforts to plug a $500 million hole in the state budget, Gov. George Ryan announced Wednesday he wants lawmakers to approve $17 million for anti-terrorism initiatives.
The money could build a stockpile of pharmaceuticals to be used in the event of bioterrorism, as well as bolster the state's public-health laboratory system.
"Planning and preparation is our focus. Vigilance is our watchword," Ryan said.
A key budget hawk, however, says the governor and lawmakers will have to move quickly if they want to approve the spending and close the budget gap before the end of the month.
"We're running out of days in the veto session," said state Sen. Steve Rauschenberger, an Elgin Republican who leads the Senate Appropriations Committee.
Rauschenberger and Ryan blame the hold-up on House Speaker Michael Madigan, D-Chicago, who is not participating in budget talks.
Madigan says the governor earlier told him the state's budget woes could be addressed without legislative interference.
State revenues have been drastically affected by the events of Sept. 11, creating the need to cut at least $350 million in spending. The governor and legislative leaders also want another $150 million to pay for security and, for example, a bailout of the retired teachers health-insurance program.
Among money-saving suggestions is raiding an $11 million youth smoking-prevention program to pay for security costs. Ryan suggested needed funds could come from higher premiums on health insurance for more than 100,000 state workers.
Already, Ryan has imposed a variety of money-saving programs, including a 2 percent cut in the budget to agencies under his control and a freeze on out-of-state travel.
On Wednesday, the governor asked officials at the Illinois State Board of Education and the Illinois Board of Higher Education to pare $25 million from their budgets as part of the on-going reduction is state spending.
Amid the legislative wrangling, Illinois Comptroller Dan Hynes announced he was preparing to use the state's rainy day fund to pay a mounting backlog of unpaid bills.
Hynes said the cash - an estimated $226 million - will pay down a backlog of Medicaid bills.
As for the request for $17 million in anti-terrorism spending, Ryan said $2 million would go to train firefighters and $2.5 million would fund a pharmaceutical stockpile for rescue workers - so-called "first responders" - possibly exposed to biological weapons.
The request includes $4 million to boost the state's ability to test and identify biological agents at public-health labs in Springfield, Chicago and Carbondale.
Another $7 million would pay for the added cost of security personnel at state facilities and nuclear power stations.
Ryan said he hopes to tap into federal funding to offset some of the cost of the changes brought about by the terrorist attacks.

Load-Date: November 16, 2001


End of Document