S. ASIA CALLED TERROR HOTBED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 30, 2000, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 1128 words
Byline: JUDITH MILLER, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


The State Department has for the first time identified South Asia as a major hub of international terrorism, accusing Pakistan, a traditional U.S. ally, and especially Afghanistan of providing safe haven and support to international terrorist groups.
In its latest annual report describing the Clinton administration's efforts to combat terrorism, the State Department also concludes that while Americans were once threatened primarily by terrorism sponsored by states, today they face greater threats from "loose networks" of groups and individuals motivated more by religion or ideology than politics and financed increasingly by drug trafficking, crime and illegal trade.
"Such a network supported the failed attempt to smuggle explosives material and detonating devices into Seattle in December," the report states, referring to the arrest of Ahmed Ressam, an Algerian, and several others in connection with the alleged millennium bombing plot foiled by U.S. authorities last December.
The assessment is decidedly more upbeat than in years past about some other regions, including the Middle East, and notes that while terrorist attacks worldwide increased, the number of casualties declined, with only five Americans killed last year.
The 107-page report, a copy of which was provided to The New York Times in advance of its publication tomorrow, lists as state sponsors the same seven countries that Washington has accused of harboring and aiding terrorists since 1993: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria.
But it says that Afghanistan also poses a "major terrorist threat" by, among other things, continuing to shelter the Saudi exile Osama bin Laden, who is wanted in the 1998 bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa, as well as other Afghan-trained Islamic militants sought by the administration.
Pakistan, too, the report asserts, is sending "mixed messages" on terrorism by harboring and aiding known terrorists, many fighting to wrest control of the disputed Himalayan territory of Kashmir from neighboring India.
Yet the administration stopped short of adding either Pakistan or Afghanistan to its list of state sponsors, against which a series of tough sanctions automatically apply.
Michael A. Sheehan, the State Department's coordinator for counter-terrorism, said Afghanistan was not added to the list because Washington did not recognize its government, which is led by a fundamentalist Islamic group called the Taliban. Pakistan was not added because although its record badly needs improvement, he said, "it is a friendly state that is trying to tackle the problem."
Both countries are already under some sanctions stemming from reported terrorist and other activities, but their designation as state sponsors would further isolate them politically and effectively cut off aid, loans and credit from Washington and international lending institutions.
While the United States has no diplomatic relations with Afghanistan, President Clinton met briefly with Pakistan's military leader, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, when he visited South Asia in March and discussed terrorism and the Kashmir issue, as well as Pakistan's development of nuclear weapons and when the general would return the country to a democratically elected government. Little progress was reported on any of the issues.
Informed of the State Department report, Zamir Akram, the deputy chief of mission at Pakistan's embassy in Washington, vigorously denied that his country was supporting or tolerating terrorism. Washington, he asserted, had refused to present evidence to support such charges.
"If they have evidence, they should share it with us," Akram said. "We are more of a target and victim of terrorism than the United States has even been. We need to jointly fight against terrorism. Charges like this simply get our backs up."
A spokesman for the Taliban in New York also said that U.S. officials had not presented any significant evidence of Afghanistan's involvement in terrorism.
Outside South Asia, the report notes several significant improvements in security in the Middle East, while reiterating that the region remains a major source of concern. It chides Iran and Syria for supporting regional terrorist groups like Hamas, Hezbollah, and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, which seek to destroy the U.S.-supported Middle East peace effort. And, the report says, Lebanon's "lack of effective government control" permits terrorist groups to operate within its borders "with impunity."
This year's report is strikingly different in substance and tone from previous ones in its candid discussion of problem areas and of countries and regions in which significant progress is being made.
For instance, the report suggests that North Korea, which has agreed to a summit meeting with its arch-enemy, South Korea, could be removed from the terrorism sponsorship list given its recent "positive statements condemning terrorism in all its forms."
Similarly, the report suggests that while Cuba, Syria and some other states have reduced their direct sponsorship of terrorism, Cuba remains on the list because it continues to harbor known terrorists and terrorist groups. Syria could be removed from the list if a Middle East peace agreement is concluded, "which would necessarily address terrorism issues," the report states.
Sheehan attributed the progress partly to the administration's determination to combat terrorism by limiting the number of places, or, in his parlance, "swamps," where terrorists can seek refuge because government control is weak or governments themselves are sympathetic. "We seek to drain these swamps," he says in the report's introduction.
The report also describes changing trends in terrorism, which it says is increasingly "religiously or ideologically motivated," as opposed to the "politically motivated" terrorism of the past. And it talks of a shift from truck and car bombs to groups now seeking biological, nuclear, chemical and other "weapons of mass destruction," as well as practicing "cyberterrorism."
Another shift is geographic. The locus of terrorism is moving east "from the Middle East to South Asia, more specifically Afghanistan," the report states, as Middle Eastern governments strengthen their commitment to fighting terrorism and improve international cooperation in intelligence and law enforcement.
The report shows that while the number of international terrorist attacks increased to 392 in 1999 from 274 in 1998, the number of deaths and casualties because of such attacks declined sharply -- to 233 killed and 706 wounded in 1999 from 741 killed and 5,952 wounded the year before. The 1998 statistics reflect the high toll of the bombing of two U.S. Embassies in East Africa, in which 263 people died and more than 2,000 were injured.

Load-Date: May 2, 2000


End of Document