S.I. Man Is Convicted of Lying About Plans to Join Terrorists
The New York Times
March 26, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 442 words
Byline: By MOSI SECRET
Body


A Staten Island man was convicted on Monday of lying to federal agents about his plans to join terrorist groups overseas.
The man, Abdel Hameed Shehadeh, was accused of lying about a trip to Pakistan, telling agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation that he was visiting a religious school when his purpose was to join the Taliban.
Mr. Shehadeh was not charged with any acts of terrorism, but prosecutors sought to show his sympathies with terrorist causes because there are greater penalties for making false statements to the authorities in terrorism cases. He faces up to 21 years in prison. A sentencing date has not yet been set.
The jury delivered the verdict after a single day of deliberations, following a week of testimony in Federal District Court in Brooklyn in which prosecutors showed jihadist Web sites run by Mr. Shehadeh and other evidence that they said showed he sympathized with radical Islam.
A thin 23-year-old man of Palestinian descent, Mr. Shehadeh did not respond visibly when the jury foreman read the verdict.
Prosecutors painted Mr. Shehadeh as an aspiring jihadist who admired Osama bin Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki, the radical American-born cleric who was killed in a drone strike in 2011. Mr. Shehadeh ran several Web sites that referred to both men.
Two of his friends testified that their conversations with Mr. Shehadeh before his trip led them to believe he never planned to return to the United States and that he vowed instead to join the fight against American troops.
The investigation began when a detective with the cybercrimes unit of the Police Department discovered Mr. Shehadeh's Web sites. But testimony made it clear that the authorities had been watching Mr. Shehadeh even before he decided to travel to Pakistan: There was an undercover agent in the car with him when he drove to Kennedy Airport to board his plane in June 2008.
After Mr. Shehadeh told the authorities that he was going Pakistan to visit a school, they allowed him to board the flight. But they alerted Pakistani authorities, and he was denied entry to the country. From then on federal authorities were watching him, and Mr. Shehadeh knew it.
In the middle of the investigation, Mr. Shehadeh moved from New York to Hawaii, despite being on the federal ''no fly'' list. He was arrested in Honolulu in 2010.
A lawyer for Mr. Shehadeh, Frederick H. Cohn, argued that Mr. Shehadeh's lies were of no consequence because the authorities were always one step ahead of him. But even Mr. Cohn admitted that Mr. Shehadeh had been untruthful.
''Had he been smart enough to say, 'I don't want to talk to you,' we wouldn't be here today,'' Mr. Cohn said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/26/nyregion/staten-island-man-convicted-of-lying-about-plans-to-join-terrorists.html

Load-Date: March 26, 2013


End of Document