S.L. County loses millions in Homeland Security grants
The Salt Lake Tribune
May 20, 2011 Friday


Copyright 2011 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; State
Length: 380 words
Byline: By Jason Bergreen The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Salt Lake County is no longer eligible for millions of dollars in Department of Homeland Security initiative grants used to fund anti-terrorism and emergency preparedness programs.
Salt Lake Urban Area Director Alicia Johnson said Friday that 2011 funding for the grants, worth as much as $2.8 million locally, are no longer available.
Johnson said she was informed Wednesday about the grant cancellation, but was not told why Salt Lake County was put on the chopping block. Grant funding in 2011 was cut by 18 percent overall, she said, adding: "We will probably not be able to make up the slack."
Johnson said a calculated risk assessment is done each year to help determine which cities are eligible for grants. This year, Salt Lake County was among 31 other cities and counties nationwide that lost grant money.
Department of Homeland Security spokesman, Chris Ortman, said that in 2011 Congress cut local preparedness grants by $780 million, nearly a quarter of the department's grant funding.
"The highest-risk cities in our country continue to face the most significant threats and, consistent with recommendations from the 9/11 Commission, the fiscal 2011 homeland security grants focus the limited resources that were appropriated to mitigating and responding to these evolving threats," Ortman said.
In 2008, Salt Lake County received $1.8 million in funding from Department of Homeland Security grants. In 2009 and 2010 it received $2.8 million, Johnson said.
The good news is that 2010 funding is still available and can be spent through 2013. This will allow ongoing projects to be completed, such as equipment upgrades for several dispatch centers in the county, and planning and training for Wasatch Front earthquake preparedness and anti-terrorism scenarios.
Johnson said she thought some community preparation programs and other law enforcement information-sharing initiatives could be absorbed through regional efforts, but it was still unclear how that would be done.
Utah, as a whole, has more than $25 million in grant funding issued between 2008 and 2011 that it can draw down on now, Ortman said. Utah can also apply for additional grants through the Department of Homeland Security.
jbergreen@sltrib.com Alt Heads:
S.L. County loses millions in Homeland Security grants

Load-Date: May 21, 2011


End of Document