SADDAM'S AGENTS OPERATE ABROAD … FBI INTERVIEWS OF ARAB-AMERICANS NEEDED TO; THWART TERRORISM IN UNITED STATES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 12, 1991, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 822 words
Byline: Stuart Symington Jr.
Body


Saddam Hussein has not confined his terror to Kuwait. Outside Iraq, he has masterminded numerous political assassinations of Iraqi dissidents in Europe and elsewhere. This has been thoroughly documented.  As stated in one of the world's slimmest volumes, ''Human Rights in Iraq,'' published by Middle East Watch in 1990: ''Iraqi emigres who seek to expose Iraqi human rights abuses live in fear of violence at the hands of Iraq's overseas security operatives. Many emigres hesitate to testify even anonymously about abuses they have suffered or witnessed for fear of discovery and retribution against themselves or their families.'' A Feb. 27 Wall Street Journal article detailed the recent effort of an Iraqi diplomat to hire an Assyrian house painter in Modesto, Calif., to assassinate a local Iraqi dissident. Moreover, Saddam has not confined his terrorism to Iraqi dissidents. He showered Israel with Scud missiles. He announced a worldwide terrorism campaign against his U.N. opponents, principally the United States. Newspaper accounts have discussed intercepts of mysterious Iraqi radio broadcasts, apparently directed to terrorists operating worldwide.  Presumably, all Americans would agree that when the U.S. government is put on notice of such activities, it should try to prevent terrorists from assassinating its citizens, resident aliens and visitors.  President Ronald Reagan addressed this issue on Dec. 4, 1981, in Executive Order 12333, under authority of the National Security Act of 1947. The order directs the FBI to collect information needed, among other things, to protect the safety of individuals, including targets, victims or hostages of international terrorist organizations.
The order specifically requires intelligence agencies to collect information using the least intrusive collection techniques feasible.  In United Presbyterian Church in the U.S. vs. Reagan, a member of Congress, along with religious and political organizations, journalists, academics and politically active individuals, challenged the constitutionality of Executive Order 12333 in federal court. They claimed that the order chilled their exercise of First Amendment and other constitutional rights by putting them in fear of being targeted for surveillance.  A three-judge panel of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals unanimously upheld dismissal of the case by District Judge Gerhard Gesell (not noted as a reactionary) for failure to allege any redressable injury. In effect, a distinguished federal judge told the plaintiffs, ''Don't holler until you're hurt.'' Sadly, since Iraq invaded Kuwait, the press has reported numerous incidents of ''arson, bomb threats and indiscriminate beatings of Arab-American citizens.'' As noted in The New York Times, ''Harassment and violence against Arab-American citizens have increased dramatically since August 1990.'' The Times added, ''that no one has yet been killed seems almost miraculous.'' Against the background of these facts, the FBI has reached out to leaders of Arab-American communities to increase awareness of the bureau's civil rights jurisdiction and responsibilities to prevent terrorism. To that end, the FBI undertook voluntary interviews of more than 100 Arab-American leaders nationwide. The initiative established a dialogue with those leaders, and the channels of communication remain open.  The FBI is currently conducting more than 30 civil rights investigations of incidents in which Arab-Americans have been victims. The FBI and the Department of Justice have publicly announced that they consider these matters to be priority investigations. In addition, the FBI is working with the Immigration and Naturalization Service to locate up to 3,000 Iraqi nationals in the United States with expired visas.  Citizens have duties along with rights. At common law, the sheriff could summon to his aid the entire population of a county above age 15 to aid him in keeping the peace. The concept of the posse is as American as apple pie. No one complains when the FBI does a full check on the loyalty and character of prospective nominees to federal office.  Americans are wont to criticize Congress, the president and government agencies. But in this instance, they should applaud the fact that, since 1947, the FBI has had the duty, training and resources to combat domestic terrorism.  Only five such incidents occurred in 1990; four were prevented.  It is not too much to ask anyone, citizen or not, who enjoys the protection of our laws, for reasonable assistance in maintaining that protection. In fact, if the FBI had had the mandate, training and resources to talk with the Japanese-American citizens of Honolulu before Pearl Harbor, our Air Corps aircraft would not have been lined up wingtip to wingtip in the middle of Hickam Field for fear of attack by a fifth column that turned out to be nonexistent.  Stuart Symington Jr. is a lawyer in Clayton.

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document