SAFEGUARDS AGAINST TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 7, 1995, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B; EDITORIAL
Length: 583 words
Body


When the last rescue worker walked out of the rubble of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building in Oklahoma City Thursday night, the death toll stood at 167, including 19 children. The concussion from the April 19 blast is still being felt all over the nation as the FBI continues its search for participants in the bombing plot, lawmakers seek ways to safeguard against future terrorist attacks and the nation debates the relationship between hate speech and violence.
In Washington, the Justice Department said it was going to reinterpret its rules on infiltration and intelligence gathering so as to permit the FBI to investigate organizations that advocate violence, even if the agency has no reasonable evidence that a violent act is being planned. The announcement came as a surprise because several members of the Senate Judiciary Committee believed the guidelines prohibited the agency from acting solely on the basis of speech. It is a thin line the FBI is walking.
Given the FBI's history of trampling on civil liberties in investigating civil rights groups and political dissenters on the left, Americans have a right to feel uneasy at the prospect of the agency unleashing itself against every anti-government group that resorts to intemperate rhetoric. There is plenty of that around these days, and it can be difficult to know when to take it seriously.
Based on what is known at this point, the self-styled militias and similar anti-government organizations appear less likely to carry out terrorist attacks against the government than against blacks and Jews. Investigations by organizations like the Southern Poverty Law Center and by several newspapers reveal that many of these groups are potential successors to the Ku Klux Klan, if not already so. Though their message is the excesses of government, their subtext is hatred of blacks and Jews.
Meanwhile, if the Clinton administration is looking for ways to temper the anti-government sentiment that seems so prevalent, it might consider reviving the two-year-old recommendation to merge the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms into the FBI. After the Waco tragedy, a commission called for the merger, but its voice went unheard.  There is really no reason to divide the two agencies' law-enforcement responsibilities. For that matter, there is no reason for a separate Drug Enforcement Administration, either. Paranoids are not the only ones who see the ATF and DEA as threats to their constitutional rights.
Another step the administration could take is strongly push for legislation to require manufacturers to include color-coded, microscopic tags in explosives to help trace the source of bombings. The National Rifle Association and explosives manufacturers have teamed up in the past to thwart such legislation. It is possible as well to make the ingredients for a bomb more difficult to come by. In Europe, ammonium nitrate fertilizer, which is readily converted into a bomb by mixing it with fuel oil, must contain an additive that neutralizes its explosive characteristics. Fertilizer manufacturers oppose a similar requirement in this country because it would add to production costs.
Common sense and public safety often take a back seat in Washington when the lobbyists go to work; but this time, with Oklahoma City fresh in their minds, lawmakers ought to be willing to embrace these simple, relatively inexpensive safeguards. Best of all, they would help protect against terrorism without infringing on anyone's rights.

Load-Date: May 8, 1995


End of Document