Sailors take a break from terrorism war
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 4, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 638 words
Byline: By Chris Tomlinson Associated Press writer
Body


ABOARD THE USS THEODORE ROOSEVELT -- While the crew on this aircraft carrier took a day off last week from bombing Afghanistan, tossing footballs and grilling hamburgers on the flight deck, U.S. Marines flew from another warship as part of the anti-terrorism campaign.
Four helicopters packed with Marines lifted off the USS Peleliu in the Arabian Sea on what officials called a training and support mission.
Under U.S. Defense Department rules, reporters are barred from specifying the destination of troops being deployed from the Peleliu.
Capt. Jeff Mares said the Marines had been eager to do their part ever since Sept. 11, when hijacked planes crashed into New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. The United States is attacking the terrorism network of the prime suspect, Osama bin Laden, and the Taliban militia that is sheltering him in Afghanistan.
"Everybody's emotions are high," said Mares, 34, from California. "Everybody was devastated" by the Sept. 11 attacks, he said.
The Peleliu is the flagship of a force of about 2,200 Marines in the Arabian Sea. Officials have said little about their operations, confirming only that they recovered a helicopter downed in Pakistan in late October.
While the main U.S. offensive has been from the air, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld acknowledged last week that American troops were on the ground in Afghanistan to improve coordination of the airstrikes. Opposition commanders had complained the American attacks were too weak to crack the Taliban.
On Oct. 19, a U.S. special forces team struck a Taliban-controlled airfield and a residence of Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar.
Fighter planes from the USS Theodore Roosevelt, meanwhile, have been making bombing runs on Afghanistan since Oct. 17. After launching 900 missions in two weeks, the aircraft carrier's crew took a break Thursday and enjoyed a "steel beach picnic" on the ship's flight deck.
The sailors, many dressed in civilian gym clothes, set up grills, volleyball nets and a basketball court. They enjoyed hamburgers, hot dogs and barbecued chicken, finished off by brownies.
Capt. Rich O'Hanlon said the 5,500-member crew of the Theodore Roosevelt, which is based in Norfolk, Va., deserved a break. Most are under 21 and only see daylight from the ship's hangar doors for a few minutes a day.
But at the picnic, faces that were hardened by the work and stress of war were suddenly softened and youthful again. Young men threw footballs, women played volleyball and all danced to music broadcast over the ship's loudspeakers.
Thousands lined up for a chance to jump off the hangar deck for a swim in the sea.
Navy and Marine riflemen stood on the ship's catwalks to guard against sharks, while divers served as lifeguards in the water.
In small groups, the sailors summoned the courage to leap off the deck and plunge 36 feet into the ocean. Once in the water, the sailors swam to the back of the 1,000-foot carrier to climb back on.
"It's the coolest thing I've ever done, jumping off an aircraft carrier," said Petty Officer 3rd Class Heidi Thoma, a 21-year-old from Broomfield, Colo. "I needed a good day off, or half-day off. It makes you ready to go back in and work."
Lt. Cmdr. Terry Chauncey, the ship's administrative officer, said the occasional recreation day is key to keeping the crew sharp for the dangerous business of flying bomb-laden jets off a ship at sea.
Yet the warplanes on the steel deck and the rotating radar antennas were constant reminders that this was no ordinary company picnic. Some mechanics still worked through the morning, trying to get planes ready for new airstrikes.
The next day, all of the toys were stowed away, barbecue grills were replaced by bomb racks, and the young sailors donned their helmets, goggles and life vests to launch warplanes into the night.

Load-Date: November 4, 2001


End of Document