SALVADOR REBELS STEP UP TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 16, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 857 words
Byline: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: SAN SALVADOR, Dec. 15
Body


Trying to demonstrate their power in the face of declining international support, Salvadoran rebels have increased their use of terrorism and escalated a pre-election offensive.
The guerrillas, who are united in an umbrella group known as the Farabundo Marti Liberation Front, have assassinated eight mayors and one ex-mayor since March and for the first time threatened to start killing justices of the peace.
The rebel offensive has combined with a surge in human-rights violations attributed by monitors to right-wing death squads and the armed forces to push the level of violence to its bloodiest level in at least three years.
''They're driving the Army absolutely crazy,'' said a Western specialist in military affairs. ''The rebel attacks are making the Armed Forces run from one end of the country to the other like chickens with their heads cut off.''
Election and Rise in Killings
The guerrillas, who have described themselves as Marxists, say they are fighting to redistribute this country's wealth and overthrow the Government, which has received more than $3 billion in American aid in the last eight years.
The civil war, which has caused almost 70,000 deaths and displaced 500,000 people, is widely considered a stalemate despite the aid. Although the American-trained armed forces have improved, the guerrillas operate openly across much of the country.
The sharp increase in bloodshed coincides with the official opening of the Salvadoran presidential election campaign, the biggest test in recent years of assertions by the Reagan Administration that democracy has been established.
Salvadorans and Western diplomats say the rebel campaign appears intended to increase polarization and to show that the Government remains little more than a figurehead, unable to project or protect civilian authority.
 
Issue of Dual Power
The twin-pronged offensive, which has been picking up steam week by week for the last two months, is a step to translate the rebels' military prowess into political influence.
''The rebels are showing they're the only order in many parts of the country,'' a Salvadoran analyst said. ''They're very much intent on raising the issue of dual power and making it clear that there is what amounts to power sharing.''
The March election, which for the first time will include candidates allied with the guerrillas, will test whether El Salvador's ruling powers can tolerate dissent and respond to popular demand for change without repression.
The rebels' offensive follows a diplomatic tour through Latin America by the guerrillas' most senior commanders, their first public trip outside the country since the beginning of the civil war eight years ago.
 
Leaders Push for Settlement
Although the rebel commanders scored a propaganda coup by publicly meeting with several of the hemisphere's most important leaders, Latin diplomats said the guerrillas received an unexpectedly chilly reception.
One Latin leader after another, the diplomats said, pushed the rebels to seek a negotiated settlement and told them that they planned to de-emphasize their focus on Central America and concentrate on other, more pressing problems, such as the debt crisis.
Though outside pressure has imbued the guerrillas with a sense of urgency, Salvadoran analysts and Western diplomats said, the coming election has created what the rebels see as an unparalleled opportunity.
''It's not only the best moment in a long time for the guerrillas to make a push, but it's going to be the only moment for a long time,'' a Salvadoran analyst said. ''If there's one thing they've learned, it's that the elections bring fresh oxygen to the system and that they can't stop the elections.''
 
Harm in Mayor Killings
But the guerrilla offensive does demonstrate that they are the law and the Government's equal in many parts of the country. Despite extensive Army protection of the coffee harvest, the rebels have stopped it on many farms that declined to pay the minimum wage set by the rebels.
Officials also report that the rebels are increasing their use of forced recruitment and the killing of civilian authorities.
Even some leftists who have been sympathetic with the rebels say killing mayors harms their cause, They say the practice, nothing more than terrorism, costs civilian support and is a clear sign of the guerrillas' growing desperation.
But the guerrillas say the mayors are a base for the American counterinsurgency program, which finances municipal programs in an attempt to win friends for the governments in rural areas. The guerrillas say that makes the mayors legitimate targets.
 
Worst Violators: Death Squads
As the conflict has escalated, there has been an increase in human-rights violations by both sides, and groups monitoring such violations maintain that the military and right-wing extremists are the worst violators.
A report by the New York-based Americas Watch made public in September said the military was responsible for killing 52 civilians in the first six months of 1988, compared with 72 in all of 1987. The guerrillas were accused in 27 deaths in the first six months of this year, compared with 31 in all of last year.


End of Document