SALVADOR OUSTS AIDE OVER TERRORISM REPORTS
The New York Times
April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 330 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 1
Body


El Salvador has dismissed a New Orleans- based diplomat who it said implicated Salvadoran military and civilian leaders in acts of terrorism.
An official at the Salvadoran Embassy in Washington said Saturday that Roberto Santivanez, who served in the army's military intelligence operations until 1979, was discharged earlier this week at the order of Provisional President Alvaro Magana.
El Salvador dismisses Roberto Santivanez, New Orleans-based Salvadoran diplomat who it says implicated Salvadoran military and civilian leaders in acts of terrorism, and received money for being unidentified former military official quoted in various news stories about death squads (S)
Mr. Santivanez had been El Salvador's Consul in New Orleans for the last four months.
The embassy official said that Mr. Santivanez was the unidentified former military official quoted by CBS News and The New York Times last month in reports about the inner workings of Salvadoran death squads. He asserted that Mr. Santivanez had received payments for his statements to members of Congress and to news organizations.
The Times has not identified by name a former Salvadoran military official who it said made such accusations against Salvadoran military and civilian leaders.
The official quoted in The Times's dispatch was promised $50,000 by a group of Americans who wanted him to speak out. The group said the money had been promised to help support the official, move his family from El Salvador and meet other expenses.
Among the allegations he made in the March 3 article in The Times were that the network of death squads was shaped by leading officials, including Col. Nicolas Carranza, chief of the treasury police, and Jose Guillermo Garcia, former Minister of Defense. The former official was also quoted in The Times as having said that Roberto d'Aubuisson, a former army officer who finished second in the recent Salvadoran presidential elections, continued to direct and organize the death squads.


End of Document