SAM NUNN POLICY FORUM;
Terrorism response needed, panelists say
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
April 29, 1997, Tuesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: STATE NEWS; Pg. 03A
Length: 492 words
Byline: Rebecca McCarthy; STAFF WRITER
Dateline: Athens
Body


Don't expect the nuclear device that flattens Los Angeles to be delivered from a high-flying aircraft - it's more likely to arrive in a minivan or truck.
That sobering scenario was only one of many sketched out Monday by participants at the inaugural Sam Nunn Policy Forum at the University of Georgia, where the focus was on "Terrorism, Weapons of Mass Destruction, and U.S. Security."
The all-day session of presentations and panels drew experts such as former Sen. Nunn and Sen. Richard Lugar (R-Ind.), Secretary of Defense William Cohen and former CIA Director James Woolsey, as well as scholars from UGA and Harvard University.
With the breakup of the Soviet Union, "the world is safer today than it has been in 50 years, but there is less stability," Nunn told 650 people in the university's Center for Continuing Education. "We've had some warning bells" about the potential nuclear threat from terrorists.
These warnings include the bombings of the World Trade Center, the federal building in Oklahoma City, Atlanta's Centennial Olympic Park and apartments for U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia.
Combating terrorist groups, home-grown and imported, represents a "multifaceted challenge" that will involve diplomacy, economic sanctions, intelligence and armed forces, as well as preparedness at home, Nunn said.
Because of the United States' superior military power, an adversary can't challenge the country directly, Cohen said. Instead, another country or an organized group is likely to do so indirectly, through unconventional strategies - using "cyber soldiers" to wreck computer systems, genetically targeted viruses to wipe out a particular ethnic group or even lasers to cut holes in the ozone layer to destroy crops.
"Local law enforcement is the first line of defense, and we're not equipped to handle such a crisis," said George Vuilleumier, president of the National Association of Chiefs of Police. "We don't have the technology and we don't have the funds."
Speakers stressed the importance of designing a coordinated response plan involving many agencies to deal with any incident involving a weapon of mass destruction. Lugar called for the creation of a national nonproliferation coordinator in the National Security Council who would handle domestic issues.
While Lugar's idea for a coordinator hasn't been well-received, about $ 40 million has been budgeted for the Department of Defense to train local and state officials in the 120 largest American cities, said Allen Holmes, an assistant secretary of defense.
Nine cities have done self-assessments that will help the Defense Department tailor response programs to each city's individual needs. The department is distributing information on the Internet, through training videos and CD-ROMs. Both Atlanta and Washington already have medical teams in place that can respond to large scale emergencies.
"The anxiety generated by such fear may pose more danger than the threat itself," Holmes said.

Load-Date: May 1, 1997


End of Document