San Benito soldier's death probed
Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas)
March 20, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 Valley Morning Star
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 291 words
Byline: Fernando Del Valle, Valley Morning Star, Harlingen, Texas
Body


March 20--SAN BENITO -- Military police are investigating the death of a soldier and decorated Iraq war veteran from San Benito whose body was found Sunday in a river at a Georgia Army base, an Army spokeswoman said.
The body of Army Staff Sgt. Roberto Reyna, 35, was found in the Chattahoochee River at the Fort Benning Army base, spokeswoman Elsie Jackson said.
Fort Benning criminal investigators were investigating the death, Jackson said, a routine procedure for deaths on the base.
An online search found addresses for Reyna and Mary Rosario Reyna in Killeen and Fort Benning. The family could not be reached for comment.
A private citizen reported that Fort Benning authorities dredged a section of the river Sunday, Columbus, Ga., police Lt. James Walton, said. But Walton said he did not know whether authorities dredged the river in search of the body.
According to a press release, Reyna, a Cavalry Scout based at Fort Benning since October 2011, was assigned to the 194th Armored Brigade. He had served on active duty with the Army and Air Force for 15 years.
Reyna's decorations include seven Army Commendation Medals, 10 Army Achievement Medals, an Army Meritorious Unit Commendation, five Army Good Conduct Medals, an Air Force Good Conduct Medal, a National Defense Medal, four Iraq Campaign Metals, a Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, a Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, two Noncommissioned Officer Professional Development Ribbons, an Army Service Ribbon, five Oversees Service Ribbons, a Combat Action Badge and an Air Assault Badge, the press release said.
___ (c)2013 Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas) Visit Valley Morning Star (Harlingen, Texas) at www.valleymorningstar.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: March 20, 2013


End of Document