San Jose State U. students join protest of terrorism in Mumbai
University Wire
December 8, 2008 Monday


Copyright 2008 Spartan Daily via U-Wire
Length: 567 words
Byline: By Jason Le Miere, Spartan Daily; SOURCE: San Jose State U.
Dateline: SAN JOSE, Calif. 
Body


Following the terror attacks on Mumbai, India, almost two weeks ago, more than 40 people, including many San Jose State University students, protested the attacks and called for peace around the globe at the intersection of San Fernando and Fourth streets Sunday evening.
"What we want to do is to spread awareness that we want peace," said SJSU alumnus Kamlesh Kudchadkar. "The way we can do it is just get united no matter what caste, creed, religion, ethnicity or nationality you belong to and probably that's the best way that we can step ahead to swipe the terrorism from the world."
The protesters were not only raising awareness about the Mumbai attacks, but also attempting to encourage everyone to stand together against terrorists.
"We want to stand united across religions, across countries, across the world," said Yogheshwar Sanchihar, a software engineering graduate student. "We personally believe that there are only a few percent [of people] who really don't like peace and the rest of the world likes peace, so we really need to give this message to all those extremist groups."
Londhe Gaurav, a graduate from Cal State Chico and organizer of the rally, said that it mirrored similar rallies being held in India.
"There are a lot of protests going on in India right now," he said. "Lots of people on every Sunday, they are gathering somewhere. There is no leader, but they are coming on their own. We are gathered here just to support those guys, which have come on street in India."
The contingent who gathered at all four corners of the street's intersection held up signs for passing motorists, many urging them to "honk for peace." Judging by the din heard, the passers-by were sympathetic to the cause.
"You can see they are honking at those people, means they agree in this; everyone wants peace," Gaurav said. "That's the message they are spreading."
At the site of the rally were images of two who lost their lives in the attacks trying to save the lives of others. Anti-terrorism chief Hemant Karkare and police inspector Vijay Salaskar were both killed in the line of duty. During the protest, candles were lit for them.
"We are with them, with their families, we all support them," Gaurav said.
Gaurav was keen to point out that he wanted all people to come out and protest, not just those affected by the Mumbai attacks.
"This is not against any country or against any religion," he said. "It's not against Muslim; it's not against Pakistan. This is against terror. I argue all the people to come here and stand by us and oppose the terror."
Members of the group also said that they hoped that their protest would be a springboard to louder calls for peace.
"We want people like this who have actually gathered in a good amount and we want to improve this mass into a mass movement," Kudchadkar said. "This is something we want to do as a peace rally. The more you do it, the more the terrorists stop and probably this will get united as one community."
One member of the group said that politics was not the answer to solving terrorism, but instead it is down to people all over the world.
"When the bullet strikes only blood falls; it doesn't know which caste, creed, religion, the blood is falling," said Ravikran Deshpande, an electrical engineering graduate student. "The blood is always red. We all have to stand-up; we all have to raise our voices."
(C) 2008 Spartan Daily via UWIRE

Load-Date: December 9, 2008


End of Document