SANDINISTS ACCUSE U.S. OF TERRORISM
The New York Times
January 13, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 391 words
Byline: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Jan. 12
Body


Nicaragua charged the Reagan Administration today with sponsoring ''a campaign of terror'' against Nicaragua, but renewed its offer to hold negotiations ''without conditions'' aimed at improving relations with the United States.
Addressing a ministerial meeting of third-world nations, the head of Nicaragua's junta, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, said the United States Central Intelligence Agency was directing covert military operations against Nicaragua from neighboring Honduras and Costa Rica, with 7,000 former guardsmen of the ousted Somoza regime organized and armed in camps in Honduras.
''There have been more than 500 armed aggressions against Nicaragua,'' he went on. ''Thousands of former national guardsmen have created terror, assassinating more than 400 Nicaraguans.''
MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Jan. 12 -Nicaragua charged the Reagan Administration today with sponsoring ''a campaign of terror'' against Nicaragua, but renewed its offer to hold negotiations ''without conditions'' aimed at improving relations with the United States.
Mr. Ortega also contended that the United States and Honduras were planning new joint military maneuvers near the Nicaraguan border.  The maneuvers, scheduled for December but postponed because of President Reagan's trip through the region, are to be held in late January, diplomatic officials say.
Further, Mr. Ortega contended that Washington had encouraged Israel to increase its presence in the region. He noted that the Israeli Foreign Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, visited Costa Rica in October, while the Defense Minister, Ariel Sharon, held talks in Honduras a month ago.
''Honduras has been assigned a predominantly military role,'' he said, ''while Costa Rica is playing a predominantly political role.'' He added that clandestine radio and television stations were broadcasting anti-Sandinist propaganda from inside Costa Rica.
 
Ready for a Dialogue
But the Nicaraguan leader said that his Government was ready for a dialogue with the United States and he praised the declaration last weekend by the Foreign Ministers of Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama calling for negotiations to settle conflicts within Central America.
Mr. Ortega also referred to the acute financial crisis in much of Latin America and proposed that third-world nations seek joint renegotiation of their debts to Western commercial banks.


End of Document