Santorum: strengthen farms to fight terrorism
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
September 9, 2006 Saturday


Copyright 2006 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: A; Pg. 10
Length: 472 words
Byline: Anya Litvak
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


ANYA LITVAK
By the time many Lancastrians were just rounding their cubicle walls on Friday morning, U.S. Senator Rick Santorum, a Pennsylvania Republican, had already prayed at Mass in Columbia, snacked at Hinkle's Pharmacy and Restaurant, also in Columbia, and posed for pictures at the Brubaker cattle and dairy farm in Mount Joy.
Such is life as the election approaches.
In another half hour, his car would zoom off to Philadelphia - red and blue campaign stickers minimizing on the rear window - with a consortium of local farmers and politicians left behind to absorb his message.
And that, in a nutshell, is: strengthen farms and weaken terrorists.
Speaking from a USDA-tagged podium, in the foreground of a red tractor and rustic wagon cart, the senator explained the link.
"We have to stop feeding the hand that wants to destroy us," he urged, referring to America's reliance on foreign oil. "That's what we're doing right now. And we have to stop it."
Santorum came to Lancaster County to award an oversized check for $784,100 to Brubaker Farms of Mount Joy, and two other Pennsylvania farmers. The money will help purchase and operate a digester machine which produces energy from cow manure.
Luke Brubaker said the goal is to power his farm and sell extra kilowatts to the town's electricity grid.
"We could be the Saudi Arabia of the United States," Santorum said of Pennsylvania. "It's a win for those who'd like to win this war and stop funding the enemy."
Santorum, who reiterated his support for President Bush's handling of the war in Iraq, trails his opponent, democrat Bob Casey, by 14 percent, according to a recent Gallup Poll.
Across the nation, 65 percent of Americans said they disapproved of our progress in Iraq, something Santorum attributes to our "love and respect of life."
"People don't like to open the paper each morning and see people dying," he said. "And the enemy knows that. They know that America doesn't like death."
While Santurom said we are winning the war - that the United States has not been attacked since Sept. 11, 2001 is a benchmark of our victory - he urged the crowd to stop doing business with countries that give support to terrorists.
It's a fight he took to Congress when he authored the Iran Freedom and Support Act. The legislation, which has struggled during the last two years, goes a step further and refuses trade with any nation that does business with Iran and helps develop the country's nuclear potential.
"I see Iran as really the principle threat, not just in the Middle East but in the war on Islamic fascism," he said during his visit at Mount Joy. "It is the principle fomenter of the radical form of Islam and illegitimate jihad."
So it is with great expectations that the three Pennsylvania farmers featured in Friday's ceremony will begin producing energy from manure in 2007.

Load-Date: September 10, 2006


End of Document