SAUDIS ON NOTICE Senate OKs bill to sue 'em for 9/11 But Bam stands ready to veto measure
Daily News (New York)
May 18, 2016 Wednesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 762 words
Byline: BY CAMERON JOSEPH NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU
Body


WASHINGTON - Survivors and the families of those killed in the 9/11 attacks got a piece of good news on Tuesday - though they face a tough road ahead.
The Senate unanimously passed a bill backed by Sens. Chuck Schumer and John Cornyn that would allow victims and their families to sue Saudi Arabia and some power players in the kingdom for their role in the attacks.
Earlier attempts to hold Saudi Arabia legally accountable were stymied by claims of sovereign immunity. The bill, if it becomes law, would make it easier to go after the people the victims and families believe helped fund the terrorists.
"It would allow the victims of 9/11 to pursue some small measure of justice by giving them a legal avenue to hold foreign sponsors of terrorism accountable for their actions," Schumer (D-N.Y.) said on the Senate floor Tuesday shortly before the bill passed.
He called the bill - which is opposed by the Obama administration and still must pass the House - "long overdue, a responsible, balanced fix to a law that has extended too large a shield to foreign actors who finance and enable terrorism on a massive scale."
Cornyn (R-Tex.) said the bill makes "small changes" in current law to allow victims to "pursue their claims for justice against those who sponsored" terrorism.
This is the second time the Senate has unanimously passed the legislation. But it's not smooth sailing going forward, in spite of heavy bipartisan support.
The Obama administration opposes the legislation because of concerns it could damage relations with the Saudis, a key U.S. ally in the Middle East.
White House press secretary Josh Earnest made it clear Tuesday that President Obama still "strongly continues to oppose" the legislation even with recent tweaks that supporters say address some of the administration's concerns.
"This legislation would change longstanding international law regarding sovereign immunity," he said, warning it "would make the United States vulnerable in other court systems around the world" and could create "vulnerability" for some of America's allies in U.S. courts.
Advocates for the bill expressed frustration with that line of reasoning.
"It's heartbreaking to have to fight against your administration for justice. It just adds insult to injury," said Terry Strada, whose husband, Tom, was killed at the World Trade Center.
"We should not have to sacrifice justice for diplomacy; we can have both. And if they have nothing to hide and they did nothing wrong, they should have nothing to worry about," said Strada, who heads the group 9/11 Victims' Families & Survivors United for Justice Against Terrorism.
Saudi leaders have repeatedly denied any involvement in the terror plot, and are furious that they might face charges in U.S. courts. They reportedly have threatened to sell the $750 billion in Treasury securities they own, which would lead to economic chaos.
Saudi allies argue that the 9/11 Commission report cleared the kingdom of any wrongdoing. But some of those who read the full report - including 28 redacted pages that 9/11 survivors and some lawmakers are pushing to get released - say that there were clear implications that agents working for the Saudi government aided the hijackers.
Saudi Arabia is making "a hollow threat," Cornyn said Tuesday. "They are not going to suffer a huge financial loss in order to try to make a point."
The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act would make it easier to sue foreign governments and officials under U.S. law, which currently gives foreign governments sovereign immunity in lawsuits accusing them of supporting terrorism.
"The victims of 9/11 and other terrorist attacks have suffered such pain and heartache. They certainly should not be denied justice," Schumer said on the Senate floor.
Earnest made it clear that the White House will lobby the House to try to keep the bill from passing, and reiterated that Obama would veto the bill even if it does make it through the House.
House Speaker Paul Ryan has expressed concerns about the bill as well.
"I think we need to look at it. I think we need to review it to make sure that we're not making mistakes with our allies and that we're not catching people up in this that shouldn't be caught up in this," Ryan (R-Wis.) said recently.
Ryan staffers are set to sit down with bill advocates, including Strada, on Wednesday."It's a good feeling, but you're only allowed to enjoy it about two seconds, because now we have to start looking at what comes next," Rep. Pete King (R-L.I.), the bill's House sponsor, said about the measure's passage in the Senate.

Graphic

 
President Obama (left with Saudi King Salman) opposes measure passed in Senate on Tuesday that would give survivors of 9/11 victims, memorialized at Ground Zero (main photo), kin right to sue Saudis. Bill, backed by Sens. John Cornyn and Chuck Schumer (bottom, opposite page), is strongly endorsed by Terry Strada (below), whose husband died at WTC. AP; EPA; REUTERS; ROBERT SABO; JAMES KEIVOM/DAILY NEWS

Load-Date: May 18, 2016


End of Document