SAUDI CLERICS DECRY JIHADI TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
September 18, 2014 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2014 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 489 words
Body


RIYADH, Saudi Arabia -- Saudi Arabia's top religious clerics issued a statement banning travel to conflict zones as the country's conservative religious establishment backs the Al- Saud ruling family's efforts to defeat Islamic State.
The scholars criticized clerics who issued religious edicts, or fatwas, justifying terrorism, saying they should be tried in court, the official Saudi Press Agency reported.
The statement comes more than a week after senior Saudi scholar Abdulaziz Al Al-Sheikh called on Muslims to fight Islamic State to "rid people and religion of their evil and harm."
Arrest spooks billionaires
MOSCOW -- The arrest of Vladimir Evtushenkov, one of Russia's oldest billionaires, is sending shivers down the backs of business owners already reeling from U.S. and European sanctions over President Vladimir Putin's policies in Ukraine.
Mr. Evtushenkov was charged with money-laundering and placed under house arrest two days ago, triggering a sell-off in shares of his companies, including AFK Sistema. Mr. Evtushenkov denies the charges.
Afghan journalist killed
KABUL, Afghanistan -- An Afghan woman has become the seventh journalist killed in Afghanistan so far this year, an Afghan media group said Wednesday, adding to a toll that has already made 2014 by far the deadliest year for the media here since the fall of the Taliban.
Palwasha Tokhi, who worked for Bayan Radio in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif, was called out of her home purportedly to receive a wedding invitation from a visitor Tuesday night. She was then stabbed to death by the visitor, who fled.
Chinese leader in India
NEW DELHI -- India's new prime minister, Narendra Modi, celebrated his 64th birthday Wednesday by hosting President Xi Jinping of China in his home state of Gujarat, as the leaders of Asia's two giants lay the foundation for a long-term relationship that carries huge economic and political stakes for both.
It is the first visit of a Chinese president to India in eight years -- only the third in history -- and the reasons for mutual good will are compelling.
Nigerian terrorists strike
KANO, Nigeria-- Gunmen stormed a higher education college in northern Nigeria on Wednesday, firing on fleeing students and setting off an explosion in an attack that killed at least 15 people and wounded 35, police said.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attack in the region's main city of Kano, but the Islamist militant group Boko Haram, which has repeatedly targeted civilians in the north, is likely to be a prime suspect.
Nurse contracts Ebola
PARIS -- A French volunteer working for Medecins Sans Frontieres in Liberia has contracted Ebola, the medical charity said on Wednesday, adding that seven local staff members have already fallen ill from the deadly virus.
The volunteer, the first French national and MSF's first international staff member to catch the disease in the outbreak, was put in quarantine on Tuesday.

Load-Date: September 19, 2014


End of Document