Saudi court hands prison sentence to women's rights activist Loujain al-Hathloul
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 28, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 535 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


A Saudi terrorism court on Monday sentenced prominent women's rights activist Loujain al-Hathloul to five years and eight months in prison, local media reported, despite worldwide criticism of her detention and pressure to release her.
The main charges against Hathloul, which carried up to a 20-year sentence, include: seeking to change the Saudi political system, calling for an end to male guardianship, attempting to apply for a United Nations job, attending digital privacy training, communicating with global rights groups and other Saudi activists.
Rights groups and her family say Hathloul, who had championed women's right to drive and for ending the kingdom's male guardian system, was subjected to abuse, including electric shocks, waterboarding, flogging and sexual assault.
Al-Hathloul rejected an offer to rescind her allegations of torture in exchange for early release, according to her family. The Saudi court recently dismissed the charges.
Saudi women's rights activist Loujain al Hathloul is seen in this undated handout picture.
Lucy Rae, of Grant Liberty, the human rights group, called the conviction "an worldwide outrage".
Hathloul, 31, was arrested in May 2018 with about a dozen other women activists just weeks before the historic lifting of a decades-long ban on female drivers, a reform they had long campaigned for, sparking a torrent of worldwide criticism.
The prosecutor had called for the maximum sentence of 20 years, citing evidence such as al-Hathloul's tweets in support of lifting a decades-long ban on women driving and speaking out against male guardianship laws that had led to multiple instances of Saudi women fleeing abusive families for refuge overseas.
Nick Cannon is a new dad
Brittany , 33, took to Instagram on Christmas Day to announce the exciting news by sharing some adorable family photos. Brittany knows that she and Nick are on the same page and she is thrilled to be growing their family together.
Saudi authorities put her in juvenile detention when she tried to drive into the kingdom from the neighbouring United Arab Emirates.
The activist also has the option of file a motion to appeal within the next 30 days. "She's not a shrinking violet by any means", Godfrey told CBC television in 2018.
Hathloul's jail time was ordered by a Saudi court on Monday in presence of a few selected local media outlets.
"She spoke a lot about her mother, who wanted her daughters to be out there and have their voices be heard", Godfrey said.
Activist Nassimah al-Saadah was sentenced to five years in prison with two suspended in late November, according to Human Rights Watch .
Butairi was arrested in Jordan in 2018 and deported to the kingdom, multiple campaigners and friends of the couple told AFP. Thus goes the background of a woman who is regarded as one of the powerful women rights campaigners across the world, but regarded as a threat back in Saudi Arabia. Saudi officials have denied that they torture prisoners.
She refused to accept the "deal", they said. The court suspended part of the sentence and included time already served, so Hathloul could be released in approximately two months, her family said in a news release.
She and her family have denied all charges.

Load-Date: December 28, 2020


End of Document