SAUDI RELATIONS: For Islamist terrorists, haven becomes a hot seat
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 27, 2005 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: @issue;
Length: 905 words
Byline: MARGARET COKER
Body


Amarriyah, Saudi Arabia --- After prolonged foot-dragging over how to address the roots of radical Islam and even denying al-Qaida's existence, Saudi Arabia has begun to confront terrorists threatening both the West and its own stability.
With uncustomary frankness, Crown Prince Abdullah recently gave his country a mixed rating in its campaign. While he praised his government's get-tough policy, the ruler conceded that terrorist networks were neither wiped out nor paralyzed. In fact, he said, the fight could be getting harder. Pressured by security forces, terrorists could resort to more desperate measures.
The assessment came as the Saudi royal family hosted security officials and delegates from 54 countries at an anti-terrorism conference. The event, at which countries pledged closer cooperation in fighting militants, was a showcase for the Saudis to brag about their own successes against al-Qaida.
In the aftermath of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks against the United States, the Saudi royal family denied that the problem of international terrorism was linked to their austere brand of Islam known as Wahhabism or that religious radicals were based in Saudi Arabia, despite the existence of their own intelligence beforehand that showed al-Qaida cells working inside the kingdom.
The government's public statements changed in May 2003 when al-Qaida operatives stormed three housing compounds in the Saudi capital of Riyadh and killed 35 people, including eight Americans.
A war against militants
The result was a declaration of war against the militants and a review of religious teachings and the educational system in the kingdom. Opinion is split on whether the Saudis have adequately reined in religious leaders who preach militancy, but antiterrorism experts and diplomats agree that the Saudi counterterrorism response has been excellent.
"Saudi Arabia has completely turned the corner," said U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia James Oberwetter. "They have an enviable rate of success." Between 2002 and 2003, Saudi intelligence identified 23 men in the kingdom who associated themselves with al-Qaida and were considered dangerous.
Only after the Riyadh bombings, security sources say, did Saudi police receive the green light to arrest them. The government alleges that the men, organized into five cells, were ringleaders of the May 2003 bombings and 21 other attacks and kidnappings in Saudi Arabia over the last 18 months.
Saudi Interior Ministry officials say they have destroyed four of the five cells. Only six of the 23 men remain at large --- all the rest have been killed or captured by Saudi forces.
In the past two years, the royal family has spent nearly $14 billion on troop training and military hardware, especially surveillance technology such as pilotless drones, Saudi officials say.
The government has also upgraded its communications technology, allowing officials to eavesdrop on cellphone calls and Internet chatter. At the same time, the country has recruited and trained a brigade of elite anti-terrorism forces. The troops are trained at a new base outside of Riyadh by German, French and British forces, according to Gen. Ali el-Raheeli, commander of the brigade.
Eight units, along with thousands of undercover agents, have been deployed throughout the kingdom with a mandate to find, infiltrate and destroy militant cells. The campaign, however, has not come without a cost.
Payment in blood
The 22 attacks, bombings and kidnappings involving al-Qaida militants since May 2003 have killed 90 Saudi and foreign civilians and wounded 507 more. Thirty-nine Interior troops and police have been killed and 213 wounded in anti-terrorism operations. At the same time, Saudi security forces have been successful in foiling 52 planned al-Qaida operations, Interior Minister Prince Nayaf told journalists recently. Also, they have arrested almost 800 suspected militants or their sympathizers, giving the intelligence agencies insight into their structure and operations.
Working in the government's favor is growing public disgust about the militants' actions, Saudi political analysts say. Despite the unpopularity of the royal regime among many Saudis, al-Qaida is having greater difficulty attracting recruits and the government is seeing more families turning in their suspect sons.
"You can't convince most Saudis that killing their brothers is an Islamic act," said Hani Wafa, political editor at the capital's al-Riyadh newspaper.
But it remains unclear just how large a dent the Saudi effort has made in al-Qaida. Various Saudi officials disagree on the estimates, but the number of extremists ready to be suicide bombers could be anywhere from 100 to 200. The number of al-Qaida sympathizers could exceed 5,000.
Saudi officials say that their brand of Islam is not inherently violent and that the few religious leaders who have accepted "deviant" interpretations of Wahhabism have been fired. During the first half of 2004, 44 preachers, 160 imams or mosque leaders, and 149 muezzins, the men who give the call to prayer, lost their jobs, they say.
Since the names of these allegedly disgraced religious leaders have never been publicized, it is impossible to verify that these men have not found work in other of the country's estimated 30,000 mosques. No Saudi religious leader has been arrested on charges of aiding or abetting terrorist acts.
Margaret Coker covers the Middle East for Cox Newspapers.

Graphic

 
An Iraqi woman, who refused to give her name and who lives next to this devastated apartment building, weeps after seeing the extent of damage caused by a blast at the al-Hamra compound in eastern Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The May 2003 al-Qaida attacks on three Saudi housing compounds prompted the Saudis to declare war against terrorism./ ALI FRAIDOON / Associated Press ; Crown Prince Abdullah has given mixed grades to his kingdom's anti-terrorism campaign.

Load-Date: February 27, 2005


End of Document