Saudis Give $100 Million to U.N. Fight on Terrorism
The New York Times
August 14, 2014 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 720 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE
Body


UNITED NATIONS -- Increasingly worried about the spread of Islamist militant extremism reaching its own doorstep, Saudi Arabia donated $100 million to a fledgling United Nations counterterrorism agency on Wednesday and expressed hope that such an infusion -- 10 times what the Saudis gave to help create the agency three years ago -- would strengthen its abilities and set an example for other donor countries.
The money was the second big contribution by Saudi Arabia to the United Nations in the past few months, largely in response to crises caused by the ascent of radical Sunni Islamist militancy in the Middle East.
On July 1, Saudi Arabia provided $500 million to United Nations humanitarian relief efforts in Iraq, where hundreds of thousands of people have been uprooted by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, a marauding force that many counterterrorism experts now regard as a leading threat.
With its vast trove of petroleum wealth, Saudi Arabia's Sunni monarchy has also provided grants and loans worth more than $1 billion to help strengthen Lebanon's armed forces, which have recently battled ISIS fighters on the Syria-Lebanon border. The Saudis are also huge financial underwriters of Egypt's new anti-Islamist government and have been somewhat silent about Israel's war against Islamist militants in Gaza.
At a ceremony in the 38th-floor offices of Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, top Saudi diplomats gave him the $100 million for the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Center, an agency that was first proposed by the Saudis' King Abdullah in 2005 and formally inaugurated in 2011 with a $10 million contribution by Saudi Arabia. Mr. Ban expressed thanks for ''this generous donation'' and urged other United Nations members ''to follow the example of Saudi Arabia by investing in the center's efforts.''
Mr. Ban also drew a direct link to the mayhem convulsing parts of the Middle East.
''The recent disturbing upsurge of terrorism in a number of countries and regions of the world, most dramatically demonstrated by the so-called Islamic State in Iraq, underscores the challenges before us,'' Mr. Ban said.
Adel bin Ahmed al-Jubeir, the Saudi ambassador to the United States, who attended the ceremony, said the money was meant to ''help provide the tools, technologies and methods to confront and eliminate the threat of terrorism.''
Later in a telephone interview, Mr. Jubeir described the initial $10 million contribution as ''seed money'' that had been meant to get the counterterrorism center started, and said there were no strings attached to how it uses the $100 million.
''You can't handcuff them by assigning a specific project,'' he said. ''The only restriction is that it goes to fight terrorism.''
The center's website describes it as an advisory body that aims to provide training, information sharing and expertise to member states, with projects and working groups on topics that include support of terrorism victims and countering use of the Internet and international financing channels by terrorist groups. But the center has no policing or regulatory power, and its budget has been relatively limited.
The new Saudi donation to the center, Mr. Jubeir said, reflected King Abdullah's effort to ''make sure it becomes an effective player in countering terrorism around the world.''
Outside scholars in Middle East politics said the Saudi donation was part of a broader effort by the Saudi monarchy to contain a problem that it has indirectly helped to create through the support of the armed Sunni opposition in Syria's civil war.
The Saudis see the Syrian opposition as a counterweight to the influence of Iran, Saudi Arabia's Shiite rival in the region. But the Saudis are also alarmed over the growing might of groups like ISIS, with its violent intolerance of other religious sects and its stated goal of creating a monolithic Islamic caliphate that knows no national boundaries.
''They are opening their coffers to deal with the effects of sectarian war in Iraq and Syria,'' said Andrew J. Tabler, a senior fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
But he also said the Saudis were ''working to contain and roll back rapidly spreading jihadi influence which they perceive as a threat, both to their security as well as their perceived role leading Sunni Arabs.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/14/world/middleeast/saudis-give-100-million-to-un-fight-on-terrorism.html

Load-Date: August 14, 2014


End of Document