Saudi king visiting London
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 30, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 6
Length: 299 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


LONDON (AP) - Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah accused Britain of failing to act on intelligence that might have prevented the 2005 London transit bombings, touching off a debate about terrorism at the start of the first state visit by a Saudi monarch in two decades.
Prince Charles met Abdullah on the steps of the king's plane and escorted him along a red carpet flanked by a military honor guard. The king arrived in a private Boeing 747, one of five aircraft that brought him and his entourage from Jiddah.
Facing criticism for his support for a strident brand of Islam, Abdullah prefaced the visit by saying Britain and other countries were not doing enough to fight terrorism. The remarks were made in a rare interview with the British Broadcasting Corp.
"I believe that most countries are not taking this issue too seriously, including, unfortunately, Great Britain," he said through a translator. "We have sent information to Great Britain before the terrorist attacks in Britain, but unfortunately no action was taken and it may have been able to avert the tragedy."
British officials denied the king's claims, saying they would have acted on such information if it had existed.
The king did not specify what information Saudi Arabia provided about the July 7, 2005, attack in which 52 commuters and four suicide bombers died.
Officials told The Associated Press previously that the Saudis informed Britain and the U.S. months before the bombings that they had arrested a Saudi man who confessed to fundraising for an attack in the British capital. But the officials said no specific information was given.
Abdullah's comments appeared to be an attempt to distance himself from Islamic extremists and at the same time pre-empt attacks on Saudi Arabia's record of fighting terrorism, analysts said.

Load-Date: October 30, 2007


End of Document