Saudi Economy Defies Terrorism Fears
The New York Times
March 18, 2004 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section W; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1251 words
Byline: By SIMON ROMERO
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, March 11 
Body


Saudi Arabia's economy is expected to deliver a second year of growth in 2004, helped by the highest sustained oil prices in more than two decades, though its performance is expected to fall short of the surprising 6 percent surge in output last year. 
 In 2003 the economy had its most robust year since 1981, and investors expecting additional expansion are fueling a rally in local markets. Saudi Arabia's leading stock gauge, the Tadawul all-shares index, which climbed 76 percent in 2003, is up an additional 11 percent so far this year, making it the best-performing market in the Middle East. 
 Such figures are welcome news for a government seeking relief after years of tepid economic activity and attacks last year on Western and Saudi targets by Islamist extremists. Evidence of attempts to crack down on such incidents is seen throughout the Saudi capital, a spread-out city of four million where gasoline sells for $1 a gallon and sidewalks are rarely frequented by pedestrians.
 The international airport, for instance, is posted with fliers featuring photos of suspected terrorists and asking for anonymous tips on their whereabouts. The police have checkpoints along Riyadh's main thoroughfares, and the entrances to luxury hotels and residential compounds for Western expatriates are cordoned off by private security squads. [Reuters reported that at a checkpoint in Eastern Riyadh on Monday, security forces engaged in a shootout, killing a Yemeni man suspected of being a leader in Al Qaeda.]
 Even with the rebound in growth, there is considerable concern as to whether the economy will grow fast enough to alleviate social concerns like unemployment, which stands at 10 percent in government figures but is probably above 13 percent, according to private forecasts. Sustained growth of about 7 percent a year is needed to start reducing joblessness, said Nahed Taher, chief economist at National Commercial Bank in Jeddah. 
 ''Saudis have a lower skill set than many foreign workers,'' Ms. Taher said, referring to the estimated 6 million foreigners employed in Saudi Arabia, many of them from the Indian subcontinent, out of a total population of about 24 million. ''We need extensive training programs and a robust expansion of the private sector to create more opportunities.''
 Activity outside state-controlled companies accounts for only about 20 percent of the economy, pressuring the government to speed efforts to open some areas to foreign investment. Saudi Arabia is seeking to enter the World Trade Organization this year, though differences with the United States over issues like competition in telecommunications and intellectual property protection persist as obstacles. 
 Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil producer, also remains heavily dependent on oil sales. For instance, oil-related areas of the economy expanded 14 percent last year, while nonoil areas grew just 3.4 percent and other state-controlled sectors 1 percent, according to the Samba Financial Group, a banking organization based in Riyadh. 
 The heavy reliance on oil does little to combat joblessness, said Brad Bourland, chief economist at Samba, who said Saudi Arabia's economy had more in common with Exxon Mobil, the largest energy company in the United States, than with Wal-Mart, the largest retailer. Although Exxon Mobil and Wal-Mart both had revenues of roughly $250 billion last year, Exxon Mobil employs about 88,000, while Wal-Mart has more than 1.4 million employees. 
 ''Managing Saudi Arabia's oil industry in boom times essentially involves turning the spigot on and off,'' Mr. Bourland, a former State Department official who has lived in Riyadh for more than a decade, said in an interview here. ''Oil has done very little to keep up with the needs of the population.''
 The perceived urgency of creating jobs explains Saudi Arabia's recent aggressiveness in relation to oil prices. The nation needs an oil price of about $30 a barrel to continue meeting current budgetary obligations, suggesting that Saudi officials will continue lobbying for higher oil prices within OPEC, according to the Center for Global Energy Studies, a London research organization founded by a former Saudi oil minister. Private economists are hesitant to forecast specific growth rates for 2004, though few expect the economy to expand more than 2 to 3 percent despite high oil prices this year. 
 [Brent crude oil for May delivery climbed 40 cents on Wednesday, to $33.08 a barrel.] 
 Oil prices have risen more than $4 a barrel since the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries decided to cut production last month at a meeting in Algiers. The 11-country organization is planning to discuss the possibility of further production cuts at a meeting later this month in Vienna. 
 Because oil plays such a prominent role in the Saudi economy, government finances and spending are subject to volatile swings. The Saudi government posted a budget surplus of $12 billion in 2003, its first in three years, and is planning to invest about that amount in infrastructure projects this year in areas like transportation and utilities, Ms. Taher of National Commercial Bank said. 
 Beneath the optimistic spending projections, the economy appears to be slowly evolving away from its traditionally strong economic ties to the United States, several analysts said. In a symbolically significant move this month, Saudi Arabia signed gas exploration agreements with Chinese, Russian, Italian and Spanish companies. No American energy companies were awarded contracts.
 European investors also appear more willing than their American counterparts to take business risks like these in Saudi Arabia. With a new law allowing foreigners to invest in domestic capital markets expected to go into effect soon, two European banks, Deutsche Bank and HSBC of Britain, have applied for licenses to start investment banking operations in Riyadh. 
 Citigroup, meanwhile, long the most prominent foreign financial company in Saudi Arabia, has lowered its exposure to the country, reducing its stake in Samba to 20 percent from 48 percent and withdrawing from its management contract with the bank. The company also changed its name to Samba from Saudi American Bank. 
 Analysts attribute the decline in American investment to heightened political tension between Saudi Arabia and the United States and the end of large military and infrastructure contracts for American companies. Still, energy companies like Exxon Mobil and ChevronTexaco remain active in the nation's oil refining and petrochemicals industries.
 ''The hesitance of Americans is seen as something that's not quite merited by the actual dynamics of the Saudi economy,'' Nawaf Obaid, an independent consultant on security issues in Riyadh, said in an interview. ''Thanks to the budget surplus, the kingdom is able to spend more than expected on anti-terror efforts and is in a more favorable position to start privatizing certain areas like telecoms, the national airline and rail lines.''
 Still, strong growth and a robust stock market are not necessarily signs of increased political stability in Saudi Arabia, which has suffered several terrorist attacks and bombings by Islamic fundamentalists on Western enclaves and domestic targets in the last year. Much of the stock market's performance, for instance, is said to be fueled by Saudis repatriating cash from foreign accounts that have come under greater scrutiny from regulators investigating possible ties to terrorism.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Saudis, like these visitors to a shopping mall in Riyadh, are enjoying the fruits of an economic revival. (Photo by Associated Press)                                     

Load-Date: March 18, 2004


End of Document