SAUDI ARABIA CREATES ANTI-TERRORISM ALLIANCE Iran, Iraq missing from Islamic bloc
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 16, 2015 Wednesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2015 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 004
Length: 691 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia 
Body


Projecting its ambition for regional leadership, Saudi Arabia said Tuesday it has lined up most of the Arab world, NATO member Turkey, and several African and Asian countries behind a vaguely defined "Islamic military alliance" against terrorists.
 The move allows the kingdom, which follows a deeply conservative interpretation of Islam, to cast itself as a leader in the fight against extremism.
 But absent from the alliance are the Shiite-led countries of Iran and Iraq, as well as Syria, whose government is backed by Tehran. And that omission raises questions about whether the 34-member bloc is primarily intended to present a unified front against extremists - or to also serve as a Sunni deterrent to Iran, Saudi Arabia's main regional rival.
 Riyadh supports rebels fighting to overthrow Syrian President Bashar Assad and has been leading an Arab coalition against Iran-supported Shiite Houthi rebels in Yemen since March. It is also part of the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq.
 The announcement on state media said the Saudi-led alliance is being established because terrorism "should be fought by all means."
 Deputy Crown Prince and Defense Minister Mohammed bin Salman said at a rare news conference that the bloc will develop mechanisms for working with other countries and international bodies to support counterterrorism efforts. Their efforts would not be limited to countering the Islamic State group, he added.
 "Currently, every Muslim country is fighting terrorism individually ? so coordinating efforts is very important," he said.
 Though few details were given, the statement said the alliance would not just be countering Sunni extremists but protecting Muslim nations from all terrorists "whatever their doctrine."
 When asked if this meant the alliance would also counter Shiite militants, the Saudi defense minister replied the coalition would fight terrorist groups "regardless of their categorization," particularly in Syria and Iraq, where he said there will be cooperation with the international community.
 The U.S. and its allies have trained militarily with the Gulf states and other friendly countries in the region for years, encouraging them to work more closely together.
 Last year, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states joined the U.S. in carrying out airstrikes in Syria against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL. Many of the Arab countries in the new Saudi-led coalition are part of that existing alliance against IS, though their contributions have waned since March, with Gulf efforts diverted to the Yemen offensive.
 The Saudi endeavor appeared to catch some in Washington off-guard. A senior defense official speaking on condition of anonymity said the U.S. did not know in advance about the plan for the alliance and that officials were working to find out details.
 U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter, visiting Incerlik Air Base in Turkey, said: "In general, at least, it appears that it's very much aligned with something that we've been urging for quite some time, which is greater involvement in the campaign to combat ISIL by Sunni Arab countries."
SIDEBAR:
YEMEN PEACE TALKS OPEN
 GENEVA - U.N.-brokered peace talks between Yemen's internationally recognized government and Shiite rebels opened Tuesday in Switzerland with expectations for a deal low as fighters on both sides failed to honor a weeklong cease-fire in some parts of the country.
 The truce, scheduled to start at noon  Tuesday, was meant to give the warring factions a chance to find a solution to the conflict that has engulfed the Arab world's poorest country. Security officials said rebel shelling and ground clashes continued in southwestern Taiz province and a Saudi-led coalition struck back with airstrikes several times throughout the day.
 Yemen has been torn by fighting pitting the rebels, known as Houthis, and army units loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh against forces of the internationally recognized government, which is backed by the Saudi-led coalition and supported by the United States, as well as southern separatists, religious extremists and other militants.

Load-Date: December 17, 2015


End of Document