Saudi Arabia's lid on oil prices is rattling If civil unrest or terrorism disrupt output, cost of crude could soar.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 9, 2011 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2011 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. A9
Length: 500 words
Byline: By CHRIS KAHN • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


Beyond the crisis in Libya, what's driving up oil prices is concern about Saudi Arabia.
That nation, the world's largest oil exporter, is dipping into its excess reserves to make up for lost exports from Libya, where a rebel uprising has largely shut down production. And the Saudis are clamping down on similar, yet smaller, protests at home.
That unnerves energy markets because Saudi Arabia's ability to ramp up production, known as spare capacity, serves as a cushion, both real and psychological, when world supplies tighten. And if civil unrest - or an act of terrorism - were to disrupt the kingdom's oil output, the price of crude would probably surge well above today's prices.
Oil futures fell Tuesday as OPEC ministers, including Saudi Arabia's Ali Naimi, discussed an increase in production. The benchmark in the U.S., West Texas Intermediate crude for April delivery, fell 42 cents to settle at $105.02 per barrel. Brent crude dropped $1.98 to settle at $113.06 per barrel on the ICE Futures exchange in London.
Goldman Sachs estimated that OPEC's spare production has dropped by about 1 million barrels per day in the past three months. Part of that is Libya and part is increased world demand. The concern is that the cartel won't be able to keep prices in check if another conflict disrupts world supplies, analyst David Greely said.
Greely expects WTI and Brent to both hold above $100 per barrel during the next 12 months. Oil prices have jumped about $20 per barrel since mid-February when the Libyan uprising escalated.
With the entire region in upheaval, it would be a mistake to think the Saudis have shielded themselves from the anger that ousted leaders in Egypt and Tunisia, said Barclays analyst Helima Croft. Demonstrations in neighboring Bahrain have oil traders fearing that the unrest could spill across the border. The rebellions in North Africa and the Middle East have taken the world by surprise, forcing a fundamental realignment of the region's political power.
More than 17,000 Saudis have signed up on a Facebook page calling for a "Day of Rage" Friday, according to Barclays Capital. That's despite King Abdulla's announcement of a $36 billion program for employment, housing and education.
"You could say, they're rich, Abdulla's popular, no problem," Croft said. But anything is possible. "If anyone had asked us in January whether (Egypt's) Hosni Mubarak would be gone, most of us would have said 'absolutely not.'"
Libya produced 1.6 million barrels per day before fighting forced companies to evacuate workers. Most of that production is shut down.
Ali Naimi, the Saudi oil minister, said the kingdom had about 3.5 million barrels per day of spare capacity that could be brought online.
Nigeria also offered help if OPEC asks, said Levi Ajuonoma, a spokesman for the state-run Nigerian National Petroleum Corp.
Boosting production now might cool off overheated energy prices, but experts warn that OPEC could weaken its ability to manage global supplies later this year.

Load-Date: March 10, 2011


End of Document