Saudis Aiding U.S. in Cutting Off Terrorism Funds, Panel Is Told
The New York Times
March 25, 2004 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 579 words
Byline: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 24 
Body


A panel of government terrorism experts testified Wednesday that a deadly attack last year in the Saudi capital of Riyadh had spurred the Saudi government to work more closely with the United States in stemming the flow of money to terrorist organizations like Al Qaeda and Hamas.
 At the same time, the panel pointed to the closed nature of Saudi society and banking institutions to say that more efforts were needed to stop money from reaching groups that consider themselves at war with the United States, Israel and their allies.
  ''Their performance has not been flawless, and they have a large task before them,'' J. Cofer Black, the State Department's coordinator for counterterrorism, said of the Saudi government as he appeared before a House subcommittee on the Middle East and Central Asia. ''But we see clear evidence of the seriousness of purpose and the commitment of the leadership of the kingdom to this fight.''
 Mr. Black was joined by two other experts, Thomas J. Harrington, a deputy assistant director of the F.B.I., and Juan Carlos Zarate, a deputy assistant Treasury secretary. Together, they described recent joint efforts between the United States and Saudi Arabia that have closed down charities suspected of funneling money to terrorists and spurred Saudi banks to freeze the assets of organizations suspected of financing terrorist operations.
 They said some of the new initiatives would have been unimaginable before last May 12, when a series of bombs rocked the Saudi capital, killing 29 people, including nine Americans. Mr. Harrington said, ''The current state of cooperation between our two countries is significant, and information sharing continues to increase in matters pertaining to groups like Al Qaeda.''
 No one from the Saudi government appeared before the subcommittee. But just as lawmakers ended their questions, two brochures from the Saudi Embassy, each recounting the country's antiterrorism efforts, were distributed to reporters.
 The assessment by the experts went largely unchallenged by lawmakers. Only Representative Shelley Berkley, a Democrat from Nevada, expressed skepticism toward Saudi Arabia's professed eagerness to fight terrorism, saying, ''I'm not overly impressed'' with the efforts.
 ''They have been exporting terrorism for 20 years,'' she said. ''Now that they are victims, all of a sudden they are our allies. To me, it's too little too late. We don't have a clue what the Saudis are doing or whom the royal family is funding.''
 To some degree, her view was echoed by two other witnesses, Steven Simon, an analyst for the Rand Corporation, and Robert Baer, a former Central Intelligence Agency agent. Mr. Simon described a country where Osama bin Laden, a Saudi native and the leader of Al Qaeda, ''is revered'' and supporters would always find a way to get him and others the financial support they need to plan future attacks.
 ''You can build a dam, but tributaries develop,'' Mr. Simon said of efforts to choke off money.
 Mr. Baer, who served in Iraq, Lebanon and other Middle East countries, said Saudi Arabia's efforts to dismantle terrorist organizations would always be hampered by the passion of terrorist groups and the financial traditions of a region that relies heavily on cash transfers.
 ''Going after banking and charities is a good start,'' he said. ''But it's just the tip of the iceberg. This is going to be a long war.''                                                                       

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 25, 2004


End of Document