SAUDIS SEEKING REFORM HOLD UNLAWFUL PROTEST;
TERRORISM PROMPTS CALL FOR DEMOCRATIC CHANGES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 15, 2003 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A14
Length: 416 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA
Body


Hundreds of Saudis staged an illegal protest in the capital Tuesday, calling for changes in this conservative Islamic kingdom.
Police fired tear gas to break up the demonstration, which follows months of public debate, also a rarity, over growing terrorism. Critics charge that a lack of democratic freedoms has made the kingdom a breeding ground for extremists.
The Saudi royal family is under pressure to bring democratic changes to the country - especially after the heavy Saudi presence in the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and increasing terrorist violence at home.
On Monday, the government announced it would hold the kingdom's first-ever elections, a vote to select members of 14 municipal councils.
The electoral announcement was applauded by the United States. "We support any initiative that leads to greater participation of all elements of Saudi society in political life," State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said.
Tuesday's protest appeared to be in response to repeated calls by the London-based Movement for Islamic Reform in Arabia for political, economic and administrative changes.
Most of Tuesday's protesters were young people. They demonstrated in front of Al-Mamlaka shopping mall and blocked traffic before police moved in, breaking up the crowd with tear gas and arresting some. Some of the protesters chanted religious phrases such as "God is great," but witnesses heard no anti-government chants.
The Movement for Islamic Reform in Arabia, or MIRA, is one of the better-known dissident groups, bringing together a number of Saudi intellectuals. Its faxes and e-mails circulate widely in reform circles inside and outside the kingdom.
The 7-year-old group opposes the policies of the Saudi royal family. Instead, the group champions a liberal, moderate system of government. It has never been linked to violence.
Analyst Dawoud el-Sheryan said the demonstration "reflects that the winds of change sweeping the region have reached Saudi Arabia," but he questioned the motive behind the protests.
"I think the reform movement might be seeking personal gains from this," he said.
Turki al-Sudeiry, editor in chief of the private but pro-government newspaper Al-Riyadh, said the protest had been incited by a group with "certain interests." He even linked MIRA to the Islamic extremists that the government is fighting.
Last month, some 300 Saudi men and women signed a petition urging Saudi rulers to speed reforms as a way of warding off the influence of extremist Islam.

Notes

WORLD

Load-Date: October 15, 2003


End of Document