Saudi Arabia creates Islamic bloc to fight terror groups
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 16, 2015 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 710 words
Byline:  Associated Press   
Body


RIYADH, Saudi Arabia • Projecting its ambition for regional leadership, Saudi Arabia said Tuesday that it had lined up most of the Arab world, NATO member Turkey and several African and Asian countries behind a vaguely defined "Islamic military alliance" against terrorists.
The move allows the kingdom, which follows a deeply conservative interpretation of Islam, to cast itself as a leader in the fight against extremism.
But absent from the alliance are the Shiite-led countries of Iran and Iraq, as well as Syria, whose government is backed by Tehran. And that omission raises questions about whether the 34-member bloc is primarily intended to present a unified front against extremists - or to also serve as a Sunni deterrent to Iran, Saudi Arabia's main regional rival.
Riyadh supports rebels fighting to overthrow Syrian President Bashar Assad and has been leading an Arab coalition against Iran-supported Shiite Houthi rebels in Yemen since March. It is also part of the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State militants in Syria and Iraq.
The announcement on state media said the Saudi-led alliance was being established because terrorism "should be fought by all means."
Deputy Crown Prince and Defense Minister Mohammed bin Salman said at a rare news conference that the bloc will develop mechanisms for working with other countries and international bodies to support counterterrorism efforts. Their efforts would not be limited to countering the Islamic State group, he added.
"Currently, every Muslim country is fighting terrorism individually ... so coordinating efforts is very important," he said.
Though few details were given, the statement said the alliance would protect Muslim nations from all terrorists "whatever their doctrine."
When asked if this meant the alliance would also counter Shiite militants, the Saudi defense minister replied the coalition would fight terrorist groups "regardless of their categorization," particularly in Syria and Iraq, where he said there will be cooperation with the international community.
The U.S. and its allies have trained militarily with the Gulf states and other friendly countries in the region for years, encouraging them to work more closely together.
Last year, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states joined the U.S. in carrying out airstrikes in Syria against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL. Many of the Arab countries in the new Saudi-led coalition are part of that existing alliance against IS, though their contributions have waned since March, with Gulf efforts diverted to the Yemen offensive.
The Saudi endeavor appeared to catch some in Washington off-guard. A senior defense official said the U.S. did not know in advance about the plan for the alliance and that officials were working to find out details. The official was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly and spoke on condition of anonymity.
U.S. Defense Secretary Ash Carter, visiting Incerlik Air Base in Turkey, said: "In general, at least, it appears that it's very much aligned with something that we've been urging for quite some time, which is greater involvement in the campaign to combat ISIL by Sunni Arab countries."
White House spokesman Josh Earnest said the alliance wouldn't be a substitute or a replacement for the U.S.-led coalition fighting IS militants, noting the Saudi effort was intended to focus on broader targets. The Saudis have made "important contributions" to the anti-IS coalition led by Washington, "and we anticipate that they will continue to do so," he said.
Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir said in Paris that members could ask for assistance from the coalition, which would address the requests "on a case-by-case basis." He did not rule out the deployment of ground troops.
The new coalition includes nations with large and established armies such as Pakistan, Turkey and Egypt, as well as war-torn countries like Libya and Yemen. African nations that have suffered militant attacks, such as Mali, Chad, Somalia and Nigeria, also are members.
Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu of Turkey, the only NATO member in the coalition, called it the "best response to those who are trying to associate terror and Islam."
Jihadis on a popular IS-affiliated website quickly mocked the alliance.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this Thursday, Sept. 17, 2015 file photo, Saudi security forces take part in a military parade in preparation for the annual Hajj pilgrimage in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. (AP Photo/Mosa'ab Elshamy, File)  In this Nov. 11, 2015, photo, Saudi Arabian Deputy Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman attends a summit of Arab and Latin American leaders in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. Mohammed bin Salman said the new Islamic military coalition will develop mechanisms for working with other countries and international bodies to support counterterrorism efforts. (AP Photo/Hasan Jamali)  FILE - In this Thursday, Sept. 17, 2015 file photo, Saudi security forces take part in a military parade in preparation for the annual Hajj pilgrimage in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh.(AP Photo/Mosa'ab Elshamy, File)  FILE - In this Thursday, Sept. 17, 2015 file photo, Saudi security forces take part in a military parade in preparation for the annual Hajj pilgrimage in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. (AP Photo/Mosa'ab Elshamy, File)  FILE - In this Thursday, Sept. 17, 2015 file photo, a drone is used to record a military parade by Saudi security forces in preparation for the annual Hajj pilgrimage in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. (AP Photo/Mosa'ab Elshamy, File)  FILE- In this May 13, 2015, file photo, Saudi Arabian Deputy Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman listens in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, during a meeting between Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Mohammed bin Nayef and President Barack Obama. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. Mohammed bin Salman said the new Islamic military coalition will develop mechanisms for working with other countries and international bodies to support counterterrorism efforts. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin, File)  FILE - In this Monday, April 20, 2015 file photo, a Saudi soldier aims machine-gun from behind sandbag barricade in the border with Yemen in Jazan, Saudi Arabia. The Saudi air campaign in Yemen is now in its fourth week. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. (AP Photo/Hasan Jamali, File)  FILE - In this Thursday, Sept. 17, 2015 file photo, Saudi security forces show their skills to handle a terrorist attack as they take part in a military parade in preparation for the annual Hajj pilgrimage in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom's capital, Riyadh. (AP Photo/Mosa'ab Elshamy, File)  Saudi Arabia's foreign minister Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir holds a press conference Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 in Paris. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom, but the coalition does not include Shiite-majority Iran or Iraq, and it's not clear how exactly it would function. (AP Photo/Christophe Ena)  Saudi Arabia's foreign minister Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir holds a press conference Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 in Paris. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom, but the coalition does not include Shiite-majority Iran or Iraq, and it's not clear how exactly it would function. (AP Photo/Christophe Ena)  Saudi Arabia's foreign minister Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir holds a press conference Tuesday, Dec. 15, 2015 in Paris. Saudi Arabia said Tuesday that 34 nations have agreed to form a new "Islamic military alliance" to fight terrorism with a joint operations center based in the kingdom, but the coalition does not include Shiite-majority Iran or Iraq, and it's not clear how exactly it would function. (AP Photo/Christophe Ena) 

Load-Date: December 17, 2015


End of Document