Saudis arrest 172 said to be planning attacks
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 28, 2007 Saturday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A25
Length: 282 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia 
Body


Saudi Arabia announced Friday that an anti-terrorism sweep netted 172 Islamic extremists and stopped plans to mount air attacks on the kingdom's oil refineries, break militants out of jail and send suicide attackers to kill government officials.
An official said the plotters had completed preparations for their attacks, and all that remained to put the plot in motion "was to set the zero hour."
But while the monthslong police operation provided a high-profile victory for the royal family, the large number of people arrested highlighted the extremism threat in the world's leading oil exporter.
The Interior Ministry said the plotters were organized into seven cells and planned to stage suicide attacks on "public figures, oil facilities, refineries ... and military zones." It did not identify any of the targets.
The militants also planned to storm Saudi prisons to free jailed militants, the ministry's statement said.
"They had reached an advance stage of readiness, and what remained only was to set the zero hour for their attacks," said the ministry's spokesman, Brig. Mansour al-Turki.
The Saudi statement said some of the detainees had been "sent to other countries to study flying in preparation for using them to carry out terrorist attacks inside the kingdom."
Al-Turki said he didn't know whether the militants who trained as pilots planned to fly suicide missions like those in the Sept. 11, 2001, attack on the United States or whether they intended to strike oil targets in some other way with the aircraft.
U.S. officials praised the sweep as a blow to international terrorism. Saudi Arabia's long alliance with the United States angers Saudi extremists who object to Western ways.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - This image made from a broadcast Friday is said to show sacks of weapons being dug up in a desert. Extremists were planning attacks in Saudi Arabia, officials say.  The Associated Press 

Load-Date: April 28, 2007


End of Document