SAUDI SUITS GET OK 9/11 vics' kin 'ecastatic'
Daily News (New York)
December 20, 2013 Friday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 11
Length: 405 words
Byline: BY DANIEL BEEKMAN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With News Wire Services
Body


TWELVE YEARS after Sept. 11, and eight years after a federal judge ruled Saudi Arabia has immunity from prosecution, families of 9/11 victims will get their day in court after all.
The relatives can revive their claims against Saudi Arabia and a charity affiliated with its government, a federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled Thursday.
"I'm ecstatic, because we have a lot of information and evidence," William Doyle, whose 25-year-old son, Joseph, was killed in the North Tower of the World Trade Center, told the Daily News.
The ruling overturned a 2005 Manhattan Federal Court judge's decision that Saudi Arabia was immune from prosecution in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. The lawsuit was brought by 9/11 families and insurers that covered losses suffered by building and business owners. The appellate panel pointed to a 2011 decision allowing similar claims against Afghanistan to advance.
Fifteen of the 19 terrorists were Saudi nationals who flew hijacked planes into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and, when passengers revolted, a Pennsylvania field. Nearly 3,000 innocent people died in the attacks.
The families said Saudi Arabia and the Saudi High Commission for Relief of Bosnia and Herzegovina knowingly provided Al Qaeda with funds and other aid that helped the terrorist group carry out the attacks."These people are getting off scot-free. They didn't even get a slap on the wrist, and to this day we still have terrorism running rampant. We have to hold accountable the people who finance terrorism," the 66-year-old Doyle, a retired Staten Island stock trader now living in Florida, told The News.
"It's been 12 years that I've been fighting this battle," Doyle said. "I will not give up this fight."
In the appellate ruling, Judge Chester Straub wrote "the interests of justice" meant the claims should be allowed to move ahead.
Michael Kellogg, a lawyer for Saudi Arabia, said the kingdom will seek further review of "this erroneous decision."
The 2005 ruling said Saudi Arabia was immune under the federal Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act from the claims, which were first filed in 2002.
"This opinion is eminently correct and will give 9/11 victims their day in court," said Stephen Cozen, a lawyer for the plaintiffs. "We are very, very satisfied that we will meet any defenses, both legal and factual, that are raised."
Cozen also said his clients are seeking damages that could reach tens of billions of dollars.

Graphic

 
Joseph Doyle, William Doyle

Load-Date: December 20, 2013


End of Document