SAVAGERY TERRORISM DEFIES CURE
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 22, 1994, Friday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 450 words
Byline: James A. Haught
Body


IT SEEMS likely that more than
100 bodies will be found in the rubble of a Jewish charity building
in Argentina that was bombed Monday, presumably by fundamentalist
Muslim terrorists.
In Israel, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin is blaming Hezbollah
(the Party of God) and its sponsor, the Shi'ite theocracy in Iran.
Rabin urged the democratic community of nations "to strike at this
viper and crush its skull."
Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, replied
fiercely that Israel is a "counterfeit" nation, a "cancerous tumor
inside an Islamic body," and a "gathering of a bunch of Jews from
around the world who possess qualities such as mischief, malice,
thievery and murder." He added: "Because of their filthy nature,
the Zionists have no right to adjudicate on Islamic Iran."
The hatred in this language is the sort of blind emotion that
fuels terrorism.  Zealots who mix fundamentalism, politics and
guerrilla action blight many parts of the world.
Look what's happening in Algeria: Islamic militants won national
elections in 1991, but the military regime voided the balloting, to
head off an Iran-style theocracy.  Ever since, fanatics have been
planting bombs and assassinating intellectuals in an attempt to
overthrow the government.  The New York Times said last week:
"If the Islamic terrorists now murdering foreigners, outspoken
Algerians and government officials ever came to power, the
consequences would be calamitous, threatening governments across
North Africa and flooding Europe, especially France, with desperate
refugees."
The Times urged President Clinton to facilitate talks between
Algeria's leaders and the religious radicals, to find a political
solution.  But if talks bring another election, and the zealots win
again, won't that produce the calamity the Times warned against?
Meanwhile, in India Tuesday, Muslim guerrillas threatened to
shoot any Hindus who make a yearly pilgrimage to a shrine in the
Kashmir province, where Muslims and Hindus have been killing each
other for a half-century.
All these events are facets of the religious-ethnic-political
strife that is a major world dilemma of the 1990s.  Now that the Cold
War has ceased causing conflicts, the spotlight has shifted to
localized troubles, many of them involving differences of faith.
It's maddeningly difficult to find cures for these hostilities
.  Killers who blow up a building full of charity workers, or shoot
unarmed pilgrims kneeling at a shrine, usually aren't receptive to
discussion.
Of course, the Times is right.  The United Nations should do
whatever it can to lure warring parties to conference tables, in hope
of resolving the root of trouble. But compromise isn't easy for
people whose passionate convictions make them murderers.

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document