Save Islam's 'Heretics'
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
October 27, 1993, Wednesday


Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18
Length: 452 words
Body


THE year 1993 is recording a new campaign of terror and
censorship, one that Western intellectuals have said little about.
The campaign is waged against Arab and Islamic writers and
intellectuals by strict fundamentalists. From Algeria to Pakistan
and from Turkey to Sudan, thousands of professors, poets, and
journalists have been threatened and silenced, and in the past year
100 have been targeted by assassins.
In Turkey this summer, 35 writers were burned to death in their
hotel by a mob that objected to the presence of Salman Rushdie's
translator. In Algeria, four journalists and a professor were
brutally killed; the assassins forced family members to watch. In
Egypt, a professor is undergoing divorce proceedings brought by
Islamists who say his wife, as a Muslim, may not be married to an
''apostate.'' In June, as the Saudi Arabian representative to the
United Nations Human Rights Conference in Vienna gave a talk, Saudi
professors who started that country's first human rights group were
arrested and jailed.
The new terrorism reflects the struggle for the soul of Islam
inside Islamic states. Most of those attacked are grappling with
modern thought and its implications for Islamic culture. Some are
critical of the treatment of women in Islamic states; others want
to explore what an American-style ''separation of church and
state'' democracy would mean in Islam. Some are secular or even
atheist (not a crime); others want Islam to integrate with modern
culture but retain its distinctiveness.
Yet for fundamentalists who want to use Western means but reject
Western culture, this is heretical. They would eradicate any middle
ground for dialogue about Islam and the modern world. Arab scholars
coming to the United States for exchange this fall spend their time
describing a new terror. Some feel imprisoned in their libraries.
''For lectures I didn't think twice about in the 1980s, I would be
killed today,'' said one.
The right to disagree and question is central in the West;
Western intellectuals have always demanded this for colleagues
elsewhere. Yet there is a curious silence about these
assassinations. They are clear-cut cases of wrong, terror,
intolerance. Yet in the gummy relativism and correctness in the
academy today, excuses are made. It is popular to criticize the
Mubarak regime in Egypt for selling out to the secular West. But
raise Islamist terrorism and one hears, ''They have a different
culture,'' or ''Only extreme critics are attacked.'' More often one
detects indifference.
For Islam and the West to get along in coming years there must
be a lively middle ground of discussion. Islamic progressives who
want to shape that ground are being killed. The West should wake up
to this crime and its implications.

Load-Date: October 27, 1993


End of Document