Scared out of their rights
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 7, 1998, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 12A; EDITORIAL
Length: 723 words
Body


Two draconian anti-terrorism measures have been pushed through the British  and Irish parliaments as a legislative response to the terrorist car bombing  in Omagh, Northern Ireland. The laws are designed to snag members of a  dissident branch of the Irish Republican Army, called the Real IRA, which has  claimed responsibility for the Aug. 15 attack that killed 28 people. The  governments of Britain and Ireland think the best way to subdue the members of  this group is by making their countries a little less free. History teaches  otherwise.
It is a natural reaction of any government facing a terrorist threat to try  to combat the menace in every way possible. Nonetheless, when governments  enhance security by stripping their citizens of civil liberties, the  terrorists win.
TERRORISM
The new laws change the rules of evidence and make it easier to obtain  convictions of suspected terrorists. They repudiate the right to silence for  terrorist suspects, meaning that anyone accused of being a member of a  terrorist group could have his silence interpreted as an admission of guilt;  something prohibited in our country under the Fifth Amendment. The laws also  allow the conviction of a suspect accused of being a member of a terrorist  organization, largely upon the word of a senior police officer. Our  constitutional guarantees of due process would prevent Congress from directing  that such weight be afforded a single witness.
In Ireland, the new law goes even further and allows police to take  suspects into custody and interrogate them without charge for up to four days.  Again, this is an idea that would be disallowed under our Constitution.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern say  that these extreme measures are necessary to root out the small cells of  terrorists that still stand in the way of peace. Well-meaning governments  often find important security reasons for curtailing civil liberties. It is  that same rationale that led our government to arrest and deport thousands of  pacifist protesters during World War I, to intern over 100,000  Japanese-Americans and legal residents during World War II, and to ruin the  careers of hundreds of teachers, writers and entertainers during the Red scare  of McCarthyism. Inevitably those instincts are wrong. When those erosions of  civil liberties are reflected upon after the crisis has passed, they are  generally seen as hysterical overreactions that damage the moral authority of  a nation.
In Britain, draconian emergency response laws have often backfired. Rather  than containing terrorism, the injustices they engendered served to fan the  flames of insurgency.
Particularly where there is no written Bill of Rights, as in Britain and  Ireland, governments can easily roll back fundamental rights through the  passage of legislation. Our bastion of citizen rights is the Constitution,  which is much more difficult to amend. The founders did that purposely to  temper against fear-induced calls for the repudiation of rights.
Even so, history is replete with examples of our Congress and president  running roughshod over the Bill of Rights whenever this country is gripped by  fear. Most recently, after the World Trade Center bombings, an anti-terrorism  law was enacted here. It allowed immigrants to be deported on the basis of  secret evidence; prohibited Americans from monetarily supporting the  charitable arms of foreign groups that our government designates as terrorist;  and sharply limited our right of habeas corpus, a provision of the  Constitution that allows us to go to court if we've been unconstitutionally  imprisoned.
We now must deal with the victims of that law, who include men being  deported on the basis of evidence they never got to see or rebut, and  prisoners on death row who can't get into federal court with potential  evidence of their innocence because they already exhausted their one habeas  corpus appeal.
As Britain and Ireland prepare to implement their new anti-terrorism laws,  they should keep in mind the trenchant words of one of America's finest  citizens, Benjamin Franklin, who said: "They that can give up essential  liberty to obtain a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor  safety." It's a lesson countries in the midst of a national scare never seem  to learn.

Load-Date: September 8, 1998


End of Document