School of the Americas Institute doesn't teach terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 07, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 994 words
Byline: William M. Morgan
Body


I RECENTLY read a commentary by Bill Mehle, "Source of Suffering" (Dec. 3) explaining his opposition to the now-closed U.S. Army School of the Americas. I sympathize with Bill Mehle and the loss of friends he has experienced. I too lost friends in the Sept. 11 attack on the Pentagon. Yet his commentary also directly impugns the integrity of every member of the Armed Forces by accusing the Department of Defense of conduct that is illegal and immoral: running a training camp for terrorists at Fort Benning, Ga.
As an active duty Army officer with responsibility for the former School of the Americas and for the new Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation, I cannot allow the author's mischaracterizations and misperceptions to pass for fact. I do not doubt his sincerity, and I support his First Amendment right to express his views. But, sadly, he casts the very soldiers who have sworn to protect his freedoms in the same category as the true terrorists who killed our citizens.
Over the past 15 years the old School of the Americas has become a rallying symbol for a political movement that disagrees with U.S. policy in Latin America. However, as in most political movements, symbols supercede reality, and myth repeated by those like Mr. Mehle has become accepted as fact. The importance of this symbology has become even more apparent in our post-Sept. 11 world: Now the school is conveniently tied to the latest headline - the war on terrorism.
The myth is that the United States taught torture to Latin American students at the School of the Americas. Yet even the head of the Catholic Maryknoll Order has been quoted as saying, "We know you do not teach torture, but we say that because you are the symbol of wrongheaded foreign policy toward that region [Latin America]." The accusations have been investigated on 12 separate occasions, including those by the General Accounting Office of the U.S. Congress. All have found the accusations without substance. Yet the myth persists. The reality is that courses covered nothing more than standard instruction given to all U.S. military officers, or the West Virginia National Guard for that matter - the only difference being the courses were conducted in Spanish.
Mr. Mehle claims because less than 1 percent of the graduates later committed criminal acts that their behavior was somehow acquired at the School of the Americas. Look more closely at the accusations: He mentions the murderers of Archbishop Oscar Romero as School of the Americas graduates.  What he does not say is that one of those involved attended a radio communications course eight years before the murder; the other attended a two-week cadet orientation 13 years before the murder. Does Mr. Mehle really believe assassination is covered in a typical radio course? It takes either a great leap of logic or a very profound misunderstanding of the U.S. military to assert these courses were the source of subsequent criminal behavior.
He also mentions the United Nations Truth Commission Report on El Salvador, yet as a teacher of theology I am surprised he neglects to mention one of the report's key findings: that humans alone possess free will. The individual who commits a crime makes his or her own choices about right and wrong. He neglects to mention that over 2,500 Costa Rican officers attended classes at the School of the Americas and not one has been cited for human rights abuses. Over 1,500 U.S. officers have graduated from the School of the Americas and serve this nation honorably. Why is that? Anyone familiar with the complexities of Latin America knows the roots of violence in the region are more likely to be found in regional history and development than at the School of the Americas.
The terrorism accusation is equally ludicrous; unless of course his premise is that all legal and government sanctioned military training falls under his terrorism rubric. In that case I would expect Mr. Mehle to be down protesting at his local National Guard Armory.
Congress voted to close the School of the Americas during 2000. In its place it created the Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation. The institute provides professional education to mid-career military, law enforcement and civilian leaders from throughout the hemisphere. The congressionally mandated mission focuses on promoting democratic values, military professionalism, the advancement of human rights and civilian control of the military.
Students study the same information taught in all Department of Defense educational facilities, and receive the most extensive human rights training of any school in the Department of Defense. Every course includes a mandatory human rights segment. The U.S. soldiers who proudly serve citizens like Mr. Mehle, and the institute's entire staff, ensure the students understand the appropriate role of the military and law enforcement in democratic societies - to protect and honorably serve their citizens. Courses cover medical assistance training, disaster relief, counter-narcotics, border observation and peacekeeping to name a few. All courses are described on the institute's Web site: www. benning.army.mil/whisc. Torture and terrorism are not in the curriculum.
WHINSEC is open to the public and any of your readers can visit if they are traveling to Georgia. I invite Mr. Mehle to visit so that he might meet the faculty and talk to the students. If he has been to Fort Benning to protest but has never taken the time to walk through the front door of the institute to begin a dialogue, he has done himself a disservice. While I doubt that this political movement is willing to give up its symbols and myths, I do ask that its supporters such as Bill Mehle refrain from rhetoric that dishonors those who serve or have served in the armed forces of the United States.
Col. Morgan serves at the Pentagon and his office has oversight for the new Western Hemisphere for Security Cooperation.

Load-Date: January 8, 2002


End of Document