School killings should change U.S. stance
University Wire
September 8, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 376 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, Daily Trojan; SOURCE: U. Southern California
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


The world held its breath last week as horrifying and gruesome pictures, video and stories emerged from a school in the Russian town of Belsan where Chechen separatists stormed a school and killed at least 330 people, most of whom were children.
The United States should end its hypocritical terrorism policies and treat these Chechen separatists who choose to use terrorism and violence the same as they treat the Middle Eastern terrorists.
Russian President Vladimir Puti has intensified his hard-line stance against terrorism in response to the tragedy. He has often echoed President Bush's position against terrorism, saying that he refused to negotiate with the separatists.
The Bush Administration, however, has consistently claimed that the situation in Chechnya is different. Even in light of the attacks, the Bush Administration still supports the idea of a negotiated political settlement. They have condemned the attacks, but maintain that only a political settlement would end the conflict.
In doing so, the United States has taken a decidedly inconsistent position with regards to its policies governing Iraq, Afghanistan and other terrorism-sympathetic countries. They maintain that the situation is Chechnya is different and the Chechen officials the U.S. has dealt with in the past have not been tied to the groups responsible for terrorism.
The Russian president remains unconvinced. Putin responded sarcastically to calls for negotiation and moderation, saying, "Why don't you meet Osama bin Laden, invite him to Brussels or to the White House and engage him in talks, ask him what he wants and give it to him so he leaves you in peace?"
In doing so he highlighted the hypocrisy of the U.S. position on terrorism.
The United States must hold the Chechen rebels in the same regard as they do the Palestinian terrorists or the Iraq insurgents. If the U.S. truly believes that a peaceful settlement can be made with the Chechens, they must show a greater willingness to negotiate with governments who have used terrorism in the past.
If they, instead, truly believe in a zero-sum negotiation policy with terrorist organizations, they must maintain the same policy with governments that are sympathetic with those groups.
(C) 2003 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 8, 2004


End of Document