Scholar to deliver inaugural lecture at USU
The Salt Lake Tribune
February 8, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES; Religion; LDS
Length: 304 words
Byline: The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


Utah State University on Wednesday will hold an inaugural lecture by the first scholar chosen for its Leonard J. Arrington Chair of Mormon History and Culture.
Philip Barlow, who joined USU's Religious Studies Program last fall, will present "Wish-Fulfillment, 'The Opium of the People,' and Terrorism: Is Religion Sick?" at 3 p.m. in the school's Performance Hall at about 1090 E. 675 North, Logan. The lecture is free and a reception will follow.
The lecture's title could be simplified to "Is Religion Sick?" but Barlow said in a statement that he wants to get behind the question. "In the minds of many pivotal thinkers in Western civilization, religion does not fare well."
Freud, for example, found religion to be a comforting illusion and pathology, based on the human desire for meaning and solace amid the harsh realities of existence, he said.
"Marx identified religion as the enemy of social progress, a drug to keep the deprived masses in a sweet stupor of ethereal, other-worldly hopes while the ruling classes enjoyed real wealth and power in the actual world of here and now," Barlow said in the statement. "A cluster of recent, articulate and popular books argue for an end to faith, insisting on the superiority of science and suggesting that terrorism is only the most flagrant of many ills by which religion poisons society, including conflict, mindless obedience, wasted time, the constriction of medical advances and the derailing of progressive political policies."
He holds a doctorate in American religion and culture and from the Harvard Divinity School and earned a master's degree at Harvard in the history of Christianity. Barlow also has a bachelor's degree in psychology from Weber State College. Before his arrival at USU, he was a professor at Hanover College in the department of theological studies.

Graphic

 
Philip Barlow

Load-Date: February 9, 2008


End of Document