Schools' dilemma: Terror insurance;
Attacks on schools aren't likely, officials say, but some districts in the area don't want to risk the alternative.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
February 10, 2003 Monday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B01
Length: 963 words
Byline: By Kellie Patrick; Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


Even in the post-Sept. 11 world, it's hard to fathom foreign terrorists attacking an elementary school.
But a change in federal law has forced school officials to think about the unthinkable.
The new law requires insurers to offer terrorism insurance to their commercial clients, including schools, by Feb. 24.
The Pennsylvania School Boards Association surveyed its 450 policyholders - school districts, community colleges and intermediate units - and learned last week that two-thirds of those responding so far want terrorism insurance.
"With the situation in the world as it is right now, it seemed like a prudent thing to do," said Robert McAuliffe, business administrator in the Council Rock School District in Bucks County, which recently bought the insurance from a private carrier. "A year from now, we'll take another look at it as to whether we want to continue that coverage."
Council Rock's annual insurance bill rose about 3 percent, adding roughly $4,800 to cover the rest of the fiscal year, which ends June 30, McAuliffe said.
Some school districts may see such an expense as a small price for peace of mind. Others weighed tight budgets against the odds of an attack and decided to do without the insurance.
Before Sept. 11, 2001, most schools and business were covered against terrorist attack under their old policies.
As claims stemming from that attack mounted, many carriers canceled or sharply reduced coverage. Congress intervened, promising to help insurers pay for claims of more than $5 million, with an industry-wide cap of $100 billion per year.
Some schools and businesses still don't know they will face this decision.
The 57 New Jersey school districts covered by a joint insurance fund administered by Cashan & Co. will receive word by the deadline, executive director Bill Ryan said.
The districts have liability insurance in case of terrorist attack, but not property insurance. Cashan & Co. is still pricing the coverage. Ryan said he's received mixed reactions in e-mail discussions with some districts.
"Some are just not interested. Others say if it's affordable, it's something they want to do," he said. "It's going to be a difficult decision for everyone."
Psychologists say that part of what makes this decision difficult is that just thinking about a terrorist striking a school elicits a strong emotional response.
Human nature would tend to push those weighing the decision toward a purchase, Bryn Mawr College psychology professor Clark McCauley said.
School leaders making those decisions may have difficulty separating emotion from logic, said Louis Manza, assistant professor of psychology at Lebanon Valley College in Annville, Pa., but that's exactly what he thinks they should do.
"If you truly make a rational decision, you should have numbers on your side for why the money would be spent on the terrorism side, versus the students' academic side," he said.
Safety experts differ on the need for terrorism insurance.
"My take is risk for terroristic attacks is remote," said Ronald Stephens, executive director of the National School Safety Center in California, a nonprofit organization that gathers safety information and provides advice and training for schools.
Kenneth S. Trump - president of National School Safety & Security Services, a consulting firm - disagrees.
"By striking America's schoolchildren, terrorists would hit at the heart of America and fulfill their goal of inflicting fear, panic and unrest," Trump said.
Though no school in the United States has ever been the target of terrorism, two New York City high schools were damaged in the Sept. 11 attacks, and 500 students were in class about one mile from where a hijacked plane crashed in Shanksville, Pa.
Stephens, Trump and Sheldon Grasley, managing director of the Pennsylvania School Board Association's insurance trust, suggest districts should consider their proximity to major cities, airports, power plants, and other potential targets when deciding whether to buy the insurance.
The Cheltenham School District in Montgomery County isn't interested in terrorism insurance, Superintendent Christopher McGinley said through a spokeswoman, because the district's focus is on terrorism prevention.
The Centennial School District in Bucks County will pay $4,700 for the additional coverage, business administrator Timothy Vail said. The West Chester Area School District spent about $5,000 for a policy rider to cover terrorism this year, a spokeswoman said.
Both the Philadelphia district and the New York City district are self-insured, paying their own claims as they see fit.
Temple University's coverage for terrorist attacks was "reduced substantially" after Sept. 11, 2001, said Martin Dorph, the university's vice president, chief financial officer and treasurer. Temple now expects to fully restore its terrorism coverage, although it is still waiting for a price quote, he said.
So far, the Pennsylvania School Boards Association insurance trust - which administers the insurance plan - has learned that roughly 150 of its insurance customers want terrorism insurance and 75 do not; 225 have asked for more time to decide.
Terrorism insurance covers buildings and possessions. It also would cover damaged vehicles, workers' compensation claims, and any damages if a district were sued by parents for failing to protect students against an attack.
Council Rock parent Wendy Greisler thinks her district was right to buy insurance.
"It's scary to think that they would even need it," she said.
Michael Cirelli, a senior at Council Rock High School South, doesn't think insurance can make much difference.
"What's the difference if you're insured or not?" he asked. "The damage is already done."
Contact staff writer Kellie Patrick at 215-702-7807 or kpatrick@phillynews.com  

Load-Date: February 10, 2003


End of Document