School police chief trains with global security experts
The Brunswick News (Georgia)
June 8, 2013 Saturday


Copyright 2013 The Brunswick News
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 614 words
Byline: Sarah Lundgren, The Brunswick News, Ga.
Body


June 08--Flipping through hundreds of images on his computer, Glynn County Schools Police Chief Rod Ellis points to one in particular: The visibly well-armed guard is standing in front of a building as schoolchildren pass behind him.
"Israeli police take the role of a 'student resource officer' much more seriously than we do here -- officers are armed and ready," Ellis said. "They don't have 'problem students,' the students are well-behaved. Their fear is terrorism, the suicide bomber."
All of the photos Ellis is looking at were taken during a two-week trip to Israel after the end of the past school year. He was one of 16 public safety officials from the state in the Georgia International Law Enforcement Exchange delegation.
Ellis and the other officials received peer-to-peer training from Israeli police on counterterrorism, emergency management and other public safety strategies.
"Getting a lesson on safety and securing from the Israelis is like if you want to be a golfer and you spend two weeks with Davis Love (III)," Ellis said. "It doesn't get any better than them, they're pros at what they do.
"They're a fledgling nation that started in 1948 that has been at war almost the whole time. There are acts of terrorism every day, and they've learned to deal with it, to mitigate it, understand it."
Ellis was one of three school system police chiefs on the trip, with city police chiefs and members of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. He was thankful to see some of the tactics he's firmly believed in, and utilized in Glynn County, being used in Israel.
"They use a three-tier approach, first focusing on as much public information and intelligence as they can gather, where people will report what they see, which is the same thing I talk about here. It lets me know we're doing things the right way," he said.
"The next is the tactical preparedness and then how to get on with life if and once something does happen."
The serious nature of Ellis' training, from re-enactments to a national full-scale exercise simulating a rocket landing in Tel-Aviv with casualties, let him see what Israelis do from beginning to end in many situations.
"It opened my eyes to some things. The single biggest aspect -- I've said it before and I'll say it again -- is that trained observer (in a school) who knows when a student's out of line or something seems wrong.
"Terrorism is terrorism, I don't care if it's a radical person of another religion who blows something up with a bomb or (Newtown school shooter) Adam Lanza who says, 'I'm going to shoot up a school full of kids because ...' God knows. I don't care -- it's terrorism. Anything that causes mass casualties and disrupts our way of life is terrorism," Ellis said.
With what he learned, Ellis expects to be better able to train school resource officers in Glynn County.
"I'm going to share with my staff what I've learned, and I think we're doing a lot of things right, especially with the resources we have.
"The malls over there spend 25 percent of their budgets on security... most American malls spend less than two percent. We have people who complain about too many SROs, when we don't even spend a full one percent of the school system's budget on SROs."
Ellis attended the training on a grant from a foundation. The only cost the school system was the use of Ellis' vehicle to drive to and from Atlanta.
-- Reporter Sarah Lundgren writes about education and other local topics. Contact her at slundgren@thebrunswick news.com, on Facebook or at 265-8320, ext. 322.
___ (c)2013 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: June 8, 2013


End of Document