School board candidate wants students taught about Islamic terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
January 14, 2011 Friday
F3 Edition


Copyright 2011 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 503 words
Byline: By Ashok Selvam , aselvam@dailyherald.com
Body


With his backing from Tea Party Palatine, it's no surprise Palatine-Schaumburg High School District 211 board candidate Roman Golash says he cares tremendously about financial issues.
But unlike most tea party members, Golash isn't focusing on the economy and government spending.
Instead, in both writings on his website and in an interview Thursday, the 60-year-old retired Army colonel said he worries about whether students are being taught American values and about Islamic terrorism.
"I care about the budget tremendously, because the taxes are going through the roof, that's a given," the Palatine resident said Thursday. "But more than that, I'm concerned about the moral fiber of our youth."
Golash is one of seven candidates running for four open board seats in the April 5 election.A career military man before his retirement in May, the Chicago native has been politically active as a Palatine Township precinct captain.
While he agrees District 211 teachers do their jobs well, he said many instructors are young and lack his military perspective, a viewpoint that he believes will help the school board. He also wants to establish ROTC programs and military memorials at each of the district's five schools.
"High school graduates are going into a complex world, they need to understand the war against Islamic terrorism, but they also require a solid set of values," his website reads.
The site contains papers Golash has written about terrorism in the post-9/11 world and clamors for tougher immigration laws to keep "Islamic terrorists" off American soil.
"In 2004, up to 190,000 OTMs (other than Mexicans) came acrossthe Mexican border into the United States leaving prayer rugs and Korans in the desert," one of his papers reads.
Golash said he's not picking on Islam and that there's a difference between radical Islam and law-abiding citizens who practice the faith.
Golash argues schools are where students need to develop better American values, including loyalty and a strong sense in religious faith. He repeatedly called for schools to help students with their "moral compasses."
Those comments raised concerns with Jason Spoor, a social studies teacher at Fremd High School in Palatine and head of the District 211 teachers union.
"Morals are very different for a lot of parents and a lot of members of our community," Spoor said. "We have churches and families that are doing a wonderful job as far as educating students as to morals. His morals may not be the same standards that other members of the community determine to be their moral standard."
Speer also wondered what role teachers should play, as "morals" can come from a variety of places.
"Do we teach that cheating is bad?" he said. "I would hope. I would hope there's a role for the teacher in that. Teaching respect, I would hope, but I'm not exactly sure how we define ‘moral.'"
Golash also wants the district to switch American history books to "A Patriot's History of the United States." The book has received praise from some conservatives.

Load-Date: January 14, 2011


End of Document