Scholar: AIDS' effects abet terrorism
University Wire
November 11, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Washington Square News via U-Wire
Length: 541 words
Byline: By Irma Akansu, Washington Square News; SOURCE: New York U.
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body


Scholars clashed Wednesday night over the impact of the global AIDS crisis on international security during a discussion at the Center for Global Affairs.
Both speakers agreed that the AIDS epidemic is a crisis that the world must take more seriously and more decisively. About 40 spectators filed the public assembly room at the School of Continuing and Professional Studies, located in the Woolworth Building, for the debate.
Greg Behrman, author of "The Invisible People: How the U.S. Has Slept Through the Global AIDS Pandemic," argued that countries ravaged by the disease could create situations ripe for ideologues to recruit for terrorist activities. But Helen Epstein, a visiting research scholar from Princeton University, said the issue is basically a health issue, and that the security threat has not been proven.
"We've been looking for the effect of AIDS in all the wrong places," Epstein said. "AIDS needs to be seen as a humanitarian issue."
The discussion centered on the devastation AIDS has wreaked in Africa, though both speakers agreed that the disease is a priority throughout the entire world, especially in China, India and Russia, where AIDS infection rates are rising is growing faster than anywhere else in the world.
"Over the past 20 years, 60 million have been infected and 20 million people have died [of AIDS]," Behrman said. "That exceeds all battle deaths of the 20th century combined. A generation of adults are disappearing, and a generation of orphans are emerging in its wake."
The horror of AIDS has been used as a cover for other problems in Africa, such as government-sponsored corruption, Epstein said.
AIDS is a global security threat, Behrman said, because the disease leaves behind vulnerable orphans that can become "an army in search of a leader," creating "a cauldron of instability" in Africa.
"[AIDS might] produce conditions for Africa to become a breeding ground for terrorism," he said. "Weak states now pose a greater threat than strong states. We need to question what is making states weak."
To face the unique threat posed by the AIDS pandemic, world leaders must think and act in new ways, Behrman said.
"We need to take a forward looking approach," he said. "We have to anticipate. We cannot afford to think in old paradigms."
Epstein said she was skeptical that AIDS could lead to global political instability by creating orphans, since AIDS is responsible for only a quarter of African's approximately 45 million orphans, and believed there are larger issues at hand.
"The fact that AIDS is a horrible disease should be enough of a reason to be concerned," she said. "I have seen so little evidence of AIDS as a global security threat that I question how much of it is speculation."
She said it was unclear what impact AIDS orphans would have on African politics and society.
Behrman said that, though AIDS amounts to "an incomparable human tragedy," the fact that American interests are at stake can make people pay more attention to the epidemic.
"We need to remember to respond to this threat on all levels," Behrman said. "With leadership, a certain amount of resources, shared global strategies and common goals, you can control the rate of infections."
(C) 2003 Washington Square News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 11, 2004


End of Document