School briefs
The Salt Lake Tribune
February 21, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Education
Length: 415 words
Byline: The Salt Lake Tribune
Body


U. to host human-rights conference
Terrorism, values and violence will be the theme of an international conference on human rights March 1 and 2 at the University of Utah.
The conference, titled "Values and Violence: Intangible Aspects of Terrorism," will bring together political, legal and economic experts to explore the role of cultural and ethical values that drive terrorism and responses to it.
Participants will explore a range of topics, including female terrorists, old versus new terrorism, ethnicity and indoctrination for violence and Gandhi, Newton, and the Enlightenment.
Speakers include Martha Crenshaw of Wesleyan University, Bruce Hoffman from Georgetown University, Nobel Laureate Amartya K. Sen from Harvard University and Martha Nussbaum from the University of Chicago School of Law, among others.
"Government agencies have expressed the need for systematic multi-disciplinary approaches to values and norms in crafting policy toward public safety," says Wayne McCormack, professor of law at the University of Utah.
"The thing we found surprising is that no one has done this. As we started planning the conference, we thought that we might learn from someone else's experience, but we seem to be the first to approach the issue of terrorism from this type of multi-disciplinary perspective."
For a complete list of events, visit www.humanrights.utah.edu/forum.
- Sheena McFarland
Students offer help with tax returns
Tax season is here, and accounting students at Southern Utah University will again volunteer to assist community members in filing their income taxes before the mid-April deadline.
Students and community members can receive income tax assistance from upper division undergraduate and graduate accounting students through April 12. The service is available Monday through Thursday (excluding holidays and spring break) from 5:30 to 8:30 p.m. in Room 107 - the new Steve Harrop Investment and Service-Learning Laboratory - of the Dixie Leavitt Business Building.
Jeff Barnes, associate professor of accounting and adviser to the tax-help students, says this community service program has been very successful and worthwhile. "Other students and members of the community really appreciate this help. It takes stress off of them."
Clients in need of tax assistance are asked to bring their W-2, 1099 and other pertinent tax documents. A copy of last year's tax return would also be helpful. Also, a valid picture ID and social security card are needed.
- Sheena McFarland

Load-Date: February 21, 2007


End of Document