SCIENTISTS DISCUSS ANTI-TERRORISM EFFORTS
Santa Fe New Mexican (New Mexico)
April 23, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 New Mexican, Inc.
Section: SANTA FE/EL NORTE; Pg. B-1
Length: 593 words
Byline: JEFF TOLLEFSON
Body


Physicist says 'Jason' to continue defense advisory role
ALBUQUERQUE -- An elite group of scientists, known as Jason, expects to resolve its differences with the U.S. Department of Defense and continue its science-advisory work with the federal government, Jason Chairman Steven Koonin said during the American Physical Society's meeting here Monday.
After the Manhattan Project, a group of physicists began Jason to provide technical expertise to the federal government on nuclear-weapons issues, although Koonin said its role has since expanded to include other work, including anti-terrorism research.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the research arm of the Department of Defense, cancelled its contract with Jason last winter, according to information from the American Physical Society.
DARPA made the decision after Jason declined to accept the agency's request that the group accept three new members, "a Washington insider and two Silicon valley executives," according to the Physical Society. The New York Times reported last month the contract is worth more than $2 million.
Koonin, a physicist with California Institute of Technology, touched briefly on the issue during a session on physicists' role in federal anti-terrorism efforts. He did not elaborate except to say that Jason is meeting with federal officials in the coming months and expects to continue its advisory role with the federal government.
He said Jason works with the federal government on everything from stewardship of the nuclear-weapons stockpile to genomics and climate change. Although the group of about 50 active members began as physicists, he noted, 40 percent of its membership now includes scientists of other disciplines.
Jason is looking at various aspects of terrorism, including the use of biological and nuclear weapons and the possibility that terrorists will one day create pathogens that are genetically engineered to be more effective, according to Koonin.
Unfortunately, he said, "people are the canaries for bioterrorism. … We wait until somebody shows up in the emergency room."
Although the national laboratories are working on sensors that can detect anthrax, for instance, he noted that it could cost $1 billion to set up 10,000 such sensors to cover Los Angeles alone. Jason also has discussed the idea of creating and coordinating health-information systems that use modern "data-mining" techniques to scour insurance records and emergency-room emissions, even pharmacy sales, in search of anomalies.
In the event that an attack does take place, he noted, the nation doesn't have enough drugs that would counter some of the common bio-weapons, nor are hospitals prepared for a sudden surge in patients that would occur in a major outbreak.
He also discussed so-called "dirty bombs" -- nuclear weapons that are designed to disperse radioactive materials rather than generate an advanced nuclear explosion. He noted that "tens of thousands" of common products include radioactive materials that could be used in dirty bombs.
For instance, he said a gamma ray camera -- commonplace technology used at various construction sites -- contains iridium-192. He said just a fraction of a gram of this material, while it might not result in massive health problems, could render one square mile "uninhabitable by current standards."
He said Jason offers only scientific advice on such issues. What happens after that is up to the policy makers, he said.
"We do have an impact, enough so that it's satisfying when it happens," he said. "It's worth the effort."

Load-Date: July 16, 2002


End of Document