Scottish Police Arrest Suspect in Swedish Bombing
The New York Times
March 9, 2011 Wednesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 486 words
Byline: By RAVI SOMAIYA
Body


LONDON -- Scottish police said on Tuesday that they had arrested a man in Glasgow on terrorism charges related to a suicide bomber who killed himself and wounded two others in Sweden in December.
The arrest came as part of an investigation across Sweden and Britain into the bomber, Taimour Abdulwahab al-Abdaly, 28, who had lived in both countries after fleeing Saddam Hussein's Iraq with his family in 1992, and who detonated crude bombs in Stockholm's city center on Dec. 11, 2010.
The 30-year-old man arrested on Tuesday was accused of ''aiding terrorist activities'' outside Scotland and described only as a ''foreign national.'' He was arrested in a dawn raid in Glasgow, according to a statement from Strathclyde Police, the force that made the arrest.
Swedish security services said that there was a likely connection to Mr. Abdaly, but declined to provide any details.
Mr. Abdaly had driven to the busy Stockholm street of Drottninggatan shortly before 5 p.m. on Dec. 11, and parked among throngs of Christmas shoppers. The first blast came from gas canisters in his car, and the second came minutes later, about 200 yards away, when one of 12 pipe bombs strapped to him exploded, possibly prematurely. Mr. Abdaly was found lying in a pool of his own blood and died of his injuries.
Minutes before the blasts, he had sent recordings to the Swedish police and news media apologizing to his wife and young family. His voice breaking, he also vowed revenge in the name of Islam on Sweden for its participation in the war in Afghanistan and for cartoons published by a Swedish artist depicting the prophet Muhammad in an unflattering light.
Swedish investigators said they did not believe he acted alone. In the recordings he sent to the police, terrorism experts found hints of links to Al Qaeda in Iraq, which intelligence agencies say is a mostly Iraqi militant group with some foreign leadership.
The investigation quickly moved to Luton, England, a town near London where Mr. Abdaly had studied and lived for several years. The town is remembered by many Britons as the early morning starting point for the four bombers who attacked the London transit system on July 7, 2005, killing 56 people, including themselves.
Details of Mr. Abdaly's life pointed to an apparent conflict in a young man who associates in Luton described as friendly but increasingly extremist in the years leading up to the attack.
On his Facebook page, Mr. Abdaly posted several videos dedicated to Islamic fighters around the world. His profile picture showed hooded figures waving the black flag of Al Qaeda. But among his listed interests were ''National Geographic'' and ''I love my Apple iPad.''
In the final section of one of the recordings sent to the police, Mr. Abdaly addressed his family. ''Tell the children that I love them,'' he said, ''and their dad couldn't sit back and watch the pigs humiliate our beloved Prophet Muhammad.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 9, 2011


End of Document