SCOTT MAKES CHANGES IN DIRECTING TRANSPORT FOR WAR ON TERRORISM;
COLD WAR NAME IS REVIVED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 2, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 264 words
Byline: Robert Goodrich Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


In a ceremony Wednesday at Scott Air Force Base, the Air Mobility Command revived the name of the 18th Air Force from the Cold War as the entity that will now direct transport for the war on terrorism.
Based at Scott, the 18th replaces the 21st Air Force based in New Jersey and the 15th Air Force based in California, both of which have been redesignated as expeditionary mobility task forces.
Gen. John W. Handy said the change will "consolidate command and control," and not just shift names on the organizational chart. He called it the most dramatic reorganization since the Air Mobility Command was established in 1992.
Handy heads both the Air Mobility Command and its parent organization, the U.S. Transportation Command.
The 18th Air Force will be headed by a three-star general. Handy said he expected President George W. Bush to nominate the Transportation Command operations director, Maj. Gen. William Welser III, for the job.
Welser is a native of Mineola, N.Y., who began his Air Force career 32 years ago - in aircraft maintenance. He has been at Scott since July 2001 and served a previous tour here from 1994 to 1997.
For now, the 18th's reins have been taken over by Maj. Gen. Paul W. Essex, the Air Mobility Command's plans and programs director.
Essex said Wednesday's ceremony reveals an evolution in the Air Mobility Command that began more than a decade ago.
"We have removed layers of our organization and made ourselves more efficient," he said.
The command will operate with fewer people, both at Scott and worldwide, but exact numbers have yet to be decided, he said.

Notes

Reporter Robert Goodrich; E-mail: rgoodrich@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 618-235-8919  

Load-Date: October 3, 2003


End of Document