Scotland Yard To Pay £60,000 For Assault On Terror Suspect
RTT News (United States)
March 18, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 333 words
Body


(RTTNews) - A British Muslim awaiting extradition to the United States to face terrorism charges won £60,000 ($83,000) in compensation from the Scotland Yard, who admitted that the terrorism suspect was subjected to violent assault and religious abuse during his arrest, media reports say.
The High Court heard that Babar Ahmad, a 34-year-old IT analyst of Pakistani origin, had allegedly been punched and twice placed him in a life-threatening neck-hold, causing him to feel that he was about to die during his arrest on a U.S. extradition warrant in an anti-terrorism raid in London in December 2003.
Officers openly mocked his Islamic faith, at one point forcing him into a praying position with an officer shouting "Where is your god now? Pray to him," Justice Holroyde heard. One officer had grabbed his testicles and pulled hard, causing intense pain.
Scotland Yard chief Paul Stephenson, who was present at the High Court hearing Wednesday, conceded that Ahmad had been the victim of "gratuitous violence" by officers despite his offering no resistance. One of the unnamed officers allegedly involved in the inhuman treatment is expected to face criminal proceedings.
Ahmad, who was never charged in Britain following the raid, had been suspected of links to Al-Qaida and has been in the Long Lartin prison in Worcestershire since then awaiting a decision on whether his extradition to the U.S. on charges of fundraising in support of terrorism in Chechnya and Afghanistan would contravene the European Convention on Human Rights.
Ahmad&apos;s counsel, Phillippa Kaufman, said the treatment to which her client was subjected was intended "to humiliate and debase him and make him fear for his life".
Ahmad&apos;s brother-in-law, Fahad Ahmad, read out a statement on his behalf that said this abuse took place not in Guantanamo Bay or a secret torture chamber but in Tooting, south London.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document