Screening of 'Men in the Arena' depicts Somalian soccer story
The Daily Vidette: Illinois State University
October 17, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES; Pg. 1
Length: 309 words
Byline: REBECCA DAVIS
Body


Illinois State's Department of Sociology and Anthropology will host a free screening of the documentary "Men in the Arena"at 7 p.m. Tuesday in Capen Auditorium.
The film follows the story of two Somalian national soccer teammates on a journey that highlights human rights, survival and sports over the course of three years of filming in both Africa and the United States.
Creators of the movie hope that viewers will enjoy the story of soccer players as well as learn more about Somalia, a country with a poor reputation in the media.
"We tend to see places like Somalia through as a single story of bad ... An unfixable cycle of disaster plagued by terrorism, war, famine and piracy [...] With modern terrorism tactics we have seen that far-flung places like Somalia can have an effect on our neighborhoods," J.R. Biersmith, director and producer of the documentary, said.
The documentary focuses on Saadiq Mohammed and Sa'ad Hussein, who both previously played for the Somali national soccer team before coming to the United States. Today, both players are making a name for themselves in the U.S., but their long journey here is one of the film's main viewpoints. It also encourages viewers to become aware of the terror that plagues Somalia and become inspired to get involved in a future change.
"In the same way that terrorism can metastasize, Sa'ad and Saadiq's story can inspire a generation to pick up a pen or compete in sports instead of carrying a gun," Biersmith said. "I think hearing their story can create a butterfly effect."
The film will be followed with a question and answer session held by Biersmith, encouraging students to spark discussion on the film.
REBECCA DAVIS  is a Features reporter for The Vidette. Any questions or comments regarding her article can be directed to vidette_rjdavis@ilstu.edu Follow her on Twitter @VRebeccaDavis

Load-Date: October 17, 2016


End of Document