Searching for a way out of the hostage-taking cycle
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 2, 1987, Monday


Copyright 1987 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Ideas; PERSPECTIVES; Column; Pg. 23
Length: 934 words
Byline: RUSHWORTH M. KIDDER
Body


What's the latest state of play on the chessboard of Middle Eastern terrorism?
First, look at the history of the moves. Last March and April, a French television engineer, an Irish teacher, and a British TV journalist were kidnapped in Beirut.
Then came a lull - which, we now know, was being filled with clandestine moves toward an American-Iranian arms-for-hostages deal - and the release of an American hostage, the Rev. Lawrence Martin Jenco, in July.
In September, two American educators and an Italian businessman were kidnapped in Beirut, followed by the disappearance of an American writer in October.
Then came another lull - followed by the release, in November, of hostage David Jacobsen.
Now the cycle has started up again in earnest: Nine more foreigners (at the time of writing) have been kidnapped in Beirut since Jan. 13.
What does it all mean?
That's a question I put the other day to Paul Wilkinson, one of the world's foremost terrorism experts, in a telephone interview at his office at the University of Aberdeen, Scotland. His conclusion: The West's recent approach to Middle Eastern terrorism, far from improving the situation, has simply ''whetted the appetites'' of the small, shadowy bands of kidnappers operating in the lawless chaos of Beirut. This has been a season of misguided appeasement - ''All carrots,'' he says with feeling, ''and no bloody sticks!''
''I think that there are a number of illusions about hostage-taking in general, and about Iran's role in particular, that have been exposed by events of recent days,'' he explains, noting the connection often drawn between Ayatollah Khomeini's Iran and the radical Muslim terrorists operating in Beirut. ''One is the illusion that hostage-taking groups and their state backers can be appeased or bought off,'' he says.
On the contrary, he notes that when the terrorists and their sponsors see that ''the going is good - when they know they are going to get massive publicity, when they can see that they've made gains in terms of shipments of arms, (and) when they feel that they can gain more of these tactical objectives - then it seems to me quite unrealistic to assume that by humanitarian plea, or by trying to appeal to reason, you will make inroads into the ideas of the group and get them to curb their propensity for taking Westerners.''
By most accounts, the Jan. 13 arrest in Frankfurt of Muhammad Ali Hamadi - wanted in the hijacking of TWA Flight 847 at Beirut Airport in June 1985 - was the immediate stimulus for this latest spiral of terrorism. But Professor Wilkinson also blames the general disarray of US counter-terrorism policy - which he describes as one of ''public rhetoric and private deals.'' He notes, too, that the French government - shaken by recent industrial confrontations and student troubles, and already repaying privately to Iran some of the massive debt accrued during the Shah's day - might appear a soft target for further concessions before any more French hostages are released. Terrorist groups are opportunistic - and this, he says, appears to be ''a moment of opportunity.''
Oddly, that opportunity may be inflated, not dampened, by the presence of Anglican negotiator Terry Waite. ''I think he is an innocent, a genuine humanitarian mediator,'' says Wilkinson. ''But unfortunately a lot of the (terrorist) groups see his very presence as a guarantee of more publicity,'' he says. By calling more attention to the hostages, he says, Waite's public activities can increase their value - making their captors hungry for even more concessions. The effect of his presence, says Wilkinson, ''is almost to create a stimulus to these groups to believe that by engaging in further hostage-taking they, too, get a slice of the action - the dialogues, the hotlines, the telephone calls to London, the telephone calls to Bonn, the telephone calls to New York or Washington. And this must be attractive to them.''
Solutions? Wilkinson offers three:
*A reiteration of ''the absolutely firm, no-ransom, no-surrender-to-extortion position that the Americans traditionally took.'' Officials in Washington, he says, ''can't say that often enough, and they have to translate it into practice and be seen to be rooting out any secret organizations or groups or individuals who are trying to construct deals.''
*''A final effort must be made to evacuate all remaining Westerners from Beirut,'' he says. ''Once that has been done, in my view, we should evoke the Bonn Declaration (of 1978) and close off Beirut (International Airport) from civil aviation internationally for the industrial summit countries until such time as the authorities there can restore anything like normalcy and order.'' Currently, he says, that airport allows terrorists fairly easy access into the international aviation network - without the careful weapons checks made at other airports.
*Given that Iran has some influence, if not total control, over the terrorist groups, the time is ripe for economic sanctions against Iran. With the Iran-Iraq war escalating, he says, Iran greatly needs Western technology and weapons - and can hardly afford to ''alienate all the Western countries'' by supporting terrorism.
Wilkinson's conclusion, then, is a simple one: that we in the West are ''not using our leverage'' and must begin to do so. The danger of the current hostage-taking spiral is that it will polarize Western opinion between the ''we've done all we can'' hand-wringers and the ''bomb them into bits'' hawks. Which is why, more than ever, we need to hear more from such level-headed thinkers as Paul Wilkinson.
A Monday column


End of Document