Search for Air Bombers Heats Up
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 21, 1989, Tuesday


Copyright 1989 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U.S.; Pg. 7
Length: 894 words
Byline: E.A. Wayne, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Highlight: Syria is under pressure to show its innocence in the bombing of Pan American Flight 103. IT'S 'SQUIRM TIME'
Body


THE trail is getting closer to those responsible for the midair bombing of Pan American Flight 103 over Scotland last December.
Growing evidence reinforces the hypothesis among investigators on both sides of the Atlantic that the operation was carried out by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General Command (PFLP-GC).
This puts increasing pressure on the PFLP-GC's primary mentor, Syria, to demonstrate that it played no role in the incident and is willing to cooperate in the probe.
Investigators also suspect that elements in Iran, most likely the Revolutionary Guards, contracted the hit to avenge the United States downing of an Iranian civilian jet last summer. PFLP-GC leader Ahmed Jabril reportedly was in Tehran for the 10th anniversary celebrations of the Iranian Revolution, Western terrorism specialists say.
The PFLP-GC denies responsibility for the Pan Am bombing, while investigators concede they have not yet proved PFLP involvement. As one official says, ''It's squirm time for Mr. Ahmed Jabril.
European terrorism specialists say the connection between Iranians and the PFLP-GC is part of a broader common front formed late last year which includes other radical Palestinians and Lebanese. They are rallying, these experts say, against the US and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) chairman Yasser Arafat.
SPECIALISTS on both sides of the Atlantic also say some elements of the Syrian government probably knew of the PFLP-GC's plans and operations in West Germany. The question is how much they knew and if there was an active Syrian role.
The PFLP-GC, headquartered in Damascus, has close links to Syria's secret services. The head of the operation in Germany, Haffez Kassem Dalkamouni, was apparently traveling on an official Syrian passport when arrested last October.
''You Americans are being naive if you think (Syrian President Hafez) Assad didn't know of all this and took full advantage of it for its own ends,'' a top European terrorism specialist says. Mr. Assad ''stood to profit immensely from this operation,'' because of his opposition to the US dialogue with the PLO and his desire to reassert himself as a necessary linchpin if the chaos spilling out of Lebanon is to be controlled, the specialist says.
US Mideast specialists say they doubt Assad would have any interest in directly targeting a US plane. But they agree he may have been willing to overlook hints that such an operation was under way.
Libya is also still under suspicion as a source of funds or transit for part of the operation.
A good deal of the scenario for the Pan Am bombing is hypothetical. Recent press reports that Mr. Dalkamouni, a reported PFLP-GC operative, had confessed to his group's involvement in the Pan Am bombing are false, informed Western officials say.
But last week British investigators announced that the bomb that downed Flight 103 had been hidden in a radio-cassette player. British officials say the device was probably put on the plane in Frankfurt, West Germany, where the PFLP-GC was operating. Well-placed Western specialists say the cassette player was a Toshiba model similar to the Toshiba Boombeat 435 filled with plastic explosives that was reportedly found last fall in a PFLP-GC arms cache in West Germany.
Both the Pan Am bomb and the one discovered with the PFLP-GC were apparently outfitted with Semtex explosive and had high-altitude detonators.
Investigators are trying to find how similar the two devices are as well as to identify and then trace the suitcase that contained the cassette player.
Terrorism specialists note, however, that other groups have used similar devices and methods in recent years.
A EUROPEAN official with long antiterrorism experience says three of these devices were reportedly fabricated in Lebanon and transported to Europe via Libya. Another European terrorism specialist says that in addition to PFLP-GC operatives, investigators are searching for several members of the Abu Nidal Organization who may have played a role in the Pan Am attack.
Publicly, Western officials are being very cautious about assigning blame for the Pan Am incident. In the US, the investigation may lead to criminal prosecutions. Certain pretrial discussions of evidence could violate the law and harm an eventual case.
But more broadly, Western officials want to have their case as tight as possible before they decide what response might be required in retaliation against those responsible or their state sponsors, if any are found. US officials note the outcry after the US attacked Tripoli in 1986 because of believed Libyan involvement in the bombing of a West Berlin disco. They want to be able to mobilize international support.
Still, quiet pressure is already being exerted on Syria in connection with the PFLP-GC. As part of an effort to break out of international isolation for earlier involvement in terrorism, the Syrian government promised to mend its ways and cooperate, if given evidence that those under its influence were participating in terrorism.
The two PFLP-GC operatives under arrest in West Germany are reportedly to be charged with bombing attacks on two US military trains in that country. Syria has been asked to cooperate in the investigation and take appropriate action against those responsible. A number of Western officials say they see this as a test of Syrian goodwill.


End of Document