Searchers say 'black box' might not be retrievable; French official is unwilling to rule out terrorism in the crash of an Egyptian jet
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 7, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. b6
Length: 630 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SHARM EL-SHEIK, Egypt
Body


Searchers located one of the flight data recorders Tuesday from a charter jet that crashed into the Red Sea last weekend, but it was too far under water to be immediately retrieved, a French official said.
Rear Adm. Jacques Mazars told reporters at the popular Sinai resort of Sharm el-Sheik that more-advanced equipment was needed to retrieve the box, which was believed to be 2,000 to 2,500 feet below the sea's surface.
"Given the approximate depth of the black box, it is not possible to find it immediately with the means that we have," he said.
A robot submarine sent by the French can operate no deeper than 1,300 feet. Mazars, who heads the French forces sent to Egypt to help with the search, said the French Defense Ministry might send a remote-control submarine that can go deeper, but that it would take a week to arrive.
The recorders could provide clues as to why a Flash Airlines jet bound for Paris crashed Saturday shortly after takeoff from this popular resort, killing all 148 people on board. Most victims were French tourists. Four people with dual U.S.-Egyptian citizenship were among the dead.
The crash coincided with heightened concern about terrorism in the skies, but Egypt quickly ruled out the possibility of an attack, calling the crash an accident caused by a mechanical failure.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said Tuesday he cannot speculate about the cause of the crash. "But I don't think it was a terrorist act because there's no possibility for that in Sharm el-Sheik or anywhere else in Egypt," Mubarak said in the northern city of Alexandria.
He added that officials need the black box "to determine what went wrong and whether there was a problem with the plane."
Officials have not yet found the fuselage of the 11-year-old Boeing 737, but Mazars said that searchers on Tuesday used a sonar attached to a robotic arm extending from a boat to determine that a signal that had been picked up was from the recorders. The signal is about 500 to 600 yards from where the plane is believed to have crashed.
Mazars said the search for the fuselage was focused on a surface area of less than 2.5 acres, four to five miles from shore.
"Underwater acoustics are not an exact science," he said.
France's top aviation official said Monday that the crash appeared to be accidental, but he still could not rule out terrorism.
"We have no information concerning the cause of this accident, and until we have the flight recorder, we won't know," said Michel Wachenheim, head of France's Civil Aviation Authority.
But body parts recovered thus far have shown no burns, suggesting there was no explosion, French Deputy Foreign Minister Renaud Muselier said Monday.
Since the jet was American-made, the United States was sending a team of investigators, including experts from Boeing.
France has sent in 500 personnel and dispatched equipment, including a military surveillance plane looking for floating debris. French forensics experts were hoping to identify body parts through DNA testing.
Families of victims were to begin arriving today in Sharm el-Sheik, about 480 miles southeast of Cairo, for memorial services on land and sea. French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin is also flying in for the ceremonies.
The aircraft was one of two Boeing 737s operated by Flash.
The Swiss Federal Office for Civil Aviation said it detected safety problems with both airplanes and it has banned Flash from flying into Switzerland for more than a year.
Airline chairman Mohamed Nour said his company made necessary improvements and later passed Swiss inspection - but the Swiss denied this.
Switzerland informed France of its concerns last year. French authorities carried out three safety checks and obtained satisfactory results, French Transport Minister Gilles de Robien said.

Load-Date: January 7, 2004


End of Document