Search. Pat down. Question. The mood is one of suspicion
USA TODAY
July 29, 1996, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1123 words
Byline: Mindy Fetterman
Body


In the spotlight of the Olympic Games a pipe bomb explodes, leaving
two dead and injuring 111. A week earlier, a jetliner bound for
Paris explodes, killing all 230 on board.
Two acts of violence. Perhaps two acts of terrorism.
In their wake, a growing paranoia. What is that bag? Who left
that there? Where are you going? Can I see your I.D.?
All in one weekend: A "suspicious" bag left outside Birmingham's
Legion Field is removed by bomb technicians and investigated;
it contains soft drinks.
A phone call and "suspicious" bag force police to evacuate 1,000
people from Union Station in Washington, D.C.; no bomb is found.
Bomb-sniffing dogs are brought in after a backpack is left near
a fence outside the White House; it's a tourist's harmless belongings.
A telephoned bomb threat halts ferry service for several hours
between Mukilteo and the Whidbey Island town of Clinton in Washington
state, prompting the evacuation of two buildings.
At Minneapolis-St Paul International Airport, unattended bags
have police "running" to check out each one, says Sgt. Steve
Alfveby.
In this over-anxious, over-wrought, over-cautious July, fears
of terrorism both real and imagined have raised the image of an
open society slipping toward a bunker mentality. Search all luggage
on international flights. Install million-dollar bomb-detection
devices at airports nationwide.
Search. Pat down. Question. Are we seeing the fortressing of America?
Will we see more?
"You don't know who the bad guys are. You don't know who to look
out for," says Dan Seiler, 34, of Burlington, N.C., while visiting
New York City.
Fear of violent crime -- and now terrorism -- is creating "a
neo-medieval society," reminiscent of the era when towns were
walled and buildings constructed with an eye toward defense, says
Brian Jenkins, senior director of Kroll Associates, a New York
international security firm.
Heightened security
Put a gate around your community. Install a high-tech security
system for your house. Put a video camera in the nursery to watch
the nanny.
"In those days it was castles and moats," Jenkins says. "Today
it's Kevlar (used in bulletproof vests), electronic access control
systems, closed-circuit TV and concrete (posts) surrounding federal
buildings. It's 20th-century technology, but the concepts are
medieval."
Across the nation, public gathering spots -- from football fields
to airports -- have heightened security.
-- In Massachusetts, authorities reassessed the safety of sports
arenas and stadiums. Don Lowery, a spokesman for the New England
Patriots, said the organization has been increasing security since
Foxboro Stadium hosted the World Cup soccer matches in 1994.
-- At the Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, the mayor
closed access to the concourse to those without tickets.
-- In New York, Mayor Rudy Giuliani added extra police to large
events such as the Colombian Independence Festival held Sunday
at Flushing Meadow Park in Queens. About 250,000 attended, and
no problems were reported.
"There is nothing for people to be afraid of," Giuliani says.
Yet even as people seem to boast that "You can't change my behavior,"
they are feeling vulnerable.
The Olympic bombing and the TWA explosions were a "double whammy,"
says S. George Reed, 58, of Orange, N.J. "It puts us on guard,"
says Reed, sitting with wife Carolyn at a restaurant next to Lincoln
Center in New York. "At least we're aware we're as vulnerable
as anyone else."
It's a feeling of being "held hostage," says Henry Snyder, whose
brother, Steve, was the pilot on Flight 800.
"I just hate to feel held hostage by this terrorist," says the
truck driver from Churchville, N.Y. "Gosh, if it means not flying
someplace because you've got fear of being brought out of the
air by some stupid nut, then they've won."
Darla Worden of Reno, Calif., finds it hard to believe that all
this is happening in the USA. "We're here, but there's a part
of us that's looking at people's bags and wondering," says Worden,
visiting Universal Studios in Hollywood with her family.
"You can't be daunted by one wanton, decadent, wild act of terrorism,"
says Ivelaw Griffith, a political science professor visiting Miami
for the city's 100th birthday celebration. "Life has got to go
on as normally as possible."
International terrorism expert Mike Ackerman sees such reactions
by the public not as bravado or complacency but simply as appropriate
responses to a murderous crime "that only has worldwide significance
because it happened to a crowd during the Olympics."
Acts of violence, whether politically motivated violence or not,
can raise the collective fear in a society way beyond the threat,
experts say.
But more can be done to ease the threat, says Brian Levin, co-author
of The Limits of Dissent, a book about militias.
"In a democratic society with open access, you can't guard against
every sick person," he says.
But at the least we should expect more video monitoring of public
places, Levin says.
Some have called for limits on sales of poisonous chemicals, or
a number-marking system for items that can be used to make bombs.
Using pellets in gunpowder to leave traces is being discussed.
That way, a bomb's maker could be found.
Crisis prevention
"What we have to do as a society is to try and make hurdles as
high as possible to deter the marginal terrorist," Levin says.
"But not make it so high as to limit civil liberties and joys
of living in a peaceful society."
Because of a rising threat of violence and terrorism, Marriott
Hotels is importing its crisis management program from Europe
to the USA. The company is hosting both the International Olympic
Committee in Atlanta and will host the Republican National Committee
in San Diego next month.
Marriott will be training staffers to deal with terrorism, hostage
situations and the care of people in crisis, such as families
of plane crash victims.
"We have to ask ourselves: How much is the American public willing
to be inconvenienced (by anti-terrorism measures)?" says Marriott's
security chief, Chad Callaghan. "What's the right balance between
security and convenience?"
Already, Americans spend about $ 65 billion on private security.
There are 1.6 million people employed as private security guards.
In four years, that will be 2 million people and $ 100 billion,
Jenkins says.
Ackerman, head of the Miami-based Ackerman Group, says there's
no reason to put bomb-scanners at mall doorways, frisk visitors
to Old Faithful or otherwise step up security at popular tourist
spots.
"I don't think we're anywhere near close to that need for concern.
In places like Israel, if you see an unaccompanied knapsack, you
are trained to think of it as a bomb." But "a lost knapsack
in Disney World is a lost knapsack."
Contributing: Cathy Grossman, Gale Holland, Maria Puente, Deborah
Sharp, Christine Sparta and Jeannie Williams

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Michael Probst, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Porter Binks, USA TODAY; PHOTO, b/w, Johanna Vossler, USA TODAY; Games' busiest day: Huge crowds, including more than 80,000 people at Olympic Stadium, above, appeared undeterred by tougher security screening and fears of terrorism. Sunday was the Games' busiest day with baseball, track and field and women's marathon. Top hat: James Laudenthal expresses his opinion and patriotism as he waits in line Saturday for the USA women's basketball game. Near Centennial Park: Atlanta visitor Jon Long, 5, of Marietta, Ga., peers at an area cordoned off by authorities. Explosives experts are finishing up their investigative work at the site of the bombing.

Load-Date: July 29, 1996


End of Document