Seattle builds a concrete wall around police precinct after suspected arson attack Seattle adds a concrete wall around
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
August 30, 2020 Sunday


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: C; Pg. 011
Length: 327 words
Byline: Mike Lindblom Seattle Times
Body


City workers built a wall of concrete blocks to fortify the police department's East Precinct on Friday following a suspected arson attack this week while officers were inside the building.
The barrier wraps around the building at 11th Avenue and Pine Street - where, during confrontations this spring, police temporarily abandoned the precinct, while demonstrators set up the Capitol Hill Organized Protest or "CHOP" on the street and Cal Anderson Park, before the city retook the territory in early July.
"Officers will continue to be stationed in the precinct and respond to 9-1-1 calls in the area," a city statement said Friday.
The federal government this week charged a 19-year-old Alaska man, Desmond David-Pitts, with arson. He's accused of setting trash bags on fire Monday night in the sally-port, where police cars exit a secure steel door. Someone else tried to block a door nearby using quick-dry cement, authorities say, but police escaped. David-Pitts participated in protests against police brutality in Alaska this year after his 16-year-old brother was killed by Anchorage police, according to local news reports.
Mike Solan, president of the Seattle Police Officers Guild, called Monday's fire an "act of domestic terrorism," along with another Monday incident, in which SPOG-posted video depicts two people throwing Molotov cocktails at the union's headquarters in Sodo.
City departments will take other steps to protect the East Precinct so it resembles the newer West Precinct, said a statement Friday from Mayor Jenny Durkan's staff. The city will be equipping East Precinct with additional fire extinguishers, and "securing exposed windows," it said.
The statement points to other incidents including a fire set next to the police station in June, and an explosion that broke a temporary plywood wall.
The triple-stacked wall erected Friday is in addition to a shorter barrier, and a chain-link fence, previously set next to the police station.

Load-Date: August 30, 2020


End of Document