SEATTLE CANCELS NEW YEAR'S EVE PARTY AT SPACE NEEDLE;
TERRORISM FEARS, TRADE MEETING CHAOS ARE BLAMED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 29, 1999, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1999 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A1
Length: 946 words
Byline: News Services
Dateline: SEATTLE
Body


Spooked by the possibility of terrorism and still shaken by violence during the recent World Trade Organization meeting, Seattle is canceling its New Year's Eve party beneath the Space Needle.
"This is already an unprecedented, unpredictable New Year's, and we did not want to take chances with public safety, no matter how remote the threat might seem," Mayor Paul Schell said Tuesday, a day after consulting with police, fire and FBI officials and members of the City Council.
As the federal government made final preparations for the Y2K weekend, some of the emphasis switched from potential computer glitches. Federal officials expressed cautious optimism about the potential for breakdowns.
The city-owned Seattle Center, which includes the 605-foot Space Needle and was built for the 1962 World's Fair, is a traditional gathering point for New Year's Eve revelers. This year's celebration had been expected to attract about 50,000 people.
The city began scaling back its New Year's plans after an Algerian man, Ahmed Ressam, was arrested Dec. 14 and charged with bringing bomb-making materials into Port Angeles, Wash., from Canada. Ressam had a one-night reservation at a motel near the Space Needle.
Last week, officials canceled the New Year's Eve torching of a 17-piece wood-and-papier-mache sculpture at Seattle Center. On Sunday, poor ticket sales prompted the cancellation of a New Year's Eve circus performance.
Afternoon concerts will proceed as planned, and fireworks will still erupt from the Space Needle at midnight. But the 75-acre Seattle Center grounds will be cleared and the gates locked at 6 p.m. Rock performances, dancing, art exhibits and other festivities will be canceled. Only a long-scheduled private party in the Space Needle's revolving restaurant will be allowed to proceed.
"Nobody will give the city credit if 12 people don't die at the Seattle Center," City Councilman Jim Compton said. "This was too risky. I think the city has made a very wise decision."
Schell was criticized for the city's handling of protests during the World Trade Organization meetings early this month. Demonstrators swarmed the streets, and some caused $ 20 million in damage and lost sales. Police responded with tear gas and rubber bullets. Peaceful protesters and innocent bystanders were caught in the middle. Seattle's police chief announced his resignation afterward.
There has been no specific terrorist threat against Seattle or anywhere else over the New Year's weekend, the U.S. Justice Department said. But Schell said it was still important to be cautious.
"The city is just recovering from the (World Trade Organization) and the heightened anxieties," the mayor said. "Adding another layer of uncertainty at this time was not the prudent thing to do."
In Washington, D.C., meanwhile, President Bill Clinton's top Y2K adviser said he expects no national or regional disasters resulting from computer malfunctions.
"We're very confident there will be no disasters," John Koskinen said on NBC television.
Possible computer-related glitches affecting infrastructure such as electric power plants or telecommunications lines "will not rise to anything significant on a national basis," said Koskinen, chairman of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion.
Minor computer glitches probably will occur, as they do each day across the country, but Koskinen predicted that Americans would not notice anything abnormal this weekend.
Also on Tuesday, the Pentagon and the federal personnel agency took last-minute precautions by shutting down some of their public Internet sites this weekend to keep them safe from computer hackers as the calendar rolls over to 2000.
People are not hoarding drugs, so there will not be any shortages of medicine over New Year's, Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala said.
"Americans have used common sense," Shalala said. She said there is a 60-90 day supply in nearly every category of medicine.
Medical devices ranging from X-ray machines to artificial hearts also are expected to weather the date rollover without major problems, Shalala said.
Federal computer systems that administer Medicare, which pays millions of health care claims every year, are ready for the Y2K change, she said.
In communications, federal officials expressed confidence about 911 calls going through and public safety officials being able to dispatch services. But they also advised Americans to keep emergency numbers on hand just in case.
"There was a way to call the police, to call ambulance services, long before 911," Federal Communications Commissioner Michael Powell said.
As the government made final preparations for the Y2K weekend, some of the emphasis switched from potential computer glitches -- almost all of these have been repaired, officials insist -- to the threat of cyberattacks.
Many military installations around the country will be shutting down their Web sites temporarily as a safeguard against intrusions as well as a protection against Year 2000 viruses that might be launched on New Year's Eve.
"Within some defense agencies, they have thought the most prudent action was just to take their sites offline," said Adm. Craig Quigley, a Pentagon spokesman.
Although the Pentagon intends to keep its central Web site -- www.defenselink.mil -- in operation, Quigley said one site being temporarily blocked is that of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, which oversees military pay.
"We're going the extra mile to make sure our people's pay isn't affected," Quigley said.
Also being taken offline this weekend is the Web site maintained by the Office of Personnel Management, which services the rest of the government payroll.

Load-Date: December 30, 1999


End of Document