Second Navy base attack may be terrorism
Chicago Daily Herald
December 7, 2019 Saturday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: POLITICAL_; Pg. 2
Length: 530 words
Byline: By Lolita C. Baldor Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON — U.S. law enforcement officials were digging into the background of the suspected Florida naval station shooter Friday, to determine the Saudi Air Force officer's motive and whether it was connected to terrorism. As questions swirled about the shooting, which left four people dead, including the attacker, officials identified the suspect as 2nd Lt. Mohammed Saeed Alshamrani, an aviation officer in the Saudi Air Force. 
The suspected gunman was attending the aviation school at Naval Air Station Pensacola, one of hundreds of international military members who are receiving training there. The shooter opened fire in a classroom building on Friday morning. Defense Secretary Mark Esper said in a statement that the Pentagon was continuing to monitor the Pensacola incident and was gathering additional facts on the shooting earlier this week at Pearl Harbor, when a young Navy sailor gunned down two people and then shot himself. Esper said he is "considering several steps to ensure the security of our military installations and the safety of our service members and their families." In a separate statement, Adm. Mike Gilday, the chief of naval operations, said it has been a "devastating week" for the Navy. The U.S. has long had a robust training program for Saudis, providing assistance in the U.S. and in the kingdom. As of this week, there are more than 850 Saudis in the United States for various training activities. They are among more than 5,000 foreign students from 153 countries in the U.S. going through military training. The Pentagon said Friday that Alshamrani was in the U.S. as part of an Air Force military sales training course, and his participation was funded by Saudi Arabia. His training began in August 2017 and was scheduled to conclude next August, and it included initial pilot training, basic aviation and English-language instruction. Part of the base resembles a college campus, with buildings where 60,000 members of the Navy, Marines, Air Force and Coast Guard train each year in multiple fields of aviation. A couple hundred students from countries outside the U.S. are also enrolled in training, said Base commander Capt. Tim Kinsella. The base is also home to the Blue Angels flight demonstration team, and includes the National Naval Aviation Museum, a popular regional tourist attraction. Foreign nationals participating in U.S. training go through a vetting process. The Pentagon said it includes screening for any illicit drug activities, support for terrorist organizations, corruption and criminal conduct. The Trump administration has been aggressively helping Saudi this year, sending Patriot missile batteries and hundreds of troops there in the wake of attacks on the kingdom that officials blame on Iran. On Friday, President Donald Trump said he got a call from Saudi King Salman, who expressed "his sincere condolences" and sent sympathies to the families of those involved. "The King said that the Saudi people are greatly angered by the barbaric actions of the shooter, and that this person in no way shape or form represents the feelings of the Saudi people who love the American people," said Trump in a tweet.

Load-Date: December 9, 2019


End of Document