Second Somali terrorism suspect pleads guilty; The U.S. citizen gave few details about his recruitment to the organization Al-Shabaab.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 29, 2009 Wednesday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2009 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 644 words
Byline: JAMES WALSH, STAFF WRITER
Body


At his first appearance in federal court two weeks ago, Salah Osman Ahmed, 26 -- shaking and still wearing the security guard uniform in which he was arrested -- entered a not guilty plea to providing material support to terrorists.
On Tuesday, all of that changed.
Ahmed, from Brooklyn Park and a U.S. citizen, admitted traveling to Somalia in December 2007 to fight Ethiopians, who were occupying the country of his birth.
In several "secret meetings" with people he would describe only as "guys" that began in October 2007, Ahmed said he and others were convinced to return to fight for Al-Shabaab, an Islamic militant group that federal officials say has links to Al-Qaida.
The part-time security guard is one of two men indicted by a grand jury in February for training with Al-Shabaab. Abdifatah Yusuf Isse, 25, of Seattle, also has admitted to federal investigators that he trained with the terrorist group. Isse has already pleaded guilty. He also admitted to helping build a terrorist training camp and learning how to fire weapons.
Investigators say the indictments are part of a larger, ongoing investigation into the disappearance of up to 20 Twin Cities men of Somali descent over the past two years. Family members and federal officials believe the men have returned to Somalia to fight in a continuing civil war. At least four of those Minnesota men have been confirmed killed -- according to either family members or federal officials.
It is believed that the ongoing investigation focuses on who recruited and funded the men's travel to Somalia.
The indictments were made public two weeks ago after Ahmed was arrested on his way to his security job. Isse had been in custody since his arrest in Seattle in February. Isse has been cooperating with investigators in the case. It is not known if Ahmed, too, is cooperating.
Ahmed gave few details
Wearing a black suit and shirt, Ahmed stood before U.S. District Judge James Rosenbaum and repeatedly answered "yes sir" in heavily accented English when Rosenbaum asked him if he understood his rights and his plea.
But when asked for details of his recruitment and his travel, Ahmed gave few specifics.
He and other young men from the Twin Cities had several secret meetings in Minneapolis, Ahmed said. But he did not say where. They met with "guys," but Ahmed did not specify their identity. And, when Rosenbaum asked Ahmed how he was able to pay for his $1,500 ticket to Somalia, he answered that "they collected the money."
He first traveled from Minneapolis to Dubai, then to Somalia, where he arrived around Dec. 10, 2007.
Ahmed went on to admit that he traveled to several Somali towns, helped build a training camp and was taught how to fire an AK-47 and another, heavier machine gun -- although he never shot live ammunition.
When Rosenbaum asked Ahmed if he knew that Al-Shabaab is considered a terrorist group by U.S. officials, Ahmed said: "That time, no. But now I know."
Other charges to be dropped
As part of Ahmed's plea agreement, which Rosenbaum still must approve, prosecutors have agreed to drop other charges against him -- including conspiracy to kill, kidnap, maim and injure people in a foreign country and giving false information to federal agents.
Ahmed faces anywhere from five to 15 years in prison, Rosenbaum said.
Rosenbaum ordered Ahmed to continue to be kept in custody and ordered a pre-sentence investigation, which is expected to take a couple months.
Unlike his first appearance in court, Ahmed seemed much more at ease, often smiling at friends and family members who filled two rows of benches behind him. And, just before he was led from the courtroom and back to a jail cell, he gave a brief wave to his mother.
Family members declined to comment after the hearing. Ahmed's attorney, James Ostgard, said they are "devastated" by his arrest and guilty plea.
James Walsh - 612-673-7428

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: July 31, 2009


End of Document