Secretive Police Unit Sought to Map Terrorist Havens in City, an Official Testifies
The New York Times
August 22, 2012 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 612 words
Byline: By WENDY RUDERMAN
Body


Despite being dispatched to hundreds of places across New York City where would-be terrorists might congregate, an eight-member Police Department unit that eavesdropped on countless conversations has not generated a lead or an investigation in at least six years, a police chief testified in a deposition unsealed Monday.''I can tell you that information that have come in has not commenced an investigation,'' the chief, Thomas P. Galati, said in a deposition taken on June 28. Chief Galati's testimony, reported on Tuesday by The Associated Press, offers a detailed picture of the secretive unit, part of the Intelligence Division, which includes hundreds of investigators and analysts. Chief Galati, who has led the Intelligence Division since 2006, said the goal of the unit, once called the Demographics Unit but renamed the Zone Assessment Unit, was not primarily to identify would-be terrorists, but rather to map locations that might prove to be havens for terrorists.
''In order to fight terrorism, we needed to know where people lived from countries of concern that could either recruit, hide or secrete themselves in these communities that were radicalized toward violence,'' he said in the deposition, taken as part of a civil rights lawsuit that has been going on for decades.
The plaintiffs' lawyers are asking a federal judge to find that the Police Department's counterterrorism investigation violated the longstanding Handschu Consent Decree, which resulted in guidelines for police investigations of political groups and the monitoring of public events.
One of the plaintiffs' lawyers, Jethro M. Eisenstein, said the Demographics Unit had violated the agreement by documenting information it had overheard in mosques and public places even though it did not prove relevant to any specific terrorism investigation.
In an interview on Tuesday, Mr. Eisenstein said he believed the department was unjustly singling out Muslims.
''There is no other religious community or ethnic community that's being mapped like this in New York,'' he said. ''It's like a Zagats of Muslim-owned establishments all over New York City. They have gone to thousands of locations.''
The city, on the other hand, contends that it is not violating Handschu, but is merely trying ''to catalog business locations in neighborhoods whose populations are similar to those of countries where terrorist threats have emanated from.''
In his questioning of Chief Galati, Mr. Eisenstein cited a case in which an officer overheard and documented a conversation between two Pakistani men who were speaking Urdu at a restaurant. One complained about a man who wast fired -- and then rehired -- after he burned a Koran.
Chief Galati replied that the information, in that instance, was valuable to the department, saying that if the police are ''looking for a terrorist who is Pakistani, from a region in Pakistan who speaks Urdu, I'm not going to waste my time in a restaurant where they speak Arabic.''
The officers assigned to the unit have ''language skills,'' Chief Galati testified. ''Maybe some of them are also born in these countries. They speak the language, they can determine things that maybe I can't determine.''
The unit was formed in 2003, Chief Galati testified, as the police struggled to quickly learn the distinctions between the many Muslim communities in the city.
When eavesdropping, Chief Galati said, members of the unit were listening for conversations that were ''alarming or aggressive.''
He suggested in testimony that the unit no longer made a practice of entering mosques to determine ''what type of congregation it was, what people, from what countries of concern would be there.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/22/nyregion/nypd-unit-sought-havens-for-terrorists.html

Load-Date: August 22, 2012


End of Document