SECTION OF ANTI-TERRORISM PATRIOT ACT IS RULED UNCONSTITUTIONAL IN FEDERAL COURT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 27, 2004 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 273 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body


For the first time, a federal judge has declared unconstitutional a section of the USA Patriot Act that bars giving expert advice or assistance to groups designated as foreign terrorist organizations.
In a ruling handed down late Friday and made available Monday, U.S. District Court Judge Audrey Collins said the ban is impermissibly vague in its wording.
The Justice Department is reviewing the ruling, spokesman Mark Corallo said in a statement from Washington.
Corallo called the Patriot Act - the federal anti-terrorism law
passed in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks - "an essential tool in the war on terror" and asserted that the portion at issue in the ruling was only a modest amendment to a pre-existing anti-terrorism law.
David Cole, a Georgetown University law professor who argued the case on behalf of the Humanitarian Law Project, declared the ruling "a victory for everyone who believes the war on terrorism ought to be fought consistent with constitutional principles."
"It is the first federal court decision declaring any part of the Patriot Act unconstitutional," he said.
The case before the court involved five groups and two U.S. citizens seeking to provide support for lawful, nonviolent activities on behalf of Kurdish refugees in Turkey.
The Humanitarian Law Project said the plaintiffs were threatened with 15 years in prison if they advised groups on seeking a peaceful resolution of the Kurds' campaign for self-determination in Turkey.
The judge's ruling said the law, as written, does not differentiate between impermissible advice on violence and encouraging the use of peaceful, nonviolent means to achieve goals.

Load-Date: January 27, 2004


End of Document