SECURITY TIGHTENED AT LAMBERT, OTHER AREA SITES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 17, 1991, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 1031 words
Byline: Mark Schlinkmann and Robert Goodrich Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


Ardath McNally, 79, of Lamar, Mo., said she wasn't inconvenienced by the increased security procedures imposed at Lambert Field Tuesday in the wake of the threat of Iraqi-inspired terrorism in the United States.  ''Oh, yes, I believe in security,'' said McNally, who was interviewed while waiting for a flight to Springfield, Mo. ''I'm staying right here by my bag.  You never can tell. There are lots of crazy people in the world today.'' Lambert - which announced it would pick up and check any baggage left unattended in its terminals - was just one local institution to tighten security in the face of war with Iraq. Further steps could be imposed at Lambert later if need be, officials said.  The same was true at Scott Air Force Base near Belleville, which shifted Tuesday into ''threat condition Bravo'' - the second of four levels of security measures beyond what is normal.  McDonnell Douglas Corp., the Union Electric nuclear plant in Callaway County, the Gateway Arch and the federal prison at Marion, Ill., were among the other institutions which either implemented special precautions or instructed employees to be more aware of things or people deemed suspicious.  At Lambert, officials said the unattended bag checks went beyond the precautions ordered for airports nationwide by the Federal Aviation Administration.  Floyd Hargrove, deputy director, said unattended bags would be checked on the spot for explosives by police dogs, then taken through X-ray machines.  They then would be taken to storage areas.
In most cases, he said, anyone returning to his luggage to find the procedure in progress would be able to retrieve his or her luggage.  Airport Police Capt. Sharon Gaines, who was recently placed in charge of the Lambert's security operations, said extra attention is being paid to parts of Lambert frequented by military personnel - such as the Military Airlift Command and United Services Organization (USO) areas.  She also said there would be more frequent patrols of restrooms and other public areas and a more visible presence by police at Lambert.  Airport officials said the security precautions would not delay travelers much and advised passengers to arrive just a few minutes earlier than usual for their flights.  But Hargrove said that if Lambert moved to a higher state of security, delays could increase.  At the next level of security, the airport would keep people without plane tickets out of the flight concourses, and some police would be put on plainclothes duty. In such a situation, he said, Lambert might also have to seek military police for assistance ''to supplement our increased vigilance.'' In a yet higher level of security that could theoretically be imposed, Hargrove said, the airport would bar curbside checking. ''That's the one that would impact the traveling public the most,'' he said.  Among other Lambert passengers who were willing to deal with increased security was Bill Buckmiller, 43, of New Jersey. ''Anything they can do, they should do,'' he said Tuesday.  Also endorsing the increased security was Pete Burns, 43, of Sikeston, Mo., who was here with his wife to begin a trip to the BahamasB.  Burns said the couple was ''a little apprehensive'' about leaving the country but that at least they weren't crossing the Atlantic.  Wilma Lampman, 69, of Carbondale, Ill., spoke similarly. She and her husband were heading to Mexico for a train trip across that countryt.  Dr. Edward DuVivier, 71, of Alton, showed up for his flight to London to see his son and grandchild, who live in Ireland. He said he wasn't overly concerned about a terrorist threat. ''It would be a catastrophe if everybody stopped traveling because of this,'' he said.  But Bob Steiner, 57, a salesman from Chicago, said he and friends who travel often on business had serious discussions recently on whether they want to be traveling on international flights now. ''Nobody is going'' overseas, he said.  When told of the extra security at Lambert, Steiner responded: ''That's wonderful.'' At Scott, Capt. Tom Dolney, the base's public affairs officer, said the measures taken so far are not in response to any specific incident or threat.  Dolney would not disclose the security precautions ordered for any threat level. But everyone at Scott has been warned to be on the lookout for any suspicious-looking activity or person.  As the only U.S. base with three worldwide command headquarters, Scott is the nerve center for U.S. military transportation and communication.  It also serves as the operations base for aeromedical airlift for the armed forces and has one of the largest military hospitals, as well as several other vital units and activities.  Even under normal conditions, Scott is a ''closed installation.'' Entry restrictions are always in force.  ALPHA, the first level of extra security precautions, went into effect Friday. Security police began making random vehicle and identification checks at the base's entry gates.  BRAVO is the second of four levels of security measures. That meant even closer scrutiny of vehicles and people entering Scott, and other, unpublicized measures.  In general terms, Dolney said, ALPHA level means there is a general threat of terrorist activity. BRAVO means there is an increased, or more predictable, threat of terrorism. The next level, CHARLIE, would go into effect if a terrorist incident occurred or intelligence indicated some form of terrorist incident might be imminent.  The fourth and most stringent security level, DELTA, would go into effect in the area where a terrorist incident occurred or if intelligence indicated such an act were about to occur against a specific person or location.  Staff members at the Arch and the Callaway nuclear plant have been told to increase their awareness and follow current security procedures closely, spokesmen for each said.  In the past, ''some of our major memorials in Washington'' have been subject to threats of terrorism, said Jerry Schober, superintendent of the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, which includes the Arch.  So it would pay to be vigilant at the Arch, he said. ''We're making our people more aware.'' TAB START

Graphic

 
Graphic; LOGO (COLOR) - WAR EXTRA LOGO - GULF WAR

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document