Security stepped up as Mideast talks begin
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 10, 1991, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 684 words
Byline: KARL VICK
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


To their usual concerns about keeping the State Department safe, security officials this week have five additional reasons to worry: Israel, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the Palestinians.
 
    Their negotiating teams finally get together today. And while anti-terrorism specialists are accustomed to sealing off high-level meetings, "rarely has it been an issue so violently inclined and volatile as the Mideastern one," said Bruce Hoffman, domestic terrorism specialist for the Rand Corporation.
 
    Last week roughly triple the usual number of uniformed security personnel were visible around the State Department's gray block headquarters, originally intended to house the War Department.  With Israel not yet arrived and no meetings going on, plainclothes agents sporting discreet earpieces killed time in the cafeteria.
   The State Department, whose 800-person Bureau of Diplomatic Security is in charge of protecting the diplomats, will not comment on specific precautions. But outside experts saw no harm in outlining the American "concept" of event security.
 
    Basically, these former officials said, the idea is to make a show of force impressive enough to deter a terrorist yet discreet enough to reflect civilian sensibilities.
 
    "The casual observer will notice a small fraction of the security," said Jack McGeorge, a former Secret Service explosive specialist who now heads a private security firm. "The practiced eye will see a good deal more.
 
    "We always assume the bad guy will come out to see us. Give him something to see."
 
    Third World countries often dispatch rows of troops toting machine guns to deter trouble, McGeorge noted. "We don't live in
 
t
 
t that kind of society and I don't want us to."
 
    "We believe our system is more sophisticated, therefore you don't need as many personnel," said Chuck Vance, also a former Secret Service agent now in private business.
 
    Uniformed officers may cordon traffic or add a certain ceremony, he said, but closer to the dignitaries one should see only alert fellows in business suits.
 
    Those closest to the "protectee" are personal bodyguards, designated by one type of lapel pin; they travel with the diplomat and are only nominally screened by the host nation.
 
    "The definition of who's a good guy and who's a bad guy gets a bit, bit murky over there (in the Mideast)," said McGeorge.
 
    Beyond the dignitary's personal "bubble," however, protection falls exclusively to the host nation, and the lapel pins change. The Diplomatic Security Bureau, empowered by Congress in the mid-1980s, has responsibility for all visiting dignitaries up to the presidential level and is handling the Mideast meetings alone, a spokesman said.
 
    It isn't always that simple. Presidents, prime ministers and other heads of state are protected by the Secret Service. So when a head of state arrives to talk with a foreign minister, both agencies can claim to be in charge. Further muddying things is the FBI's designation as the nation's primary counter-terrorism agency.
 
    By holding the talks in the State Department's own building, such turf battles may have been decided in advance.
 
    "We're trying to handle it as business as usual," said an official at State, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "We don't want to have a big deal of it."
 
    Some comfort may be found in FBI figures that say since 1986 only one person has died by a terrorist act inside the United States. The last big scare was the Persian Gulf war, which despite overt threats produced no major terrorist acts.
 
    Hoffman, the Rand expert, suggested the home front remained peaceful partially because countries known to sponsor terrorism, including Syria and Iran, shared an enemy with the United States in Iraq.
 
    Experts suggested that by taking part in the talks Syria may be giving them a measure of the same protection.
 
    "The fact that one of the biggest state sponsors of terrorism in the world is taking part, that's probably one of the best guarantees of at least a modicum of security," Hoffman said. "And I don't say that altogether facetiously."

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document