Security price tag hits $40M   County requests funding from Feds to battle terrorism
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
November 10, 2001, Saturday


Copyright 2001 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Front; Pg. A1
Length: 407 words
Byline: By SARA MARSH Staff Writer
Body


As the federal government is finding out, when it comes to fighting terrorism, nothing is too much to ask for.
Last week, when Gov. Parris N. Glendening asked Maryland jurisdictions to give the state a list of terrorism-related needs they would like passed on to the federal government, Anne Arundel County asked for just over $ 12 million in money and equipment.
Then the county bumped up its request to $ 20 million. This week, it jumped again to $ 40.15 million.
"Obviously, we haven't submitted all that to the feds," said Michelle Byrnie, a spokesman for Mr. Glendening.
County Executive Janet S. Owens said her initial $ 12 million request did not take into account the stepped-up security and new measures taken since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in New York and outside Washington.
"Forty million (dollars) is what I think it would cost to do the job right," she said. "A lot of the request is equipment."
Among the items included in the county's latest list of terrorism-related needs are:$ 5.95 million for overtime for the county Fire Department.
$ 3.8 million for two Bell 407 or Eurocopter 350B2 helicopters.
$ 1 million for monitoring systems for the county water supply.
$ 677,000 for the county Health Department for medical surveillance.
$ 300,000 for surveillance cameras at water treatment plants.
$ 10,000 each for two trained canine bomb detection dogs and handlers.
$ 7,500 for gas masks with chemical bio filters.
That list included prioritized requests for the county Fire, Police, Public Works and Health departments, the Emergency Operations Center and general county government.
The county also tossed in requests for $ 66,400 worth of equipment and funding for Annapolis Police, Fire and Public Works departments.
Maryland's request will come at a time when many states are scrambling to apply for federal funds from the sweeping anti-terrorism law that was recently passed and from an economic stimulus package that is working its way through Congress.
Staffers for Maryland congressmen are poring over the state and local requests to see what can be funded through those anti-terrorism bills.
"We are trying to separate the stuff that is legitimately an emergency versus the stuff that we can work for in the regular budget process," said Tony Caligiuri, chief of staff for Rep. Wayne T. Gilchrest, R-Kent. "This is happening all over Congress. Any issue in Congress can be linked to security now." ___smarsh@capitalgazette.com  

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document