Security agency for Olympics criticized; Russia's FSB has poor track record against terrorists, experts say
USA TODAY
February 3, 2014 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 391 words
Byline: Masha Charnay
Body


The Russian agency taking a lead role in security for the upcoming Winter Olympics in Sochi has a poor track record in Russia's anti-terrorism efforts, security analysts familiar with the organization say.
The Federal Security Service -- a successor to the Soviet-era KGB known by its Russian acronym FSB -- has been unable to handle numerous small-scale Islamist terror cells that are increasingly common.
"The last series of reforms of the Russian counterterrorism services took place in 2006 and were aimed at preventing large-scale militant attacks," says Andrei Soldatov, a Russian investigative journalist who specializes in terrorism. "Precisely at the same time, the militants also decided to switch their tactics and begin operating as small groups, using single suicide bombers."
The results have been discouraging, experts say.
The National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism at the University of Maryland reported this week that attacks have spiked from 50 in 2003 to more than 250 in 2010. Russia experienced 150 attacks in 2012.
The FSB is effectively a combination of intelligence and crime-fighting, akin to joining the CIA and FBI. Its main area of responsibility is to counterterrorism, conduct surveillance against spies, fight organized crime and investigate serious crimes.
One of the FBS' most challenging assignments has been taking the military lead in the fight against separatists in Chechnya.
In one attack in Russia in 2002, dozens of Islamist terrorists took over Dubrovka Theater. About 130 theatergoers were killed, as well as the terrorists, in a botched raid by FSB forces, who pumped into the ventilation system too much of a toxin intended to make the attackers drowsy.
The FBS was stripped of its counterterrorism duties in the wake of the fiasco but were restored and widened under President Vladimir Putin, himself a product of the KGB.
RECENT ATTACKS
Jan. 24, 2011: A suicide bombing at the arrivals gate at Domodedovo Airport in Moscow kills 37 people and leaves 172 injured.
March 29, 2010: Twin suicide bombings carried out by two women during the morning rush hour at two stations of the Moscow Metro (Lubyanka and Park Kultury) kill 40 and leave 140 injured.
Nov. 27, 2009: A bomb explodes under a high-speed train traveling from Moscow to St. Petersburg, killing 27 and injuring 150. 

Graphic

 
photo Alexander Hassenstein, Getty Images

Load-Date: February 3, 2014


End of Document