Security bolstered in New York after report of terrorism threat
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 27, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 6
Length: 371 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Rail headline News You can use
NEW YORK (AP) - Police bolstered security in subways and trains Wednesday after the government warned that al-Qaida suicide bombers were contemplating an attack on New York's mass-transit systems during the holiday season.
An internal memo obtained by The Associated Press says the FBI has received a "plausible but unsubstantiated" report that al-Qaida terrorists in late September might have discussed attacking the subway system.
The internal bulletin says al-Qaida terrorists "in late September may have discussed targeting transit systems in and around New York City. These discussions reportedly involved the use of suicide bombers or explosives placed on subway/passenger rail systems," according to the document.
"We have no specific details to confirm that this plot has developed beyond aspirational planning, but we are issuing this warning out of concern that such an attack could possibly be conducted during the forthcoming holiday season," according to the warning dated Tuesday.
A person briefed on the matter, speaking to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the intelligence-gathering work, said the threat might also be directed at the passenger rail lines running through New York, such as Amtrak and the Long Island Rail Road, which are particularly busy with Thanksgiving holiday travelers.
A federal law enforcement official said there's no indication that anyone involved in the planning is in the United States. That official also spoke on condition of anonymity because it involved intelligence-gathering.
While law enforcement stepped up patrols around subways and trains, many commuters around the city were unfazed by the news and had not even heard of the threat.
"If you get scared that means they win," commuter Omid Sima said on the platform of the subway below Rockefeller Center. "There's always been terror warnings."
The Big Apple's tightly packed passenger trains and subway cars have long been a source of concern for police officers but there is often disagreement as to how seriously authorities should take specific intelligence reports.
The city has more than 450 subway stations that handle millions of commuters every day.

Load-Date: November 28, 2008


End of Document