Security, coverage at Athens games set Olympic records
Business Insurance
August 9, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 1223 words
Byline: SARAH VEYSEY
Body


ATHENS, Greece-The 2004 Olympic Games will have in place one of the most comprehensive insurance and risk management plans in the history of the event when it begins in Athens, Greece, on Aug. 11.
The 2004 summer games-the first to take place since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks-are also the first Olympic event for which the International Olympics Committee has purchased event cancellation coverage, including coverage for cancellation or abandonment due to terrorism.
In addition, the other organizations with interests at the games are purchasing separate cancellation policies should the Olympics be targeted by terrorists.
And security measures that are estimated to cost the Greek government $1.5 billion and are significantly more extensive than those implemented at previous Olympics have been put in place.
The Lausanne, Switzerland-based IOC bought $170 million in event cancellation coverage for the 2004 Olympics earlier this year, marking the first time the IOC has purchased such coverage.
The policy was brokered by Marsh Ltd. in London and much of the underwriting capacity was provided by Lloyd's of London, sources say.
The policy covers the organizing committee, the National Olympic Committees and the International Federations for losses in the event of the cancellation of the games due to terrorism or natural catastrophes such as earthquake, flooding or landslide.
The events of Sept. 11 altered perceptions of terrorist risk in a way that previous acts of terrorism-such as the bomb attack on the 1996 Olympic games in Atlanta-did not, according to Michael Wright of Willis Group Holdings Ltd.'s national sports and entertainment group in Atlanta.
''Prior to Sept. 11, 2001, terrorism was not such a paramount concern on the event cancellation insurance side of the equation,'' Mr. Wright said.
Adding to fears was the explosion of a homemade bomb near an electrical substation outside Athens last week, though Greek authorities said that there were no injuries.
The IOC's purchase of cancellation cover is ''unprecedented,'' according to David Mair, president of the risk management consulting firm Risk Excellence in Melbourne, Fla., and former director of risk management for the United States Olympic Committee.
''I think it is indicative of (the IOC's) level of concern for these games,'' Mr. Mair said. ''It is a way of managing the risk that some attack on the world's largest peacetime gathering of athletes...could be disrupted by a terrorist event.''
Mr. Mair noted that the terrorist threat to the Olympics had changed because terrorist organizations such as Al Qaeda do not have national boundaries. Previously, he noted, terrorist groups had frequently abated activity around the time of Olympic games because of a desire not to see athletes-and nations-punished by exclusion from the Olympic movement.
Other companies and organizations involved in the Athens Olympics have also been purchasing event cancellation coverage, market sources say.
Prices for such coverage have been ''fairly spectacular'' because of the terrorism risk, noted Adrian Thomas, a director of Aon Ltd.'s global risks division in London.
While terrorism could be included as part of event cancellation policies, brokers have placed much of the terrorism coverage on a stand-alone basis with specialist terrorism underwriters for the Athens games, he noted.
Parties that have sought event cancellation coverage include the sponsors of the event and television networks, sources say.
The New York-based National Broadcasting Co. Inc., which will be covering the games for American audiences, has a 10-year event cancellation policy that it purchased during the 1990s, sources say. Such a policy would be difficult to purchase now due to the unwillingness of reinsurers to provide multiyear coverage for terrorism risks, they note.
NBC risk managers could not be reached for comment.
Most other television companies with broadcast rights for the Olympics likely have considered purchasing coverage for cancellation in the event of terrorism, said James Hopper, broking director of Marsh Ltd.'s sports and leisure business in London. ''Some of them will buy (coverage), and some of them will elect not to buy'' because of the high cost, he noted. ''It is a commercial decision.''
Many companies that have purchased event cancellation coverage have had a difficult time securing large limits, brokers say.
The terrorism risk, coupled with other catastrophe risks such as earthquake, have made underwriters wary of taking a large line on Olympics-related risks, they say.
''Pre-Sept. 11, 2001, if one wanted to place, say, $250 million on a major event, one could do it with, really, quite a lot of ease. Now it is an extremely difficult limit to reach,'' noted Marsh's Mr. Hopper.
Other insurance coverages in place for the upcoming games include a 200 million euro ($240.5 million) liability program purchased by the Athens organizing committee, or ATHOC. That program was placed by Lloyd's broker Swinglehurst Ltd. in conjunction with a domestic Greek broker, underwritten by Athens-based Agrotiki Insurance S.A. and reinsured in the Lloyd's and London company markets.
The coverage period is March 2004 to year-end 2005, and it covers ATHOC for liabilities it may face as a result of injuries to athletes or the general public.
The policy does not include terrorism coverage, said Jonathan Monk, a partner at of Swinglehurst.
Swinglehurst also placed a property policy to cover ATHOC's nonfixed assets, such as security devices and computer equipment. That policy is adjustable on a monthly basis, according to the value of the assets in place at any one time, Mr. Monk said. The property policy does include terrorism coverage, he said.
Other organizations and companies have bought a wide array of coverages for Olympics-related exposures, including terrorism coverage for damage to camera equipment and group accident and health policies for teams of athletes attending the event, sources say.
Security has been a major issue for ATHOC, noted Mr. Mair, who pointed out that the security budget for the 2004 games-which the Greek government announced was about $1.5 billion-is approximately equal to the total budget for the Atlanta 1996 Olympics.
''Very clearly, one of the great security challenges is to let your imagination run loose in terms of what kinds of attack we might see,'' he said. ''Certainly, a dirty nuclear device is a concern; it is something we were concerned about for Salt Lake (for the Winter Olympics) in 2002. Chemical or biological (threats are), obviously, something that you are going to be very concerned about.''
Brokers noted that it is virtually impossible to buy insurance coverage against a biological or chemical attack.
The security efforts for the Athens Olympics also include increased international cooperation. For example, 400 U.S. special forces are due to be positioned offshore.
The cooperation is ''unparalleled in the history of the games,'' said Mr. Mair.
Other measures put in place by ATHOC include the use of two high-sensitivity detectors-donated by the U.S. government-to scan the contents of heavy vehicles delivering equipment to Olympic venues.
In addition, several security-readiness exercises have been carried out, ATHOC said, and security briefings with National Olympic Committees have been held.

Graphic

 
A high-tech security airship will feed real-time aerial images, inset, of Athens to security officials during the Olympic Games.

Load-Date: August 11, 2004


End of Document