SECURITY MEASURES TIGHTENED IN PARIS
The New York Times
August 13, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 767 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, Aug. 12
Body


The French Government imposed unusually heavy security around foreign embassies and other sites in Paris today in an effort to halt a wave of terrorist attacks.
There have been seven such incidents this month in Paris alone, mostly bombings and shootings, and they appear to stem mainly from Middle East tensions.
On many streets, policemen were wearing bulletproof vests today and hundreds of extra police were ordered into place around embassies, official buildings and other ''sensitive'' places, according to a Government statement.
On Wednesday, six people were wounded when two terrorist bombs exploded, one on the Champs-Elysees and one at the Iraqi Embassy. Two days earlier, a grenade and gun attack on a Jewish restaurant killed 6 people and wounded 22.
PARIS, Aug. 12 - The French Government imposed unusually heavy security around foreign embassies and other sites in Paris today in an effort to halt a wave of terrorist attacks.Review of Security Measures
The apparent inability of French authorities to halt the attacks resulted in a three-hour review of security measures by Interior Minister Gaston Defferre and President Francois Mitterrand at the President's country home in southwestern France.
No comment was made after the session ended, but officials said that ministers, the police and intelligence chiefs were working on measures to make it easier to identify foreign groups plotting violence in the country.
In addition, apparently as part of an effort to avoid worsening tensions with Israel and jeopardizing any chances for an end to the war, the Government would not comment on the contention today by Prime Minister Menachem Begin that France was acting like an enemy and was a land of rampant anti-Semitism.
During the current Middle East crisis, France has found itself in a somewhat awkward position. Mr. Mitterrand had been trying to move his country closer to Israel, but Lebanon is a former French colony. In addition, France backed an Egyptian peace plan that was opposed by Israel.
 
Debate on Immigration Policy
In several statements this week, Mr. Begin contended that the French Government's sympathy for the Palestine Liberation Organization had stimulated a climate of anti-Semitism in France.
Sensitivity here to charges that France is too lenient on terrorism has helped spark an open debate between two senior French officials over whether France's policy of not preventing political refugees from immigrating should be changed.
On Tuesday, Mr. Defferre called for a redefinition of the right to political asylum and he contended that it was unacceptable for French citizens to be killed by those making use of political asylum. He made no specific proposals.
''Of course we must fight firmly against terrorism,'' Justice Minister Robert Badinter wrote today in Le Matin, a socialist newspaper. ''But we must respect our principles by refusing the temptation of taking extraordinary measures.'' Mr. Badinter is Jewish.
In April, the two officials also clashed, after a string of guerrilla incidents, over whether the police should be able to conduct random identity checks. Mr. Mitterrand ordered a compromise under which the checks could be carried out by the police under certain circumstances.
On Tuesday, a special Cabinet meeting will be held to discuss ways of curbing urban violence and Mr. Defferre's statements are considered certain to be discussed. On Tuesday night, Mr. Mitterrand will give an unusual interview to French television, on the Middle East situation and the terrorist attacks.
Meanwhile, the law enforcement authorities still believe that the attack Monday on the restaurant Chez Jo Goldenberg was the work of a Palestinian splinter group headed by a man who is known as Abu Nidal.
In Vienna, Austrian police reported today that recent anti-Jewish terrorist attacks in Paris, London and Vienna all involved the same type of weapon. The attack in London, on the Israeli Ambassador, Shlomo Argov, has been cited by Israel as a justification for beginning its invasion of Lebanon.
The Government has suggested privately that the aim of the attacks was to kill chances of a peaceful solution to the Beirut conflict and provoke Israel into annihilating the P.L.O., a staunch opponent of the Abu Nidal faction.
The police said today that they had no new leads in Monday's killings in the historic Jewish quarter. They also said they had released two suspected members of the French urban guerrilla group Action Directe. There were early reports that the left-wing group, believed to have been involved in three similar attacks in recent days, was responsible.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of funeral in Paris for people killed in terrorist attack


End of Document