Security guards help in terrorism battle
Business Insurance
August 15, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 28
Length: 746 words
Byline: Dave Lenckus
Body


Terrorism is an escalating threat to defenseless civilians and unfortified property. The recent bombings and failed attacks in London clearly demonstrate this risk.
Yet, amazingly, many organizations do not pay enough-if any-attention to this threat.
And, with recent governmental intelligence reports warning that terrorists are shifting their focus to ``soft'' targets, or public gathering places, many more risk managers-in title or function-have to start doing a better job of guarding against this risk.
We reported last week how some risk managers have turned to bomb blast modeling so they could better analyze their facilities' vulnerabilities to terrorist bombings and see where to implement security and loss control measures.
Only a few large organizations are using this technology, though. Bomb blast modeling and property loss control experts explain that because most risk managers do not believe that their organizations are likely terrorist targets, they don't see the need to invest in that risk identification tool.
Those risk managers are only half right. True, the risk is small that any single entity would be targeted by a terrorist. But logic tells you that those odds move in the wrong direction when security is subpar. After all, terrorism is just another form of crime, and all criminals have one thing in common: They are opportunists who prey on the weak and the complacent.
That is why property loss control experts and even bomb blast modelers who would like to see blast modeling used more extensively readily point out that the tool and various loss reduction measures alone cannot prevent terrorism losses. The first line of defense is an effective security system, they stress.
Indeed, many large organizations have ratcheted up their security in recent years. For example, they have installed key card doors and closed-circuit monitoring at their facilities, routed all traffic into their campuses through one or two security checkpoints, discontinued parking privileges for visitors in underground garages and arranged escorts for all guests and package deliverers.
Some of those measures are sound not only because they can stop and snare would-be wrongdoers in the act but also because they are highly visible and deliver a strong message to the bad guys: We're waiting and watching for you, so don't even try anything.
Risk managers at the top of their game also mix up security measures so that bad guys cannot tell what measures they would have to subvert on any given day.
Still, there are many organizations at which security is dangerously weak.
I've personally visited large corporate headquarters where security personnel was cavalier in assessing why visitors were attempting to gain access. Those same feeble-looking security guards obviously were in no shape to chase down and subdue anyone with criminal intent.
Now, given what recent intelligence reports tell us about likely new targets, security should be stepped up at businesses such as supermarkets, restaurants and theaters, as well as at schools.
By design, those entities attract heavy foot and vehicular traffic, so bomb blast modeling would be pointless in most cases. Exceptions would be those operations that are neighbors of high-risk targets. In those cases, they may benefit from analyzing their collateral blast-damage risks.
But, in general, just trotting out some highly visible and fit security personnel would be a great first step in preventing terrorism losses-with the emphasis on first step.
I'm not talking about patting down shoppers as they push their carts through the automatic doors at the grocery store or interrogating all visitors at a school.
I'm suggesting a pair or two of steely, inquisitive eyes that silently convey the message: We're not complacent; we are on watch.
Obviously, a guard or two is not the end-all and be-all in security. But how many potential soft targets have taken even that step?
Maybe company headquarters located outside of the nation's largest cities and local multiscreen cinemas are not at the top of any terrorist's hit list. But who can say how a golden opportunity might influence a terrorist's prioritization of targets?
And why would risk managers or senior management gamble they are not a target? Isn't the potential loss of lives and business worth the expense of at least a security guard or two who look like they mean business?
Feedback from readers are welcome. Please send information to dlenckus@businessinsurance.com.

Load-Date: August 19, 2005


End of Document