SECURITY FOR THE MIND;
 CONSUMER REPORT LAUNCHES SECTION TO HELP INDIVIDUAL DEAL WITH TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 21, 2003 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: BUSINESS,
Length: 918 words
Byline: HENRY GILGOFF, NEWSDAY
Body


Consumer Reports began "sizing up risks in a more dangerous world" long before war in Iraq intensified America's concerns about terrorism at home. The "sizing up risks" headline appeared in a "Home Front" section begun in January 2002 by the monthly magazine -- a reflection of the convulsions set off by Sept. 11.
 The new section has been appearing fairly regularly in the magazine, published by the nonprofit Consumers Union, even as it continued to emphasize its staples. In the edition with the first "Home Front," the cover referred to some mainstays: advice on detecting a used-car wreck, "best bets in bond funds" and ratings of refrigerators, microwave ovens, frozen pizza and four family sedans for new-car buyers.
The media at large had to adjust to concerns raised by 9/11, so Consumer Reports was doing as many publications did, each in its own niche. Lee Jolliffe, a journalism teacher at Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa, recalled seeing a cover story in a travel magazine offering advice "on the resorts most likely to be safe from terrorism."
 What readers find in Consumer Reports' "Home Front" department varies. In the February 2002 edition, for example, a winter health assessment suggested ways to help distinguish influenza from inhalation anthrax. Then in September, a review of public health and safety measures included biological and nuclear threats and security measures for air travel.
 And in January, a report was directed at the needs of employees who might respond to terrorism, questioning the adequacy of safety testing for some protective gear.
 Margot Slade, Consumer Reports editor, resides in New York and was finishing a meeting in lower Manhattan about the education of her 9-year-old twins the morning terrorists struck the World Trade Center. Living so close to the disaster intensified the impact of Sept. 11 on the former New York Times editor. "In the absence of reliable information," she said, "the imagination runs wild."
 Introducing the "Home Front" was one response, intended to have a place in the magazine as long as it has relevance.
 James Guest, president of Consumers Union, recalled in his column in the December 2001 issue, "We were stunned, we were angry, and we shared an unimaginable grief. We asked why, we asked who, and then, as people everywhere did, we asked, 'How can we help?' " In a recent interview, he said, "I approved that; yes, we need to give increased attention to security and preparedness issues."
 Consumer Reports responded in that year's December issue even before starting "Home Front." The magazine published articles with advice about travel and preparedness at home. Much of that advice could have been given any time in what Consumers Union officials characterize as a natural extension of what they normally publish, even if it had a new and disturbing context.
 Consumers Union's long-standing combination of advocacy and advice was illustrated in an article on "the new realities" of travel. It touched a nerve with reader Peter G. Cook of Mesa, Ariz. In a letter in the February 2002 issue, he said security measures recommended by the magazine such as ending curbside check-in at airports would be "expensive, inconvenient and unlikely to be effective."
 Cook, 69, a computer systems consultant, argued in an interview that Consumer Reports strays from its core mission when it offers commentary on "social" issues. "I think the primary service they provide is helping distinguish between different products," he said.
 Consumers Union officials note that during World War II, it had articles related to home front concerns, too. One of them in July 1943 gave information on poison gas warfare, including mustard gas. Before passing along advice on preparing for any gas attack on America, the article said, "You may never need it. But if you should, it may mean the difference between complete safety and serious injury."
This year, in March, the organization publicized a special posting on its Web site of a report on potassium iodide pills updating a previous reference in the magazine. (Such items on the Internet can be accessed directly at homefront.consumerreports.org without the standard www.) 
 The nonprescription pills can help protect against "long-term effects of exposure to radiation from a terror attack against a nuclear plant, or even fallout from a nuclear bomb," the posting said. It cited the pills' possible side effects and noted that while they can reduce the risk of thyroid cancer, they don't protect against other radiation-caused cancers or poisoning.
It also said keeping a supply on hand was "prudent" if "you live anywhere from 50 to 100 miles away" from a nuclear power plant. The posting provided a link to the Web site of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, www.ready.gov, which offers advice on preparing for terrorism. (A fact sheet on potassium iodide also is available from the National Center for Environmental Health at www.cdc.gov/nceh/radiation/ ki.htm).
 Jolliffe, who checked out the Consumer Reports posting on potassium iodide pills, found it "particularly odd." She said it scared her and made her question the need for its nuclear bomb reference.
 The posting preceded the war in Iraq but came as America was on heightened alert to terrorism, said Ronni Sandroff, Consumer Reports health editor. Certainly, nuclear power plant security has been a major issue.
 "What we've tried to do in the health area," Sandroff said, "is to respond to people's concerns of the moment."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Viorel Florescu/Newsday: James Guest, president of Consumers Union, and Margot Slade, editor of Consumer Reports magazine, introduced "Home Front," a section deal with issues of security in January 2002. 

Load-Date: April 22, 2003


End of Document