Security pros criticize government's approach to cyber-terrorism
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
October 11, 1997, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 03E
Length: 455 words
Byline: Michael E. Kanell; STAFF WRITER
Body


Some experts on Internet security scoffed Friday at the idea that bold government action is needed to prevent cyber-terrorism.
Brought to Atlanta to speak and teach at the NetWorld+Interop show this week, at least some of the security experts who advise companies on how to protect their technology resources viewed a federal initiative as late in coming, misconceived and possibly dangerous.
"Excuse me if I'm a little skeptical," said Marcus Ranum, chief scientist of V-One Corp., who has managed networks and designed "firewall" products aimed at protecting network security.
A presidential commission is reportedly preparing to recommend a series of government responses to the threat of terrorist "hackers" damaging the systems that undergird the nation's finances, telecommunications, utility and emergency services.
The commission's chairman, Thomas Marsh, has been quoted as warning that the nation is vulnerable to attack and should be spending $ 1 billion a year by 2004 on Internet security ---about four times what is spent annually now. The commission will propose a center to collect data on attempts to breach security in both industry and government. The group also wants a White House office to coordinate computer security.
But Ranum said he is worried that the commission is more interested in the U.S. developing hacking techniques of its own than in defending against them. "Proponents of cyber-warfare may really be talking about having the U.S. developing state-sponsored terrorism."
Ranum said the commission can do some good by drawing attention to real security risks, but should not fan unrealistic fears. "I just don't think there's a threat from state-sponsored cyber-terrorism. If you are trying to terrorize a country, you do it with guns and bombs."
Paralyzing Wall Street would be newsworthy, but would be costly to pull off and would not provoke the reaction a terrorist desires, he said. "Israel is filled with cellular phones, but Hamas doesn't mess with the phones, they put a bomb on a bus."
Computer systems are vulnerable ---but attackers are likely to be business competitors or hackers-for-the-heck-of-it, said David Piscitello, president of Core Competence Inc.
Vulnerabilities fall into four categories: theft of data, alteration of data, causing computer "down" time and embarrassment ---like the hacker changes made to Web sites of Coca-Cola or the CIA. Each company should assess its risks, balance them against the costs of protection and avoid inviting trouble, he said. Liza Draper, vice president of content for Interop, said the commission may simply have "couched" its argument badly in the rush to address security. "The issues have been there all along, and the vulnerabilities, too."

Load-Date: October 12, 1997


End of Document