SECURITY DEBATED;
PANEL DISCUSSES COSTS, POSSIBLE FUNDING FOR ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURES
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 2, 2002 Saturday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 675 words
Byline: Michael Martz, Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Michael Martz at (804) 649-6964 or mmartz@timesdispatch.com,  
Body


"Are we prepared?"
Gov. Mark R. Warner posed the question yesterday to launch the second phase of Virginia's attempt to guard against what, until six months ago, seemed unthinkable.
"International terrorists follow no rules," Warner told the Secure Virginia Panel at its first meeting, held at the Library of Virginia in Richmond. "They can strike at anyone, at anytime, at any place."
"This most important of all panels," as the governor called it, succeeds a task force appointed by former Gov. Jim Gilmore after terrorist attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center on Sept. 11.
The Gilmore panel produced a 64-page report that never was released officially, but Warner urged his 20 appointees to build on it.
Yesterday's meeting brought together the state's three top elected officials, a former lieutenant governor and state police superintendent, a sitting justice on the Virginia Supreme Court, and the board chairmen of the state's most populous locality and one of its most remote counties.
It also included leaders from two of the state's largest telecommunications companies, a handful of state legislators, and key members of Warner's Cabinet.
Unlike the Gilmore group, the Secure Virginia panel won't be operating under a 60-day deadline in the aftermath of the worst attack on U.S. soil in the country's history.
"We were still reeling, all of us, from September 11," said M. Wayne Huggins, former superintendent of Virginia State Police and the chairman of Gilmore's Security and Preparedness Panel.
Huggins and other former members offered blunt assessments of their report's shortcomings, as well as pride in what they accomplished in defining the potential threats and vulnerabilities facing the state.
Money was a recurring theme. The Gilmore report's recommendations included a price tag of more than $840 million.
"It was part wish list, part makeup list for things that have not been done in the Commonwealth for a long period of time," said former Lt. Gov. John H. Hager, a member of the previous panel who is chairman of the Secure Virginia initiative and special assistant to Warner for commonwealth preparedness.
The priciest item on the table is a statewide police communication system that the Gilmore panel estimated at $600 million. Other estimates put the cost at half that amount. State Police Superintendent Gerald Massengill said early bids put the price at about $350 million.
Warner's proposed budget included about $44 million for anti-terrorism initiatives, including money to continue paying the state's consultant on the communications project.
However, the fate of the governor's proposals rests with a General Assembly that is entering its final week sharply divided over the state budget.
The Senate's budget proposal includes about $109 million for anti-terrorism measures, much of the money coming from federal or other sources outside of the state's general fund.
The House of Delegates is proposing to budget about $10 million.
State policymakers aren't sure how much money to expect from the federal government. Little of the $40 billion allocated by Congress after the terrorist attacks came to Virginia.
The most promising sign of federal aid is $23.4 million earmarked for Virginia's efforts to bolster its public health system and private hospitals against the threat of infectious disease and bioterrorism.
Panel members also began wrestling with thorny issues about how much sensitive information to share with the public and how much to keep secret.
Legislation is sailing through the General Assembly to widen exemptions from the Freedom of Information Act for specific plans to guard against terrorism and other detailed information on potential targets.
Some local leaders say they are concerned how much information already is available on public Web sites, such as federally published lists of hazardous materials sites within their jurisdictions.
"On one hand, we want to make as much information available to the public as we can," Huggins said. "On the other hand, we're not going to hand the guy the playbook."

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: March 5, 2002


End of Document