SECURITY EXPERTS URGE BUSINESS AS USUAL DESPITE RISK OF TERRORISM ATTACKS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 30, 1998, Sunday,
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: TRAVEL,
Length: 525 words
Byline: CAROLYN SPENCER BROWN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


U.S. missile attacks on Sudan and Afghanistan Aug. 20, retaliation against terrorist groups that bombed American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania earlier this month, raise alarms for travelers. A "high-ranking government official" was quoted in the Aug. 21 Washington Post as saying that "the prospect of retaliation against Americans is very, very high." A briefing on Pinkerton Global Intelligence Services' site (http://www.pinkertons.com/pgis) on the Internet reiterated the warning: "The possibility of retaliatory attacks by terrorist groups against U.S. targets, either government or private sector, is extremely high."
All of which raises the question: Should overseas travelers worry about being unwitting victims of a terrorist retaliation scheme?
Should you just stay home?
Many people remember the bombing of Pam Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, almost a decade ago as one that, according to speculation, was retaliation for the U.S. attack on Libya in 1986. Pinkerton security consultant Frank Johns doesn't necessarily subscribe to that theory but concedes, "It's indelibly etched in everyone's mind, which is what [terrorists] wanted."
His advice? "My position is business as usual" - both from a personal-security point of view and also because we can't permit these people to change the course of our lives. Of all Americans traveling overseas, probably the least at risk are tourists.
"Now, before you go where you would have gone anyway, take a hard, careful look at your destination. Investigate the political climate. Then go."
Pinkerton and other security companies post safety information on their Web sites, so travelers can keep abreast of developments. In addition, U.S. government agencies have taken the following steps:
The State Department, on its Web site (http://travel.state.gov/travel_warnings.html), revised the "Worldwide Caution" it issued last week in response to the embassy bombings, urging U.S. travelers to "exercise much greater caution than usual" - regardless of destination. It continues to offer the recommendation that overseas travelers avoid large crowds and anti-American demonstrations. Travel warnings advise avoiding trips to obviously risky destinations, including Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Libya and North Korea, as well as Kenya, Tanzania, Albania, Eritrea, Sudan and Pakistan.
The Federal Aviation Administration announced Aug. 21 that it is prohibiting U.S.-registered airlines from flying through air space in Sudan and Afghanistan. It also said that airports and air carriers will be required to "enhance" security measures, but maintained that security procedures are already so strict that there's no need for drastic upgrades.  Eleni Jakub, of Control Risks Group, a Washington area travel security consultant, points out that U.S. airlines are at greatest risk for terrorist attacks - which means you can expect longer waits at carry-on security checkpoints.
Jakub also said passengers should be on their guard at airports. "Statistically, terrorist attacks occur in open areas outside security. Travelers should move as quickly as possible beyond security cordons. Relax on the other side."

Load-Date: September 4, 1998


End of Document