SECURITY OFFICERS CHECK ALL CARS AT LAMBERT GARAGES;
 NEW POLICY RESULTS FROM GOVERNMENT'S LATEST WARNING ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 2, 2001 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. B1
Length: 439 words
Byline: Ken Leiser Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


Security officers are stopping and inspecting cars before they enter Lambert Field's hourly parking garages in response to the government's latest terrorism alert.
Lambert Field Police Chief Paul E. Mason II said security guards previously only stopped sport utility vehicles, vans and trucks with camper shells. Those vehicles have not been allowed in the hourly parking garages for the past six weeks.
"When we got the latest FBI alert, we notified everybody to be on increased vigilance," Mason said.
He couldn't say how long the cars would be stopped and subjected to the brief visual inspections -- generally, a glance in the front and back seats. Some security measures will quietly be put in place and shifted throughout the airport, as needed.
"We get a lot of intelligence information," Mason said. "Based on what we are hearing, we are going to (go) up and down and maybe move some things around."
Lambert and other airports have beefed up security significantly since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in Washington, New York and Pennsylvania.
In St. Louis, Mason said, airport police have been working extra shifts, armed National Guard soldiers have been called in temporarily and law enforcement is enforcing wartime parking restrictions near airline terminals.
On Thursday, motorists who parked in the garage across from the airport's Main Terminal said they welcomed the additional scrutiny. Frank Jones of Eureka said the officer asked to look in his trunk before allowing his four-door car to pass.
"I think the security should have been tighter for a long time," Jones said.
Phil Hoffman of Manchester said the few extra seconds it took him to park his car Thursday didn't bother him at all. He understands the need for additional scrutiny during the country's war on terrorism.
"I'm with the Postal Service," Hoffman said. "And we're doing the same thing."
Mason said the airport had taken other security steps since Monday's alert but acknowledged that "most of what we have done is kind of behind the scenes."
He said the nation was on edge. And the strain may be starting to show at airports.
On Thursday, a 45-year-old man was taken into custody at Lambert after pushing a security screener near the C and D concourses, Mason said. The screening company employee was trying to prevent the man from entering a restricted area just after 8:30 a.m. Thursday.
"I think this is an aberration," Mason said. Even though the wait for the security checkpoints was long, Mason said, "I saw people stand in line this morning and they were happy."
===
BUMPY RIDE: Changeover to American Airlines is causing delays for TWA frequent-fliers. B5

Notes

Reporter Ken Leiser:; E-mail: kleiser@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 340-8119  

Load-Date: November 2, 2001


End of Document