Security reinforced at Belgian leader's office; Floor plan found in laptop of man linked to terrorism.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 31, 2016 Thursday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A4
Length: 433 words
Byline: Lilia Blaise and Dan Bilefsky
Body


Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi (left) holds a moment of silence after laying a wreath at the site of the Maelbeek metro station in Brussels on Wednesday. The death toll in two attacks is 32.
BRUSSELS - A file with the floor plan and photographs of the office of the Belgian prime minister was on a laptop computer discarded in a garbage can last week by one of the terrorists linked to the Brussels attacks, a government official said Wednesday.
Investigators found the computer during a raid in the Schaerbeek neighborhood of Brussels several hours after the attacks on March 22.
On the same computer, investigators found a statement by Ibrahim el-Bakraoui, one of three suicide bombers who carried out the attacks. In that statement, el-Bakraoui described himself as increasingly desperate and fearful of ending up in prison.
El-Bakraoui and another man, Najim Laachraoui, blew themselves up at Brussels Airport, and el-Bakraoui's younger brother, Khalid, detonated a suicide bomb at the Maelbeek station.
The authorities are seeking a third airport attacker, a man seen on surveillance footage wearing a white jacket. They are also looking for another person involved in the subway blast.
The toll from the attacks at Brussels Airport and the Maelbeek subway station was revised Tuesday, to 32 from 35, as the authorities finished identifying the victims.
Local news reports said the discarded computer also contained precise information about the prime minister's residence, which is known as the Lambermont and is steps from the U.S. Embassy. Secretary of State John Kerry met Prime Minister Charles Michel at the residence Friday.
The Belgian newspaper L'Écho reported that Michel had been informed about the findings, that security around the office had been reinforced, and that the United States had been asked to help decrypt information on the computer.
On Wednesday, the Dutch minister of security and justice, Ard van der Steur, said that the intelligence division of the New York Police Department had warned the Dutch government, via the embassy in Washington, on March 16 that the el-Bakraoui brothers had links to terrorism.
Van der Steur had said the warning had come from the FBI, but in a statement Wednesday, he acknowledged that he had erred in testimony before the Dutch Parliament.
It was not clear how the police in New York had become aware of the el-Bakraoui brothers, or why theyhadrelayedtheinformation to the Dutch authorities.
News outlets in the Netherlands have reported that the government there passed the warning on to the Belgians on March 17, one day after receiving it.

Load-Date: March 31, 2016


End of Document