Security Council adopts sweeping anti-terrorism rules; 'Made history tonight': Resolution stops short of endorsing military strikes or threatening sanctions
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
September 29, 2001 Saturday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 363 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS
Body


The U.N. Security Council unanimously approved a U.S.-sponsored resolution Friday night demanding that all countries take sweeping measures to crack down on terrorism.
Responding to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States, the council set out a new set of requirements that every nation must meet to cut off funding and support for terrorist activities and improve the exchange of information about terrorist networks.
To ensure that all countries adopt the measures, the council created a Security Council committee to monitor their efforts.
While the resolution stops short of threatening sanctions against those countries that fail to abide by the anti-terrorism measures, it does express the council's determination "to take all necessary steps to ensure the full implementation."
The resolution moved from start to finish in the frequently plodding Security Council in just over 24 hours, a pace that reflects Washington's wide support as it leads the global campaign to track down the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks and those who harbored them.
Every nation must also stop all forms of support to people or groups involved in terrorist acts and deny them "safe haven." The recruitment and supply of weapons to terrorist members and groups must end, and all countries must accelerate the exchange of operational information, especially regarding actions or movements of terrorists and terrorist networks.
"Tonight probably the Security Council made history," said France's U.N. Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, the current council president. "Tonight we have adopted a very ambitious, comprehensive strategy."
The resolution incorporates actions to fight terrorism from a dozen legal instruments approved by the General Assembly since 1963.
Only five of the conventions and protocols have been ratified by more than 100 countries and the newest - to cut off the financing of terrorism - hasn't yet taken effect because it doesn't have enough ratifications.
The resolution adopted Friday night does not seek endorsement for retaliatory military strikes, but echoes the initial council resolution recognizing a nation's right to "individual or collective self-defense."

Load-Date: October 3, 2001


End of Document