SECURITY PLAN CALLS FOR CHANGES IN STATE, FEDERAL LAWS;
 WHITE HOUSE BACKS UNIFORM DRIVERS LICENSE RULES, TERRORISM INSURANCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 16, 2002 Tuesday Early Five Star Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS ; Pg. A4
Length: 524 words
Byline: Curt Anderson The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The White House's long-awaited national security strategy emphasizes the establishment of a Homeland Security Department and calls for new laws such as uniform rules for getting a drivers license.
The administration released the document Monday. Its goals:
* Prevent terrorism.
* Reduce vulnerability to attacks.
* Minimize damage from any attacks that take place anyway.
It leaves little doubt that groups such as al-Qaida are all but certain to strike again.
"Our society presents an almost infinite array of potential targets that can be attacked through a variety of methods," says a summary of the 100-page strategy. President George W. Bush plans to issue the document formally at the White House today.
The White House document goes far beyond the new department that Bush wants. It also recommends changes in state and federal laws and outlines long-range steps in the domestic war against terrorism.
For example, the strategy suggests that states adopt similar laws for getting a drivers license. Such a move would guard against ease of access by terrorists. The strategy also calls on states to make terrorism insurance more readily available to businesses and property owners.
On the federal level, it says extradition agreements with other nations should be expanded. It calls for greater authority for the federal government to call out the National Guard. And it seeks greater power for the president to transfer money appropriated by Congress to deal with terrorist threats inside U.S. borders.
Other recommendations would increase vaccine stockpiles, enhance the FBI's analysis capabilities and improve computer security.
Also on Monday, Homeland Security chief Tom Ridge urged lawmakers to reconsider the broad changes they want in Bush's plan for the new departments.
He testified before the nine-member House Select Committee on Homeland Security. That panel will put together a bill establishing the new department and send it along this week to the full House.
Last week, a dozen House committees made big changes to Bush's plan. Among them: keeping the Federal Emergency Management Agency as an independent unit and keeping the Coast Guard in the Transportation Department.
In his testimony Monday, Ridge singled out the Coast Guard and FEMA as agencies that must be included in the new department.
Likewise, Ridge urged the panel to revisit the rejection by the House Appropriations Committee of Bush's proposal to permit the new department's secretary to transfer up to 5 percent of each year's budget within programs without consulting Congress.
Ridge called that power critical to quick response to terrorist threats. He said, "This is not a traditional war."
But Congress jealously guards its constitutional power of the purse. House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas and the panel's chairman, said Congress was unlikely to grant Bush's request for broad transfer authority.
Democrats on the panel repeatedly urged that the House consider its bill under open rules of debate, so that all viewpoints could be heard. Rep. Martin Frost, D-Texas, said, "To make this work, we must build a bipartisan coalition that is as deep as it is broad."

Graphic

 
PHOTO; THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo - Homeland Security chief Tom Ridge gestures while testifying on Capitol Hill Monday.

Load-Date: July 16, 2002


End of Document