Security Council Deplores Deadly Moscow Metro Blasts
RTT News (United States)
March 30, 2010 Tuesday


Copyright 2010 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 290 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The United Nations Security Council (UNSC) and the world body&apos;s Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon condemned Monday morning&apos;s twin suicide-bombings in the crowded subway railroad network of Russian capital Moscow that killed dozens of commuters and injured scores of others.
More than 38 passengers were reportedly killed in the suicide-bombings, which occurred at separate metro stations within 40 minutes of each other during the morning rush hour.
A press statement read out by Ambassador Emanuel Issoze-Ngondet of Gabon, which holds the Council presidency this month, said: "The members of the Security Council reaffirmed that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security, and that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation."
The 15-member panel said Council members also "reiterated their determination to combat all forms of terrorism."
In a statement issued by his spokesperson, Ban extended "his deepest condolences to the families of the victims, and to the Government and people of the Russian Federation. He also wished the injured a swift recovery."
He was confident that "the Russian authorities will bring to justice the perpetrators of this heinous terrorist attack."
The first explosion hit the second carriage of a train at the central Lubbyanka station at 7.52 a.m. (0352 GMT) killing 25 commuters and injuring 10 others.
Forty minutes later, the second explosion hit the Park Kultury Metro Station in the southwest of the city, killing 12 passengers and injuring an equal number.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2010 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 9, 2010


End of Document