Security changes since 9/11 make the skies less unfriendly
USA TODAY
September 8, 2011 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDIT; Pg. 10A
Length: 568 words
Body


Nineteen hijackers who boarded planes in small
groups in Boston, Newark and Washington on the
morning of Sept. 11, 2001, didn't so much evade
airline security as walk boldly through its many gaps.
Terrorism watch lists were of little bother. Box
cutters were permitted on planes. Checkpoints were
manned by minimum-wage screeners
working for the lowest bidders
who won airline contracts. And once
on board, the hijackers faced obstacles
as flimsy as the security on the
ground.
Today, experts who complain that
security is still porous and just "theater"
must be suffering from amnesia.
The Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), created in the weeks
after 9/11, has brought security a long
way in the past 10 years. And while
the agency has had its share of missteps
and failures, there's no question
that flying is far safer today than
in 2001.
One of the most effective changes,
hardening cockpit doors to make
them impassable, was accomplished
in a matter of months, proving how
much the government and industry
can accomplish when both are committed.
Many pilots are now armed
and trained to use guns in an emergency.
Air marshals are deployed on
more flights.
All checked baggage is screened for
explosives, and TSA agents have taken
over screening from private companies at the vast
majority of airports. Cargo in the bellies of domestic
passenger planes is screened, too. At 78 airports,
many travelers pass through full-body scanners designed
to detect explosives. And the TSA, albeit
belatedly, is finally checking passengers against
combined government watch lists — to detect dangerous
people, not just dangerous objects. For years,
the airlines carried out such work, a law enforcement
function that never should have been jobbed
out to the private sector.
Of course, even all these steps cannot eliminate
risk. What they can do is make it harder for terrorists
to succeed and less enticing for them to try.
That terrorists remain fixated on
airplanes is certain, as evidenced by
last October's plot to ship parcel
bombs on planes from Yemen to the
USA, and the "underwear bomber"
who tried to blow up a Detroitbound
jetliner on Christmas Day of
2009. The parcel-bomb plot was
foiled by good intelligence and swift
international cooperation, but it exposed
holes in the screening of cargo
on international flights. The Christmas
Day near-miss revealed gaps in
intelligence sharing as well as the
role that alert, courageous passengers
can play in subduing terrorists.
Which brings us to another point
about passengers. They often show
more sense than the lawmakers who
make policy and oversee security. In
November, amid an uproar over
body scanners and pat-downs, 71% of
fliers said both were "worth it" to
prevent acts of terrorism, according
to a USA/Gallup Poll. Tellingly, the
TSA's vocal critics failed to propose
any credible alternative.
The TSA and its director, John Pistole,
are taking some cautious steps
toward reducing the airport "hassle
factor." Next month, the agency will
start testing a new way to identify
frequent fliers who are not risks and
treat them accordingly. Another
overdue program would limit the
screening of children. On Tuesday, Homeland Security
Secretary Janet Napolitano also mentioned allowing
passengers to keep their shoes on — at some
vague point in the future.
We hope this doesn't take another 10 years. Having
the nerve to decide when a procedure is no
longer necessary is as important as deciding to add
yet another layer of security. 

Load-Date: September 9, 2011


End of Document