SECURE FEELINGS PREVALENT;
   ATHLETES AND COACHES WITH LOCAL TIES DOWNPLAY THE THREAT OF TERRORISM.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
August 14, 2004 Saturday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2004 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: SPORTS; Pg. C8
Length: 604 words
Byline: Andy Baggot Wisconsin State Journal
Body


Kathy Butler was smack in the middle of her first Summer Olympic experience when a tragedy of stunning, but now familiar, proportions took place.
Butler, a former University of Wisconsin distance runner, was in the middle of her 5,000-meter race at the Olympic Stadium in Atlanta the night of July27, 1996. She found out later that a bomb had gone off downtown in Olympic Park, killing two and wounding 111.
"I didn't hear it," said Butler, who was competing for Canada. "I was too far away."
The photo of Kathy Butler appeared in the second edition only.
But, like millions around the world, she was forever changed by the events of that night. The man accused of building and detonating the bomb, Eric Rudolph, was arrested in May 2003 after avoiding capture by hiding in the wilderness of North Carolina. Rudolph is jailed without bond, awaiting trial next spring on death penalty charges in the fatal bombing of a Birmingham, Ala., abortion clinic in 1998.
Butler recounted the moment because fears of terrorism and concerns about security are rampant heading into the Summer Games in Greece, which began with the Opening Ceremony Friday night in Athens.
"People weren't on edge as much then as they are now with those kind of things, so I'd like to think the security is going to be super-intense," she said. "I think they'll do the best they can to keep everything to a minimum."
Fueled by the events of Sept.11 in the U.S. and several bomb-related incidents in Greece leading up to the Olympics, there is unprecedented security for the 28th Summer Games.
Greek officials have requested American special forces and NATO anti-terrorism units be available to protect the Olympics, which run through Aug.29. A record $1.5billion is being spent on security, including $2.4million for a blimp outfitted with high-resolution cameras and chemical detecting systems.
Sean Wherley of Sun Prairie, whose brother Mike is a member of the American men's rowing team, was in Washington, D.C., at the Capitol when terrorists struck Sept.11, 2001.
"I'm not concerned," Sean Wherley said. "You can be in a city and not be involved when there are terrorist attacks. I'm confident the Greek government and the U.S. will keep the athletes and venues secure."
Added Mike Wherley: "I don't worry about (the athletes). Maybe the spectators or friends and family members might be a little more at risk. It's definitely in the back of my mind. It wouldn't have been in Sydney (where he competed for the U.S. in the 2000 Summer Games)."
Butler, now competing for Great Britain and running in the 10,000, said all athletes had to have their personal baggage forwarded to the Olympic Village more than a month ago. Those who qualified after the deadline must have their belongings checked upon arriving in Athens.
During her running career -- she has dual citizenship in Canada and Great Britain -- Butler has flown all over the world. She understands one sobering reality when it comes to acts of violence.
"You're not going to stop someone if they really want to do something," she said.
UW men's and women's swimming coach Eric Hansen is in Athens assisting two of his athletes who qualified for the Games: Adam Mania for Team Poland and Carly Piper for Team USA.
"The Olympics (are) such a buzz that you almost gain this big false sense of security and you just focus on the task at hand," Hansen said. "It's almost as if you were worried about it, then the terrorists involved are winning.
"I think everyone will be very cautious, but at the same time we're going to go out and go about our business."
Contact Andy Baggot at abaggot@madison.com or 252-6175.  

Graphic

 
Kathy Butler

Load-Date: August 15, 2004


End of Document