Security limits freedom
University Wire
November 13, 2006 Monday


Copyright 2006 The Lantern via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 575 words
Byline: By Elizabeth Thomas, The Lantern; SOURCE: Ohio State U.
Dateline: COLUMBUS, Ohio 
Body


Now that the elections have passed, one things seems to stand out: Americans have voted for change. Democrats swept the board Tuesday, winning six seats in the Senate, 29 seats in the House and the majority in both houses of Congress. As our nation moves in a new direction, I can recall issues I've had with the current administration. One such issue is related to what I feel is an overemphasis on terrorism, and our subsequent surrender of various freedoms in exchange for perceived safety.
In the summer, back before school had started up again this year, I was listening to NPR. I heard the talk-radio hosts discussing the latest trends in airport security. They did not have breaking news to report, because I heard a few days previous that airports began banning all gels and liquids. Even a simple classification like "gel" or "liquid" is disputable, though. As NPR noted, what do we call ice cream or silly putty?
The gentleman speaking on the air took a pro-security approach. His enthusiasm, however, escalated to an all-out embrace of airport bans. Terrorists specifically work to evade the patterns airport security looks for, so it is important to keep the same eye out for razorblades and guns as for, say, shampoo. Although, it is possible that terrorists are sneaking liquid explosives through security in shampoo bottles, is it really worth the hassle to ban them?
Post Sept. 11 America has become unhealthily obsessed with security practices. It seems somewhat obvious to ban razorblades and other weapons, but the obsession has led to more and more bans and longer and longer trips through airport security. Although some argue it is worth the hassle to foil terrorist plots, I must disagree. It is not that I believe terrorists are not a problem. I do not believe the entire Sept. 11 situation was a constructed conspiracy to bring the American people into submission. What I believe is that terrorists are a natural (if unfortunate) part of life.
Of course, they are not a comfortable part of life, but still a part. Today, the FBI defines terrorism as "the unlawful use of force against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population or any segment thereof, in the furtherance of political or social objectives." By this definition, terrorism has not been a movement restricted to the 21st Century. The U.S. has been involved with terrorist activities at least since the Spanish-American War a century ago. For thousands of years, various forms of terrorism and assassins have plagued the world. When pirates hijacked Roman ships on the Mediterranean, Augustus did not take every potential weapon away from every person living under his rule.
My point is, this obsession with security is getting downright ridiculous. Since the birth of humanity, people have coped differently. When will the day come that we ban all pencils (too sharp) or all cameras (the flash could blind the pilot)? America is supposedly the Land of the Free, but we are throwing it all away for security. The irony is that we feel no more secure today than five years ago, but most Americans do feel considerably less free. Giving up our freedoms is submitting ourselves to the fear of terrorism, so we are simply submitting ourselves to terrorist will. If we truly wish to fight a noble War on Terrorism, we Americans need to stand up together and freely live our lives without fear or terror.
(C) 2006 The Lantern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 13, 2006


End of Document