SECURITY STANDOFF; IT'S UP TO THE HOUSE TO PROTECT AMERICANS' PRIVACY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 15, 2008 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-6
Length: 435 words
Body


The saga of the Bush administration trampling Americans' rights to privacy while coddling big corporate campaign donors continues.
Unfortunately, in spite of the outcome of the 2006 elections, Congress -- or at least the Senate, so far in this case -- continues to enable President Bush to pursue his heedless-of-the-Constitution desires.
The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 provided for intelligence oversight of some overseas communications of Americans -- as well as foreigners -- under well-defined rules. These included advance judicial approval of the procedure. The role of the courts reflects the fact that Americans value their right to privacy. They believe that government bugging of their phones and reading of their e-mails should not occur just because someone doesn't like their political views -- which is a very long way from disloyalty or plotting against the country.
After 9/11, the Bush administration bypassed this procedure and avoided the courts in thousands of cases. Some big telecommunications companies cooperated with the government in its listening in. Now, a number of Americans who believe their privacy was violated by the government, with the complicity of the telecoms, are suing the companies for billions of dollars.
The Bush administration's approach to the suits is to push for legislation that after the fact exonerates the companies from violating the law. The Senate passed this bill, 68-29, on Tuesday with 19 Democrats voting for it along with Mr. Bush's Republicans.
One supporter of the plan is Sen. Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va., who received $42,000 in political contributions from AT&T and Verizon executives. Telecom companies have been among the big donors to Mr. Bush's presidential campaigns and have favored Republican candidates in general with their gifts in elections from 2000 to 2006.
The other motive behind Mr. Bush's wanting to give the companies immunity is that any litigation surrounding the lawsuits would undoubtedly produce information about just whose phones and e-mail accounts were bugged. That list could be revealing.
If the House insists that the retroactive pardon for the companies is eliminated from the bill, Mr. Bush says he will veto it. Surveillance will continue anyway, but Mr. Bush will use rejection of it as a basis for accusing the opponents of being soft on terrorism.
The issue is not being soft on terrorism. It is being firm in defense of Americans' legal rights in the face of an administration that is trying to continue governing the country through signing statements and other measures outside the laws of the country.

Load-Date: February 16, 2008


End of Document