Security decisions vindicated, Kempthorne says;
 Case holds more surprises about state terrorism ties, governor suggests
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
February 27, 2003 Thursday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A6
Length: 477 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


Idaho Gov. Dirk Kempthorne said Wednesday that the newly disclosed
 terrorism investigation in Moscow was one of the factors that prompted him to
 barricade the state Capitol, close streets and crank up state security after
 the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
 And he suggested the case holds still more surprises about possible
 terrorist ties to Idaho. ''You will find details that you would never have
 imagined would have been originating from this state," he said.
Kempthorne said he now feels vindicated in his security decisions after
 Sept. 11, which drew sharp criticism at the time.
 ''Yes, I did take significant political heat for security measures which I
 put in place," the governor said. ''Those concerns have now been borne out."
 State legislators, who were among Kempthorne's critics for his reaction to
 9/11, were surprised by Wednesday's revelations.
 ''As I remember, everybody thought he went overboard," said Rep. Wayne
 Meyer, R-Rathdrum. ''Maybe if I had the information the governor has, maybe I
 would've felt differently about that issue. Maybe one day that information
 will come to light."
 Sen. Shawn Keough, R-Sandpoint, led a move in the Legislature's joint
 budget committee last year to trim back extra patrols of the state Capitol by
 the Idaho State Police. Since then, security at the Statehouse has been
 relaxed to levels closer to what was in place before Sept. 11, 2001, but some
 subtle changes remain in vehicle access, communications and other security
 measures.
 ''Last year we cut way back and put the troopers back on the road instead
 of in the Statehouse," Keough said. ''It was better utilization of their
 service and better management of our scarce resources to put ISP back on the
 road."
 Keough said remaining security changes, such as planters that block parking
 just outside the state Capitol's northern entrance, are probably ''prudent."
 Tom Moss, U.S. attorney for Idaho,   said, ''At the time the governor first
 heard about this shortly after 9/11, he knew very little about what was going
 on. We just knew that we had something going on, and so the governor reacted I
 would say very appropriately."
 Kempthorne hinted that ''a close associate" of Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, the
 Saudi Arabian graduate student who was arrested in Moscow on Wednesday, played
 into his decisions. ''I think you know what I'm referencing as to his location
 at a particular time," Kempthorne said during a joint press conference by
 federal, state and local agencies.
 Moss replied, ''Governor, I think we'll leave that alone. It'll probably
 come out maybe within a week. It may be brought out at the detention hearing,
 which will probably be within a week or 10 days from now."
 Kempthorne said as far as terrorist activity in Idaho, ''There are other
 pieces of information not necessarily related to this that are unresolved and
 continue to cause me concern."

Load-Date: March 1, 2003


End of Document