SECURITY GOES LOCAL; WHITE HOUSE PLAN TARGETS DOMESTIC TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 8, 2011 Monday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-6
Length: 342 words
Body


Tip O'Neill used to say that "all politics is local." But as savvy as the late Democratic speaker of the House was about the realities of American politics, he probably would not have included terrorism prevention as a local concern.
Times have changed and the nature of the threats against American tranquility have changed, too. In an eight-page report released last week, the Obama administration argued that the best way to counter violent extremism on the domestic front is to foster robust cooperation and communication between federal, state and local communities.
Because children and young people are often recruited and targeted by extremists, families play a crucial role in counteracting hateful ideologies. The alienation that feeds violent extremism doesn't emerge from a vacuum. It often has a long gestation period where it can be observed.
Instead of relying exclusively on the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the Justice Department to take the lead, all federal agencies are expected to partner with local communities to resolve cases of suspected radicalization before they escalate into violence.
Since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, American counterterrorism efforts have been oriented toward the threat of Islamic extremists almost exclusively. This has been shortsighted. America has a history of anti-government violence that predates al-Qaida.
In "The National Strategy on Empowering Local Partners to Prevent Violent Extremism," the White House expands the scope of dangers it is concerned about to non-Islamic groups. After the recent carnage in Norway, it is important to remember that violent and anti-government extremists come in all ideological stripes.
"The best defenses against violent extremist ideologies are well-informed and equipped families, local communities, and local institutions," the report reads. "Their awareness of the threat and willingness to work with one another and government is a part of our long history of community-based initiatives and partnerships dealing with a range of public safety challenges."

Load-Date: August 9, 2011


End of Document