Security Tab For Visit By Ayers: $12,463; Millersville University Says Extra Guards, Training Exercise Costs Will Be Paid For By Donations.
Lancaster New Era (Pennsylvania)
April 29, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: B; Pg. 1
Length: 357 words
Byline: Cindy Stauffer
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


Bill Ayers' visit to Millersville University last month required the security efforts of almost 60 officers and cost $12,463.01.
The cost and manpower for the controversial visit by Ayers, a Chicago education professor and a founder of the Weather Underground, a 1960s radical protest group, included:
$7,729.61 for the South Central Task Force, a regional anti-terrorism group that used the visit as a training exercise.
The group sent 25 police officers from 10 jurisdictions.
The money is being used to cover either the cost of filling the officers' positions while they were at the Ayers' event, or their overtime.
$3,008.54 for Millersville Borough.
The municipality used eight officers to help provide security.
$1,724.96 for Security Guards Inc., a Wyomissing company.
The company sent 13 security guards to the event.
The university also used the services of 12 of its officers to cover the event throughout the day. They were regularly on duty at that time, however, so MU did not incur additional costs from them.
The added security costs are being funded by undesignated donations to the university, said MU spokeswoman Janet Kacskos.
MU officials were apprehensive about Ayers' visit, saying they got vulgar and threatening calls about it. His trips to other campuses have sparked disruptions and at least one arrest.
At MU, security officers used a metal detector to check about 300 people before they entered the room where Ayers spoke.
Officers also closed streets and kept a watchful eye on a small group of people, including both Ayers' supporters and protesters. There were no incidents outside or inside the room where the speech was given.
The Ayers visit was out of the ordinary for the university. Normally, for a large event MU would use six to eight of its own campus police officers and six to eight additional security guards, at a cost of $1,200 to $2,500.
The anti-terrorism task force initially said it would use federal funds to pay for the officers it sent to the speech.
But the university told the group it could be reimbursed, and it decided to submit a bill for its services, said Greg Noll, program manger for the task force.

Load-Date: April 30, 2009


End of Document