SECURITY COUNCIL WEIGHS TWO CRISES
The New York Times
March 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 396 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., March 22
Body


The Security Council confronted the prospect today of holding simultaneous hearings on Nicaragua's charges against the United States and Syria's complaint against Israel.
A formal request for a meeting from Damascus had not arrived when Arab delegates began laying plans for a session. Syria wants to rebuke Israel for dissolving the city council of El Bireh, in the occupied West Bank, and for firing on Palestinian demonstrators.
The Security Council confronted the prospect today of holding simultaneous hearings on Nicaragua's charges against the United States and Syria's complaint against Israel.
On Friday Nicaragua asked for an ''urgent'' meeting to dramatize its fears of what it called ''an imminent invasion'' by the United States. Today, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate and Council president for March, continued consulting the 14 other Council members to arrange the Nicaraguan session.
Arab representatives said they hoped Mrs. Kirkpatrick would schedule a morning hearing for one complaint and an afternoon meeting for the other. American diplomats made clear they did not think this was an orderly way of proceeding but would raise no objections if other Council members wanted such an arrangement.
 
U.S. to Answer Charges
Daniel Ortega Saavedra, coordinator of Nicaragua's governing junta, has said he will come to New York to present his country's complaint. Mrs. Kirkpatrick intends to answer for the United States and accuse Nicaragua of supplying Soviet and Cuban arms to guerrillas in El Salvador.
At a news conference today, Zehdi Labib Terzi, the observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization, accused Israel of ''state terrorism'' and said Israel's fire against stone-throwing demonstrators was ''reminiscent of the Nazis.'' He said ''our people cannot stand idly by'' and warned that resistance ''will intensify.''
Clovis Maksoud, representative of the Arab League, deplored the breakup of the El Bireh council. He called it ''a pattern of annexation'' of the West Bank ''that can no longer be tolerated.''
The Syrians are expected to seek a resolution rebuking Israel and demanding a halt to the dismantling of ''legal and institutional structures'' on the West Bank. Nicaragua has said it wants only a resolution restating the principles of the United Nations Charter, prohibiting threats of force and intervention against another nation.


End of Document