Seeds of terrorism can grow in state, as militia case shows shows shows
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
November 01, 1997, Saturday saturday saturday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A P3A P3A
Length: 593 words
Byline: David Sharp sharp sharp
Body


WHEELING (AP) - The Mountaineer Militia case shows the state is not
immune to terrorism, U.S. Attorney William Wilmoth said.
Five of seven defendants who were arrested a year ago either were
convicted or pleaded guilty.
In the aftermath, the Mountaineer Militia collapsed and West
Virginians learned that the seeds of terrorism can grow even in
"salt-of-the-earth" places like Clarksburg, Wilmoth said.  said.  said.
"First of all, a potentially dangerous organization has been taken
apart," the federal prosecutor said. "Secondly, the public is aware
that this kind of thing can happen anywhere."
The final trial ended last week with the conviction of Terry Coon of
Waynesburg, Pa., of providing plastic explosives, TNT and grenades
across state lines to militia commander Floyd "Ray" Looker.
The only setback for prosecutors was the acquittal of two Ohio men who
supplied 1,000 explosives to the militia. The Cleveland men contended
the explosives were nothing but overgrown firecrackers.
The next phase begins Monday with the sentencing of Jack Phillips of
Fairmont for conspiracy to manufacture explosives. A week later,
Edward F. Moore of Lavallette, Wayne County, will be sentenced for
making a small ammonium nitrate bomb at a militia training session.
The other sentencings will continue through early next year in the
same courtroom where jurors were kept anonymous for their safety and
where extra marshals were on hand for security.
The militia investigation began two months after the Oklahoma City
bombing when an informant overheard militia members discussing three
federal targets during a training session in Lewis County.
One target was identified as the FBI's $ 200 million Criminal Justice
Information Services division in Clarksburg, which now employs about
3,000 people. The others were never named.
A Clarksburg firefighter who made copies of FBI center blueprints was
the first to be found guilty under an antiterrorism statute that makes
it a crime to provide material support to terrorists.
Looker and the firefighter were preparing for an assault on the
complex, but there was no active plot, officials said.
Defense lawyers contended the entire investigation was improperly
launched on the word of a habitual liar who went to the FBI in hopes
of living out his dream of being a secret agent.
The informant, Okey Marshall Richards Jr., had told tall tales for
years about being a war hero and secret government operative, and he
stood to gain financially because he was deep in debt, owing thousands
of dollars in back child support, unpaid taxes and court judgments.
Richards has been paid more than $ 80,000, including services, expenses
and relocation, since the summer of 1995.
Wilmoth said Richards' help was invaluable in giving the FBI access to
Looker through the tape recorder he wore, Wilmoth said. Richards made
more than 400 tape recordings during the 16-month investigation.
"I'm certainly glad that we were able to have him to unravel this case
before anything dangerous occurred," Wilmoth said.
The case does not necessarily end with the sentencings because Looker
can still be prosecuted for a bogus check-cashing scheme linked to
Montana Freeman leader LeRoy Schweitzer.
Also, one of the defendants, James "Rich" Rogers, a former fire
lieutenant in Clarksburg, has requested a new trial.
The government has spent thousands of dollars on the case - from the
active investigation to explosives tests by the FBI and elaborate
videotape presentations for jurors.
"I would still do it again," Wilmoth said. "It was important enough
that it was money well-spent." spent." spent."

Load-Date: November 4, 1997


End of Document