Seeing the world in red and blue, Views on terrorism highlight differences between Republicans, Democrats
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 4, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8C
Length: 1219 words
Byline: Arnold Hamilton The Dallas Morning News
Body


DALLAS - For Republicans and Democrats alike, Sept. 11, 2001, propelled the terrorism and security issue to the top of the nation's agenda.
The consensus didn't last long.
Less than three years after the attacks in New York and Virginia, the issue now serves to underscore America's hardening political divide - a disconnect between Democrats and Republicans over what's most important in selecting the next president.
From Texas to California, Iowa to New York, exit polls from the recent primaries showed the war on terrorism and the issue of homeland and national security scarcely registering among Democrats, lagging far behind the economy and jobs, health care and education.
Yet Republicans give it much higher priority in national polls - and President Bush already signaled he would make his handling of the nation's security challenges a cornerstone of his re-election campaign.
"They just have different views of America's place in the world and the use of force," said Bill McInturff, a GOP pollster who helps conduct nonpartisan surveys for National Public Radio.
"In general, Democrats are much more focused on core domestic issues … Republicans, because of their theory of the role of government, are a little more geared to looking outside the box of domestic issues."
The partisan divide over what would seem - at first glance - to be an issue of shared national interest suggests America is in a strikingly similar mood politically to four years ago, when Bush won one of the closest presidential campaigns ever.
Indeed, recent national opinion surveys and primary exit polls show a hardening of the almost 50-50 political split, reflected in the 2000 election returns that showed Republicans (red states) dominant through the nation's midsection and Democrats (blue states) powerful along the East and West coasts.
That leaves Bush and Democratic rival John Kerry scrambling to determine which issues will resonate with voters in the political middle, who could swing the election.
The Bush campaign's faith in terrorism and security as a re-election cornerstone wasn't necessarily affirmed in polls since last week's terrorist attacks in Spain: Even after the commuter train bombings that left more than 200 dead, few Americans identified terrorism or security as a leading issue they want the candidates to discuss.
Yet most polls still show that Americans trust Bush more than Kerry to deal best with terrorism and security.
The parties' differences, campaign analysts say, reflect a fundamental truth about American politics: Democrats and Republicans view the world differently.
"To President Bush and to the red states, the war on terrorism encompasses everything from the war in Afghanistan to the war in Iraq to airport security," said Bruce Cain, director of the University of California's Institute of Governmental Studies.
"To the people in the blue states, the war on terrorism has two different parts - a part they absolutely detest, the war in Iraq, and then there's airport security and the war in Afghanistan. They believe, rightly or wrongly, that the war in Iraq has nothing to do with the war on terrorism."
Convinced an improving economy will disarm one political minefield, Republican strategists say they believe terrorism and security will resonate this year, especially with swing voters such as suburban women.
"A lot of Democrats don't see the economy as coming back," said Chris Wilson, a GOP pollster working for Bush's re-election campaign. "But the economy is on the way back," he said, helping redirect the presidential campaign debate to foreign policy, which "almost always decides presidential elections."
"It's very rare where you have a 1992," he said, "where it's all about domestic issues."
But Democrats say they are equally convinced that domestic issues - the economy and jobs, health care and education - will prove most important with voters.
National polls show a majority of Americans believe Kerry would be a better choice to deal with domestic problems, a political strength that helps explain his focus on jobs and health care.
"As you know, George Bush wants this whole deal just to be about war," Kerry said during a recent campaign stop in Louisiana. "His first advertisements have pictures of Ground Zero.
"He can't come out here and talk to you about jobs. He can't come out here and talk to you about protecting the environment. … He's going to try to scare America, and he's going to try to change the subject."
On both coasts, voters acknowledged the importance of the war on terrorism, but they sharply disagreed over who could best lead the country on the issue.
"I think that's very important," Democrat Bill Canfield, 83, a retired speech pathology professor from New York, said. "But I don't have much faith in what … [Republicans have] done to protect our national security. On 9/11, they were asleep at the switch, and they haven't done much since."
Republican Maggie Bailey, who lives near the gates to Camp Pendleton near San Diego, said terrorism and security are paramount in her decision to support Bush - not only because she frequently travels, both domestically and abroad, but also because of its "implications on the global economy."
"I think the choice is very clear," said Bailey, 53, a professor of international business at Point Loma Nazarene University who formerly worked for the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the U.S. Senate. "I don't know that I would say it was his finest hour," she said of Bush and the days after Sept. 11, "but it certainly was a time when he brought the country together through a national time of mourning.
"I don't know how anyone else would have responded … but there was tremendous strength in that."
Cain, the University of California political science professor, said he believes it ultimately comes down to a difference of opinion over the issue of international vs. unilateral action.
Democrats tend to prefer an international consensus, he said, while Republicans often seem less concerned with outside opinion.
"What's underneath all these differences is more than just a party label," Cain said. "It's about lifestyle: What do you read? What do you do on vacations? Do you travel to the Smoky Mountains, or do you go to Paris? Do [you] watch Fox News or read The New York Times or Los Angeles Times?"
Many political analysts suggest about 40 percent or more of the electorate tend to be staunchly Republican and a like number unwaveringly Democratic. As a result, it's the 20 percent or so in the political middle who often decide presidential elections - voters such as Al Hudspeth, a 48-year-old technical writing consultant and computer programmer from Rock Hill, S.C., near Charlotte, N.C.
Hudspeth, who described himself as a registered independent, said he's not certain if new security measures really are making American safer, or "if we've just been lucky, if they [terrorists] just haven't gotten the right opportunities."
But he said the terrorism and security issue isn't nearly as much on his mind - at least, for now - as the outsourcing of American jobs and environmental problems in his area.
"It's kind of a thing that the further away from 9/11 we get, the more it gets on the back burner," he said. "If something were to happen between now and then [Election Day], it would make it more important."

Load-Date: April 5, 2004


End of Document