Seeking justice for father;
Atlanta family sues Cuba under 1996 terrorism compensation statute
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
February 17, 2002 Sunday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Metro News;
Length: 1032 words
Byline: JINGLE DAVIS
Body


To all appearances, Atlanta resident Bonnie Anderson lives the good life.
A successful print and television journalist whose work was once nominated for a Pulitzer Prize, Anderson, 46, is attractive and personable. Her Dunwoody home is decorated with art, exotic furnishings and memorabilia collected on assignments all over the world. Her hobbies include orchid-growing, fly-fishing and playing with her four six-toed cats, descendants of the extra-toed felines from Ernest Hemingway's Key West home.
AJC
But Anderson's good life has been lived in the shadow of a tragedy.
When she was 5, her father, Howard F. "Andy" Anderson, was executed by a Cuban firing squad.
"My dad's death was the most central, traumatic thing in my life," she said.
It also shaped her decision to become a journalist. Sent on assignment to Cuba as a 23-year-old reporter for The Miami Herald, Bonnie Anderson met Fidel Castro, who recognized her name. There was an awkward silence while the reporter and the dictator looked into each other's eyes. Then Castro asked about the health of her mother and her siblings and thanked her for reasons she still does not understand.
Bonnie Anderson has replayed that scene in her head a thousand times, along with the details of her father's death, gleaned from former prisoners incarcerated with Andy Anderson.
"Before he died, most of the blood was drained from his body to be used in transfusions for Castro loyalists," she said. His body was buried in a grave in western Cuba marked only by a simple concrete cross hand-lettered by a sympathetic local woman who misspelled his name. Later, his remains were "dug up and dumped" elsewhere, his daughter said.
For decades, Bonnie Anderson's mother, Dorothy, and her two brothers and sister, have sought justice for what they believe was Andy Anderson's wrongful death.
Now, for the first time, they have reason to hope Cuba may finally have to pay.
They have filed suit against the Cuban government under the same 1996 anti-terrorism statute that allows compensating family members of World Trade Center attack victims. The law permits Americans whose loved ones are harmed by terrorists to sue foreign countries and organizations the U.S. State Department says sponsor terrorism.
Cuba is one of those countries.
In the case of the Sept. 11 victims, the compensation comes from the millions of dollars in frozen assets seized from Osama bin Laden and the Taliban regime.
The Andersons could receive part of the $150 million in Cuban assets frozen here after Castro seized power. Although the Andersons are asking for unspecified damages, their claims could total $16 million, Bonnie Anderson said.
"But it's not about the money," she said. "We just want something for my mom. We want her to have some sort of closure. And if a court says, 'You were wronged, Dorothy Anderson,' that will give her a measure of peace."
For many years, U.S. officials told Dorothy Anderson McCarthy, now 79 and in frail health, to downplay her husband's death, his daughter said.
"Mom was told by the State Department when Dad died to keep her mouth shut, not to talk to the media and not to make a fuss. That's what we always did," she said.
Then in February 1996, four American volunteers in unarmed small civilian planes were shot down by Cuban MiGs. The volunteers, members of an organization called Brothers to the Rescue, were searching for Cuban rafters in international waters.
The United States condemned the attack as an act of terrorism. Congress passed the Anti-Terrorism Act. Families of the dead volunteers filed suit, eventually winning a judgment of almost $100 million from a federal judge in Miami.
But in a bizarre twist of international politics, the U.S. government argued against paying the award. They claimed the Cuban assets, frozen since the 1960 trade embargo against Cuba, could be used as a bargaining chip.
That, said Bonnie Anderson, is ridiculous. "It's been more than 40 years," she said. "We're not going to bargain with those assets."
Just before leaving office, President Clinton signed an executive order, and the money was released to families of the slain Brothers to the Rescue last year.
On Dec. 1, Bonnie Anderson and her family filed a civil suit in Miami-Dade County, Fla., seeking wrongful death damages.
Andy Anderson, born in Washington state, served with the U.S. Navy in World War II. An avid fisherman, he traveled to Cuba and fell in love both with the island and with a woman whose parents were Swiss immigrants.
They married. Andy Anderson operated several businesses: a Jeep distributorship, a factory, and a string of gas stations owned by his in-laws. He designed a fishing boat praised by big-game anglers, including Hemingway's former captain.
Her father "taught me to love fishing before I could walk," Bonnie Anderson said.
She was born in Cuba a few years before the revolution. Her father moved the family to the United States after Castro seized power in 1959 and conditions "got uncomfortable," she said. Andy Anderson continued to commute to run the family businesses.
In March 1961, he was arrested by Cuban soldiers and charged with smuggling arms to anti-Castro revolutionaries. His trial was two months later, as CIA-backed forces were launching their failed attempt to overthrow Castro's government.
"By horrible coincidence, his trial fell on the day of the Bay of Pigs invasion," Bonnie Anderson said. "He had had nothing to do with it, but the prosecutor was standing on the table, yelling 'Death to Americans.' "
Andy Anderson was convicted, perhaps for crimes he did not commit. Bonnie Anderson said her father had "passed messages" back and forth between Cuba and the United States for the CIA but probably actually never smuggled arms.
But even if he was guilty, Bonnie Anderson said her father's conviction, under Cuban law, carried a maximum sentence of nine years in prison, not the death penalty. His death, she said, was not only wrong but illegal.
She said her family is pleased families of the Brothers to the Rescue volunteers have won their case and gotten compensation.
"We support them completely; they deserve it," she said. "But we've been waiting 35 years longer for justice for my father."

Graphic

 
Photo:
"Mom was told by the State Department when Dad died to keep her mouth shut, not to talk to the media and not to make a fuss. That's what we always did." BONNIE ANDERSON, shown with print and video images of her father, executed in Cuba. / KIMBERLY SMITH / Staff

Load-Date: February 17, 2002


End of Document