SEEKING MORE STABILITY IN THE PERSIAN GULF
The New York Times
September 15, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Op-Ed
Length: 883 words
Byline: By Edward M. Kennedy
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Concern over Lebanon and Arab-Israeli issues has rightly dominated United States foreign policy in recent months, but we cannot ignore the need for greater stability in the Persian Gulf, where the conflict between Iran and Iraq poses serious challenges for the West.
Although America now obtains only 5 percent of its oil from the Gulf, Western Europe and Japan still rely on that region for more than half of their oil, and a cutoff of the supply could trigger America's oil-sharing obligations under the 1974 International Energy Agreement. There is no early prospect of eliminating this dependence on Gulf petroleum.
Decisive Iranian penetration into Iraq would multiply the dangers already posed by the Khomeini revolution elsewhere in the region. If the battlefield stalemate breaks in Iran's favor, pressures will grow for America to side with Iraq and prevent Iranian conquest. But Iraq also has a history of internal repression, support for terrorism, confrontation with Israel and diehard opposition to American peace efforts. Although Baghdad's ties with Moscow are frayed, its extremist policies remain unchanged, and there is no justification for the Administration's recent decisions to license sales to Iraq of transport and jet aircraft with potential military applications.
WASHINGTON - Concern over Lebanon and Arab-Israeli issues has rightly dominated United States foreign policy in recent months, but we cannot ignore the need for greater stability in the Persian Gulf, where the conflict between Iran and Iraq poses serious challenges for the West.
Iran's revolution has not yet run its course, and the struggle over Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's successor will likely provoke continuing unrest. In spite of the bitterness caused by the hostage crisis and our abhorrence of continued extreme human rights violations in Iran, America must resist the impulse to accept the disintegration of Iran as a desirable outcome of regional turbulence. Only Moscow would benefit from Iran's dismemberment. The Kremlin's conduct since the fall of the Shah demonstrates its awareness that Iran is the strategic prize in the Gulf. If the Soviet Union controlled Iran, it would realize its ancient ambition for access to warm-water ports; it could shape the future of the Gulf and tighten the noose on oil supplies.
The breakup of Iran could be a catalyst for revolution in nearby countries beset by ethnic tensions and make them sitting ducks for Soviet ambition. In fact, Soviet control of Iran would be the most serious strategic defeat for the West since World War II. The potential magnitude of such a defeat requires preventive diplomacy now - not diplomatic hand-wringing after it occurred.
In its approach to the Persian Gulf, the Reagan Administration has concentrated overwhelmingly on the Soviet military threat. As Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr. sought a ''strategic consensus'' in the region to head off Soviet aggression. There is a Soviet threat, but it is as much political as military. If Moscow achieved domination of Iran through political means instead of military might, no Rapid Deployment Force, no bases for our troops, no aircraft carriers, no budget-busting military buildup, no military alliances with other countries in the area could undo the damage. American military precautions are a last resort to be possibly invoked if diplomacy fails; they are no substitute for the political, economic and social ties that constitute the best guarantee of Gulf stability.
America needs a policy to bolster the independence and stability of all Gulf states, including Iran. If successful, it would reduce opportunities for Soviet gains in the Gulf and discourage Iran and others from tilting toward Moscow. There is no realistic possibility of early resumption of American diplomatic relations with Teheran, but we do not require them to clarify the importance we place on the territorial integrity of Iran and its neighbors. We should reaffirm that commitment in our own national interest. And we should encourage Western Europe, Japan and concerned Islamic countries to seek improved relations with Iran and help keep it outside the Soviet orbit.
It is not enough to guard against Soviet machinations. Other dangers having little to do with Moscow also confront the region: the stress of industrial modernization, the acceleration of social change, the export of terrorism and revolutionary extremism, the Palestinian issue, and deeply rooted historical rivalries among neighboring but unfriendly countries.
Our interests in the Gulf will not be secured by preoccupation with Soviet military adventures; they require a coherent overall strategy for the entire Middle East. That means opposition to the extremism of the Libyan leader Muammar el-Qaddafi and Palestine Liberation Organization terrorism, rebuilding Lebanon physically and politically, and making progress on the Palestinian issue in accord with the mandate and vision of Camp David. It also means working to end the Iran-Iraq war and coming to grips with the external and internal issues plaguing the Gulf. A sensible foreign policy must deal with both ends of the Middle East.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat, is senior Senator from Massachusetts.


End of Document