Seeking 'weakness' in fighting terrorism;
A staged program involves a fake plague attack.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 5, 2005 Tuesday JERSEY EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B01
Length: 786 words
Byline: Mitch Lipka and Edward Colimore INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS
Body


New Jersey received a simulated dousing of the pneumonic plague yesterday, launching the nation's largest-ever terrorism response drill.
The simulation started at Kean University in Union County, where officers found a container in an SUV that appeared to have sprayed the fake plague agent. Then, volunteers and actors simulating casualties began turning up in hospitals in Union and New Brunswick, state officials said.
The casualties and simulated death toll mounted throughout the day.
"Clearly, today has been an eventful day," acting Gov. Richard J. Codey said. "In this bio-terror drill, virtual patients have been reporting to real hospitals, reporting mysterious flulike symptoms. There have been virtual fatalities."
The point of the drill - the third national exercise of its kind, called TOPOFF 3 - is for real police, medical, other emergency workers, and government leaders to practice handling a terrorist attack. Officials want to see whether vulnerabilities show up during the drill.
"We are looking for weaknesses we can improve. . . . This is an opportunity," Codey said.
A federal Department of Homeland Security spokesman said the exercise allows various agencies a chance to try out what has thus far only appeared in writing.
"It is a wonderful opportunity for all players to test their plans," said the spokesman, Don Jacks.
TOPOFF, which stands for "top officials," is scheduled to run until Friday. The first TOPOFF was in Colorado and New Hampshire in 2000, and the second was in Illinois and Washington state in 2003.
In addition to New Jersey, which is running the exercise this week in all 21 counties, Connecticut - which had a simulated chemical explosion - is also testing its preparedness. The Department of Homeland Security said it is spending $16 million on the exercise.
Canada and the United Kingdom also were running parallel simulations.
South Jersey is expected to see the bulk of its participation in the drill Wednesday and Thursday. Meanwhile, area officials are monitoring what's going on elsewhere in the state, keeping an eye on whether fallout from the "biological attack" expands.
Camden County spokesman Ron Tomasello said its Health Department was operating on emergency footing, but the rest of the county's emergency apparatus would not gear up until it received information that the scenario had moved to the area.
In many cases, the drill may look authentic to people who see it under way.
"The public should not be alarmed, even though there are real actors involved, even though there will be first responders dressed in haz-mat [hazardous material] suits and other surprising sights in New Jersey," Codey said. "None of this is real. All of this is part of a rigorous test of our homeland-security preparedness at every level, from the local to the counties to state government to the federal government."
At an afternoon briefing, Codey said the state had been handling the situation.
"Everything seems to be working well so far, both medically and law enforcement," he said. "Nothing's breaking down so far."
All this was going on while state officials were responding to a real emergency - widespread flooding along the Delaware River that shut parts of the Capital Complex.
Hospitals today and tomorrow are to receive the fake patients and also test how prepared they are to treat people affected by a biological attack- for example, checking whether the facilities have enough appropriate medicine.
Yesterday the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued new guidelines about pneumonic plague - which is caused by a bacterium that could be introduced by spraying an aerosol. Those who inhale it or come in contact with someone who has the plague could contract the disease within one to six days, the CDC said.
A person can be treated for the plague, if properly and quickly given antibiotics. Otherwise, death is almost certain.
Contact staff writer Mitch Lipka at 609-989-8990 or mlipka@phillynews.com.  
Possible Weapon
Pneumonic plague is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. While it is easily destroyed by sunlight and drying, it can survive for up to an hour when released in the air.
This type of plague can spread from person to person through the air or if someone inhales aerosolized bacteria, which could happen in a bioterrorist attack.
The first signs of illness are fever, headache, weakness, and rapidly developing pneumonia, with shortness of breath, chest pain, cough, and sometimes bloody or watery sputum. The pneumonia progresses for two to four days and may cause respiratory failure and shock.
To reduce the chance of death, antibiotics must be given within 24 hours of the first symptoms.
SOURCE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
A police robot, used during a terrorism response drill, is examined by Union County bomb squad members. Real police, medical and other emergency workers, and government leaders are practicing handling a terrorist attack.
MIKE DERER, Associated Press
A member of the Union County bomb squad looks into an SUV that is part of a statewide mock disaster. The largest antiterrorism drill ever undertaken in the United States. is under way this week in New Jersey and Connecticut.
MIKE DERER, Associated Press
An unidentified Union County officer is helped into a hazardous-materials protective suit during a mock antiterrorism drill on the campus of Kean University in Hillside Township.

Load-Date: September 12, 2005


End of Document