Self-made notes to pay debt do nothing Treasury agent links them to desperation or 'paper terrorism.'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 10, 2009 Thursday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 863 words
Byline: BY ROBERT PATRICK , rpatrick@post-dispatch.com,  314-621-5154
Dateline: 0 
Body


ST. LOUIS - It would seem to be the ultimate debt reduction plan: Create your own official-looking document, add some mumbo-jumbo legal language and mail it instead of a check with your payment coupon.
People are not only doing it but paying in real currency for advice on how, according to federal officials here and elsewhere who say it's not only a scam but a form of attack on the government.
Whether the documents at issue are called "bond promissory notes" or "private offset bonds" or something else, they are really a worthless exercise that defies common sense but nonetheless seems to be growing in prevalence.
The people who try to use them are either desperately in debt or engaged in anti-establishment "paper terrorism," said Special Agent Joe Jackson of the Treasury Department's inspector general's office in St. Louis.
"Nationwide, it's something that's growing," he said.
Jackson said that St. Louis area bankers tell him they have received such notes offered as payment for car loans, mortgages and credit card debt, and in each case explained to issuers that the documents are no good.
"In every instance that we're aware of in law enforcement, it's not being (honored)," Jackson said.
He said that a man from O'Fallon, Ill., tried it 60 or 70 times before making a big mistake - filing a bond promissory note in U.S. District Court in St. Louis to pay someone else's $14,100 federal tax lien.
In doing it, Kennedy M. Russell even acknowledged in a note to U.S. District Jean Hamilton that, "Your clerks may not be familiar with these type of instruments and do not know how to handle them." Russell wrote that the note should be presented to the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for payment.
Both the note and the letter are peppered with what officials say is coded language to assert his independence from the government and protect him from repercussions.
It didn't.
Russell, 71, admitted last week that the note was bogus and pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor financial violation charge in federal court. His apology letter, retracting the promissory note, was filed in the tax case Monday.
Jackson said some of these people are victims of wishful thinking or misplaced hope. "People want to believe. You've got a lot of people in economic despair," he explained.
Others simply want to strike a blow against the government or taxes by forcing federal officials to spend money dealing with the scheme, Jackson said. "That's, in essence, what paper terrorism is."
The notes first appeared at the Internal Revenue Service in 2008 as attempted payment of taxes owed, a federal prosecutor said in a speech last year.
Only a few prosecutions have resulted across the country so far, according to news reports.
At the top of the scam, Jackson said, are promoters who charge money to teach the bogus methods in seminars. The fee is often $100 or more, according to websites.
Jackson said those promoters are the investigators' ultimate targets, although he declined to name any.
One of those targets lashed back, saying he would use his own authority to sue or fine Jackson simply for asking about the notes, he said.
The Shadow Mountain Bank, which offered a seminar this month in Nevada, offers to pay off debt for $100 per $100,000 owed. It does not accept bond promissory notes from its own customers, however - only cash or a money order. Bank representatives did not respond to an e-mail seeking comment.
The IRS says scam promoters claim in their seminars that a secret bank account, sometimes called a "straw man" account, was created at the Treasury Department for each U.S. citizen to use for tax and nontax debts. Supposedly, they can use bonded promissory notes as if they were checks.
"None of it really makes sense, but according to their conspiracy theory, it does," Jackson said.
One fan of the promissory notes, Denny Ray Hardin, of Kansas City, wrote on a website in June that he set up the "Private Bank of Denny Ray Hardin" last year "to help (people) remove their 'fictitious obligations' ... to 'foreign agents' who control most banks, mortgage companies and lending institutions. These are operated by the 'organized crime operation' commonly referred to as 'Credit.'"
Hardin's fiancée, Melinda Harrington, said in a telephone interview that Hardin had "quite a few successes" with his bond promissory notes, and that she knows other "private bankers" who have also had successes.
Hardin is currently in prison in Missouri for violating conditions of probation imposed after he was convicted of tampering with judicial proceedings.
Russell did not attend a seminar but learned the methods from those who did, Jackson said.
And at least two websites refer to Russell's apparent success in paying off the tax lien as proof that the scheme works.
Russell's lawyer, John Stobbs, said Russell filed most of his bond promissory notes on behalf of others.
"His involvement in this was extremely minor and limited. He was the low guy on the totem pole, and he was being used," Stobbs said.
Russell, a court stenographer, did not shed any debt in the tax lien case. To the contrary, he added debt: a $1,000 fine, three years of probation and 40 hours of community service each year.

Load-Date: December 10, 2009


End of Document