Self-policing text service unwise
Daily Targum: Rutgers University
October 17, 2013 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 511 words
Body


We know you've seen them. The "If You See Something, Say Something" campaign has been dominating New York City streets for years. It's hard to go to a major transit area without seeing a dark elusive poster of a heavy-looking bag covered with a headline calling for you to report suspicious activity. It's even harder to go into a single subway station without seeing yellow signs on the stairs encouraging people to "tell a cop" or call the number provided.
The campaign trickled over into New Jersey and has even been adopted by Amtrak. Now, Amtrak launched a new service through which people can directly text their suspicions.
The nation's inclination towards self-policing escalated from the insecurities we rightfully felt after 9/11. Those insecurities have manifested themselves in a variety of ways, sometimes becoming more detrimental than helpful to our social fabric. One such way has been the rampant racial profiling that overwhelmingly misdirects attention onto one group of people, disregarding other potential threats.
Campaigns like "If You See Something, Say Something" have powerful effects on how we interact with each other. They prompt increased paranoia between people and communities. The heightened sense of alarm can breed feelings of mistrust and insecurity, which can surface in violent ways. It's easy for us to start seeing everyone as a potential threat and feel responsible for policing them.
Now with the ability to conveniently text suspicions to the hotline, the quantity of tips, whether legitimate or not, can wildly increase - not only making it more difficult to sift through them all for serious inquiries, but also demanding more resources to do so. An easily accessible service like this needs at least some type of filters to make it workable.
It could also be helpful to limit the number of tips by creating a viable set of criteria for what the public should be vigilant about.
In that case, it would be in the best interest of our country to redefine what we consider "suspicious activity."
Right now, it has a certain image: a heavy bag, a foreign language, a certain look - all characteristics that are inappropriately attributed to terrorism. It causes us to completely overlook the "suspicious activity" of criminal behavior that we see everyday. Our subway messages indirectly prompt us to be on the lookout for terrorism, but ignore that over the past year, there have been several incidences of subway users pushing others onto the tracks of an oncoming subway train. In one case, a woman pushed a Hindu man to his death because she thought that because of his skin color he was somehow responsible for 9/11.
The people that were present at the time were probably conditioned to look for the wrong precursors of what is deemed "suspicious behavior."
The "If You See Something, Say Something" campaign fans the flames of heightened tensions in our country, ultimately serving to legitimize foreign policy. While safety is necessary, it can only be guaranteed if we take only the necessary precautions and in a responsible way.

Load-Date: October 17, 2013


End of Document