Sen. Hutchison announces counterterrorism money
University Wire
July 27, 1998


Copyright 1998 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 583 words
Byline: By Sarah Goldston, The Battalion
Dateline: College Station, Texas
Body


Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison announced the congressional appropriations committee will target millions of dollars to train first emergency response units for situations of domestic terrorism.
 Hutchison made her remarks at a press conference at the National Emergency Response and Rescure Training Center at Texas A&M University Friday. A&M's Texas Engineering Extension Service will receive $ 2.5 million to continue research and training for such incidents, she said.
Texas A&M U.
"After the Oklahoma City bombing, we have been looking for a center to train first responders," she said. "We have seen attacks at the World Trade Center, Oklahoma, and we've even seen it happen in a subway in Japan. We'll save the most lives if we try to contain these tragedies."
 Hutchison said 25 percent of terrorist attacks are targeted against U.S. citizens and property.
 "Studies have shown that terrorists go elsewhere if they know people are prepared to react," she said. "Our first line of defense is our police, our firemen and our medical units that arrive on the scene first. In the case of domestic terrorism, the best defense is offense."
 TEEX is a member of a consortium that includes four other counter-terrorism training centers.
 Energetic Materials Research and Testing Center at New Mexico Tech, The National Center for Bio-Med Research and Training at Louisiana State University, The Nevada Test Site, and the National Center for Domestic Preparedness at Ft. McClellan, Ala. make up the consortium.
 By establishing a budget for the entire consortium, the training schools will receive more funding than they would if the appropriations committee had lobbied for each individual school, Hutchison said.
 "In the consortium, they will be able to come together and plan for domestic terrorism acts and be better prepared to react," she said. "A&M has done a phenomenal job and is known as the leading training center."
 Gary Stinson, president of SO Technologies and representative of the Nevada Test Site, said all first response units are trained at the Nevada Test Site. "Our training center in Nevada is larger than the state of Rhode Island," he said.
 Each member will receive $ 2.5 million in funding for the next year, but Ft. McClellan will get a higher share to build new and updated facilities.
 Hutchison said the consortium will continue to see a commitment of counter-terrorism training at the federal level.
 With an annual budget of $ 50 million and over 500 acres of outdoor facilities, TEEX conducts more than 7,000 classes each year and trains more than 133,000 workers.
 Dr. Kemble Bennett, director of TEEX and associate vice chancellor of engineering, said TEEX helps to increase response across the nation and around the world.
 "Many of our courses require intensive hands-on exercises," Bennett said. "Knowledge isn't enough to ensure success. You've got to be able to apply that knowledge. We make sure you can."
 Training aids are continually upgraded and new ones are added, Bennett said.
 A recent addition to the center is an exercise for the the Passenger Train Emergency Response course, which is made up of six passenger cars and locomotives arranged to simulate an Amtrak train derailment.
 TEEX, headquartered in College Station, includes full-scale training aids that enable students to gain hands-on training by making first responders more capable of effectively handling emergency situations.
(C) 1999 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 2, 1999


End of Document