Sen. Bond is writing book on terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 15, 2006 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A2
Length: 314 words
Byline: By Deirdre Shesgreen POST-DISPATCH WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


It may not have the cachet of Hillary Clinton's tale of life in the White House or the allure of Barack Obama's hot-selling memoir.
But Christopher "Kit" Bond, R-Mo., is putting pen to paper to become an author -- with a little help, that is. The Missouri senator is teaming up with former Associated Press reporter Lewis Simons to write about the growing threat of Islamic terrorism in Southeast Asia.
Bond, who serves on the Senate Intelligence Committee, has traveled to Southeast Asia since his days as Missouri governor to promote the state's business and agriculture interests. More recently, though, his attention has turned to the increasing Islamic terrorist activities in Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and other Asian countries.
"Some of the most virulent and dangerous Islamic fascist groups are operating" in that region, Bond said. "The best way we can avoid having any of these areas become havens for terrorists is to work with the democratically elected, generally Muslim governments in the region . . . who have tremendous challenges. We need to be taking a more interested, active role there if we're to help our friends guide their countries."
Bond has spoken out on the issue after several recent trips to Indonesia and elsewhere, but he garnered little attention. Finally, he said, his wife suggested he write a book.
He commissioned Simons to write a proposal, and after "getting a very significant number of rejection slips," Bond said, publishing giant Simon & Schuster Inc. offered the pair a contract. Bond declined to say how much he would be paid but said the figure would eventually be disclosed in ethics filings.
Simons will do most of the writing and will get most of the money, Bond said.
Bond said he hoped the book would come out before the next presidential election so it could have an impact on the national debate about how to protect the country.

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Sen. Christopher "Kit" Bond says Southeast Asia harbors virulent groups. 

Load-Date: February 15, 2006


End of Document