Sen. Murray seems confused on anniversary of terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 17, 2003 Wednesday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; HOT POTATOES; Pg.B4; COLUMN, COMMENTARY
Length: 454 words
Byline: D.F. Oliveria, The Spokesman-Review
Body


First, U.S. Sen. Patty Murray applauded that great humanitarian Osama bin
 Laden. Now, the Washington Demo has dissed the memory of Has-Bin Laden's
 victims. Remember New York City? Sept. 11, 2001? Seems Peppermint Patty
 doesn't. She staged a $1,000-a-plate breakfast Thursday - two years to the
 morning that Osama's rabid disciples flew planes into the Twin Towers and the
 Pentagon. How clueless can you get? At a time when this nation was pausing to
 remember the terror inflicted upon us by the Devil Incarnate, Murray's only
 concern was for her political skin. Murray's tacky breakfast raised $10,000
 for her campaign against George Nethercutt. She should donate her blood money
 to Osama's victims. And then tell us which side she's on in the war on terror.
 If you can't vote by mail, when can you vote?
 Spokane County election boss Paul Brandt predicted - what? That only 45
 percent of county voters overall would cast ballots Tuesday? Forty-five
 percent! In a county that votes overwhelmingly by mail? What do you non-voting
 slackers want? Someone to fill out your ballot, put it in an envelope and take
 it to the mailbox? F'shame … Der Dummkopf Richard Butler will have to beat
 Hayden's bushes if he wants to better fellow racist Vincent Bertollini's
 record for votes in a North Idaho mayoral election. Before he became a
 fugitive from justice, Bertollini garnered 33 votes out of 1,395 cast in the
 1999 Sandpoint mayor's race. Underwhelming, hunh? … Tater Tots (or, ''Our
 Father . . . deliver us from the silly 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals"):
 1. California recall delay; 2. Pledge of Allegiance ban; 3. Goodbye Washington
 'Blanket Primary;' 4. Death Row reprieve; and 5. Male inmates have right to
 procreate by artificial insemination.
 Wanna know who's The Bard? Take a number
 Poet's Corner: ''Osama from his dusty cave/Continues with his jihad
 rave./In D.C., they all get the frights/And toss out half our bill of rights"
 - The Bard of Sherman Avenue (''Patriot Act") … From the Peanut Gallery
 (and Dave Ransom of Post Falls re: The Bard of Sherman Avenue): ''The Bard of
 Sherman Avenue whom we love, is tried and true./ 'Cause this person's not
 loyal to the influential you-know-who./But since the identity of this poet is
 still a mystery,/Your readers want some clues, we want some history!" Hot
 Potatoes: In CDA, it's risky to express one's thoughts freely/So anonymous the
 Bard must be/But this one clue we'll give thee/We ain't he and he ain't we …
 This edition of Hot Potatoes was brought to you by the Nos. 47 and 26. Or, the
 number of points scored by Washington State and No. 17 Colorado last weekend
 at Boulder, respectively. Or, all aboooooard, the seats on the WSU bandwagon
 are beginning to fill rapidly.

Notes

D.F. Oliveria can be contacted at (800) 344-6718 or (208) 765-7125, or daveo@spokesman.com.  

Load-Date: September 19, 2003


End of Document