Senate Committee to Investigate Benghazi 'Talking Points'
The New York Times
November 19, 2012 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 548 words
Byline: By BRIAN KNOWLTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- The chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said Sunday that she planned to investigate why the C.I.A.'s quick determination of terrorism in the Sept. 11 attack in Benghazi, Libya, was not reflected in the ''talking points'' used days later on television by Susan E. Rice, the ambassador to the United Nations.
But the chairwoman, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, also said she was certain that the White House had not been behind any change in the original C.I.A. language to that later used by Ms. Rice. ''With the allegation that the White House changed those talking points, that is false,'' Ms. Feinstein said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press.''
The White House, she said, had changed a reference to the ''consulate'' in Benghazi to the more accurate ''mission.''
''That's the only change that anyone in the White House made, and I have checked this out,'' Ms. Feinstein said.
She said a transcript of testimony given a day after the attack by David H. Petraeus, who was the director of the C.I.A., showed that ''Petraeus very clearly said that it was a terrorist attack.''
Asked whether President Obama or anyone working for him had deliberately misled the public by characterizing the attack as a result of a spontaneous protest -- to avoid invoking a terrorist threat at a crucial point in the presidential campaign -- she was adamant, saying, ''No, no.''
The United States ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans were killed in the attack on the American Mission in Benghazi.
Representative Mike Rogers, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said the talking points had been amended during a review by an interdepartmental ''deputies committee,'' which he described as being ''populated by appointees from the administration.''
''We do know that the intelligence community, as they presented it, was accurate, and it did include terrorism,'' Mr. Rogers, a Republican from Michigan, said on ''Meet the Press.''
Ms. Feinstein said Ms. Rice, in five television appearances on Sept. 16, had carefully followed the talking points. Ms. Feinstein made clear her displeasure that some Republican senators have criticized Ms. Rice for doing so.
''I have read every one of the five interviews she did that day,'' Ms. Feinstein said. ''She was within the context of that statement, and for this she has been pilloried for two months.
''I don't understand it. It has to stop.''
Mr. Obama, in a news conference on Thursday, angrily challenged Ms. Rice's Republican critics to bring their complaints directly to him.
One of those critics, Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, appeared to retreat slightly on Sunday. Asked on NBC whether he would actively block Ms. Rice should the president nominate her to succeed Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, he would not go that far.
Mr. Graham said that he was ''very disappointed'' in Ms. Rice, but that as a general rule, ''I'm very deferential to the president's picks.''
Another of the Republican critics, Senator John McCain of Arizona, suggested on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation'' that any nomination process would be eased if Ms. Rice accepted some responsibility for her remarks. Still, he said, ''She has a lot of explaining to do.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/19/us/politics/feinstein-to-investigate-benghazi-talking-points.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Senator Dianne Feinstein said  the C.I.A.'s conclusions about  terrorism had been dropped  from official explanations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CLIFF OWEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)        

Load-Date: November 19, 2012


End of Document