Senators grill Ashcroft on tactics of war on terrorism
USA TODAY
July 26, 2002, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 351 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Attorney General John Ashcroft got a frosty reception on Capitol Hill on Thursday when Democrats and some Republicans sharply questioned the Justice Department's tactics in pursuing terror suspects.
Senate Judiciary Committee members took issue with a proposed Justice program -- dubbed "Operation TIPS" -- that would encourage millions of postal workers, truckers and others to report suspicious activity they might notice during their workday.
Although Ashcroft defended the proposal as a way to promote a national ethic of community service, Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., committee chairman, suggested the program might encourage a vigilante movement.
"We don't want to see a 1984, Orwellian-type situation here where neighbors are reporting on neighbors," Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, said. "We want to make sure that this involves legitimate reports of real concerns that might involve some terrorists activities."
Ashcroft told the senators that raw information provided by citizens would not be kept in a database that could be used to damage the reputations of innocent people.
Troubled by the detention of immigrants during the federal terrorism investigation, Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., also urged Ashcroft to adopt a specific legal standard in cases in which illegal immigrants are held for reasons other than potential immigration violations.
Since Sept. 11, some immigrants have been held for months at a time to allow investigators a chance to review any possible links to terrorist groups.
Meanwhile, Sen. Maria Cantwell, D-Wash., asked that the FBI send more agents to the Seattle area, where U.S. authorities have been probing possible al-Qaeda links to local Muslims. Despite fears about al-Qaeda in Washington state and Seattle's potential vulnerability as a port city, Cantwell said, the FBI had only 60 agents in Washington, fewer than in neighboring states.
Asked about the possible presence of terrorist "sleeper cells" in Seattle, Ashcroft said he preferred to discuss the issue in private. "I don't want to intimate that we have specific information" about a threat to Seattle, he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Hyungwon Kang, Reuters; On the Hill: Sen. Patrick Leahy holds a copy of the Constitution at a hearing.

Load-Date: July 26, 2002


End of Document