SENATE PUSHES ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
June 08, 1995, Thursday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. C1
Length: 502 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) After weeks of sniping, President Clinton and Republicans now are claiming victory in the Senate's passage of major new anti-terrorism legislation and pressing the House to follow suit quickly.
The measure, inspired by the April 19 Oklahoma City bombing, passed Wednesday by a 91-8 vote. The $ 2 billion package includes provisions sought by Clinton to enlarge federal law enforcement agencies and the government's wiretapping authority and allow use of the military in emergencies involving chemical or biological weapons.
In addition, the bill would stringently limit appeals by death-row inmates, a change long pushed by Republicans.
At the White House, Clinton hailed the Senate's bipartisan vote 52 Republicans and 39 Democrats supported the bill and expressed the hope that the legislation would forestall another attack like the one that killed 168 people at the federal building in downtown Oklahoma City.
"This legislation will give law enforcement the tools it needs to do everything possible to prevent this kind of tragedy from happening again," the president said. "It will also help us prosecute and punish terrorists more effectively."
Clinton sent a $ 1.5 billion anti-terrorism measure to Congress a week after the bombing. In his statement Wednesday, Clinton urged the House where a comparable bill is pending "to do its part and get a bill on my desk without delay."
The same sentiment was expressed on Capitol Hill. "I hope the House will act swiftly to join the Senate in sending a clear message to terrorists that atrocities like the bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building will not be tolerated," said Sen. Don Nickles, R-Okla.
The bipartisan concord contrasted with the recent weeks of political sniping between Clinton and Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., who blamed each other for delaying the legislation. Dole wrote the bill with Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah.
By Wednesday, Dole was thanking Clinton for his efforts in discouraging Democratic amendments. "No doubt about it, the president's involvement has helped speed up the process here in the Senate."
In addition to some liberal Democrats, civil libertarians and several ethnic groups have objected to the Senate and House bills.
The Center for Constitutional Rights called the measures "tough, not on terrorism, but on civil liberties."
Donald Haines, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union, said, "We remain most concerned that we do not, out of a heightened fear of the threat of terrorism, throw out the civil liberties and constitutional rights that have defined us as a land of freedom."
Before Wednesday's vote, the Senate rejected four Democratic amendments aimed at tempering the bill's limits on prisoners' appeals, which include a one-year limit for death-row inmates to appeal their sentences.
Republicans say the limits are needed to stem what they say is frivolous, repetitive litigation by death-row prisoners that delays their executions for years and frustrates victims' families.

Load-Date: June 8, 1995


End of Document