SENATE ADVANCES MEASURE IN OPPOSITION TO YEMEN WAR
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 13, 2018 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ASECTION; Pg. A-7
Length: 479 words
Byline: Compiled from news sources
Body


WASHINGTON - The Senate on Wednesday advanced a resolution calling for an end to American support for the Saudi-led war in Yemen, a reaction to Saudi Arabia's killing of a U.S.-based Saudi journalist.
The measure, which advanced by a vote of 60-39, is largely symbolic and still faces a final vote. Even if it passes the Senate, the House is not expected to even consider the bill this year and President Donald Trump has threatened to veto it.
The Yemen measure, a rare bipartisan rebuke of Mr. Trump, passed despite fierce White House opposition. It gained support after the killing of Jamal Khashoggi, a U.S. resident and contributing columnist for the Washington Post who was critical of the Saudi royal family.
The CIA has concluded that Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman ordered the killing. The issue has unified some Republicans and Democrats.Republican lawmakers have been especially angry with Trump administration officials who sought to downplay the role of Prince Mohammed, the de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia, in the Oct. 2 killing.
Shooting 'act of terrorism'
STRASBOURG, France - The shooting at a crowded street market in Strasbourg, France, was an act of terrorism, officials said Wednesday, as the police continued an intensive search for the gunman who killed at least two people and wounded 12 others.
Remy Heitz, the Paris prosecutor, who handles terrorism investigations nationwide, said Wednesday that witnesses had heard the attacker yell "Allahu akbar," or "God is great" in Arabic, and that the targets and the suspect's profile justified the opening of a terrorism investigation.
Officials said the man suspected of carrying out the shooting, Cherif Chekatt, 29, who was born in Strasbourg, had a criminal record and had served time in prison.Mr. Chekatt was one of about 20,000 people flagged for possible radicalization by the French security services.
Four people in the suspect's entourage were taken into custody.
The attack Tuesday night hit one of France's most popular Christmas markets, unleashing chaos among the thousands of people milling around the vendors' stalls dotting Strasbourg's historic neighborhood.
Pompeo on Iran missiles
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo ramped up the campaign against Iran another notch Wednesday by urging the U.N. Security Council to prohibit the Islamic republic from conducting ballistic missile tests.
In a speech to the Security Council, Mr. Pompeo trained his criticism on Iran's ballistic missile activity, saying it had increased since the nuclear deal took force in 2016.
"Our goodwill gestures have been futile correctives to the Iranian regime's reckless missile activity and all other destructive behaviors," he said.
Mr. Pompeo specifically said the United States will work to impose prohibitions on Iran's ballistic missile tests that were in effect before the nuclear deal, which were largely ignored by Tehran.

Load-Date: December 13, 2018


End of Document