Senate seeks NSA disclosure; Provision in defense bill would require details about phone records
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 3, 2013 Saturday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 5
Length: 455 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


- Exactly how many phone records of Americans does the National Security Agency collect in its massive surveillance program?
Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Democrat in the Senate, tucked a provision into the 2014 fiscal year defense spending bill that would require the NSA to report to Congress - within 90 days after the legislation becomes law - on the precise number of phone records collected, the total reviewed by NSA employees and all bulk collection activities, including how much they cost and when they began.
The NSA also would have to provide Congress with a list of potential terrorist attacks that have been thwarted due to the information obtained through the sweeping data collection program.
The Senate Appropriations Committee backed the report request this week in voting for the overall bill. It is the first Senate effort aimed at the program since revelations two months ago that the NSA was collecting hundreds of millions of Americans' phone records as part of an effort to combat terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks.
The disclosure has revived the debate - in the nation and Congress - over whether secret national security programs encroach on Americans' privacy rights.
 Skeptics wary of the program are pressing for changes though wholesale revisions are unlikely as surveillance efforts have the strong support of the Republican and Democratic leaders in the House and Senate.
The NSA has said that its two surveillance programs - the other sweeps up Internet usage data - have stopped at least 50 terror plots across 20 countries.We're talking about some changes in the program, some disclosure in the program that would still keep it in some form as a tool to fight terrorism but would also assure the American people about the limits of its use, Durbin said on Friday.
The senator was one of several lawmakers - proponents and critics - who met with President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden at the White House on Thursday to discuss the surveillance programs.
Durbin said the purpose of his measure is to obtain basic information about the program, which has largely emerged piecemeal.Just this last week, we did get some information from the NSA about the number of queries in a given year, which you can draw some conclusions about just how active is this effort, how many telephone numbers are being followed to find out if they have connections and what we do in the bill is to try to make this a more complete disclosure of the volume of collected information, said Durbin, chairman of the Appropriations defense subcommittee and a member of the Judiciary Committee.
There is a lot of misunderstanding about what's collected, why it's collected and how much is being used, Durbin said.

Load-Date: September 25, 2013


End of Document