Senate Approves Terrorism Insurance Bill, Paving Way for Thorny Conference Talks
CongressNow
November 26, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 714 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


The Senate today passed a seven-year extension of a terrorism risk insurance program by unanimous consent, clearing the way for what will likely be tough conference negotiations with the House over the length and the scope of coverage in the bill.
Without debate, the Senate called up the House bill (H.R. 2761) and adopted a substitute amendment inserting the Senate language in the same motion offered to approve the bill. Under a "UC," no roll call vote is taken.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act was enacted in 2002, in response to the dwindling private insurance market for property owners and developers who want to insure against the risk of terrorist attacks. Without the terrorism risk coverage, lenders would not make loans to developers for their construction projects. The program was reauthorized in 2005 and is scheduled to expire in December.
"The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program has made that coverage available again to the marketplace and restored investor confidence needed for continued job creation," Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said in a statement. "Without this program, terrorism insurance will become unavailable or prohibitively expensive, construction projects would grind to a halt and Americans would lose jobs."
The Senate bill would set the program's coverage trigger at $100 million - double the event trigger language in the House bill - but it would not mandate that insurers make available coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological attacks. The Senate draft would also cap insurers' liability for attacks at $100 billion.
In addition, it would modify the definition of terrorism to include domestic acts of terror, and it would require ongoing reports to Congress from the President's Working Group on inclusion of coverage for group life and nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological events.
The Senate passage of the bill, which is estimated to cost $3.1 billion over the next five years, had been held up in part by pay-as-you-go budget rules, which require offsets for new spending. The fix would require the Treasury Department to recoup up to $27.5 billion from carriers in the event of a terrorist attack covered under the program.
Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Chairman Christopher Dodd (D-Conn.) has advocated for a longer solution, but Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.) has said the seven-year extension would make it more palatable to the Administration, which has threatened to veto the House version which extends the program for 15 years. The White House favors phasing out the program in favor of a private market for terrorism insurance.
Supporters of a longer-term extension argue that it would correct a market failure caused by the threat of terrorism. They argue that the existence of too many variables - including weapons, methods, targets and timing - make it difficult if not impossible for commercial insurers to assess the scale of risk from terrorism prior to an attack.
"We applaud the Senate for their vote this morning," said Jimi Grande, vice president for federal and political affairs for the National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies. "We continue to encourage the two congressional chambers to work together for final passage of this important legislation."
American Insurance Association president Marc Racicot said the next step is just as critical. "It's absolutely necessary that the Congress continue their work and reauthorize this program by year's end," Racicot said in a statement.
If conference negotiators cannot come to agreement on those issues before the program expires, House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.) has said he will introduce legislation to provide a 120-day extension.
The House bill, passed in September, would require insurers to provide coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological events beginning in 2009.
Insurance industry lobbying groups, including NAMIC, tha AIA and the Property and Casualty Insurance Association of America have objected to expanding so-called NBCR coverage.
As conference negotiators undertake the debate over how much longer the program should run, they will also have to hammer out the program's trigger and whether insurers must offer nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological coverage.

Load-Date: December 3, 2007


End of Document