Senate Bill Would Cut Ex-Presidents' Guards
The New York Times
September 23, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 283 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22
Body


A Treasury Department official argued today that the Government should not pinch pennies ''in this age of terrorism'' by reducing Secret Service protection for former Presidents and their wives and widows.
''The United States should not willingly expose itself to the national grief as well as the immense political disruption which would accompany a kidnapping and assassination by terrorists,'' the Treasury aide, Robert E. Powis, said at a Senate hearing.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 22 (AP) - A Treasury Department official argued today that the Government should not pinch pennies ''in this age of terrorism'' by reducing Secret Service protection for former Presidents and their wives and widows.
The Committee on Governmental Affairs summoned Administration officials to testify about a bill that would limit the amount of Federal money for former Presidents' support, libraries, staffs and offices, and for bodyguards.
''A former President ought to be able to lead a dignified retired life, secure from threats and with enough financial stability,'' said Senator Lawton Chiles, Democrat of Florida, a member of the committee. ''However, today's system establishes something that is more along the lines of an imperial former Presidency.''
The cost of lifetime protection for former Presidents and their families was $10.3 million in the 1982 fiscal year, Senator Chiles said. Under the new bill, wives, minor children and widows of former Presidents would have no guards and the Presidents would have them for only eight years.
The Secret Service now gives permanent protection to nine people, including former Presidents Carter, Ford and Nixon; their wives; Amy Carter; Lady Bird Johnson, and Bess Truman.


End of Document