Senate Republicans block action on hate-crimes measure; Sexual orientation, disabilities: Kennedy says the GOPrefuses to 'fight terrorism at home'
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 12, 2002 Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a2
Length: 598 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON.
Body


Senate Republicans blocked action on a hate-crimes measure Tuesday, refusing to cut off debate on a bill that would make a federal crime of violent attacks prompted by victims' sexual orientation or disabilities.
Democrats, pushing the measure in an election year, said they would try again.
"Senate Republicans made clear that they will not take action to fight terrorism at home," said Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., a longtime champion of the bill. "Today's vote is a clear sign of the lack of commitment by Senate Republicans on this basic civil- rights issue."
The bill would add crimes motivated by sex, sexual orientation and disability to the list of offenses already covered under a 1968 hate-crimes law that prohibits attacks based on race, religion or national origin. It would allow federal prosecutors to pursue a hate-crime case if local authorities refuse to press charges.
The 54-43 vote derailed efforts to win a speedy vote on the legislation and send it to the House, which has rejected it twice in recent years. While it takes only a simple majority to pass a bill, a motion to end debate to allow consideration of the bill itself requires 60 votes.
Backers of the bill fell six votes short.
The Senate has 50 Democrats, 49 Republicans and one independent, Sen. James Jeffords, of Vermont. Four GOP senators voted to stop debate.
Republicans complained the bill would allow the government to swoop into and take over local prosecutions. They also complained bitterly about the decision by Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., to limit debate on the bill only minutes after it was brought to the floor.
The Republican-controlled House will not take the bill as written by its supporters, said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah.
"If you really want to do something about hate crimes, let's do it the right way and amend this bill so the House will be forced to take it," said Hatch, who wanted to scale the bill back to ensure the federal government doesn't interfere with state prosecutions and ensure prosecutors can use the death penalty.
In addition, Senate Republican leader Trent Lott of Mississippi suggested the Senate should be working on prevention of terrorism rather than hate crimes.
"The greatest hate crime of all, which we should be dealing with right now, is the hate crime of terrorism against America," Lott said.
Democrats say hate crimes are no less than domestic terrorism. "We ought to be fighting terror here at home," Kennedy said.
The bill's supporters took it off the schedule before GOP senators could tack their amendments onto it. "We will be back. We'll find another bill, another vehicle," said Sen. Gordon Smith of Oregon, one of the bill's Republican supporters.
The other Republicans who voted to squelch debate were Sens. Susan Collins and Olympia Snowe, both of Maine, and Lincoln Chafee of Rhode Island.
"Too many Republican senators are willing to talk the hate crimes bill to death," said Ralph Neas, president of the liberal People For the American Way. "How many hate crimes must be committed before Sen. Trent Lott and his leadership will allow the Senate to consider stronger hate crimes prevention legislation?" said Nancy Zirkin, spokeswoman for the American Association of University Women.
The bill could resurface this year as an amendment to the Defense Department authorization bill.
Republican vote-counters had expressed confidence before the vote that they could hold the bill's supporters short of 60 votes. But they said they were concerned about defections on later votes.
The bill is S. 625.
On the Net: Bill text: http://thomas.loc.gov 

Load-Date: June 12, 2002


End of Document