Senate votes to set rules for treatment of terrorism suspects
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 6, 2005 Thursday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 3A; Newspaper
Length: 495 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The U.S. Senate voted Wednesday to impose restrictions on the treatment of terrorism suspects, delivering a rare wartime defeat for the White House.
Senators voted 90-9 to approve an amendment that would prohibit the use of "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" against anyone in U.S. government custody, regardless of where they are held.
The amendment was added to a $440-billion military spending bill for the budget year that began Oct. 1.
Compiled from Times Wires
The proposal, sponsored by Sen. John McCain, also requires all service members to follow procedures in the Army Field Manual when they detain and interrogate terrorism suspects.
Bush administration officials say the legislation would limit the president's authority and flexibility in war.
 
CIA won't order Sept. 11 disciplinary reviews
WASHINGTON - Contrary to recommendations from his own internal watchdog, CIA Director Porter Goss will not order disciplinary reviews for a former director, George Tenet, and other officials criticized for their performance before the Sept. 11 attacks.
Goss said in a statement Wednesday that the report from the CIA's inspector general, John Helgerson, did not suggest "that any one person or group of people could have prevented 9/11."
"After great consideration of this report and its conclusions, I will not convene an accountability board to judge the performances of any individual CIA officers," Goss said.
 
Guilty plea entered in Pentagon spying case
A top Pentagon analyst with expertise in the Middle East pleaded guilty Wednesday to giving classified information to an Israeli embassy official and members of a pro-Israel lobbying group.
Lawrence A. Franklin, 58, said during a plea hearing he was frustrated with the government and that he had hoped the two members of the lobbying group could use their connections at the National Security Council to influence U.S. policy.
He also admitted giving classified information to a political official at the Israeli embassy.
Franklin, of Kearneysville, W.Va., pleaded guilty to two conspiracy counts and a charge of unlawful retention of national defense information. He faces 25 years in prison at sentencing Jan. 20.
 
Berger traffic case
 
violates probation
WASHINGTON - Just two days after he was sentenced for smuggling classified documents from the National Archives, former Clinton administration National Security Adviser Sandy Berger violated his probation when he was ticketed for reckless driving in suburban Fairfax County, Va., according to court officials and records.
Magistrate Judge Deborah Robinson admonished Berger Wednesday for the traffic charge during a brief hearing in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, but left him on probation as recommended by the federal probation office, according to court records.
Berger was driving 88 mph in a 55 mph zoneon Sept. 10, according to court records. Reckless driving carries a penalty of as much as 12 months in jail and a $2,500 fine.

Load-Date: October 6, 2005


End of Document