Senate votes an apology on lynching;
Lawmakers expressed regret for never having outlawed what one called "domestic terrorism."
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 14, 2005 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 716 words
Byline: Lauren Markoe INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The U.S. Senate apologized yesterday for never having outlawed lynching, which from the 1880s to the 1960s took the lives of more than 4,700 people, mostly African Americans.
Lynching "is really an act of domestic terrorism," said Sen. Mary L. Landrieu (D., La.), who sponsored the apology resolution along with Sen. George Allen (R., Va.), "and I think it's quite appropriate today that we're discussing this as our country leads the fight against terrorism abroad."
The resolution passed by voice vote without objection. It apologized not only for the Senate's earlier failure to act but also to the descendants of lynching victims. Several hundred descendants crowded into the Capitol yesterday to witness the Senate's vote.
One witness present was the oldest known survivor of a lynching, James Cameron, now 91. At age 16 he was arrested in Marion, Ind., along with two companions in the slaying of a white man and alleged rape of a white woman. A mob seized them, hanged his two friends, and had a noose around Cameron's neck when, somehow, a voice protesting his innocence prevailed. Cameron was later convicted of robbery and was pardoned in 1993.
In a statement, he said of the resolution: "The apology is a good idea, but it still won't bring anyone back. And I hope the next time it won't take so long to admit our mistakes."
Lynchings, defined as any killing by a mob, not just hanging, have been documented in 46 states. Victims included Italians, Jews, Asians, Latinos and women, but most were blacks. Historians have documented 4,743 lynchings between 1882 and 1968, 80 percent of them in Southern states.
Lynching was one way that whites reinforced the prevailing racial power structure, historians say. Victims often were blacks who had achieved a degree of success or conveyed a sense of self-worth that Southern whites deemed unacceptable. State and local officials often took part in savage and public lynchings, mostly of black men, sometimes for such offenses as disagreeing with a white man or owning a successful farm.
"A rapid execution did not satisfy the emotional hunger of whites who insisted on prolonging and intensifying the taking of a life, not only to inflict a harsher penalty, but also to send a more forceful message to the black community," historian Leon Litwack wrote in Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow.
Fewer than 1 percent of lynchings were followed by serious efforts to bring those responsible to justice.
More than 200 anti-lynching bills were introduced in Congress in the first half of the 20th century, and seven presidents urged their passage. The legislation would have made lynching a federal crime and exposed complicit local authorities to possible federal prosecution.
Three times the House passed such bills, but each failed to pass the Senate.
"The Senate failed these Americans," Landrieu said. "If we truly want to move forward, we must admit that failure and learn from it."
Momentum for a Senate apology grew after the 2000 publication of Without Sanctuary: Lynching Photography in America, by James Allen, a history based on postcards depicting lynchings. Spectators would buy and trade the postcards as souvenirs of the brutal events, which often were held at fairgrounds or in public squares.
In 2003, a group of activists formed "the Committee for a Public Apology" to press the Senate. It consists of about 20 people, including Dick Gregory, Rep. John Lewis (D., Ga.), and descendants of lynching victims. The committee sent letters to all 100 senators asking them to act, and Landrieu and Allen took up the cause.
Federal anti-lynching legislation is deemed unnecessary today since lynching is rare and state law enforcement more trustworthy.
The Senate historian's office said it could not determine how many times the Senate has apologized previously, but there have been no more than a handful.
The Senate apologized in 1993 to native Hawaiians for America's overthrow of the Hawaiian kingdom and in 1988 to Japanese Americans for their internment during World War II.
The Senate is also considering an apology to Native Americans for centuries of mistreatment by the federal government. Sen. Sam Brownback (R., Kan.) sponsors that resolution.
Contact reporter Lauren Markoe at 202-383-5023 or lmarkoe@krwashington.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
EVAN VUCCI, Associated Press
James Cameron, 91, the oldest known survivor of a lynching, shakes hands with Sen. Mark Pryor (D., Ark.). Sen. Mary L. Landrieu (D., La.), behind Cameron, was a sponsor of the apology.

Load-Date: September 14, 2005


End of Document