SENATORS IN CLASH OVER 'PEACE DAY'
The New York Times
October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 396 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1
Body


Senator Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, charged on the floor of the Senate tonight that a move to proclaim Oct. 10 as National Peace Day ''will give aid and comfort to the enemies of this country.''
He pointed out that the provision, contained in the omnibus spending bill, was sponsored by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas, whose wife Betty was the chairman of Peace Links, which is sponsoring a National Peace Day demonstration against nuclear war on that date.
Senator Bumpers reacted angrily to the the Denton remarks. ''If people engage in an appropriate activity to show their commitment to peace, if that becomes subversive, we can kiss everything this country stands for goodbye,'' Mr. Bumpers said.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 1 -Senator Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, charged on the floor of the Senate tonight that a move to proclaim Oct. 10 as National Peace Day ''will give aid and comfort to the enemies of this country.''
The proposal, which was removed from the spending bill by the House. caused an acrimonious Senate debate.  ''Four organizations on the Peace Links advisory board are either Soviet controlled or openly sympathetic with, and advocates for, Communist foreign policy objectives,'' said Mr. Denton, chairman of the Security and Terrorism subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee.  ''These are the Women Strike for Peace, an affiliate of the Sovietcontrolled women's International Democratic Federation, which is based in East Germany; the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom; the radical United States Student Association, and the Committee for National Security, which was established by the radical, left-oriented Institute for Policy Studies.''
Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, said that for more than 20 years, United States policy had been to seek bilateral disarmament.  Addressing Mr. Denton, he said, ''The Senator seeks to link by scurrilous, conspiratorial, ideological literature people who seek to promote that policy with the Communist threat and the Communist menace.''
Pointing a finger at Mr. Denton, Mr. Hart said: ''I intend consciously and on purpose to breach the protocol of the United States Senate and address the Senator from Alabama directly.
''I say to the Senator from Alabama, 'Shame on you.' '' Mrs. Bumpers could not be reached for comment either at home or through the Senator's office.


End of Document