Senate Diverts War Money To U.S. Border
The New York Times
April 27, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 550 words
Byline: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 26 
Body


Prodded by Republicans, the Senate voted on Wednesday to trim President Bush's financing request for the Iraq war by $1.9 billion and to use that money to improve border security.
  The vote, 59 to 39, was on an amendment to an emergency spending measure and was cast on a day of difficult choices for Republicans. They passed up opportunities to strip the bill of provisions unrelated to its primary purpose of paying for hurricane relief and military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
 The action was unusual because Republicans have been adamant that the war is the highest priority and have been quick to attack Democrats who show signs of wavering on the issue. Three Republicans voted against the shift of money, seven Democrats voted for it and two Democrats did not vote.
  With Mr. Bush promising to veto the $106.5 billion spending measure unless it is pared to less than $95 billion, senators who wanted to improve border security, a cause that grassroots conservatives have declared a main goal this election year, felt they had to do so without letting the underlying bill expand.
  ''This bill is about national defense, especially relative to terrorism,'' said Senator Judd Gregg, the New Hampshire Republican who is the amendment's lead sponsor. ''And, yes, fighting the war in Iraq is critical to this war on terrorism. Fighting the war in Afghanistan is critical to this war on terrorism. But I have to think equally important is making sure that our borders are secure.''
  The amendment would provide money to the Border Patrol and Coast Guard for new airplanes, helicopters, patrol boats and communications equipment. Democrats criticized the proposal as ''a false, cheap choice to secure political points,'' in the words of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Democrat of New York.
  The debate exposed a widening rift among Republicans on fiscal policy, in particular the special projects called earmarks. Those splits forced the House Republican leadership this month to abandon its effort to pass a budget. Now they are complicating the debate on the emergency spending bill, known in Senate lexicon as a supplemental, and threatening to derail lobbying bills in the House.
  In the Senate, 35 Republicans, enough to sustain a veto, signed a letter on Wednesday saying they would back Mr. Bush if he decided to veto the bill. Senator George Allen of Virginia, who like many other Republicans is campaigning for re-election on a theme of fiscal restraint, was among the signers. 
  ''I think an emergency supplemental ought to deal with only emergency matters,'' Mr. Allen said.
  Republicans fought over what, if anything, to strip from the bill, and some of the senators who said they would sustain the veto also rejected an effort by conservatives to restore the bill to Mr. Bush's original request. That vote, 72 to 26, retained provisions for farm subsidies, aid for the fisheries industry and a $700 million proposal to relocate a freight railroad in Mississippi.
  The train project has the strong backing of Senator Thad Cochran, the Mississippi Republican who is chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee. 
  It has drawn intense complaints from other Republicans, notably Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma. A move by Mr. Coburn to strike the project from the bill failed, 49 to 48.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 27, 2006


End of Document