Senators revisit funeral protest limits; Lawmakers advance bill requiring protesters to keep 500 feet away.
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
February 25, 2011 Friday


Copyright 2011 Lincoln Journal Star All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B3
Length: 577 words
Byline: KEVIN O'HANLON
Body


When members of a radical Kansas church protest near military funerals, are they exercising their constitutional right to free speech or engaging in what some call "psychological terrorism"?
Nebraska lawmakers are again trying to strike a balance in that debate by regulating how close protesters should be allowed when they picket at military funerals.
Members of Westboro Baptist Church, based in Topeka, Kan., travel the country protesting at military funerals because they believe U.S. troop deaths are punishment for the nation's tolerance of homosexuality. They carry signs that say "Thank God for dead soldiers" and include gay epithets, among other things.
Nebraska lawmakers gave 45-0 first-round approval Thursday to a measure (LB284) that would require protesters to keep 500 feet away from funerals. The current law sets the limit at 300 feet.
"Striking the appropriate balance between the privacy rights of grieving family members and the freedom of speech rights of others is a delicate undertaking," said Omaha Sen. Bob Krist, who has made the bill his priority measure this session.
"My primary concern in trying to make a good law better is to have enforceable legislation which meets constitutional muster, in the event of a court challenge," he said.
Last year, prosecutors reached a deal that kept both sides out of court in a case stemming from a church member's 2007 protest at the funeral of Petty Officer 1st Class Jeffrey Chaney of Bellevue, who was killed by a roadside bomb in Iraq.
The deal was signed just before Shirley Phelps-Roper, whose father, Fred, founded the church, was to go to trial on charges of disturbing the peace and negligent child abuse.
Those charges were dismissed in exchange for Phelps-Roper dropping a federal lawsuit against Nebraska authorities accusing them of malicious prosecution.
Phelps-Roper also agreed to remove Sarpy County Attorney Lee Polikov from a separate suit challenging the constitutionality of the state's funeral protest law. Defendants in that federal suit also included Republican Gov. Dave Heineman and state Attorney General Jon Bruning.
According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, 24 states have enacted distance requirements of at least 500 feet for funeral protesters. Of those, five have a 1,000-foot requirement. Montana's is 1,500 feet.
"It should be noted courts have upheld distance requirements states place on those attempting to campaign within a certain distance of a polling site," Krist said. "Funerals and memorial services, much like polling places, could be viewed as having participants who are a captive audience. I believe there is a compelling state interest to protect family privacy and prevent emotional distress at funerals or memorial services."
The U.S. Supreme Court last year heard arguments in a case against the Kansas church members brought by the family of a Marine at whose 2006 funeral in Maryland the Westboro members protested. The family was awarded $5 million in damages from the church in district court, but an appeals court overturned that judgment.
Supreme Court justices seemed both troubled and divided on the issue. Several justices hinted that the funeral protest, though offensive, was lawful.
Forty-eight states, including Nebraska, and 42 U.S. senators and veterans groups asked the high court in a friend-of-court brief to shield funerals from "psychological terrorism."
Reach Kevin O'Hanlon at 402-473-2682 or kohanlon@journalstar.com

Load-Date: February 25, 2011


End of Document