Senate wants restrictions on detainee treatment; The amendment is added to a $440 billion military spending bill
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 6, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. d5
Length: 499 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Republican-controlled Senate voted Wednesday to impose restrictions on the treatment of terrorism suspects, delivering a rare wartime rebuke to President Bush.
Defying the White House, senators voted 90-9 to approve an amendment that would prohibit the use of "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" against anyone in U.S. government custody, regardless of where they are held.
The amendment was added to a $440 billion military spending bill for the budget year that began Oct. 1.
The proposal, sponsored by Sen. John McCain, also requires all service members to follow procedures in the Army Field Manual when they detain and interrogate terrorism suspects.
Bush administration officials say the legislation would limit the president's authority and flexibility in war.
But lawmakers from each party have said Congress must provide U.S. troops with clear standards for detaining, interrogating and prosecuting terrorism suspects in light of allegations of mistreatment at Guantanamo Bay and the abuse scandal at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq.
"We demanded intelligence without ever clearly telling our troops what was permitted and what was forbidden. And when things went wrong, we blamed them and we punished them," said McCain, a prisoner of war in Vietnam.
"Our troops are not served by ambiguity. They are crying out for clarity and Congress cannot shrink from this duty," said McCain, R-Ariz.
The Senate was expected to vote on the overall spending bill by weeks' end. The House-approved version of it does not include the detainee provisions. It is unclear how much support the measure has in the GOP-run House.
Rep. John Murtha of Pennsylvania, the top Democrat on the House Appropriations subcommittee on defense, is supporting McCain's legislation. Murtha could prove a powerful ally when House and Senate negotiators reconcile differences in their bills.
In other developments:
* A U.S. interrogator accused of showing prisoners his genitals and threatening to sexually assault them has been charged in the ongoing abuse investigation in Afghanistan, the Army announced Wednesday.
Pfc. Damien M. Corsetti, a military intelligence interrogator with the 519th MI Battalion at Fort Bragg, N.C., is the 15th soldier to face charges since the 2002 deaths of two detainees at the Bagram Airfield detention center in Afghanistan.
* Under pressure from Congress, the Pentagon on Wednesday issued overdue regulations for reimbursing soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan for body armor and other gear they bought to protect themselves.
The program, which is effective immediately, would allow reimbursement for combat helmets, ballistic eye protection, hydration systems, and tactical vests, including a variety of body armor inserts to protect a soldier's throat, groin, and collar.
The guidelines from the undersecretary of defense, David Chu, come nearly a year after Congress passed legislation mandating the reimbursement policy. That law required the Pentagon to issue the rules by last Feb. 25.

Load-Date: October 6, 2005


End of Document