SENATE APPROVES ANTI-TERRORISM, AVIATION SECURITY BILLS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
October 12, 2001 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 669 words
Byline: JIM ABRAMS, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate voted yesterday to give police broad new wiretapping authority and other tools to pursue suspected terrorists and to increase and federalize security on airliners and at airports.
 Hours after unanimously passing a bill to overhaul protections against terrorism in aviation, the Senate approved a compromise bill negotiated with Attorney General John Ashcroft authorizing the use of roaming wiretaps and new subpoena powers against suspected terrorists.
 The Bush administration had urgently pressed for the two measures as a response to the Sept. 11 hijacked airliner attacks in New York and Washington. But both had been stalled for two weeks, the anti-terrorism bill over civil liberty concerns and the aviation security bill over efforts to add aid for laid-off airline workers and money for Amtrak.
The Senate passed the anti-terrorism legislation 96-1. Sen. Russ Feingold, D-Wis., cast the only dissenting vote.
 Feingold had failed in a last-ditch effort to tone down parts of the bill's police powers, and grew angry that the bill, which came straight to the floor, was moving so fast. "What have we come to when we don't have either committee or Senate deliberation or amendments on an issue of this importance?" he said.
 Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., who negotiated with Senate Republicans and the administration to come up with the final version of the bill, conceded that the legislation "is really not the bill that any of the 100 here would have written, but we can't pass 100 bills.
 "What we have done is put together the best bill possible," he said.
 The House is expected to take up its version of the bill today.
 Both the House and Senate measures would expand the FBI's wiretapping authority, impose stronger penalties on those who harbor or finance terrorists and increase punishment for terrorists.
 But unlike the House anti-terrorism bill, the Senate measure has no expiration date on the new police powers and also includes anti-money-laundering legislation requested by the White House.
 The administration has been trying to get the House to drop its request for a sunset provision, and House and White House negotiators appeared close to a deal yesterday that would extend the new wiretapping laws for five years, instead of the two years currently specified in the House bill, said a spokesman for House Judiciary Chairman James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis.
 A two-week stalemate on the aviation bill was broken yesterday, when a procedural vote went against an amendment to link the bill to a $1.9 billion package to help laid-off aviation workers. Sen. Jean Carnahan, D-Mo., author of the amendment, withdrew it after the vote, opening the way for passage of the bill.
 Carnahan argued that after Congress approved $40 billion in emergency spending and a $15 billion plan to help the airline industry in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terror attacks, it was only right to provide extended unemployment benefits, health care and training to the estimated 140,000 laid-off aviation workers.
 But others said accepting the Carnahan amendment would open the bill to other peripheral amendments, including a $3 billion package to upgrade Amtrak security and capacity.
 Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, said that if the worker relief measure went forward, he would try to attach language to open 2,000 acres of Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and gas drilling.
 The bill creates a new force of thousands of federal employees to screen baggage, putting armed federal guards at key checkpoints and expanding the number of plainclothes marshals on commercial airplanes.
 It also would authorize the Federal Aviation Administration to permit pilots to carry firearms in flight if they and their employers want them to do so, and would study the feasibility of using non-lethal weapons such as stun guns to disable would-be hijackers.
 The legislation, approved 100-0, now goes to the House, where Republican leaders oppose putting baggage and gate screeners on the federal payroll.

Notes

THE WAR ON TERROR THE HOME FRONT The Washington Post contributed to this report.

Load-Date: October 12, 2001


End of Document