SENATOR SEEKING SOURCE OF DISCLOSURE/ TERRORISM SUSPECT'S NAME WAS LEAKED DESPITE HIS HELP TRACKING AL-QAIDA MEMBERS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 10, 2004 Tuesday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-2
Length: 514 words
Byline: From Wire Reports
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A Democratic senator asked the White House yesterday to explain why the name of an imprisoned al-Qaida terror suspect was disclosed to reporters as the suspect was aiding the United States.
The comments added to a bipartisan chorus raising questions about an unusual amount of intelligence that has recently been released about the terrorist network.
Sen. Charles E. Schumer of New York asked the White House homeland security adviser, Frances Fragos Townsend, to identify who provided reporters the name of Mohammed Naeem Noor Khan.
Schumer also asked whether Townsend believed the disclosure had compromised national security. He cited statements by authorities in Pakistan and England that the disclosure harmed their investigations.
Khan, arrested July 13 in Pakistan, was described by authorities as a communications technician working for al-Qaida who helped send electronic messages on behalf of the group's members.
U.S. and Pakistani officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, have confirmed that Khan agreed after his arrest to send e-mails to al-Qaida members, and Khan received replies from at least some of them. Days after Khan's arrest, British authorities arrested 12 terror suspects in raids, including one person described as a senior al-Qaida operative, Abu Eisa al-Hindi, and Khan's cousin Babar Ahmad.
Over the last week, administration sources were quoted as revealing details about uncovered terrorist cells in Pakistan and Britain and alleged plots to blow up key financial institutions, kill top congressional leaders, destroy the U.S. Capitol, and use tourist helicopters in New York City for attacks.
The stream of information has generated extensive coverage about the Bush administration's efforts against terrorism - including cover stories in two of the three major newsweeklies - and prompted complaints that the White House was jeopardizing national security by revealing too much.
Sen. George Allen of Virginia, a Republican member of the Foreign Relations Committee, told CNN Sunday that in the Khan situation "they should have kept their mouth shut and just said, 'We have information, trust us.' "
Those expressing concern at leaks of intelligence included members of the administration itself. Yesterday, aides to Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld pointed to a little-noticed remark he made in a speech Friday warning of the dangers of providing too much information about intelligence findings.
The U.S. government's disclosure on Aug. 1 of Khan's arrest and some of the information tied to Khan came amid a furious defense by the Bush administration explaining its decision to warn one day earlier about possible attacks against U.S. financial buildings in New York, Washington and Newark, N.J.
White House spokesman Scott McClellan cautioned yesterday that information may be more limited about future raids against al-Qaida suspects.
"It is important that we recognize that sometimes there are ongoing operations under way. . . .  And sometimes we aren't able to go into as much detail we would like to because of those ongoing operations," he said.

Load-Date: August 12, 2004


End of Document