Senate Approves a Bill to Track Cooperation Against Terrorism
The New York Times
July 26, 1996, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk   
Section: Section A;   ; Section A;    Page 10;    Column 1;    Foreign Desk   ; Column 1;   
Length: 307 words
Byline: By JERRY GRAY   

By JERRY GRAY   
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 25
Body


The Senate voted unanimously today to require the State Department, as part of its reporting on terrorism, to give detailed information on how much individual countries cooperate in helping the United States fight terrorists.
The proposal, sponsored by Senator John McCain of Arizona, is partly a reaction to the truck bombing of a United States military complex near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, on June 25. Some American officials have complained that the Saudi Government has refused to cooperate sufficiently on terrorist issues.
"The recent terrorist attack in Dhahran demonstrates the importance of cooperation of other Governments in investigating and preventing terrorism against Americans," Mr. McCain, a Republican, said on the Senate floor.
"I believe the Congress and the American people have a right to know whether foreign Governments are indeed cooperating," Senator McCain said.
Today's 96-0 vote was the latest in a string of recent decisions in Congress regarding terrorism, including some unilateral actions that have rankled American allies. The Senate voted last week to appropriate $150 million next year for the Pentagon to begin developing a program to defend against possible nuclear, chemical or biological attacks by terrorists.
On Tuesday, Congress voted to require the President to impose sanctions on foreign companies that invest heavily in the energy industries of Iran and Libya, a bill that President Clinton has said he will sign.
Mr. McCain's proposal, which was an amendment to the $12.2 billion foreign operations spending bill for fiscal 1997, would apply to countries that Washington has asked to cooperate in the investigation or prosecution of a terrorist act against an American citizen or interest.
The amendment does not spell out any penalties, but it could open the way for punitive action through other laws.

Load-Date: July 26, 1996


End of Document