Senators: Track mail by sender to thwart terrorism; Privacy advocates urge other methods
Federal Times
May 24, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: POSTAL REPORT; Pg. 12
Length: 1032 words
Byline: By STEPHEN LOSEY, Alan Lessig/Federal Times
Body


Some Senators propose stopping mail terrorism by identifying each piece by sender.
The Senate's bill to reform the U.S. Postal Service's structure and operations, introduced May 20, proposes creation of a "secure, sender-identified mail" system, but offers no details on how that would be accomplished.
The government wants to prevent terrorists like convicted mail bomber Theodore Kaczynski or the still-at-large anthrax mailer from using the postal system to kill. Proponents of using sender-identified mail to increase security say the ability to trace mail would deter terrorists from abusing the mail system.
"We're in an age where dangerous things could go in the mail," said Shelly Dreifuss, the Postal Rate Commission's consumer advocate.
The Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act also calls for a process to set postage rates. The Postal Service would also have to study ways to make its infrastructure more efficient. This could lead to closing or consolidating mail facilities.
The bill would also allow the Postal Service to move employees receiving disability payments into a retirement annuity when they reach age 65. Employees now continue to receive disability payments well after they reach retirement age.
The bill was introduced by Sens. Susan Collins, R-Maine, and Thomas Carper, D-Del.
One tactic to track mail may be to print bar codes on stamps that identify the buyer, said Dreifuss and Maynard Benjamin, president of the Envelope Manufacturers Association.
Robert Walker, a member of the White House postal reform commission that included mail tracking among its 35 recommendations last July, said technology beyond bar codes exists that could encode far more information.
Walker did not know what this effort could cost, but said it would be less expensive than countermeasures such as the biodetection systems the Postal Service is now installing at a cost of more than $800 million.
But the Postal Service is skeptical about the proposal, which a spokesman said needs to be more clearly defined.
"We're not in that business," said Bob Anderson. "Privacy concerns are an issue for us."
The Postal Service also nixed tracking mail last October, when it withdrew a Federal Register notice that broached this proposal. The Postal Service said it was not considering tracking mail and references to doing so should not have been included in the notice.
And one privacy advocate says secure mail would threaten free speech while offering little security.
Ari Schwartz, associate director of the Center for Democracy and Technology, said this tracking effort could be prohibitively expensive and create a hassle for postal customers.
Schwartz said the Washington-based center, which promotes democratic values and constitutional liberties in the digital age, supports using limited technology to track mail more efficiently, but without tracking every postal customer.
Schwartz and other proponents of limited intelligent mail say adding more information to the bar codes now printed on envelopes can let customers monitor where their letters are in the mail transportation process.
Private carriers such as Federal Express and United Parcel Service offer this service. Postal Service customers can track mail by sending letters via Priority Mail, but at a cost of at least $4, a White House commission said. And even then, customers cannot monitor their letters' progress; they are notified only when the letter is delivered.
An optional tracking service similar to those offered by FedEx and UPS would be a boon for the Postal Service, Schwartz said.
"But if they start [requiring a bar code] for my Mother's Day card, and I have to go to the post office, that puts an awful strain on me," Schwartz said. "It's questionable on privacy and efficiency, and it creates the sense the mail is not safe."
Dreifuss said the loss of anonymity is a trade-off that provides greater security.
"If you ask me, I wouldn't mind," Dreifuss said. "I'm not engaged in criminal activity."
Benjamin of the Envelope Manufacturers Association said privacy concerns must be considered, but he said the security benefits of tracking mail outweigh the disadvantages. He compared it to the airline industry, which has the right to know who is on its airplanes.
But Schwartz said the freedom to send unsigned mail or mail under a fake name is vital for a democracy.
Schwartz cited the Federalist Papers as an example. Founding Fathers Alexander Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay wrote a series of 85 essays under the pen name Publius in 1787 and 1788 to drum up support for the Constitution, then mailed the essays to New York newspapers.
Today, Schwartz said, the Senate's proposal could stifle potential whistleblowers, who may fear their letters would be traced back to them. As a result, the public could remain unaware of government fraud or workplace safety problems.
Walker acknowledged that tracking mail could make a whistleblower reluctant to use the mail, but said there are other avenues available to alert the public.
Dreifuss said Congress could reassure the public of their privacy by setting rules that govern the conditions under which a letter could be traced to the sender.
Schwartz questioned whether the system could be airtight enough to deter terrorists. Someone could steal a letter and remove the stamp before a postmark cancels it, he said, or even rinse off the postmark, as do stamp collectors.
The proposal also could create a black market for stamps, he said.
"Unless a person goes in and proves who they are [when they send a letter], it's not going to be any more secure than it is today," Schwartz said. "If someone buys a sheet of stamps and sells them on the street, what's that person responsible for?"
Walker said those could be problems. But he said the system does not have to be airtight, just good enough to deter abuse of the mail.
Also, he said, a sophisticated criminal organization would be more likely to take those steps than a loner like Kaczynski, and tracking a criminal gang is easier than detecting a solo terrorist.
And even if a person gave a stamp away to someone who used it for terrorism, that person could be a source to help identify the terrorist, Benjamin said.

Notes

1 COLOR PHOTO.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document