SENATE PASSES TERRORISM DEFENSE BILL;
 MEASURE BANS TRANSPORT OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL THROUGH LAMBERT TUNNEL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 16, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. B2
Length: 367 words
Byline: Bill Bell Jr. Post-Dispatch Jefferson City Bureau
Dateline: JEFFERSON CITY
Body


A bill meant to make the state better prepared for a terrorist attack won final approval Wednesday from the Missouri Senate.
It needs final House approval before it goes to the governor.
The measure would make it illegal to drive hazardous materials through the proposed Lindbergh Boulevard tunnel under the new runway planned at Lambert Field.
The quarter-mile-long tunnel would be Missouri's first highway tunnel. The bill also would make it a crime to park a vehicle carrying hazardous materials within 300 feet of any highway tunnel in the state.
The bill also would:
* Define bioterrorism in state laws.
* Create the crimes of supporting terrorism, agri-terrorism and making a terrorist threat.
* Allow the Water Patrol to close waterways in the event of a man-made or natural disaster.
* Establish a 14-member Joint Commission on Terrorism and Bioterrorism and Homeland Security.
* Set forth rules on wiretapping.
The bill was approved with little debate.
In February, debate in the Senate centered on the governor's ability to declare martial law when there is a clear and present danger of a terrorist attack. Civil libertarians protested, and lawmakers took that provision out of the bill. Legislators also deleted a provision that would have penalized people for leaving quarantine.
A price-gouging provision was stripped from the bill. Gov. Bob Holden and others had pushed for laws clarifying the attorney general's power to go after price gouging.
The sponsor, Marvin Singleton, R-Seneca, said it was hard to define gouging.
Last fall, Attorney General Jay Nixon fined 48 gas stations that raised prices in the hours after the terrorist attacks Sept. 11. The stations were ordered to pay $60,043 in penalties.
Singleton said under current law, those fines might not have held up in court if the stations challenged them.
Several Springfield lawmakers had fought to use the measure to close records of a public utility company. Under the bill passed Wednesday, a "public governmental body" would have to petition a court to close records of "existing or proposed security systems and structural plans of real property." This exception to the state Sunshine Law would end on Dec. 31, 2006.
The bill is SB 712.

Notes

MISSOURI LEGISLATURE; Reporter Bill Bell Jr.: E-mail: bbell@post-dispatch.com Phone: 573-635-6178  

Load-Date: May 16, 2002


End of Document