Senate Awaits House Action on Terrorism Insurance Bill
CongressNow
December 17, 2007 Monday


Copyright 2007 GalleryWatch All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial Services
Length: 496 words
Byline: Charlene Carter, CongressNow Staff
Body


Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) said today that terrorism risk insurance legislation would be one of the last issues the chamber will take up before adjourning this year's session. But not everyone in the House is satisfied with the Senate version, which is more narrow than versions the House passed twice this year. Still, sources say the Senate version is likelier to prevail.
The terrorism risk insurance program, called TRIA, was enacted in 2002 to help restore the private market for terrorism risk insurance following the Sept. 11 attacks. It is scheduled to expire Dec. 31.
House Financial Services Chairman Barney Frank (D-Mass.), who had been pushing for the legislation to include group life insurance coverage, a lower "trigger" for the government's share in the cost of an event, and a reset provision for areas hit by more than one event, has said he won't block final legislation from being enacted.
The House passed a version (H.R. 2761) in September that included those provisions and provided a 15-year extension, as well as making mandatory coverage for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological events. But in November, the Senate took up the House bill, amending it to provide a 7-year extension, but without the NBCR, group life or reset provisions. It also raised the trigger from $50 million to $100 million.
Just last Wednesday, the House passed H.R. 4299, a trimmed down version or earlier TRIA legislation that would continue the program for seven years and set the trigger at $50 million. Other provisions of that bill include travel underwriting restrictions and group life insurance coverage. The 303-116, vote, represents a large enough margin for the chamber to override a promised veto by President Bush.
With the White House supporting the Senate version, the chamber has held firm on its position. The Bush administration has maintained that the program was intended to be a temporary fix and expansion would further impede the private market. House Republicans, lead by Rep. Spencer Bachus (R-Ala.), ranking Member of the House Financial Services Committee, had been whipping up support for the Senate version.
One of the main obstacles to House and Senate agreement on the legislation had been inclusion of group life insurance. Sen. Richard Shelby (R-Ala.), ranking member of the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee has held firm on his opposition to its inclusion.
"The Senate has said they are not going to include group life. So why put a provision on about group life when the Senate already said it is not going to include group life?," Bachus said during the House floor debate last Wednesday.
Insurance industry lobbyists are expecting the House to take up the Senate version without the additional provisions in H.R. 4299 by Tuesday or Wednesday.
The property-casualty insurance groups have expressed support for both versions, urging the lawmakers the settle their differences before the program's expiration.

Load-Date: December 18, 2007


End of Document