Senate contest tight in N.C.; Poll shows Democrat Hagan not pulling away from Tillis
USA TODAY
October 9, 2014 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 339 words
Byline: Susan Page, USA TODAY
Body


Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan is clinging to a tiny lead over Republican Thom Tillis, a new USA TODAY/Suffolk University poll of North Carolina finds -- disappointing news for Democrats who thought she was beginning to pull away from her challenger.
After seven weeks of fierce campaigning and millions spent on negative ads, the crucial North Carolina Senate race hasn't budged: Hagan at 47%, Tillis at 45% and libertarian Sean Haugh at 4%. In mid-August, the poll also had shown Hagan with a 2-point lead.  "The one the Democrats were beginning to think they had put away is still in play," says Jennifer Duffy of the non-partisan Cook Political Report.
Since August, some things have changed in the Tar Heel State. Terrorism is a rising concern amid a growing threat from the Islamic State extremist group in Syria and Iraq. The percentage of voters who call foreign policy/terrorism the most important issue has doubled to 18%, second only to health care as a concern.
Partisan lines have hardened, and President Obama has become an increasing drag for Democrats on the ballot. While nearly half of those surveyed say the president isn't much of a factor in their vote, 28% say they think of it as a vote against Obama; 20% as a vote for him. In August, his impact was closer to a wash.
Margaret Ellington, 42, of Raleigh, who was among those polled, said in a follow-up interview that Republicans are the ones mentioning Obama's name. "They want to say Obama has caused all these problems," especially in health care, she said.
Ellington supports Hagan, saying Tillis and other Republicans "are pushing this uber-conservative agenda," including on issues such as education spending and abortion rights. "It's like they're on this warpath of conservatism."
In Fayetteville, Michael Koba, 52, who is most concerned about the federal budget deficit and the economy, is "95%" settled on voting for Tillis. "Quite honestly, I haven't really been impressed with Kay Hagan's performance over the past six years," he said in a follow-up interview. 

Graphic

 
graphic

Load-Date: October 9, 2014


End of Document