Senate Passes Bill on Terror Victims' Lawsuits
The New York Times
October 12, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 365 words
Byline: By The New York Times 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11
Body


The Senate enacted legislation today that would allow victims of terrorism to collect court-awarded damages from countries that sponsor terrorist activity. The bill, passed overwhelmingly by the House last week, goes to the president who is expected to sign it into law.
In a bipartisan effort, the Senate passed the measure 95 to 0.
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, a co-sponsor of the bill, said it would "strengthen our stand against terrorism" by acting as a deterrent to attacks aimed at American citizens.
Under exisiting law, the president can block efforts by American victims of terrorism to collect damages from foreign countries. The new measure does not give the president that option.
For a suit to succeed in courts here, the State Department must list the country as a sponsor of terrorism. Iran, for example, has been on the list since 1984.
Congress passed a measure in October 1998 that called for the State Department and the Treasury Department to assist victims of terrorism to locate money for judgments. But the legislation contained a waiver that permitted the president to decline support in the interest of national security.
Administration officials have voiced concern that the sanctity of American diplomatic property abroad, a right extended to all diplomatic missions under international law, might be compromised if private citizens here were allowed to seize foreign government property.
Terry Anderson, a former correspondent for The Associated Press who was held hostage in Lebanon in the 1980's, and his family were awarded more than $300 million in damages from Iran in March.
In March 1998, a federal judge ordered Iran to pay $247.5 million to the family of Alisa M. Flatow, of West Orange, N.J., who was studying at a seminary in Jerusalem in 1995 when she was killed in a suicide bus attack for which Islamic Holy War, with ties to Iran, claimed responsibility. And in August 1998, a federal court ordered Iran to pay $65 million in damages for its role in the kidnapping of Joseph J. Cicippio, Frank H. Reed and David P. Jacobsen, three Americans held with Mr. Anderson.
Thus far, they have been unable to collect on the settlements.
      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 12, 2000


End of Document