Senate rejects Udall attempt to strike detainee provision
The Hill
December 5, 2011 Monday


Copyright  2011 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 29
Length: 486 words
Body


WHEN Tuesday, Nov. 29, 2011 WHAT Senate Vote 210: Amendment offered by Sen. Mark Udall (D-Colo.) to strike language in the Senate’s Defense authorization bill to permit President Obama to use “all necessary and appropriate force” to detain suspected terrorists. 
OUTCOME Rejected, 30-68 WHAT IT REALLY MEANT Udall took aim at what he described as “controversial detainee provisions that have been inserted in the National Defense Authorization Act.” His amendment would have taken those changes out and instead require that Defense intelligence and law enforcement agencies submit to Congress a report on any additional authority they need to investigate suspected terrorists. At that point, Udall said, Congress could hold hearings “so we can fully understand the opposition to these provisions by our national security experts — bipartisan opposition, I might add — and hopefully avoid a veto of the Defense authorization bill.” But Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Carl Levin (D-Mich.) noted bipartisan support for the provisions, that President Obama’s administration “helped to draft almost all of this bill” and that the Supreme Court had upheld the government’s right to hold its own citizens suspected of terrorism, he added. “I would hope we would deal with the al Qaeda threat in an appropriate way, in a bipartisan way,” he said. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) argued a similar point, noting that the language targeted by Udall is existing law. “It reaffirms the fact that this body believes al Qaeda and affiliated groups are a military threat to the United States and they can be held under the law of war indefinitely to make sure we find out what they are up to — and they can be questioned in a humane manner consistent with the law of war.” But Udall countered by arguing that FBI Director Robert Mueller, Attorney General Eric Holder, Defense Secretary Leon Panetta and the Obama administration have specific concerns with the language. In a Statement of Administration Policy issued last month endorsing the Defense authorization bill overall, the Obama administration said it “objects to and has serious legal and policy concerns about many of the detainee provisions in the bill.” “In their current form, some of these provisions disrupt the Executive branch’s ability to enforce the law and impose unwise and unwarranted restrictions on the U.S. Government’s ability to aggressively combat international terrorism; other provisions inject legal uncertainty and ambiguity that may only complicate the military’s operations and detention practices.” Udall added: “We have been successful in prosecuting over 300 terrorists through our civil justice system. Let’s not fix what isn’t broken until we fully understand the ramifications.” After the vote closed, Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) corrected his vote to “aye” from “nay,” which changed the widely reported 37-61 vote to the official 38-60.

Load-Date: February 13, 2012


End of Document