Senate approves Clinton's anti-terrorism package;
Measure includes Specter amendment to curtail lengthy appeals by death-row inmates
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 8, 1995, Thursday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 696 words
Byline: Jack Torry, Post-Gazette Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate yesterday expanded federal powers to combat domestic terrorists, including an amendment co-sponsored by Sen. Arlen Specter that sharply limits the ability of death-row inmates to delay their executions by federal court appeals.
By a 91-8 vote, the Senate approved the anti-terrorism package called for by President Clinton in the wake of the April 19 bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building, in which 168 people were killed.
Not only Specter but also all other regional senators -- Rick Santorum, R-Pa., Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., Jay Rockefeller, D-W.Va., Mike DeWine, R-Ohio, and John Glenn, D-Ohio -- supported the measure.
The eight no votes were cast by Democratic Sens. Paul Simon of Illinois, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, Russ Feingold of Wisconsin, Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois and Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island and Republicans Bob Packwood and Mark Hatfield of Oregon.
The bill authorizes spending $ 2 billion over the next five years to beef up FBI and Justice Department programs to deter domestic terrorism. The measure also expands the FBI's authority to obtain credit and financial records of suspected terrorists from banks.
The bill will be sent on to the House, where it is also expected to win approval.
The final tally was misleading because as many as 30 Democrats opposed a section of the bill, co-sponsored by Specter and Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, that would curb the right of defendants to appeal death sentences by filing federal habeas corpus petitions. But Senate Republicans rebuffed three floor amendments by Democrats that would have modified the Specter-Hatch amendment.
Habeas corpus lets a death-row inmate argue in federal court that prosecutors violated his constitutional rights at his state trial, such as by introducing evidence gathered illegally. Federal judges throw out as many as 30 percent of all state death-penalty convictions because of constitutional errors, resulting in a new trial for the defendant.
But Specter, Hatch and other Republicans have contended that defense attorneys have abused the system, delaying executions for years by filing an endless series of habeas corpus petitions. Hatch cited the case of William Andrews, who after his death sentence was affirmed by the Utah Supreme Court, delayed the sentence for 14 years while he filed 30 habeas corpus appeals.
The Specter-Hatch amendment generally would limit a defendant to one habeas corpus petition, to be filed within six months after a state supreme court has upheld a state court conviction. A federal judge would have 180 days to rule on the petition. Specter has claimed that states could carry out death sentences two years after the state supreme court upholds the original conviction.
Insisting that the death penalty can effectively deter future crimes, Specter said yesterday that ''the deterrent effect on capital punishment is virtually eliminated'' if a state must wait 10 to 15 years to carry out a sentence. ''It is my judgment that society needs this ultimate weapon to deal with violent crime in America,'' he said on the Senate floor.
But Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., sharply objected, warning that tampering with federal safeguards would increase ''the likelihood that innocent people will be executed in this country.
''This bill goes far beyond terrorism, and far beyond federal prisoners. It severely limits the ability of any state prisoner -- not just terrorists, but any state prisoner -- to seek federal court review of federal constitutional rights. This is a highly controversial, very complicated proposal, and it is wrong to try and sneak it into an anti-terrorism bill that all of us want to pass as quickly as we responsibly can.''
Clinton, in a letter last month to Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., urged the Senate not to include habeas corpus reform in the terrorism bill. But in an interview Monday on CNN's Larry King Show, Clinton presented an opposite stance, saying habeas corpus reform ''ought to be done in the context of this terrorism legislation, so that it would apply to any prosecutions brought against anyone indicted in Oklahoma.''

Load-Date: June 9, 1995


End of Document