Senate hearing questions tribunals;
Emergency measures are needed to prevent future
attacks, the head of the terrorism probe testified.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 29, 2001 Thursday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A16
Length: 761 words
Byline: Frank Davies INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Under sharp questioning yesterday from senators, the top official directing the terrorism investigation vigorously defended military tribunals, lengthy detentions and other emergency powers as wartime necessities.
"Are we being aggressive and hard-nosed? You bet," Assistant Attorney General Michael Chertoff told the Senate Judiciary Committee. "In the aftermath of Sept. 11, how could we not be?"
Chertoff, a former U.S. attorney for New Jersey, said the measures were needed to prevent future terrorism and were being used "within established constitutional and legal limits."
He said that "dragnet" interviews of 5,000 Middle Eastern men did not amount to ethnic profiling and defended the Justice Department order allowing the monitoring of conversations between some terrorism suspects and their lawyers.
In the first oversight hearing in Congress on a range of executive powers newly asserted by the President, several senators criticized Bush's decision to set up military tribunals to try terrorism suspects and accomplices, which could include resident aliens in the United States.
Under Bush's order, made without congressional consultation, the tribunals could be held in secret, with military officers serving as judge and jury. Rules of evidence would be relaxed and defendants could be convicted and sentenced, including to the death penalty, on a two-thirds vote.
'A terrible message'
Judiciary Chairman Patrick J. Leahy (D., Vt.) contended that the tribunals, by avoiding the federal court system, "would send a terrible message to the world that when confronted with a serious challenge, we lack the confidence in the very institutions we're fighting for."
Leahy and Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.) questioned whether Bush was overstepping his authority. Congress "has the exclusive authority to authorize tribunals," Specter said.
Leahy reminded Chertoff that U.S. officials complained when Egypt, Peru and others used military courts without due process.
Chertoff cited Bush's "inherent authority as commander in chief" in a time of war, even undeclared war. He tried to assure senators that Bush and the Pentagon would make sure that tribunals extend "a full and fair hearing" to those "accused of war crimes - not garden-variety crimes."
Chertoff suggested that for any terrorist leaders who might be captured during the fighting, overseas tribunals would make sense for security and practical reasons:
"In the battlefield, if somebody is caught in Afghanistan, the President should have the option not to bring terrorists back and put them on trial in a federal court in New York or Washington and subject those cities to the danger of having that trial."
GOP support
And he did not rule out sending U.S. suspects before a military tribunal.
Several GOP senators came to Chertoff's defense. Sen. Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said a terrorist trial in the United States "could be a replay of the O.J. Simpson trial."
Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R., Utah) said he approved of the executive powers taken so far, calling some of the criticism he had heard "almost hysterical."
"Most Americans are worried that we are not doing enough to thwart potential terrorist attacks, not that we are doing too much," Hatch said.
Attorney General John Ashcroft has faced growing skepticism on Capitol Hill about some of the measures. Under pressure, he released limited information Tuesday on some of the suspects in custody, and he plans to testify before the committee next Thursday.
Chertoff said the order to eavesdrop on some suspect-attorney conversations would be used very selectively. So far, he said, 16 prisoners are "eligible" for the monitoring, designed to deter plans for future attacks.
Chertoff also told Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D., Mass.) that interviews of 5,000 young, mostly Middle Eastern men in the United States on nonimmigrant visas were "the least intrusive investigative technique that one can imagine."
After Chertoff's testimony, a panel of six former officials and legal experts analyzed the new range of executive powers.
Two former attorneys general, William Barr, who served under the elder George Bush, and Griffin Bell, who served under Jimmy Carter, defended tribunals. Barr said he considered using them during the investigation of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland.
Philip Heymann, deputy attorney general under Bill Clinton, said tribunals were wrong. "I don't think we should give the President that power," he said. "A secret trial by three colonels? It does sound like Paraguay."
Frank Davies' e-mail address is fdavies@krwashington.com.  

Notes

At War With Terror

Load-Date: November 30, 2001


End of Document