Senators have tough questions for Holder; NYC terror trial, Fort Hood shootings fodder for critics
USA TODAY
November 18, 2009 Wednesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 572 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Body


WASHINGTON -- Attorney General Eric Holder has said his decision to bring self-proclaimed 9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and four alleged accomplices to New York City to stand trial in civilian court was the "toughest" call in his short tenure as the nation's top law enforcement officer.
Today, his job gets even more difficult.
In an appearance before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Holder most likely will face difficult questions not only about his decision in the Mohammed case but also about whether federal investigators mishandled information about the Fort Hood shooting suspect's contacts with a radical cleric months before the Nov. 5 massacre.
Three of Holder's most vocal critics of the decision to try Mohammed in civilian court are members of the panel: Republican Sens. Jeff Sessions of Alabama, John Cornyn of Texas and Jon Kyl of Arizona.
"The attorney general is in the middle of a host of major and sensitive issues," said Sessions, the panel's top Republican. "There is a host of questions, and the time will be short."
Holder's decision to try the accused 9/11 planners in civilian court "has monumental policy implications," Sessions said in an interview. He has said the transfer of Mohammed and his alleged accomplices to civilian court is an unnecessary security risk.
Holder, a former federal prosecutor, has said he is "confident" that the terrorism suspects can be tried safely New York.
Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., supports Holder's decision to try Mohammed in New York City. Leahy said last week that the federal courts are "capable" of dealing with terrorism cases.
Leahy has said Holder should expect questions on Fort Hood.
"A lot of the dots were not connected," the senator said Sunday on CBS' Face the Nation.
Leahy, who was not available for comment Tuesday, has said  questions remain about whether information about Army Maj. Nidal Hasan's contacts with Anwar al-Awlaki was properly shared prior to the Fort Hood shooting rampage, which left 13 dead.
Hasan's contacts with Awlaki, now living in Yemen, were first discovered in December by investigators working with an FBI-supervised Joint Terrorism Task Force in Washington.
The task force, which included Pentagon investigators, did not share information about Hasan, an Army psychiatrist, because it found his e-mails were "consistent with research" being done by Hasan, who "was not involved in terrorist activities or planning," the FBI said in a statement last week.
"Ultimately, we should know if mistakes were made ... for the sole purpose of making sure those mistakes are not made again," Leahy said.
Holder's visit to Capitol Hill comes after President Obama last week ordered a government-wide inquiry into how intelligence about Hasan was handled in the months before the rampage. The Defense Department is launching its own review of how the services deal with troubled soldiers, the Associated Press reported Tuesday.
Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, said Tuesday that Holder needs to address a range of subjects, including whether U.S. prisons should be used to house Guantanamo Bay detainees.
As the Obama administration moves to close the military detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, federal officials have been examining prison facilities across the U.S. as possible destinations for terrorism suspects.
Grassley said in an interview that such a transfer raises national security issues.
"What if they got out?" he asked. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Kevin Lamarque, Reuters
PHOTO, B/W, Reuters
PHOTO, B/W, AP

Load-Date: November 18, 2009


End of Document