Senate terrorism legislation sidetracked
Business Insurance
December 10, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 3
Length: 740 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The legislative clock continues to wind down as senators wrestle with the issue of the U.S. government's role in guaranteeing insurance coverage for terrorism-related losses.
A somewhat ancillary issue-whether a terrorism insurance bill should contain significant tort reform provisions in addition to financial guarantees-is delaying a bill's introduction. Nevertheless, insurers are hopeful that a Senate bill will advance, perhaps as early as this week.
''It appears at least there is some light at the end of what has seemed like a very long tunnel,'' said Julie A. Rochman, senior vp for the American Insurance Assn. in Washington.
''It seems like the real sticking issue is legal reform, which is good for us, because clearly they've come to some sort of accommodation on the insurance issues,'' she said.
''We are very encouraged by the movement and the direct contacts we've had with some of the key players in both the Senate and the administration,'' said Carl M. Parks, senior vp-government relations for the National Assn. of Independent Insurers in Washington.
The House of Representatives approved its own terrorism insurance bill on Nov. 29 (BI, Dec. 3). The House measure would set up a government loan program for insurers that sustained terrorism losses. Insurers have generally been cool to the idea of loans rather than cost sharing because it would do nothing to assure availability of coverage.
In the Senate, negotiators from both sides of the aisle managed to reach tentative agreement on the shape of a Senate bill drawn from elements of three competing proposals that were formally introduced in late November. According to sources familiar with the ongoing negotiations, the consensus Senate bill would probably require industry aggregate terrorism losses to reach $10 billion before the federal government would begin paying a share of claims. If losses exceeded $10 billion, it is expected that insurers would have to retain 10% of their losses while the government picked up the remainder.
The Senate approach, however, might also provide additional protection for individual companies under some circumstances if the $10 billion industry aggregate is not reached. Companies would be responsible for an as-yet-unspecified retention based on their market share percentage applied to the $10 billion overall industry retention. If an individual company's losses exceeded the individual retention, the government could step in and pick up 80% of the losses above the retention.
Under the expected Senate consensus, the participation of commercial insurers in the program would be mandatory, while personal lines insurers could do so on a voluntary basis.
How long the program would last also remains to be determined. Some senators favor a two-year program, others a single-year program.
''Arguably, you could say this is a great compromise because everyone is getting some of what they wanted,'' said AIA's Ms. Rochman.
While the House bill would provide a system of government loans to insurers, the Senate plan contains no payback provisions.
''Our preference all along has been for coinsurance rather than a loan program,'' said Ms. Rochman.
The House bill contains a ban on punitive damages except those levied against the perpetrators of terrorist acts or those who conspire to commit them. The inclusion of that tort reform provision held up consideration of the bill for a number of days.
''We continue to be concerned that the issue of tort reform continues to cloud the substance of the debate, which in our view should be about stabilizing insurance markets,'' said David M. Farmer, senior vp in the Alliance of American Insurers' Washington office.
Nevertheless, ''I think it's certainly a welcome movement on the part of Senate leaders to move a bill to the floor of the Senate. We're very much encouraged by that process because of the limited number of days left before the recess,'' he said, noting that the Senate is expected to recess sometime next week.
The NAII's Mr. Parks said that he expected a bill to move to the floor soon, perhaps as early as Dec. 11.
The negotiators ''don't have long to go. I think there's recognition that this is not so much about the insurance industry as it is about the economy. A lot of members have been from constituents in the business community.''
He said he had a ''very, very strong feeling'' that the negotiators are engaged and ''committed to finding a solution.''

Load-Date: December 14, 2001


End of Document