Senate vote more evidence of Gonzales' shredded credibility; Though not officially enacted, a bipartisan majority supported a no-confidence measure.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
June 13, 2007 Wednesday
ELECTION Edition


Copyright 2007 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A8; OUR VIEWS
Length: 300 words
Body


It's instructive to examine just exactly what the U.S. attorney general was doing on Monday while the U.S. Senate weighed a vote of no confidence.
Alberto Gonzales was attending a conference on nuclear terrorism in Miami when he fielded questions about the Senate's vote. ''I'm not focusing on what the Senate is doing,'' he said.
Really? Then how is it the embattled Gonzales found himself talking about whether he would resign at that particular moment?
Through his own actions, Gonzales has greatly diminished his capacity to do his job. His department appears to have fired eight U.S. attorneys for political reasons and, subsequently, could not come up with a straight story about those decisions.
In his own testimony before Congress, Gonzales had astounding lapses in memory when questioned about the involvement of White House political aides in the firings.
Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle say they've lost faith in the attorney general's ability to perform his duties as the nation's chief law-enforcement officer. It is past time that he resign.
In Monday's vote, 53 senators, including seven Republicans, favored ending debate on a no-confidence measure. That's fewer than the 60 votes needed for final enactment but a clear rebuke by a bipartisan majority of the Senate. 
Maine's two GOP senators, Olympia Snowe and Susan Collins, were among those wanting to keep the no-confidence measure alive.
Collins put the issue well in her statement following the vote, noting that Gonzales had made serious errors in judgment.
''It's up to the president to decide the attorney general's future, but I think his continued tenure does not benefit the department or our country,'' said Collins.
Indeed. When Alberto Gonzales went to bed on Monday night, was he thinking about nuclear terrorism or his career?

Load-Date: June 13, 2007


End of Document