SENATORS THINKING HIT SQUAD? / LOOKING FOR WAYS TO FIGHT TERRORISM
 Philadelphia Daily News
SEPTEMBER 4, 1998 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 32
Length: 592 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senators asked FBI Director Louis Freeh yesterday to consider the legality of assassinating Osama bin Laden and other suspected terrorist leaders.
Referring to terrorist leaders, Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., asked Freeh, "What is present law with respect to their takedown?" Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., said, "I would very much like a legal memorandum from the FBI, stating whether or not the prohibition against assassination of heads of state applies to organized crime units, and/or terrorist units."
Freeh said that while the prohibition against killing heads of state is clear, he was unsure about the legality of assassinating others and would study the question.
There was no doubt in the Judiciary Committee hearing whom the senators had in mind: bin Laden, the alleged mastermind of the Aug. 7 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed more than 250 people, including a dozen Americans.
After the hearing, lawmakers stopped short of advocating an assassination attempt on the exiled Saudi multimillionaire and fundamentalist Muslim. But even public discussion of assassination represents a sharp change on Capitol Hill, where the pressure for the executive order prohibiting U.S. involvement in assassinations originated in the 1970s.
"I just want to know what the law is," said Biden.
Feinstein said arrest of terrorists is the best option but said that other "robust" strategies should be considered.
"We have to think in a different way than we thought before," Feinstein said. "It's a very dicey thing to get into a situation where you're going to have licensed hit squads. At the same time we need to find ways to be pro-active."
"It's a bad idea," Sen. Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said of assassination. "We are the most open society on earth. We are the most forward-deployed on earth. And as a result of those things our leaders and our citizens are at risk of retaliation."
Retaliation for the U.S. cruise missile strikes on targets in Sudan and Afghanistan on Aug. 20 is already in the planning, said Freeh.
"We can predict with some certainty that we will see a reaction by bin Laden and his organization," Freeh said. The potential targets are not limited to embassies overseas. "We've identified people in the United States or people who have transited the United States who are associated with him." Freeh said Bin Laden poses "about as serious and imminent a threat as I can imagine."
In 1976, after extensive hearings that exposed CIA assassination plots, President Ford signed an executive order prohibiting U.S. officials from plotting or engaging in "political assassination." The prohibition was broadened by Presidents Carter and Reagan to state: "No person employed by or acting on behalf of the United States government shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, assassination."
The legalities of killing a specific person in a military strike are less clear.
"I don't think the prohibition applies if you're undertaking a military action," said Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa.
Former CIA Director James Woolsey, who also testified before the Judiciary Committee, said, "There's a difference, even though it's a subtle one, between an air strike going at facilities when you know an individual might be there, and going after a single individual."
Before the missile strike on targets in Sudan and Afghanistan, U.S. intelligence was aware that bin Laden planned to be at one of the Afghan camps that day. Officials now believe bin Laden left the site before the missiles struck.

Load-Date: October 17, 2002


End of Document