Senate passes broad anti-terrorism bill
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 14, 2007 Wednesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A3
Length: 337 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


The Senate approved broad legislation Tuesday to give state and local governments new weapons to stop terrorists intent on destruction within U.S. borders. The bill still faces considerable hurdles, however. Differences remain with legislation the House passed in January, and the White House threatened a veto over a provision to give airport screeners limited bargaining rights.
Tuesday's Senate vote was 60-38. The senators from Illinois and Missouri voted in favor of the bill.
The new Democratic majority made the legislation one of its most urgent tasks, saying it was long past time to carry out the July 2004 recommendations of the 9/11 Commission formed after the 2001 attacks.
"This bill is a direct response to the appeals of the 9/11 Commission and the 9/11 families to take constructive action," said Sen. Joseph Lieberman, I-Conn., co-sponsor of the measure.
The bill approves $3.1 billion in each of the next three years for first-responder grants to the states while adjusting the formula on how the money is divided among high-risk states and states less vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Of that, $1.3 billion is specified for high-risk urban areas.
The measure establishes an emergency communications grant program, funded at $3.3 billion over five years; requires bags checked on planes to be screened with the same aggressiveness as carryon bags and outlines improvements for rail and transit security.
The House bill, passed in the first week of the new Congress, also requires, within five years, 100 percent radiation scanning of all cargo ship containers loaded at foreign ports and inspection of all cargo on passenger planes within three years.
The Senate bill additionally moves to block potential terrorists from entering the country by improving reporting of lost or stolen passports and requiring countries to provide information about visitors who could pose a threat to the United States.
---
STLtoday.com/current What would you like to see in an anti-terrorism bill? Talk about it in Current Affairs.

Load-Date: June 26, 2007


End of Document