SENATE OKS ANTI-TERROR BILL
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 18, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. C1
Length: 397 words
Byline: AP
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- Even as the Senate voted overwhelmingly in favor of an anti-terrorism bill, Republicans were divided about whether the legislation would accomplish what it was supposed to.
"We have a measure that will give us a strong upper hand in the battle to prevent and punish domestic and international terrorism," said Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, shortly before the 91-8 vote Wednesday evening.
But Sen. Don Nickles, R-Okla., while praising the bill, said the country remains "very open" to terrorism. "Will it stop any acts of terrorism, domestic and international? No," he said, adding: "We don't want a police state."
The bill moves to the House today on the eve of the first anniversary of the Oklahoma City federal building bombing that killed 168 people. Lawmakers are trying to finish the legislation by Friday.
The bill would limit federal appeals by death-row inmates and other prisoners. It also would provide new federal death penalties in certain international terrorism cases and for killing a federal employee because of the work.
Attorney General Janet Reno said today the bill "has some very effective tools that we can use in our efforts to combat terrorism."
She specifically cited provisions to deport alien terrorists without disclosing classified evidence against them, to prevent fund-raising for terrorism in the United States, and to require taggants, or chemical markers, in plastic explosives so they can be traced.
But she was less enthusiastic about the bill's limits on appeals by prisoners, including death-row inmates.
"I would draft it differently, but I think that there are safeguards" in the bill, she told her weekly news conference. Reno complained that the bill would make it harder for federal judges to overturn a state court ruling.
She added that limiting such appeals would make it more important that states and bar associations ensure that penniless defendants are provided lawyers "who are experienced in death penalty cases, who understand the law so that mistakes will not be made along the way that cause reversals."
The Senate rejected numerous Democratic attempts to expand federal law enforcement powers that the White House had sought.
Nevertheless, President Clinton, who long has pressed Congress to pass tough anti-terrorism legislation, was considered likely to sign the bill.

Load-Date: April 18, 1996


End of Document