SENATORS, ADMINISTRATION NEAR DEAL ON TERRORISM BILL
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 4, 2001 Thursday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-16
Length: 511 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senate Democrats and the Bush administration neared agreement yesterday on a package of new police powers to combat terrorism as a House committee sent its own compromise package to the full House for approval.
Key Democratic and Republican members of the Senate Judiciary Committee worked with the White House and Justice Department to come up with a compromise bill after negotiations fell apart Tuesday over how much secret grand jury evidence could be shared with intelligence agencies.
"We are hopeful that we will have an agreement tonight," said Mimi Devlin, a spokeswoman for committee Chairman Patrick J. Leahy, R-Vt. "We expect to refine the legislation as the process moves forward."
Several agreements have been made on the bill, Senate aides said on the condition of anonymity. They include:
* dropping the administration's request for unlimited detention of immigrants suspected of terrorism;
* dropping the House request for an expiration date on the new laws;
* nationwide jurisdiction for electronic surveillance devices and legal expansion of those devices to e-mail and Internet; and
* authorization for the use of "roving" wiretaps - in which officials get orders allowing them to tap whatever telephone a person uses - under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act.
Two of the final hurdles include the sharing of grand jury information and the deportation of immigrants for supporting terrorist activities, the aides said.
Under the administration bill, immigrants can be deported if they raise or give money to known terrorist organizations or to organizations they should have known committed terrorist acts.
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., wants to give immigrants a chance to prove that they didn't know their solicitations would further terrorist activities, the aides said.
Senate Majority Leader Thomas Daschle, D-S.D., said he wanted to have the final bill on the floor of the Senate for debate before the end of next week. He also said he would try to attach money-laundering legislation that up until the Sept. 11 terrorism attacks had been opposed by the administration.
Devlin declined to immediately provide details of the compromise.
President Bush and Attorney General John Ashcroft have been prodding Congress for quick action on measures that would make it easier for authorities to detain terrorism suspects and monitor their communications.
Meanwhile, the House prepared to act early next week on its own version of the legislation, which weakens some of the police powers Ashcroft sought and would have the laws expire in January 2004.
The House Judiciary Committee approved its compromise version 36-0 late yesterday and sent it on to the full House. House Democratic leader Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri said he also expected the House bill to come up before next Friday.
The bill strengthens the hand of investigators in several areas, including their ability to conduct electronic surveillance in anti-terrorism cases. It also stiffens penalties for several terrorist offenses and extends the statute of limitations on terrorism cases.

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document