Senate to take up bill for screening of refugees; IS drives voter concerns about terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 17, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 Times Publishing Company  All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 6
Length: 384 words
Byline: RICHARD LARDNER

The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON  
Body


The Senate will consider new rigorous screening procedures for Syrian and Iraqi refugees seeking to enter the United States as national security looms large for voters in an election year.
Propelled by the Islamic State group's attacks in Paris, the GOP-backed legislation raced through the House last November with 289 votes. 
That veto-proof margin included 47 Democrats despite the Obama administration's opposition to the measure.
The legislation will have a much harder time making it through the Senate in the week ahead.
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., needs at least six Democrats to join all 54 Republicans to approve a motion clearing the bill for final passage in the 100-member chamber.
The Senate's top Democrat, Harry Reid of Nevada, said last year that was not going to happen. Even if it did, President Barack Obama has pledged to veto the bill if it got to him.
The upshot may be more of the same on Capitol Hill: A war of words, with Republicans blasting Obama for failing to do what they see as necessary to secure the United States and Democrats accusing the GOP of fearmongering to score points with voters.
Some of the key points to know about the Syrian-Iraqi refugee legislation:
IS controls territory in Syria and Iraq. As a result of the extremists' harsh, uncompromising rule, people in those areas have tried to flee and make it to the United States. The House-passed American Security Against Foreign Enemies Act is rooted in concerns the current process of screening refugee is inadequate and could allow a terrorist to be admitted into the United States.
The legislation would order FBI background checks for Syrian and Iraqi refugees and require that the FBI, Homeland Security Department and the director of National Intelligence certify that each refugee is not a security threat. 
The bill's requirements would effectively suspend admissions of Syrian and Iraqi refugees.
Republicans pointed to the arrest this month of two Iraqi refugees with suspected links to terrorism as one more example of the flawed vetting system.
Over the past few months, voters' concerns about terrorism have surged and their confidence in the government's ability to defeat IS and other extremist groups has plummeted, according to a national survey conducted in December by the Pew Research Center.

Load-Date: January 17, 2016


End of Document