SENATE PASSES ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
June 08, 1995, Thursday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 952 words
Body


WASHINGTON _ The Senate responded to the Oklahoma City bombing
by passing sweeping anti-terrorism legislation Wednesday that would
expand law enforcement's powers and stringently limit appeals by
death-row inmates.
The $ 2 billion measure, passed by a 91-8 vote, includes
provisions sought by President Clinton to enlarge federal law
enforcement agencies and the government's wiretapping authority and
allow use of the military in emergencies involving chemical or
biological weapons.
At the White House, Clinton hailed the Senate's bipartisan vote
_ 52 Republicans and 39 Democrats supported the bill _ and expressed
the hope that the legislation would forestall another attack like the
one that killed 168 people in Oklahoma City.
"This legislation will give law enforcement the tools it needs
to do everything possible to prevent this kind of tragedy from
happening again," the president said in a statement.  "It will also
help us prosecute and punish terrorists more effectively.  I urge the
House to do its part and get a bill on my desk without delay."
The vote followed weeks of partisan sniping between Clinton and
Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., who blamed each other for
delaying the legislation.  Dole, who is seeking the GOP presidential
nomination, wrote the bill with Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, the Senate
Judiciary Committee chairman.
Prozac can relieve PMS, researchers say
BOSTON _ Prozac, the world's most popular anti-depressant, can
also greatly relieve the tension and irritability of severe
premenstrual syndrome, researchers say.
Word of Prozac's effects on PMS has spread over the past two or
three years, and many doctors are already routinely prescribing it
for severe cases, which afflict about 1 in 25 women.
This use is likely to increase following the publication in
today's New England Journal of Medicine of a major new study from
Canada.
The study, by far the largest conducted on Prozac for PMS,
confirms several smaller reports showing that the medicine
substantially reduces symptoms in at least half of all women who take
it. It was paid for by Eli Lilly & Co., the maker of Prozac.
Dr. Samuel Wood of Palomar-Pomerado Health System in San Diego
estimates he has prescribed Prozac for 400 to 500 women with PMS and
said the latest work should convince those who still have doubts.
An estimated 16 million people worldwide _ 11 million in the
United States _ have taken Prozac since its introduction in 1988,
largely for depression and obsessive-compulsive behavior.  The growth
has continued despite fears, now largely debunked, that the mind
medicine causes violent and suicidal urges.
Even though depression can be a PMS symptom, doctors believe
Prozac works in PMS largely by regulating the brain's use of the
chemical serotonin rather than by its effect on depression alone.
Wilson retreats from abortion conflict
WASHINGTON _ Retreating from a fight he had promised to join,
California Gov. Pete Wilson will not make a major push to delete the
Republican platform's strict anti-abortion language, campaign aides
say.
Despite his longstanding support of abortion rights, the GOP
presidential hopeful would have no qualms as his party's nominee if
the platform maintained its call for a constitutional amendment
outlawing abortion, said campaign chairman Craig Fuller.
Wilson simply would ignore it, Fuller suggested, no more
"compelled to run on exactly what is in the platform than other
nominees have in the past."
On Wednesday, Wilson spokesman Dan Schnur said it remained the
governor's "preference that the Republican platform include no
language on abortion."
But winning the White House is more important, he indicated.
Schnur said Republicans had an excellent chance of defeating
President Clinton next year "but if we are fighting about issues on
which there are divisions within the party it is not going to happen
."
Wilson's situation is the latest example of shifting abortion
politics among the Republican White House hopefuls and conservative
groups involved in the GOP's divisive abortion debate.
Fighting picks upin Sarajevo
SARAJEVO, Bosnia-Herzegovina _ Fighting intensified in Sarajevo
and surrounding frontlines Wednesday, hours after Bosnia's rebel
Serbs released 111 hostages but blocked other U.N. peacekeepers from
receiving supplies.
Bosnian Serb mortars and tanks pounded Sarajevo, and government
troops attempted to cut a key rebel supply line linking the capital
with rebel headquarters in Pale.
Four people were killed, including a patient shot to death in
his hospital bed by sniper fire. Twenty-two civilians and two French
peacekeepers were wounded.
U.N. officials said they might have to take food meant for
hungry civilians if the Serbs continued to block supplies to U.N.
peacekeepers in besieged government enclaves.
Those comments wrung a small concession late Wednesday.  The
Bosnian Serb military leader, Gen. Ratko Mladic, told U.N. officials
he will allow 90 Ukrainian peacekeepers in the eastern enclave of
Zepa to be resupplied, according to U.N. spokesman Lt. Col. Gary
Coward.
Some 111 peacekeepers released by the Bosnian Serbs early
Wednesday arrived at U.N. headquarters in Zagreb, Croatia.  They had
been freed under intense pressure from Slobodan Milosevic, president
of neighboring Serbia.
Officials tout French cave drawings
The Culture Ministry said French and British specialists had
determined that charcoal pigments of two rhinoceros and a bison found
in the Chauvet cave in the southeastern Ardeche region were between
30,340 and 32,410 years old.
Archaeologists said they were stunned by the finding.  The team
studying the great underground gallery with its more than 300 animal
images, many of them leaping or running across great panels, were
painted perhaps some 20,000 years ago.
Compiled from wire reports

Load-Date: June 8, 1995


End of Document