Senate endorses Patriot Act 'review';
Maine on Tuesday becomes the fourth state officially challenging parts of the anti-terrorism law.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
March 24, 2004 Wednesday, Final Edition


Copyright 2004 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 617 words
Byline: JOSHUA L. WEINSTEIN Staff Writer
Series: STATE HOUSE '04
Body


The Legislature passed a resolution raising concerns about the USA Patriot Act Tuesday, making Maine the fourth state to officially question the anti-terrorism law.
Maine's resolution - passed by the House without a roll call vote on Friday and by the Senate on a largely party-line vote of 18-15 Tuesday - asks Congress to review the act and ensure that future laws "do not infringe on Americans' civil rights and liberties."
It also asks Maine's congressional delegation to work to repeal sections of the act that infringe "upon fundamental rights and liberties as recognized in the United States Constitution."
The resolution is nonbinding and does not require the governor's signature.
The Patriot Act , which Congress passed only weeks after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, comes up for renewal in 2005. President Bush has said he would like Congress to renew the law without changes.
U.S. Rep. Tom Allen, a Democrat who represents Maine's 1st Congressional District, said that the "sunset provision" of the law - a mechanism that makes the law expire if it is not renewed - was key in passing it.
"Parts of the Patriot Act are very important to dealing with the threat of terrorism, and when we passed it in early October of 2001, we knew we were acting in the aftermath of the most devastating terrorist attack in U.S. history," he said.
But he said that parts of it have to go.
Section 215, for example, allows the FBI to find out what books people are borrowing from libraries and makes it a crime for librarians to disclose to patrons that agents have requested their records.
State Rep. Deb Hutton, a Democrat from Bowdoinham, sponsored the resolution passed Tuesday. She said the act is flawed on many levels, but is especially corrosive on issues involving free speech, privacy and search and seizure.
She said she worries that, under the act, she could "be labeled as a domestic terrorist if I go out and possibly challenge the government and what they're doing." She also said she is troubled by the act's impact on search and seizure law.
Hutton said that under the act, government agents can seize library and other records without a warrant. Other sections let people be jailed without being informed of the charges under which they are being held, and without access to lawyers, she said.
U.S. Sen. Susan Collins, a Republican, said in a written statement that the act "was intended to update existing laws in order to give federal officials reasonable and necessary tools to combat domestic threats without sacrificing constitutional liberties."
She said, however, that the act could be improved, and noted that she supported an amendment that "would have more clearly defined protections for people who use computers at their libraries, schools and offices from wiretap surveillance by government investigators without judicial review."
A statement from the office of Sen. Olympia Snowe, also a Republican, emphasized the law's sunset provision. "Congress," it said, "will have the opportunity to . . . make any necessary improvements."
The City of Portland passed a resolution on March 15 criticizing the Patriot Act. According to the Bill of Rights Defense Committee in Massachusetts, 271 other municipalities have passed similar resolutions.
In a January letter to Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft wrote that "the Department of Justice is firmly committed to preserving American liberties as we strive to protect American lives."
Legislatures in Alaska, Hawaii and Vermont have passed resolutions critical of the Patriot Act.
Staff Writer Joshua L. Weinstein can be contacted at 791-6368 or at:
jweinstein@pressherald.com  

Load-Date: March 24, 2004


End of Document