Senate Passes Terrorism Bill Based on Sept. 11 Panel Proposals
The New York Times
July 27, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 417 words
Byline: By CARL HULSE
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 26 
Body


The Senate approved antiterrorism legislation late Thursday that grew out of the recommendations of the bipartisan Sept. 11 commission after voting overwhelmingly for a measure allocating $40 billion for domestic security in the coming year.
  Approval of the antiterrorism bill, which passed 85 to 8, put Democrats within reach of one of their central legislative goals. Party leaders hope the victory helps put to rest talk of a do-nothing Congress before lawmakers begin an August break. The House was expected to pass it the measure and send it to President Bush as early as Friday.
  ''I believe this bill will greatly enhance the security of the American people, protecting them from natural disaster and also, God forbid, from terrorist attack,'' said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, an independent from Connecticut who was one of the chief authors of the bill.
  Defying the White House, Republican senators led an effort to add $3 billion for border security to the homeland security spending bill and suggested they would join an effort to override any veto by President Bush, who has threatened to reject bills that exceed his spending goals. The measure was approved 89 to 4.
  ''On the issue of border security,'' said the Republican leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, ''Senate Republicans have not been pleased with the administration's progress, and are not particularly reluctant to have a vigorous discussion with the administration about the appropriateness of adequately funding border security.''
  Democrats made enacting the remaining recommendations of the Sept. 11 Commission a major campaign theme last year, saying the Bush administration had refused to follow through on some of the proposals even though the commission said they would better secure the nation against the threat of terrorism. 
  The measure put new requirements in place for screening air and sea cargo. In a compromise with Republicans and the administration, Democrats agreed to extend the deadline for inspecting all seaport cargo if ports are unable to comply.
  The legislation changes the way the homeland security agency distributes antiterrorism grants, putting more emphasis on the risk faced by a community.
  The legislation also created a $3.3 billion program intended to help communities improve the ability of different emergency agencies to communicate in an attack or catastrophe. Communication breakdowns were a major problem after the Sept. 11 attacks and Hurricane Katrina, Mr. Lieberman said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 27, 2007


End of Document