SENATE PASSES $ 1.8 BILLION ANTI-TERRORISM BILL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 8, 1995, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 607 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


After five days of bitter debate, the Senate passed on Wednesday a $ 1.8 billion bill sought by President Bill Clinton to bolster the government's ability to sniff out and prosecute terrorists.
The president had asked for the legislation in the wake of the April bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma City and the 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York City.
Republicans and Democrats both agreed on the thrust of the overall bill. However, a successful GOP move to include strict limits on the constitutional right of death-row inmates to file appeals touched off a furious fight that delayed final action.
Once that issue was cleared away, senators voted 91-8 to adopt the overall bill and send it to the House, which is expected to take up similar legislation in two weeks. Two of the senators opposing the bill were Carol Moseley-Braun, D-Ill., and Paul Simon, D-Ill.
Simon referred to capital punishment as "a penalty we reserve for those of modest means."
Republicans argued that too many convicted murderers over the years have filed repeated and frivolous appeals to delay their executions, adding to the pain of victims' families and diverting local prosecutors and states' attorneys from pursuing other crimes.
"Some of these appeals drag on for years and years, up to 18 years in one case I know, thwarting the principle of swift and sure punishment for heinous crimes," said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman. "The real reason opponents fight . . . reform is because they hate the death penalty."
But Democrats insisted that the haste to carry out death penalties would lead to the execution of innocent people, particularly the poor who rarely have access to adequate defenses.
"This might well result in rushing innocent people to execution and that itself would be a dreadful crime," said Sen. Russell Feingold, D-Wis. He cited 52 cases in the last 20 years of innocent defendants being convicted of capital offenses.
But the Senate voted 53-46 to kill one key Democratic effort to make it easier to file death row appeals.
As the House moves toward adoption of its own version of the bill, early signs indicate some differences with the Senate. Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, would require congressional review of any presidential action to designate certain foreign groups that raise money in this country as terrorist-linked.cs
In the Senate bill, special courts could deport suspected alien terrorists without having to reveal any clandestinely collected evidence to support the government's reasons for the deportation.ppd
The House bill also differs from the Senate's requirement that tracer elements, called "taggants," be added to commercial explosives such as dynamite and plastique to help authorities trace their origin. w
The Senate bill would authorize $ 1.8 billion to be spent over five years on counter-terrorism efforts, including the addition of up to 1,000 federal agents to investigate suspected terrorists and the establishment of a new counter-terrorism office in the FBI.
At the White House, Clinton hailed the Senate's 52 Republicans and 39 Democrats who supported the bill, and expressed the hope that the legislation would forestall another attack like the one that killed 168 people in Oklahoma City.
"This legislation will give law enforcement the tools it needs to do everything possible to prevent this kind of tragedy from happening again, " the president said in a statement. "It will also help us prosecute and punish terrorists more effectively. I urge the House to do its part and get a bill on my desk without delay."

Load-Date: June 12, 1995


End of Document