SENATE SENDS BUSH TERRORISM BILL THAT SUBSIDIZES INSURANCE CLAIMS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 20, 2002 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 859 words
Byline: RICHARD SIMON, LOS ANGELES TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


A bill to make the federal government the insurer of last resort for future terrorist attacks, touted by President Bush as critical to the nation's economic security, was overwhelmingly approved by the Senate and sent to the White House yesterday.
 Bush has said the measure will stimulate billions of dollars in new construction and provide thousands of jobs that have been put on hold because of the unavailability or the high cost of terrorism insurance.
 The Senate later last night passed a bill that keeps the government's domestic programs running through mid-January at current spending levels, a stopgap budget that clears the way for the 107th Congress to adjourn.
 The 86-11 vote on the insurance measure came as the Senate headed toward adjournment of its lame-duck session, passing another one of Bush's priorities in the war on terrorism -- a bill creating a Department of Homeland Security.
"We have dealt with the physical security of our country since 9/11," said Sen. Christopher J. Dodd, D-Conn., one of the bill's sponsors. "But no security is ever final unless you've also dealt with economic security."
 The bill had been stalled for months because of a dispute over Republican efforts to limit damages in terrorism-related lawsuits. But Bush broke the deadlock, persuading the GOP-controlled House last week to pass the bill, saying it was too important to the economy to delay any longer.
 The legislation creates a three-year $100 billion program, under which the government will cover 90 percent of terrorism-related losses after insurance companies pay an initial amount. Insurers will be responsible for the remaining 10 percent.
 The industry will be required to repay the government -- through a surcharge on commercial policy-holders -- for payments up to $10 billion in the first year, $12.5 billion in the second year and $15 billion in the third year.
 The legislation is the second major package to aid an industry from the economic fallout of the Sept. 11 attacks. The other was a $15 billion package for the airline industry. Insurance industry officials say the insurance measure is not a bailout because government funds will go to policy-holders.
 Sen. Ben Nelson, D-Neb., called the bill a "backstop," not a bailout, for catastrophic losses resulting from acts of terrorism. "This issue is about the economy," he said. "It's not about insurance. Fundamentally, it is a jobs bill."
 Consumer and taxpayer groups questioned whether the bill was still needed.
 "More than a year after Sept. 11, a private market for terror insurance is developing, and this kind of broad taxpayer assistance is no longer necessary," said Travis Plunkett, legislative director for the Consumer Federation of America. "Congress is roaring up to the scene of the accident with a lot of money while the patient has gotten up and limped away."
 The industry expects to be able to cover the estimated $40 billion to $50 billion in claims arising from last year's attacks, and this legislation does not cover those claims. Industry officials have said that without government assistance, they cannot insure against the incalculable liability from future attacks.
 A wide range of business interests, from builders and mortgage bankers to hotels and sports teams, lobbied for the legislation, contending that the unavailability or the high cost of terrorism insurance has stalled more than $15 billion in projects. But supporters were unable to provide a list of such projects.
 The spending bill, which was approved 92-2 and has passed the House, postpones major budget decisions until after the new GOP-controlled Congress convenes in early January. The measure is needed because lawmakers have passed only two of the 13 appropriation bills -- for the Pentagon and military construction -- needed to finance the government in the budget year that began Oct. 1.
 Postponing action on the other spending bills culminates a year of budget meltdown that has been almost without precedent. Not in recent memory has Congress left so much of its basic fiscal work undone for so long.
 The deadlock had its roots not only in divisions between the parties on spending priorities, but also in intraparty schisms. For the first time since the modern budget process was established, the Senate failed to pass a budget resolution setting spending guidelines for the year -- largely because Democrats who control the Senate could not keep their party together behind such a plan.
 In the House, appropriation bills were stalled largely by a power struggle within the GOP that pitted conservative leaders -- who want to keep spending on nonentitlement programs to Bush's request of about $750 billion -- against members of the powerful Appropriations Committee, who want to spend more.
 To keep the government running after Oct. 1, Congress passed a series of short-term measures to keep funding at last year's levels. The latest version would extend that funding level through Jan. 11, which is more than one-quarter into the current budget year. That means most programs scheduled for increases in pending appropriation bills will not get them before mid-January, if then.

Notes

Los Angeles Times writer Janet Hook contributed to this report.

Load-Date: November 21, 2002


End of Document