Senate Committee Approves Legislation To Reauthorize Patriot Act Provisions
RTT News (United States)
October 8, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 483 words
Body


(RTTNews) - On Thursday, the Senate Judiciary Committee voted 11-8 to approve legislation to reauthorize expiring provisions in the USA PATRIOT Act and improve oversight of several tools used to gather intelligence.
The USA PATRIOT Act Sunset Extension Act reauthorizes three provisions of the Patriot Act that are set to expire at the end of the year: roving wiretaps, the "lone wolf" measure, and Section 215 orders for tangible things, commonly referred to as the "library records" provision.
The legislation also includes several oversight provisions, including sunsets and audits of National Security Letters (NSLs), ensures greater judicial review of nondisclosure orders and reporting requirements to allow Congress to monitor the use of authorities.
Further, it includes new court approved minimization procedures for Section 215 orders for business records or tangible things and for NSLs to ensure stronger privacy protections.
"I remain mindful of our responsibility to ensure both security and liberty as we proceed," said Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy (D-VT). "Our bill will provide the tools that are needed to protect us, while increasing the protections of our vital constitutional rights, as well."
With the approval of the Committee, the Act now heads to the full Senate for a vote.
Some of the changes to the legislation at the meeting included clarifying that minimization procedures for pen register/trap and trace orders apply to information "known to concern" U.S. persons.
They also adopted a change that requires FBI (or another agency issuing a National Security Letter) to include specific facts in its written statement supporting the issuance of the National Security Letter showing that the information requested is relevant to an authorized investigation.
President George W. Bush signed the PATRIOT Act into law on October 26, 2001 in response to the September 11 terrorist attacks.
Under the Act, law enforcement agencies were granted increased abilities to search telephone, e-mail communications, medical, financial, and other records in order to uncover potential terrorist plots.
Additionally, the Act eased the restrictions on foreign intelligence gathering within the U.S., as well as expanding the definition of terrorism to include "domestic terrorism."
Though the Act passed both the House and Senate easily, it was criticized by many for infringing on civil liberties because of the freedom it gave law enforcement agencies to potentially invade the privacy of U.S. citizens.
Over the years since it was signed into law, the PATRIOT Act has undergone many revisions to address the privacy concerns, but there are still enough of the much-debated provisions left that there are continued calls for further modification or outright non-extension of the Act.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document