Senate Bill Would Renew Insurers' Aid On Terrorism 
The New York Times
November 19, 2005 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 765 words
Byline: By RAYMOND HERNANDEZ
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18 
Body


The Senate on Friday passed legislation that would extend a program that required the federal government to cover insurance losses in cases involving catastrophic terrorist attacks.
  President Bush and Congress put the program in place roughly three years ago after billions of dollars in construction projects were disrupted because private insurers abruptly excluded terrorism coverage from standard policies after the Sept. 11 attacks.
The program was set to expire at the end of this year, leading to concern in the real estate, construction and insurance industries, especially in New York and in other cities considered vulnerable to attack, like Boston, Miami, Chicago, Los Angeles and Washington.
  The Senate legislation makes several significant changes in the program, most notably through provisions that would increase the costs for insurance companies and reduce the coverage.
  But even with those changes, the bill drew praise from industry representatives, largely because it leaves intact the main part of the program: requiring the government to pay the bulk of insurance losses in a terrorist attack up to $100 billion.
  Representatives of the industries had warned that many real estate transactions would be jeopardized if the federal program expired because terrorism insurance would become difficult, if not impossible, to obtain.
  ''The Senate has acted to protect U.S. businesses, workers and investors from uncertainty about the future availability of terrorism insurance, as well as the potentially catastrophic economic losses and dislocations that would follow any future terrorist attacks,'' said Jeffrey D. DeBoer, president of the Real Estate Roundtable, an advocacy organization for real estate companies.
  Now, the issue moves to the House, where lawmakers are also advancing legislation that would extend the program, though the bill making its way through that chamber differs from the Senate bill in some significant respects. 
  Industry leaders urged the House to follow the Senate's lead and move to extend the program before it expires.
  The program has been intensely debated since it was adopted. Critics said the huge role played by the government was preventing the private sector from developing ways to provide terrorism coverage on its own.
  In fact, the Bush administration had said it would not support an extension of the program, known as the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, unless the insurance industry was willing to play a larger role in providing insurance. That position emboldened members of Congress who had argued that the program amounted to a needless bailout of the insurance industry.
  But proponents of the current program argue that in the absence of terrorism coverage, banks will be reluctant to finance real estate purchases, construction projects or other such investments. Banks usually require businesses to insure any property they use to secure loans, according to industry experts.
  Moreover, the program's supporters said that critics of government intervention ignore the crisis the business community faced after the 9/11 attacks, when losses totaled more than $40 billion. Insurers suddenly began excluding terrorism coverage from standard commercial policies, arguing that the risks were too difficult to predict and could ultimately ruin them.
  In a statement released on Friday, the White House expressed its support for the Senate bill.
  The bill extends the federal insurance program through the end of 2007. It increases the amount of property and casualty losses that would require the federal government to provide coverage: to $50 million in 2006 and $100 million in 2007. The government program is now put into effect after an attack involving as little as $5 million in losses.
  The bill also reduces the range of coverage in the program by excluding coverage for damage to commercial vehicles, theft, burglary and other areas. It also raises the deductibles for insurers before federal help begins. After the deductible is reached, the federal government covers 90 percent of insured losses in 2006 and 85 percent in 2007.
  Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, expressed disappointment that the bill does not make the program permanent, as some industry leaders preferred, arguing that it had restored confidence in the real estate and insurance industries.
  ''Insurance rates have come down, terrorism insurance is available, and insurance companies know if, God forbid, the worst happens there will be a backstop, and they are willing to issue policies,'' Mr. Schumer said on the Senate floor.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 19, 2005


End of Document