SENATE PASSES TERRORISM INSURANCE BILL THAT DIFFERS FROM HOUSE'S
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 19, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 281 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate approved a bill Tuesday to help allay the costs of terrorism insurance, setting up a showdown with the House over how to help businesses survive possible future disasters. President George W. Bush warned that he wanted the final measure to include protections against "predatory lawsuits."
The Democratic-controlled Senate approved the bill by a vote of 84-14, sending it to a House-Senate conference committee and beginning a new fight over a final version to send to the president. All senators from Missouri and Illinois voted to pass the bill.
The House approved its own version of the bill last year, and the two sides will now get together and try to hammer out their differences.
Democrats say there is room for compromise with House Republicans. "The president wants this bill, the House wants this bill, we want this bill," said Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev.
Earlier Tuesday, Bush showed his desire for the bill, making calls to some senators to help twist arms on a vote to speed the bill's passage. After the vote, Bush applauded Senate passage.
After Sept. 11, many insurers limited or dropped coverage for casualty and property losses to terrorism because insurance companies faced record payouts of $30 billion to $50 billion.
The House has passed legislation under which the government would help insurers continue to offer terror insurance by agreeing to pick up, for at least one year, 90 percent of losses in any major attack.
Under the Senate bill, the insurance industry would have to pay $10 billion of insurance costs for terror attacks for two years. Beyond that level, the government would cover 90 percent with the insurance industry paying the remaining 10 percent.

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: June 19, 2002


End of Document