SENATE CRIME BILL HITS A NEW SNAG
The New York Times
July 10, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk; Column 1;
Length: 433 words
Byline: By GWEN IFILL,

By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 9
Body


Senate Republicans and Democrats are trying to resolve several disputes over the anti-crime package that threaten to revive debates on gun control, prisoners' rights and deportation of foreigners suspected of terrorism.
The anti-crime bill seemed close to passage after the Senate approved the gun control provisions shortly before the Fourth of July recess, but it became bogged in details this week.
A first attempt to end debate on the bill collapsed today when gun control opponents objected to an understanding worked out by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, and Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina. The Senators had sought to limit debate on the more than 70 outstanding amendments.
 
Vote to Limit Debate
 By the end of the day, key members of both parties were pessimistic about resolving the disputes.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, scheduled a vote for Wednesday on a move to limit debate, but he was skeptical about the Senate's willingness to approve it.
"That vote will determine whether Senators want to enact a crime bill or not," he said.
One of the more divisive issues could be the revival of a Republican measure that would allow the Government to hold special deportation hearings for foreigners suspected of terrorism.
The original proposal would have allowed the hearings to be conducted in secret without giving a defendant an opportunity to respond to charges.
A new version, drafted by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, includes stricter guidelines for such hearings.
But it has not satisfied critics, including the American Civil Liberties Union and the American Bar Association. John J. Curtin Jr., the president of the lawyers organization, said that if passed, the Simpson amendment would be a "dramatic erosion of accepted notions of due process."
In another potentially crippling dispute, Senators opposed to gun control have refused to limit debate. Patrick Raffaniello, director of the National Rifle Association's legislative arm, wrote the Senators today, urging them to resist limiting debate.
Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, said disagreements on the gun control provisions "represent a continuing impediment" to the conclusion of the anti-crime debate.
"At this point, I guess that the bill's going to pass at some point," Mr. Gramm said.
Part of the agreement worked out between Mr. Thurmond and Mr. Biden would have barred reopening either the debate regarding the search and seizure and the habeas corpus provision, which would limit inmates' rights to Federal court reviews of their cases.

Load-Date: July 10, 1991


End of Document