Senior Aide Implicating Bin Laden In Terrorism
The New York Times
December 3, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 752 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


If Osama bin Laden ever stands trial in New York for the bombings of the American Embassies in Africa and other acts of terror, it is already clear who prosecutors will call as a chief witness: one of his senior aides who has been talking to American investigators for two years.
The Government has identified the aide in court papers with the pseudonymn CS-1 -- it means confidential source -- saying the person pleaded guilty to terrorism in a secret proceeding in Federal district court in Manhattan.
According to the Government, the informant worked closely with Mr. bin Laden from 1989 to 1996, a period when prosecutors assert that Mr. bin Laden was ordering deadly attacks on United States soldiers in Somalia and elsewhere.
From the court papers filed in the investigation of the embassy bombings in East Africa in August, it is clear that the informant has provided crucial information to Federal investigators. They have cited the source in the papers filed to support the extradition of two associates of Mr. bin Laden who are under arrest in Germany and Britain. Mr. bin Laden, a Saudi exile, is thought to be living in Afghanistan.
The source is also a basis for many of the significant charges in the indictment against Mr. bin Laden himself, including the assertion that he ordered the attacks on American soldiers in Somalia and that he attempted to obtain nuclear weapons.
It is not known whether the source is in custody somewhere, or hiding under Government protection. As recently as 11 days ago, records show, the source swore to a five-page affidavit before a New York notary summarizing his allegations against Mr. bin Laden.
Government officials adamantly declined to say anything about the identity of CS-1.
But at least one operative of Mr. bin Laden's group in East Africa concluded more than a year ago that he knew the identity of a crucial turncoat: Sidi Tayyib, a businessman who was married to one of Mr. bin Laden's relatives.
The operative's concerns were inflamed by a report in a British newspaper that Mr. Tayyib was cooperating with Saudi and American authorities.
In an August 1997 article, The Daily Telegraph reported that Mr. Tayyib had been in custody in Saudi Arabia since May and had given intelligence officials details of Mr. bin Laden's bank accounts and businesses.
The news of Mr. Tayyib's possible defection, the East African operative wrote in a report apparently intended for the group's commanders, "almost made me explode.
"An important man with close links" to Mr. bin Laden "seems to have fallen into the enemy's hands, and we have to take all the appropriate security precautions against that," the operative, Haroun Fazil, wrote in his summary of security concerns. Mr. Fazil has since been charged in the embassy attacks and remains at large.
The report was typed on a computer seized last year by Kenyan authorities, according to a Government filing last week in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Thus far, American prosecutors have charged at least six members of Mr. bin Laden's organization with terrorist activities or conspiracy. In one recent filing, they said their case will in part be "based on the testimony" of the confidential source, suggesting that the informant has agreed to testify at any trial of Mr. bin Laden or his associates.
The arrangement appears to have resulted from a plea bargain in which the source is cooperating in hopes of receiving a lesser sentence. There is no indication that the source has yet been sentenced and it seems likely that sentencing would take place after the investigation and ensuing trials are complete.
In the affidavit prepared last week, the source acknowledged pleading guilty to terrorism charges in the United States and said they stemmed from attacks on American targets, which were not specifically identified. The source described taking "an oath of allegiance" to follow Mr. bin Laden's orders, and gave a detailed account of Mr. bin Laden's group, including its history and inner workings.
The source told of private statements by Mr. bin Laden to other members of his group, Al Qaeda, encouraging them to attack United States troops and other citizens in the Middle East and Africa.
"I either heard these statements myself," the source said, "or I read them or learned of them from other Al Qaeda members."
The Government has also said in other court papers that the source helped identify Mr. bin Laden's signature on a 1996 document urging Muslims to kill Americans.
Mr. Tayyib's whereabouts are unknown.

Load-Date: December 3, 1998


End of Document