Sensing Weakness, Senate Democrats See Strength in Bucking the President
The New York Times
September 29, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 20; NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 1029 words
Byline: By CARL HULSE
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28 
Body


The Democratic vote in the Senate on Thursday against legislation governing the treatment of terrorism suspects showed that party leaders believe that President Bush's power to wield national security as a political issue is seriously diminished.
  The most vivid example of the Democratic assessment came from the party's many presidential hopefuls in the Senate. All of them voted against the bill, apparently calculating that Mr. Bush's handling of Iraq has undercut the traditional Republican strength on national security and will insulate them from what are certain to be strong attacks from Republicans not only this year but also in 2008.
Democratic opponents of the legislation said their political position was driven by a substantive determination that the bill, which creates rules for interrogating and trying terrorism suspects, is fundamentally flawed and a dangerous departure from founding American principles. 
  ''The only reason to worry about the politics of it is if you don't understand it and don't have the guts to stand up and defend your vote,'' said Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, who is considering a presidential race. 
  Over all, 32 Democrats voted against the measure while 12, including some of those in the most difficult re-election fights, backed it. Among the latter was Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, whose perceived support for Mr. Bush has brought him political trouble at home.
  It was a stark change from four years ago, when Mr. Bush cornered Democrats into another defining pre-election vote on security issues -- that one to give the president the authority to launch an attack against Iraq. At the time, many Democrats felt they had little choice politically but to side with Mr. Bush, and a majority of Senate Democrats backed him. 
  The Iraq vote of October 2002 was a subtext to the Senate debate on Thursday. Democrats pointed to the situation in Iraq as an example of what can happen when the Bush administration, in the charged atmosphere of an approaching Congressional election, is handed new power by a compliant Congress.
  ''After four years, the price we are paying is clear for saying to a president and an administration that we would trust you,'' said Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, whose own vote on the war haunted his 2004 presidential campaign. There is no doubt the vote will be injected into the final weeks of the midterm campaigns. Republicans have been working to draw Democrats into a fight over security legislation. But a division among Republicans allowed Democrats to stay out of the fray until the moment of truth arrived this week.
  Within minutes of the vote on the bill in the House on Wednesday, Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois denounced the Democrats who had voted against it. Mr. Bush echoed him on Thursday, speaking before the Senate voted. 
  ''We must give our professionals the tools necessary to protect the American people in this war on terror, and those in the House of Representatives were wrong to vote against this bill,'' Mr. Bush told a crowd in Birmingham, Ala.
  Democrats know what awaits them. 
  ''I fear,'' said Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Democrat of New York, who is up for re-election this year and who is a possible presidential candidate in 2008, ''that there are those who place a strategy for winning elections ahead of a smart strategy for winning the war on terror.''
  Party strategists have concluded, however, that Democrats can hold their own politically with Republicans on security issues and that voters no longer give Mr. Bush such wide latitude in the fight against terrorism. Democrats believe they can rebut the stinging attack to come by persuading Americans that the tribunal bill was rushed for political reasons and overturned basic rights like the ability to challenge one's incarceration.
  ''I think most Americans would agree that if somebody is held they should at least be able to respond to the charges,'' said Senator Barack Obama, Democrat of Illinois. ''The fact we don't have that is something that, over time, Americans are going to be embarrassed about.'' 
  Yet the minority of Democrats who joined with Republicans in passing the bill again illustrated that the party is unable to speak with one voice on security issues. Senator Ben Nelson of Nebraska, a Democrat up for re-election who often breaks with his party, said he was willing to follow the lead of Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who lent the final legislation his strong endorsement. Mr. McCain is a potential Republican presidential candidate.
  ''I think people respect Senator McCain on these issues,'' Mr. Nelson said, ''and I think he probably represents the views of a lot of people in Nebraska.'' 
  Four other Democrats facing voters this year -- Bill Nelson of Florida, Debbie Stabenow of Michigan, Thomas R. Carper of Delaware and Robert Menendez of New Jersey -- voted for the bill. New Jersey's other senator, Frank R. Lautenberg, a Democrat, also supported it. Nine others running for re-election opposed it.
  Republicans were surprised by the level of Democratic opposition in both the House and Senate. Some Republicans were predicting a ''jail break,'' an outcome where lawmakers criticize a bill and support proposed changes but then support it at the end. They think Democrats will find it hard to justify their position.
  ''It is a kind of difficult vote to explain, at least where I come from,'' said Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas.
  But Democrats argue they came out on the better end of the terrorism debate this week, with public attention focused on a National Intelligence Estimate that suggested that the war in Iraq was fueling terrorism while other Republican-backed security legislation was tied up in divisions between the House and Senate.
  ''Republicans thought this would end up in a big roar for them, and it is ending up in a little whimper,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
  Each party believes it enhanced its political standing this week. The Nov. 7 elections will help determine which one did.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, shown yesterday with reporters, voted against legislation governing the treatment of terrorism suspects. (Photo by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

Load-Date: September 29, 2006


End of Document