Sentencing set for Al-Arian co-defendant
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 12, 2006 Wednesday
2 Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TAMPA & STATE; Pg. 4B
Length: 295 words
Byline: CARRIE WEIMAR
Dateline: TAMPA 
Body


Hatem Naji Fariz, the sole remaining co-defendant of Sami Al-Arian's, will be sentenced July 25, according to documents filed in U.S. District Court on Tuesday.
No details were available Tuesday about the sentencing. Steve Cole, a U.S. Attorney's Office spokesman, said he could not comment.
Fariz's lawyer, Kevin Beck, told the St. Petersburg Times in May that his client planned to accept a plea agreement. Beck could not be reached for comment Tuesday.
After a six-month terrorism-related trial that ended in December, a jury acquitted Fariz of 25 terrorism-related charges and deadlocked on eight. Rather than be retried, Fariz accepted a plea deal, Beck told the Times.
According to court documents, Fariz sent money raised in Tampa and Chicago to Elehssan, a charity in the Gaza Strip, which also was financially supported by Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a group that has taken credit for hundreds of deaths in Israel and the occupied territories.
The government says that when Fariz sent money to Elehssan, he in essence was helping the PIJ because that was a charity it supported, prosecutors said.
According to court documents, Fariz, 33, is a U.S. citizen from a small town near San Juan, Puerto Rico. He was raised in Bridgeview, Ill., where he was captain of the soccer team. He got bachelor's and master's degrees in computer science from the University of Northeastern Illinois.
Media General, the company that owns the Tampa Tribune, filed a motion in federal court late Tuesday to unseal documents related to Fariz's sentencing before the July 25 hearing.
In the motion, Media General lawyer Gregg Thomas wrote: "The documents should be released promptly and in advance of the upcoming sentencing, so that the public is able to fully understand those proceedings."

Load-Date: July 12, 2006


End of Document