SEPARATING TERRORISM FROM RADICALISM
The New York Times
November 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 3; Editorial Desk; OP-Ed
Length: 815 words
Byline: By Sheldon S. Wolin
Dateline: PRINCETON, N.J.
Body


After the attempted robbery of a Brink's truck Oct. 20 in Nyack, N.Y., the murder of two policemen and an armoredcar guard, and capture of some underground radicals from the 1960's, law-enforcement officials promptly claimed that the holdup was part of a ''terrorist conspiracy'' aimed at establishing ''a socialist state'' and abolishing the Government ''as we know it.''
Was this act different from terrorism? And what kind of radicalism did it represent?  How does it differ from contemporary democratic radicalism that has its roots in the revival of participatory democracy rather than in the violence of the 60's?
Terrorism is not any crime committed by someone whom public officials perceive as radical.  Leftist terrorism tends to select its victims for their symbolic value, but for the terrorist act to convey the desired meaning a specifically political context is required. Without a political context, the act signifies another kind of violence - armed robbery, for example.
Sheldon S Wolin op-ed comment distinguishes between terrorism and radicalism in context of October 20 attempted Brink's truck robbery
This distinction is not meant to justify terror or violence but to underscore the absence of context in the Brink's murders. The holdup came from nowhere, the suspects from underground. The act was gratuitous, without manifestos or ideological preliminaries, devoid of immediate political symbolism. The disconnectedness of the act is its essence, which is why the description of it by law officers as indicative of a ''Mafia-type organization'' and of ''racketeering'' is so revealingly inappropriate.
What is radical about the Weather Underground and the Black Liberation Army is their political and social isolation. Unlike the Mafia, they have no stable connections with legitimate institutions, such as political parties, public bureaucracies, trade unions, and businesses.
The absence of durable ties of race, class, work, politics, or culture accentuates the elitism and abstractness that are the most striking features of these groups. Their exclusivity and arrogance; their claim to speak for the many they have never spoken to; their contempt for law, human life, the humdrum routines of everyday existence - in short, for the moral and political universe that most human beings accept - is an elitism that accords with the closed, private, underground world of antipolitics.
It is a world of feigning, of false appearances. Typically, the neighbors of those arrested were startled by the contrast between the ''real'' identity of the alleged conspirators and their disguise as ordinary people. They are not authentic democrats, radicals with their faces averted. They do not see their actual victims: two smalltown police officers, one of them black, and a security guard.  Instead, they see abstractions, hirelings of finance capitalism; their understanding unconsciously mimics the abstract and impersonal ways of the very managers and bureaucrats they loathe.
Genuine political life exists only when human beings, on a plane of equality, engage their common problems through discussion and deliberation. The recognition that political life is in profound danger today is the true starting point for democratic radicals. At this time, when the ability to impose economic solutions is increasingly becoming the test of political arrangements, the political institutions that were designed to express the needs and hopes of citizens and to associate them directly and indirectly with political life - the institutions of parties and the Congress, state and municipal governments, public education. - have become gravely weakened or controlled by corporate power.
The task for radicals is not to discover the magic act of violence that will goad the ''masses'' into a fury at their oppressors but rather to invent the conditions for genuinely democratic politics.
The stakes are symbolized by the reactions of some Columbia University undergraduates to the Brink's holdup. ''People are basically interested in themselves,'' said one. Another observed: ''They look back at '68 and say what's the use of worrying about everyone else, what did it get them … I can't see anybody killing a cop, but … I don't think students are that concerned about it.  They're pretty apolitical.''
This response fits in perfectly with the conviction of many powerful corporate leaders, politicians, and intellectuals that the United States suffers most from an excess of democracy. To pull back from political involvement creates more space, more discretionary room for technocrats and managers. It encourages politics characterized by periods of bureaucratic order and fits of nihilistic violence - or vice-versa.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sheldon S. Wolin is professor of political theory at Princeton University and editor of democracy, a quarterly.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document