Sept. 11commission slams FBI Panel says Ashcroft refused agency's appeal for funding

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 13, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 627 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - The FBI failed miserably over several years to reorganize and respond to a steadily growing threat of terrorism, and Attorney General John Ashcroft rejected an agency appeal for more funding on the day before al-Qaida struck, the commission investigating the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks said today.
"On Sept. 11, the FBI was limited in several areas," the commission said in a staff report. It cited "limited intelligence collection and strategic analysis capabilities, a limited capacity to share information both internally and externally, insufficient training, an overly complex legal regime and inadequate resources."
On the day of the attacks, "about 1,300 agents, or 6 percent of the FBI's total personnel, worked on counterterrorism," reported the commission investigating the attacks.
The commission released its unflinchingly critical report - which chairman Thomas Kean described as an "indictment' - at the outset of two days of hearings from several current and former officials at the Justice Department and FBI.
Former FBI Director Louis J. Freeh, the first to take the witness chair, politely and firmly took issue with the findings.
"We had a very effective program with respect to counterterrorism prior to Sept. 11 given the resources that we had," Freeh said, noting that the report found that inadequate resources and legal restrictions were key ingredients in the agency's failings. That seemed a reference to Congress, which approves funding, and former Attorney General Janet Reno, who issued guidelines meant to strengthen American civil liberties protections by keeping the fruits of intelligence separate from criminal prosecution.
But Reno was quoted in the report as saying that while the FBI never seemed to have sufficient resources, "Director Freeh seemed unwilling to shift resources to terrorism from other areas such as violent crime." Freeh said he shifted resources to meet specific emergency needs, but congressional limits prevented permanent shifts.
Testifying, Reno had a different recollection, saying she had told Freeh "if we need to reprogram, let's do it."
More broadly, Reno said the FBI faced huge challenges in learning how to use all the information it collected on intelligence and criminal matters. "The FBI didn't know what it had. The right hand didn't know what the left hand was doing," she said.
Cofer Black, the former head of CIA counterterrorism center, former acting FBI Director Thomas Pickard and Ashcroft also were on the witness list for the day.
Ashcroft has testified previously that the Justice Department had "no higher priority" than protecting Americans from terrorism at home and abroad.
Yet the commission staff statement quotes a former FBI counterterrorism chief, Dale Watson, as saying he "almost fell out of his chair" when he saw a May 10 budget memo from Ashcroft listing seven priorities, including illegal drugs and gun violence, but not terrorism.
Additionally, on Sept. 10, Ashcroft rejected an appeal from Pickard for additional funding, the commission said.
According to a commission document obtained by the Associated Press, Pickard also raised questions about the presence of former Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick on the panel. The document said Pickard found her membership "surprising" because she and Reno had developed the policy to counter international terrorism primarily through the use of law enforcement techniques.
The commission staff statement discussed a long list of FBI shortcomings on terrorism, including a culture in which agents got credit and promotions for making cases and arrests but not for intelligence work that resulted in fewer prosecutions. Counterintelligence and counterterrorism, the report said, "were viewed as backwaters" within the FBI.

Load-Date: April 14, 2004


End of Document