SEPT. 11 ATTACKS UNDERLINE NEED FOR CRISIS PLAN;
Portland leaders discuss terrorism response with other cities' officials.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
October 6, 2001 Saturday, Final Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B
Length: 620 words
Byline: From staff reports
Dateline: Portland
Body


Ann Simank knows too well that towns and cities need to be prepared for terrorism.
Simank was elected to the city council in Oklahoma City just eight days before the 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. The bombing killed 168 people, left 4,000 family members grieving and caused an estimated $50 million in damage.
"It was chaotic," she said. "We actually thought an airplane had crashed into the federal building."
Simank was one of 35 elected officials in Portland on Friday for a meeting of the National League of Cities Public Safety and Crime Prevention Steering Committee. Portland was represented by City Councilor Jack Dawson, who has been on the committee for three years.
Portland was scheduled to host the committee's biannual meeting long before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. Those events made the two-day gathering, which ends today, more urgent.
On Friday, committee members focused their discussion on preparing for domestic terrorism. They worked on a resolution for Congress asking for federal funding, training and other resources to help local governments prevent and respond to acts of terrorism, including the use of weapons of mass destruction.
While many cities and towns are responsible for their own crisis management, a League survey found that only 55 percent of U.S. cities have terrorism response or prevention plans. About half of U.S. cities (48 percent) reported having conducted anti-terrorist training.
Simank said were it not for prior disaster management training from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Oklahoma City government would have been helpless after the 1995 bombing.
"The first two or three hours after an explosion are critical," she said. "You're on your own."
Portland Fire Chief Martin Jordan, commander of the city's emergency operations during a disaster, said the Fire Department is now beginning FEMA terrorism-response training. The training, which teaches firefighters how to handle hazardous materials - including weapons of mass destruction - was planned months ago, said Jordan.
"Emergency training and programs have been in the works" long before Sept. 11, Jordan said. "But terrorism is a whole new ballgame."
Dawson said Portland's emergency plans need to be sharpened in the wake of the terror attacks. "We see how vulnerable we are," he said. "And that there are people who would be so careless with human life."
The safety committee also discussed how federal authorities need to coordinate better with "first responders" - local police and fire officials - when investigating a crisis scene.
The FBI is the federal coordinator of preparedness and response to terrorism. During the agency's investigation of suspected hijackers in Portland, Dawson said, Portland police have had difficulty getting FBI information for its own investigation.
Simank said local and federal authorities clashed when initially responding to the Oklahoma City bombing. "I can remember being in the room with the feds and our police and fire departments," she said. "Deciding who was in charge was quite a discussion."
Following the 1995 bombing, the nation took some important steps in preparing for terrorism, Simank said. More FEMA training was offered regionally, more anti-terrorism equipment was distributed and grants for disaster preparedness were disbursed to municipalities.
Simank said her city is still recovering from the 1995 bombing. In her experience, she said, victims of terrorism may heal, but will never have closure.
"(Oklahoma City) has built many things back up, but we know the long-term effects are there," she said.
Staff Writer Selena Ricks can be contacted at 791-6365 or at:
sricks@pressherald.com  

Load-Date: October 7, 2001


End of Document