Sept. 11 inquiry continues
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
March 26, 2004, Friday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P10A
Length: 352 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


Developments on Thursday related to a federal commission's investigation of the Sept. 11 attacks:
s The White House asked the commission to give national security adviser Condoleezza Rice a second chance to talk privately with panel members. She met with the commission for four hours at the White House on Feb. 7. A letter from White House counsel Alberto Gonzales said Rice wanted to clear up "a number of mischaracterizations" about her statements and positions about the attacks.
s In explaining that Rice would not appear in an open session, Gonzales said it was important that presidential aides "not be compelled" to testify before congressional panels such as the commission.
s Senate Democratic leader Tom Daschle of South Dakota accused the administration of making former terrorism aide Richard Clarke the latest target in a campaign of "character assassination." Clarke testified before the commission that the Bush administration accorded a lower priority to combatting al-Qaida when it came to power than the outgoing Clinton administration had shown. He also said the invasion of Iraq undermined the fight against terrorism.
s Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, appearing on PBS' "NewsHour with Jim Lehrer," denied that anti-terrorism efforts were ignored during the Iraq war. "We're still attacking al-Qaida and the Taliban … in the Afghanistan area," Rumsfeld said. "The foreign terrorists are in Iraq, and we're working them at the same time. The efforts in the Horn of Africa and elsewhere in the world haven't stopped."
s Bush's spokesman, Scott McClellan, said Clarke "has a growing credibility problem." Bush, during a trip to New Hampshire, defended his handling of the terrorism fight.
s The commission's next public hearings, on April 13-14, focus on intelligence failures. CIA Director George Tenet is scheduled to provide additional testimony.
s The commission plans private interviews with Clinton and former Vice President Al Gore, but has yet to arrange similar meetings with Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney because they have only agreed to be interviewed by just two commissioners.

Load-Date: March 26, 2004


End of Document