Sept. 11 attack spurs international relations studies
University Wire
September 10, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Length: 1018 words
Byline: By Kristin Mayer, Daily Trojan; SOURCE: U. Southern California
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


As the third anniversary of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11 approaches, University of Southern California students are flooding the School of International Relations in preparation for careers in international affairs, officials at the school say.
"International relations is seemingly a more important discipline because of 9/11," said Douglas Becker, a visiting lecturer in the Peace and Conflict Studies program in the School of International Relations. "Students show more of an interest in what we're doing and the kind of questions we're posing."
Students who were juniors and seniors in high school on Sept. 11, 2001 enter college with an interest in pursuing international relations, said Steven Lamy, director of the school of international relations.
Sept. 11 may have been a "defining moment" for many of them in their decision to study international relations, he said.
Student interests are changing, Lamy said. More students are applying to work with the FBI and the Defense Intelligence Agency.
USC currently has 690 students majoring in international relations and close to 200 students pursuing minors in that field.
"International relations, for a lot of students, touches a nerve that is a lot deeper than other subjects," Becker said.
Becker attributed the rise in number of international relations majors to the subject's dominance in the news.
Students listed terrorism as the No. 1 threat to the United States in a class survey, said Wayne Glass, who teaches a class on nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Other top responses included religious extremism, changes in the international system and organized crime.
Now everyone understands something must be done to address the terrorism issue, Glass said.
"The possibility of terrorists using weapons of mass destruction is much more real," he said.
This realization has spurred several changes. Middle East specialists and terrorism experts are increasing in popularity as students crowd into terrorism and international law courses, Becker said.
LEARNING THE ISSUES
Despite this increasing interest, teaching within the School of International Relations has not changed, Lamy said.
The only thing that has changed is that the attack happened on United States soil. International relations scholars were surprised by when and where -- not why -- the attacks occurred, he said.
Sept. 11 is the "framework" and context for studying terrorism, Glass said, but the school has been studying terrorism all along.
It is the clearest suggestion that terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction represent a huge threat to the world, Glass said.
"Nine-eleven tells why we need to think hard about what are effective policies and programs to combat weapons of mass destruction, primarily to keep them out of the hands of terrorists," Glass said.
Courses dealing with terrorism, such as the Espionage and Intelligence course, are increasingly popular. In response to student demands, the school added a course last summer in which students spent four weeks in the middle of the term in Washington, D.C., studying weapons of mass destruction.
While in Washington, D.C., the 12 students interviewed people working in the area in Senate and research institutions.
The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, a Washington research think tank, was so impressed with the USC students that it invited them to attend a conference on weapons of mass destruction, Lamy said.
USC was the only university invited to the conference, which attracted Hans Blix, former executive chairman of the United Nations Monitoring Verification and Inspection Commission, and other U.N. representatvies.
Glass teaches the Nonproliferation and Weapons of Mass Destruction class that would not be as compelling without Sept. 11 as a backdrop, Glass said.
"If 9/11 didn't happen, it might be difficult for people to take this problem seriously," he said. "There is much more concern among the students about this problem because of 9/11."
Americans were living in an artificial bubble prior to Sept. 11, but this changed after the attacks, Lamy said.
Glass described his students as well informed, thirsty for knowledge, and genuinely interested in finding solutions for terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
"Citizens and students should learn what they can learn and do what they can do to support policies and programs to put a lid on weapons of mass destruction," Glass said.
INFORMED DISCUSSIONS
But discussions in international relations classes have become increasingly polarized, essentially eliminating worldviews in the gray middle area, Becker said. He characterized this polarization as a natural trend.
"Nine-eleven was unifying. The response to 9/11 has been polarizing," Becker said.
Nobody denies that military action against al Qaeda was warranted. The question is whether the war in Iraq was about attacking al Qaeda, Becker said.
"Because of the divide, students who tend to be more idealistic take it more seriously. They want to change the world. They take it seriously because they want to become involved in the U.N. or an NGO," Becker said. "Those who are more critical want to sharpen that critique."
Everything seems to be more Sept. 11-centered, he said.
"After 9/11" has replaced "after the wall came down," as the common lecture phrase, Becker said.
This increase in lectures revolving around Sept. 11 interests students, Glass said.
"As far as students are concerned, there is no question that the event of 9/11 and all the events and policies that followed 9/11 have caught their attention," he said.
Glass encouraged students to "think analytically about approaches to solving aggressive terrorism."
A seemingly instinctive response to the problem may not be ideal when compared to more complex solutions, he said.
Free-flowing discussion is an essential element in this process because it fosters awareness, Glass said. In this manner, students would become more informed as they form opinions on the direction in which the country should travel, he said.
"USC students are pretty worldly," Becker said.
(C) 2003 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 10, 2004


End of Document