SERBS AREN'T NEW TO TERRORISM
Daily News (New York)
April 07, 1999, Wednesday


Copyright 1999 Daily News, L.P.
Section: Editorial; Pg.  31
Length: 643 words
Byline: BY LARS-ERIK NELSON
Body


WASHINGTON In June 1979, New York lawyer Deyan Brashich found himself flying across the Atlantic in a Boeing 707 with a three-man crew and a client, a Serb named Nikola Kavaja, who was holding two shampoo bottles.
Kavaja had a plan: He would take the plane's controls and crash it into Communist headquarters in Belgrade, killing himself and, by the way, Brashich. It would be a blow for freedom.
Kavaja had hijacked the plane by persuading American Airlines that the shampoo bottles contained high explosives. Brashich negotiated the release of 135 passengers and substituted himself as a hostage. In the end, Kavaja walked off the plane in Shannon, Ireland, claiming political asylum. Instead, he was arrested and is serving 67 years.
Brashich is still around, and still working as a lawyer for Serbian bad guys. One of his clients is Stevan Todorovic, a former Bosnian Serb police official on trial for war crimes at The Hague, Netherlands. "He beat up 40 people, and one of them died," Brashich said. "It's the kind of thing that could happen in the NYPD, but it happened in Bosnia and in a war, so he's accused of being a war criminal."
Brashich, you understand, is a loyal Serbian-American who emigrated from Yugoslavia as an infant after World War II. But he won't defend Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic in his campaign to rid Kosovo of ethnic Albanians.
"Some of the Serbs in Kosovo are just psychopaths," he said over the phone yesterday. "Hoods are using this turmoil to settle old scores, asking for money. It's as if the Crips and Bloods were going through Beverly Hills."
Like everyone else with a stake in these disputes, Brashich begins his account with what ought to be the motto of the Balkans: "To understand this, you have to go back to. . . ."
And then pick a date: the Battle of Kosovo in 1389, or the Turkish rule that ended in the 19th century or the horror stories of just a dozen years ago, when Serbs were convinced that Albanians were instructing their young men to rape Serbian girls.
For Brashich, one of the grievances occurred three years ago, when Croatians pursued exactly the same kind of ethnic cleansing, driving 180,000 Serbs from the Krajina region.
"The same things that are happening now to the Kosovo Albanians happened to the Serbs in the summer of 1996," he said. "Part of it is mass hysteria, a kind of psychosis of fear. Yes, the Croatians killed 200 or 300 Serbs, but the real impetus for many people to get out was hysteria. That's what I believe is happening in Kosovo. There's no other way I can explain the exodus."
Brashich laments that the United States has not found some way to get rid of Milosevic. "We could have taken him out, but we didn't," he said. "Instead, everybody miscalculated. Milosevic miscalculated NATO's need to vindicate itself, and [President] Clinton and NATO miscalculated this man's craziness. Now it's a real morass."
So we are in a war with the Serbs, people who hold grudges for 600 years, and no solution in sight. But Brashich feels there will be no lasting damage.
"Fifty or 60 years of friendship with the United States cannot be that easily erased," he said. "The Serbs realize it's politicians who get them into these things."
I reminded him that when the World Trade Center was blown up in 1993, authorities, perhaps remembering Nikola Kavaja and some of his pals who liked to blow up parking garages, suspected that Serbs were trying to punish the U.S. for supporting Bosnian Muslims.
Even though the Serbs were not involved, Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, not the brightest light on the porch, warned us that the World Trade Center attack was just what we could expect if we got involved in the Balkans.
"It won't happen," Brashich said. "If they were going to do something to you, the Serbs would do it upfront. Even in Kosovo, when the Serbs do something, it's in your face."

Load-Date: April 8, 1999


End of Document