Settle Kashmir issue
Chicago Daily Herald
August 25, 2019 Sunday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 15
Length: 426 words
Body


Settle Kashmir issue It is difficult to talk when someone tries to smash your face. Such has been the case of India, the nation that has refused to talk to Pakistan. India has been made to bleed by Pakistani state and non-state actors, along with some misguided Kashmiris. 
India does not trust Pakistan on Kashmir until all hostile acts originating from Pakistan stop. After all, Osama bin Laden was found living close to an Army cantonment in Pakistan, a nation whose intelligence services have been fueling the fire of terrorism in Kashmir. Sadly, Pakistan itself has lost hundreds of lives to terrorism after the start of US battles with Taliban. Terrorists kill regardless of what side of the border they are on. Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan has been named among Time's 100 most influential people while Indian PM Mr. Modi called a great unifier by Time, after his victory in recent elections. It is time for Pakistan to stop supporting terrorism and work with India under Mr. Modi to resolve a contentious issue that has devastated families and economies on both sides of the border for the last 73 years. After the British left India, Indian troops arrived in Kashmir to maintain peace only after Kashmiri leadership signed the letter of accession to India, while militias from Pakistan arrived to brutally take over the entire Kashmir. Plebiscite was never an option due to ethnic cleansing of Kashmiri Hindus. India and Pakistan should accept the existing Line of Control as the international border, give Kashmiris the option to select the country of their choice within 1 year, and open the border for trade and movement of the people. They can live peacefully like US and Canada. After all, both speak the same language, have same culture. Both fought together as brothers for freedom from colonial England. Subhash Nigam Palatine Medicaid for All? I am shocked that those on the far left and the socialists keep advocating for Medicare For All. Don't these politicians and advocates know that people on Medicare pay a monthly premium of $110 to $125 a month, need a Medigap policy and a prescription drug policy, both with monthly premiums, and have no dental coverage or long-term care? Why only support Medicare for all when there are millions of people already are on Medicaid that covers all the aforementioned at no or very little cost? Shouldn't everyone get it all free? Just tax the rich and the corporations a little bit more, what's a few trillion more? The new slogan should really be free Medicaid for All. Tom Schnurstein Wheaton

Load-Date: August 26, 2019


End of Document