Settlements and terrorism
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
October 9, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. A20
Length: 486 words
Body


Another grisly suicide bombing, another Israeli retaliation. Only this time, Israel struck a target in Syria. In the chess game of the Middle East, the Israeli raid risks widening the conflict into another Arab state.
President Bush's response was half right. He condemned the suicide bombing, which killed 19 Israelis and the bomber on Saturday. He reiterated that Israel has a right to defend itself. He condemned the Palestinian Authority for failing to arrest and disarm the militant extremists of Hamas and Islamic Jihad who attack Israel. The president is correct about all of that.
But the president failed to address the underlying issue which fuels the suicide bombings in the first place: the continuing Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the ongoing expansion of Jewish settlements there. Late last week, the Israeli government added fuel to the fire by calling for bids to build 600 new homes in three West Bank settlements.
Israel's supporters will argue that there is no moral equivalence between blowing up innocent civilians and expanding Jewish settlements on disputed land. They are right.
But it is absurd for U.S. foreign policy to downplay the central dispute that fuels Arab and Palestinian rage. It is desperation over their inability to stop illegal Israeli expansion in the occupied territories that motivates Arab terrorism.
The settlements issue also deeply affects the creation of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza. Such a state would be meaningless if it were carved into isolated pieces by Jewish settlements, access roads that link them, and a security fence.
The Bush administration has urged Israel to freeze settlements in the occupied territories. That is one of the central elements of the so-called road map to peace. But the United States is not applying any real pressure on the Israeli government to comply.
The result is that Israel's settlement policy continues, and so do the terrorist attacks and Israeli reprisals.
The Israeli bombing run against a terrorist training camp near Damascus over the weekend was the first of its kind into Syria since the 1973 Yom Kippur war. It naturally raises the question of whether the upward spiral of Israeli-Palestinian violence will now engulf neighboring Arab states.
Since President Bush has made it his policy to attack states that harbor and sponsor terrorists, he can hardly condemn Israel for the raid. While there is some question as to whether the Syrian camp was used recently by Islamic Jihad, there is little doubt that Syria has sponsored terrorism in the past. It probably does today.
Given that reality, the president's response to events over the weekend in the Middle East made sense as far as it went. But if the United States expects to contain the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and reopen the road to peace, it must address grievances on both sides. And that means facing up to the settlements issue.

Load-Date: October 10, 2003


End of Document