Setting the record straight on TRIA
Business Insurance
July 18, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 6
Length: 785 words
Byline: Paul Winston
Body


Lawmakers and administration officials are giving lobbyists calling for extending the Terrorism Risk and Insurance Act the cold shoulder, as if they were asking for a pork-barrel project to fund a leech-farming institute on the Potomac. The fact that these supplicants instead represent an industry and its policyholders that are vital to the economic well-being of this country does not seem to register in Washington.
TRIA is hardly about largesse for insurers. Unfortunately, that is how it has been portrayed by consumer activists. I sense that many lawmakers have bought into that myth hook, line and sinker. If you've ever had to remove a treble-hooked Rapala from the mouth of a congressman, then you know what a challenge remedying this will be.
This and other misconceptions about TRIA need to be cleared up and lawmakers made to understand what's really at stake if the act is not renewed.
* Misconception: TRIA is a big bailout for the insurance industry.
The law provides a backstop for the insurance industry in case of a terrorist attack, not a subsidy or first-dollar coverage. To date, the federal government has not paid out one nickel to insurance companies-a fact acknowledged by Treasury Secretary John Snow.
In the event the government backstop were to be triggered, any money paid out by the feds would have to be repaid over time-after insurers themselves have paid the brunt of claims.
TRIA merely gives insurers a measure of protection so they feel more comfortable writing coverage against this unpredictable and potentially catastrophic risk. Rather than abandon TRIA and drive the private sector away from this coverage, the government should be doing everything in its power to encourage them to enter this market.
* Misconception: Insurers today are as profitable as they were before Sept. 11 so they clearly they can afford to take a hit.
For the insurance industry, profits are famously fragile and could vanish with a single large event. Insurance 101: If there's no loss under a policy, the insurer pockets the premium and makes a profit. But even without a claim, it has performed a service: it put its assets at risk in case of a claim for the duration of the policy-and often for many years down the road.
Could terrorism coverage generate a profit? Sure, as long as there's no terrorist attack, but insurers are assuming the risk and responsibility of paying out billions of dollars if a loss occurs-as well as that they will not incur a catastrophic loss in some other line of coverage.
* Misconception: Terrorism is just another risk, such as hurricanes, that can be insured in traditional ways.
Terrorism is hardly a routine business risk; rather, it's an act of war waged on individuals and businesses by nontraditional combatants unhappy with the policies of the government. As a result, the U.S. government should help cover this risk of collateral damage to its citizens by terrorists who may be unhappy with U.S. policies abroad.
As for the comparison between hurricane losses and terrorism losses, it's a specious argument. Sure, both are unpredictable, but insurers have more than 100 years of reliable weather records to try to predict their hurricane exposure and businesses have a similar amount of experience with managing weather risk. That is hardly true with terrorism.
* Misconception: The private market will develop its own solutions to the problem without any intervention by Uncle Sam.
In a truly free market, perhaps that would be true-but it would take more time. Also, insurance is one of this country's most highly regulated industries and is not free to put its assets at risk simply because it smells an opportunity. Rating agencies and stock analysts also constrain the so-called free market of insurance.
* Misconception: If the government lets TRIA lapse, it will avoid big expenses in the wake of a terrorist attack.
Without coverage, terrorism losses likely will drive many companies out of business, create unemployment and interrupted commerce, strain local government resources and other economic nastiness. Cost to the government: Increased disaster relief, loss of tax revenues, higher unemployment, welfare and aid expenditures, and so on.
I could go on and on, but the people who can clear up such misconceptions best are the ones who really stand to benefit from TRIA: Businesses, public entities and individuals who face economic ruin if they are left to bear the risk of loss without any insurance.
Stand up and be heard. Don't let this be portrayed as a government handout to fat cat insurers. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Editorial Director Paul Winston’s commentary appears fortnightly.
He can be reached at pwinston@businessinsurance.com.

Load-Date: July 20, 2005


End of Document