Seven killed in explosion outside police office in W. Afghanistan
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 21, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 326 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


A suicide vehicle bomb in Afghanistan's Ghor Province has done massive damage, and killed at least 15 people, mostly civilians.
No one has claimed responsibility for the attack yet.
Violence has continued to rise in the country already shattered by two decades of war.
Smoke rises from the site of a auto bomb attack that targeted an Afghan police headquarters in Feroz Kho, the capital of Ghor Province on October 18, 2020.
"The explosion was very powerful", said Mr Aref Abir, spokesman for the Ghor governor.
California Issues Guidance For Reopening Theme Parks (Developing News)
Under the guidelines, small theme parks may reopen to same-county residents when their county enters Tier 3 (moderate/orange). Smaller parks will have better luck here, but for now, it looks like Disneyland and Univeral won't be reopening anytime soon.
Along with the police headquarters, judiciary offices, women's affairs department and a number of government agencies are located in the blast area.
On Friday, the Taliban agreed to suspend attacks in southern Afghanistan that had displaced thousands of residents in recent days.
The US special envoy to Afghanistan has warned that "distressingly high" levels of violence threaten to derail ongoing peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban. On 16 October, the Taliban agreed to halt its attacks on the condition that the United States stopped its airstrikes in the area. "There are fatalities and casualties, and people are taking them to hospitals". "We condemn this crime, which is against humanity, and we call on the countries that support terrorism to stop supporting terrorism in Afghanistan".
USA special envoy to Afghanistan, Zalmay Khalilzad, who mediated the intra-Afghan talks, also raised concerns in a series of tweets saying the "distressingly high" levels of violence threatened to undermine the talks.
Guterres strongly condemned the "indiscriminate attack" in an area where many civilians are present.

Load-Date: October 21, 2020


End of Document