Several People Injured in United Kingdom in 'Major' Incident, Says Police
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 7, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 432 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


West Midlands Mayor Andy Street urged people "to not speculate about the incident" and to "remain calm but vigilant". A flurry of other stabbings were subsequently reported and officers said a number of people had been injured.
A rise in violence is "almost inevitable" because of the coronavirus lockdown, a police and crime commissioner warned as a series of stabbings left one dead and seven injured in Birmingham.
He confirmed that police are now searching for one suspect.
Paramedics said they responded to first reports of a call in Livery Street, in the north of the city centre, at about 12.40am.
Eyewitnesses earlier said about violence in one of the four locations, in and around the Arcadian Centre, a popular venue filled with restaurants, nightclubs and bars, where the Gay Village meets the Chinese Quarter.
He said he had no information suggesting the stabbings were related to terrorism.
Police said they are still trying to establish details about the attacks.
In an official statement, the force said, "We can confirm that at approximately 12:30am today (Sunday 6 September) we were called to reports of a stabbing in Birmingham city centre".
A 23-year-old man was killed in Irving Street at 01:50 BST on Sunday, while a man and a woman, aged 19 and 32, suffered critical stabbing injuries.
Indian, Chinese militaries hold Brigade Commander-level interaction in eastern Ladakh
We must remind the Indian side that China's national strength, including its military strength, is much stronger than India's. India's defence ministry tweeted that the meeting lasted for two hours and 20 minutes, without giving out further details.
Police believe the incidents are linked.
They are appealing for witnesses or anyone who may have access to pertinent video footage to come forward.
"Please be assured that we are doing absolutely everything we can to find whoever was responsible and try to understand what exactly happened".
"We have well-rehearsed plans for dealing with major incidents".
He has previously warned that criminal gangs were "coming out of lockdown" and said in July that the reopening of pubs could see an increase in disorder. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families.
"People should be assured we have got a significant hunt for that subject, ongoing", he added.
"But, notwithstanding that, Birmingham is a good place, it's a good place to be, it's a safe city and it is regrettable that this very bad incident happened last night".
"My thanks also go to the ambulance and hospital staff who are working around the clock to help those who have been injured".

Load-Date: September 7, 2020


End of Document