Sexual abuse at home a form of terrorism
USA TODAY
April 16, 2002, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 540 words
Body

I was surprised to read the headline "Most feel safe from terror at home" in Thursday's edition of USA TODAY ("USA Snapshots, News).
I wondered how this could possibly be true when so many children are victims of sexual abuse, which is often perpetrated at home.
It is estimated that a sizable percentage of women experience sexual abuse in childhood.
As one of those women, I know there isn't much more that's terrorizing than going to bed at night wondering if the abuse could get much worse and whether this is the night it will happen.
Childhood sexual abuse is the issue that no one wants to talk about, so I was thrilled that USA TODAY's Snapshot asked the question.
But reading past the headline of Thursday's Snapshot, I realized that the topic had nothing to do with the terror so many children experience in their own homes.
It was about terrorism.
The media has done a tremendous job covering the atrocities of sexual exploitation and secrecy in the church. But no one is mentioning the fact that many children in the USA are sexually abused each year; many kids are abused in their own homes.
According to Generation Five, whose mission is to end sexual abuse within five generations, child sexual abuse is a public health crisis. But it will not be recognized as such until there is some public conversation.
So let's start talking about it.
Could USA TODAY and other media be so bold as to ask readers how they think the terror of childhood sexual abuse could be ended?
Michele McGeoy
Richmond, Calif.
Top intelligence
I sympathize with the passenger in Corpus Christi, Texas, who was arrested and hauled to a county jail after saying, "If I have to go through this at every airport, I'm going to kill someone" ("Exclusive report: 28 delayed flights & 23 hours of waiting," Cover Story, News, Wednesday).
I am a frequent air traveler and have felt similar frustrations. And from the empty seats on aircraft, we can assume that many members of the traveling public are saying "no more" by driving to their destinations.
Requiring that inadequately trained security guards focus on the objects carried by law-abiding American travelers is absurd. I've seen knitting needles taken from grandmothers, small pocketknives removed from pilots, and children as young as five being patted down. None of these facts, incidentally, makes me feel any safer when boarding an airplane.
It is obvious that the terrorist murders of 9/11 did not occur because we failed to take a few knives and box cutters from passengers. I believe they happened because we failed to identify those who had evil in their hearts.
Denying law-abiding travelers their tools of self-defense will only ensure that they are compliant victims of the next wave of terrorism.
The fact remains that true airline security will only come from top-notch human intelligence combined with the proper profiling of passengers. When I go to my local gun store I must submit to a federal criminal background check prior to purchasing a gun. In most states that means that the purchaser has been fingerprinted and has a crime-free background.
Also, in the same way that we know the people who occupy our automobiles, airlines should know each passenger who boards aircraft.
Ken Siverts
Glendale, Ariz.

Load-Date: April 16, 2002


End of Document