SHAMIR DENOUNCES JEWISH TERRORISM
The New York Times
May 22, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 936 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: JERUSALEM, May 21
Body


In Parliament, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today denounced the Jewish settlers who are said to have confessed to acts of terrorism against West Bank Arabs.
 Mr. Shamir said the crimes damaged the nation's interests and the movement to build Jewish settlements in the occupied West Bank.
''They will be brought to trial and will bear the consequences of their actions,'' he said of the Jews under arrest. ''But the splendid enterprise of Zionist Jewish settlement of the various parts of the Land of Israel will continue with the support and full encouragement of the Government.''
Israeli Prime Min Yitzhak Shamir, in Parliament, denounces Jewish settlers who are said to have confessed to acts of terrorism against West Bank Arabs; says crimes damage nation's interests and movement to build Jewish settlements in occupied West Bank; says they will be brought to trial; photo (M)
Since April 27, when bombs were found on five Arab-owned buses in Jerusalem, Israeli security agents have arrested 26 Jews, most of them settlers from the West Bank and the Golan Heights.
According to unauthorized disclosures of information from officials to Israeli reporters, some of the people detained have confessed to three acts and one plan: placing bombs in or near the cars of three West Bank Mayors in 1980, crippling two of them and blinding an Israeli demolition expert; attacking the campus of the Islamic University in Hebron last summer with a hand grenade and submachine guns, killing 3 Arabs and wounding 33; placing bombs on the five Arab buses, and plotting to blow up the two holiest Moslem shrines in Jerusalem, Al Aksa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock.
 
Consequences Called Severe
''Besides the heavy loss of life,'' Prime Minister Shamir said today, ''the lunatic deeds which were prevented could have caused terrible damage to the State of Israel, its political struggles, its standing and its security. The settlement of Judea and Samaria could also have suffered heavy damage.'' Judea and Samaria are the biblical names by which some Israelis refer to the West Bank.
Speaking of the argument of some settlement leaders that the Government had not provided settlers with adequate security, Mr. Shamir said:
''It is worrisome and regrettable that after 36 years of independence there are still those among us who deny the authority of the state and who do not accept the fundamental principle that the Israeli Government, and it alone, is responsible for Israel's security.''
But the Prime Minister exonerated the settlement movement as a whole. ''It has become clear that this is a small group of people who were tempted into taking this crooked path,'' he said. ''The decisive majority of the settlers of Judea and Samaria, the Golan Heights and the Gaza sector dissociate themselves from these acts without reservation. There is thus no justification for sullying the entire settlement enterprise with the crime of individuals who went astray.''
 
Part of the Hardship
He added, ''Our sages said, 'One gains possession of the Land of Israel only through hardship.' The existence of a Jewish group capable of committing such actions is part of this hardship. I hope the exposure of this dangerous phenomenon will prevent the recurrence of such actions.''
Shimon Peres, the leader of the opposition Labor Party, then said, ''The underground that was uncovered is a disaster - political stupidity and moral catastrophe.''
He continued: ''Whoever believes that terror can solve problems is saying that so can Arab terror be productive from their point of view. Arab terror will not subdue Israel, and neither will Jewish terror bring security to Israel.''
Formal charges are expected soon against at least some of those being held. The names of the suspects have not been made public except for that of Rabbi Moshe Levinger, a leader of the settlers in Hebron.
Israel Harel, secretary general of the Council of Jewish Settlements, said the suspects were part of the mainstream of the settlement movement.
''The people involved are not the thinkers,'' he said, ''but the pioneers, the activists.'' Some were reportedly army reserve officers with sophisticated weapons and explosives training, and two are said by the Israeli press to have been on duty with the military government. One is said to have given information about the West Bank Mayors' cars and residences to settlers who set the bombs.
 
Views Still in Conflict
The attack on the Mayors, Mr. Harel said, was apparently carried out by a dozen people who were what he called ''the founding fathers'' of the West Bank settlement movement. At the time, he said, ''most of our people were quite pleased with it'' in the belief that the Mayors - Bassam al-Shaka of Nablus, Karim Khalef of Ramallah and Ibrahim Tawil of Bireh - had given the orders a month earlier to Arab terrorists who attacked a crowd of worshipers in Hebron, killing six of them.
A different group is said to have attacked the Islamic College and planted bombs on Arab buses. ''If the buses had exploded,'' Mr. Harel said, ''everything we did here would be up in heaven with the buses. I could give you a list of 200 reasons why it would damage the cause they are interested in.
''No one would buy a flat in Ariel or Kedumim,'' he said, speaking of two West Bank settlements. ''We would be lepers.''
Other voices have also been heard from dissident factions of the settlement movement, however. A settler was quoted by the newspaper Yedioth Aharanoth as saying: ''If I catch an Arab kid picking up a rock, I'll destroy him on the spot. Too bad the buses didn't explode, and too bad I wasn't involved in the act.''

Graphic

 
photo of Yitzhak Shamir


End of Document