SHARON'S POLL VICTORY TEMPERED BY RELENTLESS TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 30, 2002 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 548 words
Byline: JAMES BENNET, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


It was a day that encapsulated the grim paradox of Israel's politics.
 Ariel Sharon, who became prime minister two years ago on a promise of peace and security, was overwhelmingly re-elected to lead his party on Thursday to lead his party in the January national election, the same day that Israelis learned that they had become targets overseas as well as at home.
 If Thursday expressed the paradox, yesterday -- a chilling, rainy day on which Israelis once again comforted their wounded and buried their dead -- helped explain it. As he somberly claimed victory in the Likud primary early yesterday morning, after a moment of silence for those killed in attacks in Kenya and Israel, Sharon declared: "We are a strong people that shall not surrender to terrorism. We are a people who stand, struggle and triumph -- and we will triumph."
He vowed a war against the attackers that would be "practical, realistic and uncompromising."
 It is that sense of granite realism and determination that appeals to an Israeli public grown increasingly fatalistic. Although Israelis' sense of security has steadily decayed during Sharon's tenure as prime minister, he is heavily favored to win the general election in January.
 "They are tired of hearing how it is possible to expel Arafat, exterminate terrorism, liquidate the Palestinian Authority and bring a secure peace on top of all that," Israel's largest daily newspaper, Yediot Ahronot, said yesterday of the voters in Thursday's Likud Party primary election and in reference to Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader. "They prefer Sharon's fatigued face when he tells them that things will be bad. And after things are bad, they're going to get worse."
 Another newspaper, Maariv, said: "The main feeling accompanying us, following yesterday's events, was a heavy feeling of suffocation. A dead end, no way out, no solution. No escape. Now, it is even impossible to travel abroad peacefully."
 Two of the Israeli dead in Thursday's suicide bombing of a Kenyan seaside resort hotel were young brothers, Dvir and Noy Antel, on a Hanukkah vacation with their parents. Their bodies were returned to Israel yesterday, for burial tomorrow.
 On Thursday, as Israel reeled from the attacks in Kenya, two Palestinians with guns and grenades attacked a polling place in Beit Shean, in the northern Jordan Valley. They killed six Israelis.
 Sharon continued to fight his grinding campaign against Palestinian violence yesterday, even as Israeli officials considered how they would combat a new adversary overseas. In the West Bank village of Jilabun, near Jenin, Israeli forces arrested eight Palestinians from the families of the two men who committed the Beit Shean attack; the Israeli army also demolished the homes of the two.
 Last night, in the city of Nablus, Israeli forces arrested a senior leader of the Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, the group that carried out the attack in Beit Shean.
 In the campaign leading up to general elections on Jan. 28, Sharon will face an opponent from the left-of-center Labor Party, Amram Mitzna, the mayor of Haifa. Mitzna favors immediate negotiations, without conditions. He would unilaterally withdraw soldiers and settlers from the Gaza Strip, which Israel occupied, along with the West Bank, during the 1967 Middle East war.

Load-Date: November 30, 2002


End of Document