SHARON DEFENDS ISRAEL'S INVASION AS A STEP TOWARD MIDEAST PEACE
The New York Times
August 27, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 857 words
Byline: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER
Body


Defense Minister Ariel Sharon defended Israel's invasion of Lebanon yesterday, picturing it as a new opening for peace in the Middle East and playing down his Government's rift with the Reagan Administration over the conduct of the conflict.
In an hourlong, extemporaneous address in New York City to leaders of American Jewish groups, Mr. Sharon said the departure of the Palestine Liberation Organization from Beirut raised the prospect of ''peaceful coexistence'' with the Palestinians. He said it could enable Lebanon to become the second Arab nation to sign a peace treaty with Israel.
He complained that newspapers and television news programs had exaggerated civilian casualties in Lebanon and had ignored Lebanese deaths caused by the P.L.O. and the Syrians. He said the news organizations were ''not so sensitive'' about the killing of Jews.
Defense Minister Ariel Sharon defended Israel's invasion of Lebanon yesterday, picturing it as a new opening for peace in the Middle East and playing down his Government's rift with the Reagan Administration over the conduct of the conflict.Sharon to Meet With Shultz
Mr. Sharon is in the United States for a three-day visit apparently aimed at trying to still misgivings about the invasion among Americans, especially American Jews, and to mend fences in Washington.
He is scheduled to meet in the capital this morning with Secretary of State George P. Shultz and with Secretary of Defense Caspar W.  Weinberger, who is one of the more vocal Cabinet critics of some Israeli actions.
Mr. Sharon is scheduled to end his visit Saturday with an appearance before an Israel Bond rally in Washington.  Yesterday, he spoke at the Theodor Herzl Institute at 515 Park Avenue to the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations.
Mr. Sharon was interrupted by applause only once, when he praised Israeli forces, but that did not appear to indicate a lack of enthusiasm. Several people said later that the reaction of the listeners probably reflected agreement with the Defense Minister.
Even before the speech, the conference issued a statement that expressed virtually every theme raised later by Mr. Sharon.  He spoke only briefly of what he said were the enhanced prospects for peace because of the invasion, predicting that Lebanon would follow Egypt in signing a peace treaty with Israel.
Lebanon's President-elect, Bashir Gemayel, is regarded as sympathetic to Israel, but he has said a treaty is up to the Lebanese people, not to him.
With Israel, Egypt and Lebanon at peace, Mr. Sharon said, there would be ''a complete change in the region.''
 
'Peaceful Coexistence'
Mr. Sharon said Israel's ''chances for peaceful coexistence with Palestinian Arabs become better'' because of what he called the military and political destruction of the P.L.O.
He said Palestinians no longer had to fear P.L.O. intimidation. ''I renewed the dialogue with Palestinian leaders in Judea and Samaria,'' he said. ''I have already felt the change in the atmosphere.''
Judea and Samaria are the ancient names for the West Bank, captured by Israel from Jordan in the 1967 war.  Mr. Sharon acknowledged that the United States had repeatedly tried to hold back Israel. He said the Americans had wanted to maintain the cease-fire established with the P.L.O. last summer as well as a series of truces agreed on and broken after Israel's June 6 invasion.
The Defense Minister said Israel had taken the Reagan Administration's pleas into account. If Israel had ignored them, he said, ''we could have arrived at this point of expulsion much earlier.''
Now, he said, the United States and Israel share such ''common goals'' as the ''expulsion of the P.L.O. terrorists from Beirut'' and the ''withdrawal of all the foreign troops from Lebanon, the terrorists, the Syrians and the Israeli Army.'' He said both countries also wanted a strong central government in Lebanon and recognized ''the need for security arrangements'' along the @Israeli-Lebanese border. 
 
Terrorism Against Settlers
The last item was apparently an allusion to Israel's initial professed war objective, a demilitarized zone 25 miles deep in southern Lebanon.
Israel initially talked of using American troops to patrol the area, but the United States reacted coolly to the proposal.  Mr. Sharon did not specifically say why Israel moved into Lebanon on June 6. But he contended that Jewish settlers had suffered from terrorists since the beginning of the century.
He said terrorism had been the root of most of the wars that Israel had fought. He added that casualties from terrorism had risen above 7,000 since the P.L.O. first went to Beirut in 1965.
He appeared particularly disturbed by accusations that Israel had indiscriminately bombed and shelled civilians in west Beirut. ''We were blamed for causing casualties to the civilian population,'' he said. ''The figures were exaggerated.'' But he offered no figures of his own.
Outside on Park Avenue, about 100 demonstrators, some waving P.L.O. flags, chanted, ''No Begin, no Sharon, Palestine is our own!'' They were separated by police barricades from a group of about 20 people waving Israeli flags.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of Israeli defense minister Ariel Sharon


End of Document