SHARPER RESPONSE TO DOMESTIC TERRORISM URGED
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
March 1, 1997, Saturday


Copyright 1997 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 324 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) -- With fears of domestic terrorism rising, local rescue workers need military training and high-tech equipment to handle chemical and biological attacks, a House panel was told Friday.
Nearly two years after a bomb destroyed the Oklahoma City federal building, local authorities still lack the resources to provide adequate protection, Fire Chief Gary Marrs said.
''We're not any more prepared than we were then,'' he told the House National Security subcommittee on military research and development. ''This new equipment and technology, it's not going to do any good until it hits the streets. . . . We need it yesterday.''
Friday's hearing comes a year after a Senate report called the threat of domestic terrorism high - and cities' ability to handle it low.
''It is not a matter of 'if' but rather 'when' such an event will occur,'' the report said. ''Many of the terrorist groups of today appear more likely to utilize weapons of mass destruction.''
In the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, terrorists unsuccessfully tried to use sodium cyanide. A toxic gas was used in a March 1995 Tokyo subway attack. And 168 people died in the Oklahoma City bombing of April 1995.
Marrs said the death toll could have been hundreds more - including rescue workers - if biological or chemical agents had been used.
Last year, President Clinton signed an antiterrorism law widely supported in Congress to provide $1 billion to local law enforcement agencies - but not fire and emergency response units. The act also required the U.S. government to train local authorities how to respond to terrorism.
''The first responder is not always going to be the Marines,'' said Rep. Curt Weldon, R-Pa., the subcommittee's chairman. ''We've got to take the technology that is in the military and put it in every city in America.''
Weldon wants to put the Pentagon's most up-to-date equipment into the hands of firefighters and emergency medical technicians.

Load-Date: April 3, 1998


End of Document