Share data in terrorism fight
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 13, 2001, Tuesday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: OPINION;
Length: 368 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


Sharing information is critical to effectively combat terrorism. Knowing what to expect allows various national and local agencies to prepare for assorted potential threats to safety.
There already should be mechanisms in place to allow data to flow freely -- with appropriate safeguards, of course -- among the various agencies.
Unfortunately, that is not the case. In fact, according to Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch, current federal law prohibits federal, state and local law enforcement agencies from sharing information in terrorism investigations.
In the wake of what occurred on Sept. 11 and what is occurring now with the anthrax scare, current policy is woefully inadequate to deal with today's realities.
That's why legislation introduced last week by Hatch and Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., to allow the sharing of intelligence and national security information between federal and local agencies needs to be supported.
As Hatch states in support of the measure, the bill is critical for helping local agencies deal with purported threats of terrorism. It will be particularly helpful in assisting state and local law-enforcement agents during the upcoming Winter Olympics in Utah.
A major step to improve interagency awareness was taken in the past two weeks when President Bush signed into law an anti-terrorism bill that included permission for federal intelligence and law agencies to share information on terrorism.
But that bill did not have provisions to share data with local agencies. And it's the local agencies that are on the firing lines. They likely are the first ones that respond to any domestic attack. It only makes sense to have them receive information to help them thwart attacks.
At both the federal and local levels there has been too much of a mind-set to protect turf. We have used the example locally of the need to have much better cooperation among the various law enforcement agencies to effectively combat drunken driving.
To let terrorism have a foothold because of clumsy policies at any level would be inexcusable.
Senators Hatch and Schumer are to be commended for taking action to eliminate bureaucratic red tape regarding terrorism data. The rest of Congress needs to follow suit.

Load-Date: November 13, 2001


End of Document