SHC orders immediate release of accused in Daniel Pearl case
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 24, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 426 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Omar Saeed Sheikh, one of the three terrorists, was freed by India during the hijacking of airliner IC-814 in 1999 in exchange for the passengers.
The Sindh High Court in Pakistan on Thursday has directed the release of terrorist Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh, Fahad Naseem, Sheikh Adil and Salman Saqib in connection with the kidnapping and murder of United States journalist Daniel Pearl.
The Sindh High Court's order overturns a Supreme Court decision in September that Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh should remain in custody, while an appeal of his acquittal on charges he murdered Pearl is heard, said Mehmood A. Sheikh, his lawyer.
The other people who were arrested in the case who were later released are Fahad Naseem, Sheikh Adil and Salman Saqib.
Sheikh was acquitted of murdering Pearl earlier this year, but has been held while Pearl's family appeals the acquittal.
"The court has set aside the detention orders", his lawyer Khawaja Naveed told DPA news agency. Subsequently, Sheikh, the prime suspect, was arrested in 2002 and later sentenced to death by a Hyderabad anti-terrorism court while the three other men were sentenced to life imprisonment for helping him. The US has been mounting pressure on Pakistan, demanding justice for Pearl.
Explainer: Why do we greet "Merry Christmas" and not "Happy Christmas"?
Bells are ringing and everyone is singing, It's Christmas! My personal thanks must go to two sets of people this year. May your family have a holiday season that is full of wonderful surprises, treats and nonstop laughter.
Thursday's verdict was announced on an appeal from the family of Sheikh against his detention despite the acquittal. However, in April, Sheikh along with three of his aides were exonerated by the Sindh High Court, a move that stunned the world, especially the U.S. and Pearl's family and journalism advocacy groups.
Pearl's killing stirred worldwide condemnation of Pakistan's military government just as it was remaking its image after years of backing the Taliban in neighbouring Afghanistan.
British-born Sheikh was initially sentenced to death in 2002 for masterminding the murder of Pearl, who worked for the Wall Street Journal.
She said that she received an email from the abductors, saying that he has been abducted in retaliation for the imprisonment of Pakistani men by the USA government in Cuba and other complaints.
Pearl, a writer for The Wall Street Journal, was abducted and killed in 2002 in the southern port city ofKarachi while he was working on an investigation into religious leaders' purported links to al-Qaeda.

Load-Date: December 25, 2020


End of Document