She gets 30 mos. in jail for emmbezzlement, fake terrorism claims
The Philadelphia Daily News
June 22, 2010 Tuesday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; P-com Biggie News Update; Pg. 14
Length: 444 words
Byline: By MICHAEL HINKELMAN

hinkelm@phillynews.com 215-854-2656
Body


A Berks County woman was sentenced yesterday to 30 months in a federal lockup for sending a false letter to the CIA alleging that her husband's co-worker had terrorist links and for embezzling $26,341 from the school district for which she worked.
"It was really wrong what I did and I'm sorry that I caused anybody pain," Tina Paplosky told U.S. District Judge Legrome D. Davis.
Davis ordered Paplosky, 37, of Mohrsville, to begin serving her sentence immediately, saying he was skeptical that she fully appreciated the consequences of her misdeeds.
Paplosky tried to convince Davis that her husband had assisted in leading her down the path of criminality.
Davis wasn't buying it.
"It's your choice, your behavior, your sentence," he said. "Under the law, we're all responsible for what we do. Your husband didn't make you do this."
Davis also ordered her to pay $92,130 in restitution.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Pamela Foa said both victims of the false letters were co-workers of Paplosky's husband and had not done anything wrong.
Paplosky told Davis that her husband had egged her on and that she "needed to do something to stop [his co-workers] from picking on him." (The co-workers had suspected the husband of unfairly profiting at the expense of his employer, court testimony revealed.)
Authorities said Paplosky wrote a letter to the CIA on Oct. 22, 2007.
She referred to an individual, identified only as "D.B.D" in court documents, who, she wrote, had links to terrorist organizations and who was going to blow up government buildings and subways.
Although she was not charged in the matter, prosecutors said she wrote a second letter that was sent on Jan. 23, 2008, to the Pennsylvania Department of Homeland Security and that referred to an individual identified as "R.M.H."
According to court testimony, Paplosky wrote that he also had terrorist links and planned to attack the U.S. and President George W. Bush.
The feds also charged that between August 2006 and November 2007 Paplosky created bogus paperwork to make it appear that some Wilson School District taxpayers had erroneously paid their taxes twice in the same year. (Paplosky worked as a real-estate-tax specialist for the district.)
The school district issued and mailed "refund" checks to post-office boxes that Paplosky controlled in names similar to those of actual taxpayers or to third parties for the benefit of Paplosky.
The checks were then deposited into a Paplosky bank account and funds were used to purchase jewelry and pay the mortgage on a more expensive house, Foa said.
"We have a woman who wanted more than she could lawfully obtain and found the means to do it," the prosecutor said. 

Load-Date: June 22, 2010


End of Document