Sheik Called An Architect Of Terrorism
The New York Times
September 6, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B;  Page 3;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 584 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED 

By JOSEPH P. FRIED 
Body


A Federal prosecutor pointed to a blind, stooped Muslim cleric in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday and declared that he had led a "war of terrorism against the United States" that included the bombing of the World Trade Center, plots for other bombings and the assassination of a Jewish militant.
The cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, "called himself the servant of God" but told his followers that the Muslim struggle against enemies was to be waged "with the sword, the cannon, the missile," said the prosecutor, Assistant United States Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald. And in Mr. Abdel Rahman's mind, Mr. Fitzgerald said, the United States was one of Islam's "main enemies."
Beginning what are expected to be two weeks of closing arguments in the eight-month-old trial of Mr. Abdel Rahman and nine other men in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr. Fitzgerald described the cleric as a man not concerned that people might be slaughtered in bombings of major buildings, but worried only that blowing up certain buildings, such as United Nations headquarters, would be "bad public relations, bad press" for Muslims.
Mr. Abdel Rahman, a fiery fundamentalist who came to the United States from Egypt five years ago, and his nine co-defendants are charged -- in biggest terrorism trial ever in an American court -- with being part of a Muslim group that waged a three-year campaign of terrorism aimed at intimidating the United States into changing Middle Eastern policies that it believed favored Israel and the Egyptian Government.
During the trial, Mr. Abdel Rahman's lawyers have readily admitted that he advocated violent revolution in his homeland because of the Egyptian Government's secular outlook and strong ties to the United States. But the lawyers have maintained that he never conspired to commit violence in the United States and that he is the victim of a trumped-up case.
The other defendants have also said that they were set up, and have argued that the prosecution has falsely linked separate crimes and charges of crimes to create an overarching conspiracy that never existed.
But in the first of two days of closing arguments for the prosecution, Mr. Fitzgerald recalled details from testimony by more than 200 witnesses and more than 100 hours of conversations secretly recorded by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and an informer to back up its case.
He argued that the bombing of the World Trade Center in February 1993, which killed six people, and the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the Jewish militant killed at a Manhattan hotel in November 1990, were part of one overall conspiracy. So were plots, he said, to bomb additional targets in 1993 such as the United Nations headquarters and the Lincoln and Holland tunnels.
One of Mr. Abdel Rahman's co-defendants, El Sayyid A. Nosair, is charged in this trial with being the gunman who killed the rabbi, as well as with conspiring in the bombing plots. Mr. Nosair was acquitted of murder in a 1991 state trial, but was convicted of assault and other charges and was sentenced to up to 22 years in prison.
Using charts and other visual aids as he tried to hold the jury's attention, Mr. Fitzgerald urged the jury not to be misled by the fact that none of the defendants were accused of helping to carry out the Trade Center bombing. Four other men were convicted of that bombing.
"When a regular army fights a war, different people fight different battles," he said, arguing that the men now on trial were plotting to bomb the other sites.
      

Load-Date: September 6, 1995


End of Document