Sheik's Tapped Calls Entered in Terrorism Trial
The New York Times
April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk  
Section: Section 1;  ; Section 1;   Page 45;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 822 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED  

By JOSEPH P. FRIED  
Body


Between mid-February and early June 1993, militant Islamic loyalists in Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and, possibly, other countries had a series of telephone conversations with Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman in the United States that were captured by F.B.I. wiretaps.
Federal prosecutors say this was the period in which the sheik was leading a "war of urban terrorism against the United States," a campaign that they say included the bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, 1993, and plans to bomb other major New York buildings and transportation links.
In the 11 wiretapped conversations, which prosecutors began introducing last week in the sheik's terrorism trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr. Abdel Rahman talks frequently about violent clashes between his followers and the authorities in his native Egypt, and about activities involving members of his group in Afghanistan and Pakistan. But in transcripts, there are no references to violence or planned violence in New York or anywhere else in the United States.
The transcripts underline a basic difficulty in the prosecution's case against the sheik. For all the Government's accusations that he was the leader of a New York bombing conspiracy, the prosecution has provided little evidence so far showing that the sheik directed any violence.
Nevertheless, these wiretaps are important because they show that his followers looked "to him for direction," a prosecutor, Patrick Fitzgerald, told Judge Michael B. Mukasey.
Mr. Fitzgerald suggested that the conversations would bolster other evidence, including a conversation that an informer secretly taped, in which the sheik provides advice on which New York area targets to bomb and not to bomb.
The lawyers for Mr. Abdel Rahman and his 10 co-defendants say that the wiretapped conversations introduced so far show no involvement by the blind 56-year-old Muslim cleric in plotting violence in America, to which he came five years ago. He eventually settled in Jersey City and, through tape-recorded and faxed messages heard and read in Egypt, continued his long career as a fiery fundamentalist enemy of Egypt's secular Government.
"It's pretty far removed from this sedition case," said Lynne F. Stewart, a lawyer for Mr. Abdel Rahman, of the topics in the wiretapped conversations.
Jurors heard 4 of the 11 conversations last week, and are to hear the 7 others in coming weeks. Prosecutors say they intend to introduce other taped conversations later in the trial.
The jurors are not hearing the actual recordings of the conversations, which were in Arabic. Instead, Mr. Fitzgerald and another prosecutor, Andrew C. McCarthy, are reading transcripts of English translations of the conversations, with the jurors following along in transcripts.
The prosecution in the trial, now three and a half months old and expected to go into late summer or fall, argues that Mr. Abdel Rahman and his co-defendants plotted to blow up the United Nations, the Hudson River tunnels and the Federal building in lower Manhattan to try to intimidate the United States into changing its policies in the Middle East.
Though the defendants are not charged with carrying out the World Trade Center bombing, for which four other men have been convicted, the prosecution argues that the bombing was part of the overall conspiracy. Six people died in that attack.
The defense says the case has been trumped up, part of an effort to help the Egyptian Government by keeping Mr. Abdel Rahman from returning there.
The F.B.I. began tapping Mr. Abdel Rahman's telephone calls about mid-February 1993, about two weeks before the World Trade Center bombing, amid increased violence by his followers in Egypt and an effort by the United States Government to deport him.
A tap was put on his home phone in Jersey City, as well as on phones that he used when he traveled to cities like Los Angeles and Seattle, Ms. Stewart, his lawyer, said.
Mr. Fitzgerald, the prosecutor, told Judge Mukasey that Mr. Abdel Rahman often spoke on the phone in code, because he suspected that his phone was tapped. In a May 27, 1993, call, Mr. Abdel Rahman indicated that he knew his home phone was tapped. But Ms. Stewart said he knew this only because the F.B.I. informer posing as his aide, Emad Salem, had told him that only a few weeks before.
In the transcripts, which are laden with religious invocations, there is no doubt that those speaking with Mr. Abdel Rahman look to him for leadership.
"Do you command us with anything from this end?" a man in Pakistan named Khaled asked in a Feb. 23, 1993, conversation.
"God reward you plenty," Mr. Abdel Rahman replied.
The two then discuss how some people, whom Mr. Abdel Rahman refers to as "the boys," should be assigned "work that could be considered jihad."
Jihad is a Muslim religious term often translated as "struggle" or religious war.
Defense lawyers say the phrase "the boys" may be a reference to the sheik's sons in Pakistan.

Load-Date: April 23, 1995


End of Document