SHEIK ENTERS INNOCENT PLEA; RADICAL GROUPS IN EGYPT WARN OF REVENGE AGAINST AMERICANS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 27, 1993, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 582 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


In a courtroom wall-to-wall with plainclothes officers, Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman pleaded innocent Thursday to concocting a campaign of bombings, kidnappings and assassinations in the United States. His followers abroad threatened retaliation against Americans should he be harmed.  Fourteen co-defendants entered the same plea during a hearing at federal court in Manhattan exactly six months after the bombing on Feb. 26 of the World Trade Center. The appearance was the first as a defendant in the case by the Muslim cleric.  The streets outside the courthouse were lined with police in an indication of the fear that other suspects remain free.  "Whether or not we've identified the major players, obviously there's a concern that there may be others out there that we don't know about," said Matthew Fishbein, chief assistant U.S. attorney. "These are violent people who have demonstrated they successfully completed bombings and planned others." The sheik was charged Wednesday with orchestrating a terror network that bombed the World Trade Center, killed militant Rabbi Meir Kahane and plotted other bombings, kidnappings and assassinations, including that of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Abdel-Rahman is an Egyptian.  The suspects walked into the courtroom handcuffed and in single file.  Abdel-Rahman, who is blind, wore sunglasses and entered last. None spoke during the hearing.  U.S. District Court Judge Michael B. Mukasey said two separate trials might be needed because more than 10 defendants are involved and more than four months of testimony are likely.  A defense lawyer, Ron Kuby, told the judge that the evidence would prove "this conspiracy was a government conspiracy," a setup by a government informer who even taped his conversations with investigators.
The indictment returned Wednesday charged the suspects with plotting a "war of urban terrorism" against the United States.  It also charged El Sayyid Nosair with the murder of Kahane, although Nosair was acquitted of state charges in the slaying in 1990. And it detailed plans to attack U.S. military installations, murder FBI agents and seize hostages as bargaining chips to gain the release of jailed conspirators.  The case marked the first time prosecutors had tied the whole package together. They laid out the workings of a terror group that operated for at least four years before the blast in February that killed six and injured more than 1,000 at the World Trade Center.  The group also targeted the United Nations, as well as a federal office building and the Holland and Lincoln tunnels, the indictment says.  Abdel-Rahman, 55, was identified as a "godfather"-like boss, responsible for settling disputes, approving plans and detecting government surveillance.  Abdel-Rahman repeatedly has denied any involvement in terrorism.  In Egypt, followers of the sheik issued a statement Thursday warning that they were prepared to strike back over Abdel-Rahman's arrest. The sheik has been in jail since surrendering to federal authorities on July 2 and is fighting deportation.  "We will take revenge on all U.S. interests and citizens, either in Egypt or outside, if any harm occurs to Sheik Omar," said a statement from three main Egyptian radical groups - al-Gamaa al-Islamiya, or the Islamic group; the Vanguards of Conquest; and the Jihad, or Holy War.  The State Department advised Americans to be careful in their travels, especially with their luggage, and not to accept packages from strangers.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document