Shelby Raises Notion of Ending Terrorism Backstop
American Banker
May 5, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 SourceMedia LLC d/b/a Arizent. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 3; Vol. 170; No. 86
Length: 561 words
Byline: ROB BLACKWELL
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Senate Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby was expected to say
Wednesday evening that the government backstop for terrorism insurance should
expire if the Treasury Department determines the industry has recovered from
the Sept. 11 attacks.
The Alabama Republican also was expected to say that he is considering
seeking the establishment of a federal insurance charter and to reiterate
that Congress must not put too many restrictions on a proposed new regulator
for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Those statements were in the text of speech prepared for delivery at a
Market News International conference in New York.
The speech went beyond Sen. Shelby's previous comments on the
reauthorization of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, under which the
government reinsures property/casualty policies that cover acts of terrorism.
The law is set to expire at yearend.
Sen. Shelby said he is still waiting for a Treasury report due soon on
how well the program has worked and the state of the industry.
"If it is determined that the insurance markets are now over the shocks
of Sept. 11th, I believe that the Congress should let the federal backstop
expire," Sen. Shelby said. "If it is apparent that our markets are improving
but still lack the capacity to provide coverage, Congress will need to
determine the appropriate structure for the program."
He continues to believe that "market solutions are preferable to
government intervention." If an extension is necessary, "our priority must be
to develop a program that protects taxpayers and the economy while helping to
restore the efficient function of our private markets."
Opposing an extension would put him at odds with many House Republicans,
who have said they favor a reauthorization while they research a long-term 
solution.
Sen. Shelby could also disagree with House colleagues about the need for
a federal insurance charter. House Financial Services Committee Chairman
Michael Oxley and others have said they oppose creating the charter.
But Sen. Shelby hinted in his prepared remarks that the idea is still
viable, particularly after "allegations of abuse and scandal" have surfaced
in the insurance industry.
"I believe that we must closely consider the present regulatory regime to
determine whether it is adequate to address current intricacies of our
dynamic and complex markets," he said. "I intend to explore the issue further
in coming months."
Sen. Shelby also outlined the powers that he thinks a proposed new
regulator for the housing government-sponsored enterprises should have.
Though he noted that Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan has
argued for strict caps on the portfolios, Sen. Shelby said his committee has
also heard from experts who have said the portfolios benefit the nation's
housing market. The Bush administration has pushed for a regulator with power
over the portfolios, as well as clear guidance from Congress to hold them to
only that which is necessary for liquidity and to promote housing.
Sen. Shelby said that Congress should not give a new regulator too much
guidance.
"Congress is not the best forum to set such standards. Such decisions are
best left to the discretion of the regulator to act when the risks warrant
such action or the link to the housing mission is unclear," he said.
Copyright 2005 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.thomsonmedia.com            http://www.americanbanker.com

Load-Date: October 31, 2006


End of Document