Shift anti-terrorism fight a bit farther east
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 20, 2005 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 17A
Length: 570 words
Byline: JOSEPH ZARE
Body


When President Bush recently warned about the dangers of Islamic fundamentalism, he had the right idea, but, regrettably, the wrong target.
The president used a speech before the National Endowment for Democracy to solicit the American public's support for the war in Iraq, calling that conflict a critical battleground against terrorists trying to create a "radical Islamic empire."
As an Iranian American, I have to wonder when Bush will recognize that although Iraq has become a center of terrorism in the recent past, for more than 20 years before that, since Ayatollah Khomenei swept to power in 1979, Iran has been at the epicenter of Islamic fundamentalism --- and worldwide terrorism.
Khomenei established the first theocratic regime in modern history, and the mullahs have been in charge ever since. But they haven't been satisfied with trying to take Iran back to the seventh century. No, they have been intent on spreading their ideology far and wide. Thus, an isolated fundamentalist movement that had been on the fringe suddenly became a challenging force for political power.
Bush drew an interesting parallel between the ideologies of the terrorists and Communists when he said both believed "individuals can be sacrificed to serve a political vision." That concept is on target, but Bush failed to make another connection: Tehran today is to fundamentalists what Moscow was to Communists --- the center of a universe. 
Thus, if the president is to succeed in his laudable aim to root out terrorism at its roots, he must focus on Iran, the lion's den of Islamic fundamentalism --- and the spiritual center of worldwide terrorism.
Bush's rhetoric fails to recognize which country has been most involved in in Iraq since the American invasion. Syria does not have the ideology or the wherewithal. But the mullahs in Iran do, and they will stop at nothing in their efforts to set up a satellite Islamic republic in Iraq. The evidence is there for all to see, and it goes back to the time they took over my country: from the bombing of the Marine barracks in Lebanon in 1983 all the way to the recent meddling of Iranian intelligence officers in Iraq and the killing of British soldiers there.
So what should the president and Western leaders do? They must focus on Iran, but thankfully there's no need for another war.
They should take the case against Iran's nuclear development to the United Nations Security Council. Bush should tell European Union partners that they have wasted too much time watching the mullahs play hide-and-seek. It's time for the United Nations to act before it's too late and Iran really does have the bomb.
The only thing the regime understands is zero tolerance.
They should support Iranian dissidents and remove the shackles that bind them. This means an end to the blacklisting of the People's Mojahedin, the main opposition organization to the ayatollahs, which comprises the major victims of the mullahs at home and abroad and has a paramount role in exposing the mullahs' nuclear program and terrorist network.
If Bush will focus on Iran, and lead the West in support of moderate and modern Muslims, the people of Iran are fully capable of doing the rest. Leaders like Maryam Rajavi, a champion of women's rights and president-elect of the National Council of Resistance of Iran, are ready to step in and lead their nation out of the darkness.
* Joseph Zare, of Roswell, is a geologist.

Graphic

 
Photo: Joseph Zare
Photo: HASAN SARBAKHSHIAN / Associated PressAn Iranian man carries an effigy of President Bush during a recent demonstration in Tehran supporting Iran's nuclear program.
Graphic: ONLINE FORUMHow can the U.S. curtail Iran's nuclear development? Weigh in at www.ajc.com/opinion.

Load-Date: October 20, 2005


End of Document