Shock of attacks felt worldwide; Various impacts: Nations recast their problems in light of war on terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 1, 2002 Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. d10
Length: 547 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Wherever someone watched the World Trade Center towers fall - whether from Manhattan, Mexico or Mozambique - it was no distant event.
The shock was most acute in the United States, but the impact rumbled across the globe - in a massive military mobilization, in the hasty assembling of a diplomatic coalition against terrorism, in the accelerated decline of the world economy that had looked so healthy as 2001 began.
Swarms of people fled Afghanistan toward Pakistan or Iran, fearing the inevitable fury of U.S. military strikes against the nation that accepted Osama bin Laden as its guest.
In the wider world, some companies collapsed, jobs disappeared, airlines went out of business.
"We are staring into the face of the first synchronized world recession of the globalization era," said Juan Somavia, director general of the International Labor Organization. The U.N. agency estimated that the impact of the attacks would put 24 million people out of work, and sink 15 million more into deeper poverty.
The suicide attacks posed a monumental challenge to President George W. Bush, so recently disparaged in many foreign publications as the dimwitted winner of a suspect election.
Traditional U.S. allies had been stung by Bush's unilateral decision to dump the Kyoto accord on global warming, or were alarmed by his plans for a missile-defense system. Now they vied for a shoulder-to-shoulder position with the American leader.
Hardly any government beyond Baghdad dared to endorse the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, but many saw opportunities to recast their own problems as part of the Americans' international crusade.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon repeatedly compared Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to Osama bin Laden. Syrian President Bashar Assad condemned "state terrorism," and meant Israel. Russian President Vladimir Putin drew a parallel with his country's war in Chechnya, and found the West suddenly more sympathetic. China detected the local branch of international terrorism in the form of Turkic-speaking Uighur rebels in Xinjiang province. "The fight against separatists in Xinjiang is part of the fight by the world against terrorism," Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhu Bangzao told reporters.
The attacks had a swift and chilling impact on economic activity. For several days the New York Stock Exchange was closed, all U.S. flights were grounded and international airlines canceled flights to the United States. Economic forecasts were hastily revised. The World Bank said world trade was likely to grow by less than 2 percent in 2001, compared with 13 percent the previous year.
All that had passed in the first nine months of 2001 paled into insignificance.
Yugoslavia's Slobodan Milosevic was brought before a U.N. war crimes tribunal. Animal diseases decimated European farming. A world conference to promote racial tolerance dissolved into acrimony. China and the United States squared off over a spy plane. AIDS and war continued to devastate Africa.
And the world moved on: China joined the World Trade Organization - the last communist giant now bound firmly into the global trading system. Europe forged ahead with its single currency, the euro, a symbol of a continent's resolve never to descend into war again.
$$ @122:Chronology 2001

Graphic

 
Smoke billows and flames and debris explode from the World Trade Center towers Sept. 11 during terrorist attacks.  A Northern Alliance fighter covers his ears during fighting against Taiban positions Nov. 10 in northern Afghanistan.

Load-Date: January 2, 2002


End of Document