Shootings in California Reshape the Campaigns
The New York Times
December 5, 2015 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1; THE CAMPAIGN
Length: 1180 words
Byline: By MICHAEL BARBARO and TRIP GABRIEL; Jeremy W. Peters and Amy Chozick contributed reporting.
Body


The Republican candidates for president angrily demanded on Friday that the United States face up to a new world war, one that has breached its borders, threatened the safety of Americans and brought the menace of Islamic terrorism deep into the homeland.
With striking unanimity, they accused President Obama and his fellow Democrats of shrinking from a long-overdue assault on the Islamic State and its frighteningly effective tools of global recruitment. 
  Their aggression reflected the degree to which the diffuse and chaotic campaign is being reordered as the threat of terrorism moves from the capitals of foreign lands to San Bernardino, Calif., a working class city outside Los Angeles.
  ''Our nation is under siege,'' Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey said at a cafe in rural Iowa. ''What I believe we're facing is the next world war. This is what we're in right now, already.''
  The rising tide of bellicosity gripped the Republican presidential field, as the initial restraint and calls for prayers that followed the shootings gave way to revelations that the massacre may have been inspired by the Islamic State.
  Senator Ted Cruz of Texas seethed with disgust for Democrats, declaring, ''This nation needs a wartime president.''
  ''Whether or not the current administration realizes it, or is willing to acknowledge it,'' he added, ''our enemies are at war with us.''
  Their language was almost apocalyptic. Jeb Bush described the looming threat of ''Islamic terrorism that wants to destroy our way of life, wants to attack our freedom.''
  He gravely added: ''They have declared war on us. And we need to declare war on them.''
  As the Republicans spoke of the deadly shooting by a Muslim husband and wife as a clarifying moment, Democrats seemed to offer a more muddled response, torn between their instinctive desire for tighter gun regulations and the need to confront the threat of homegrown Islamic terrorism without tarring the religion itself.
  In Sioux City, Iowa, on Friday, Hillary Clinton spoke not of war but of the need to ferret out ''those folks who are on the Internet radicalizing people'' and called for fighting ''terrorist networks'' from the air and from the ground, avoiding the phrase ''Islamic terrorism'' and urging sensitivity toward Muslims.
  And she quickly pivoted to the issue that has consumed the Democratic side of the campaign since the massacre: the ready supply of guns in the United States. ''Part of that strategy, I'm just going to say this,'' she said, ''is to try to prevent terrorists from getting their hands on guns in our country.''
  That, too, was the focus of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who on Friday clamored for expanded background checks and the closure of gun-purchasing loopholes.
  Republicans showed little patience for such nuance. In Greenland, N.H., Senator Marco Rubio of Florida mocked the president and the Democratic candidates.
  ''Forty-eight hours after this is over they're still out there talking about gun control measures,'' Mr. Rubio said, evoking the terror attacks in Paris three weeks ago. ''As if somehow terrorists care about what our gun laws are. France has some of the strictest gun laws in the world and they have no problem acquiring an arsenal to kill people.''
  For all the heated expressions from Republicans, there emerged no real detailed consensus among them about how to destroy the Islamic State or stop it from inspiring future adherents in the United States.
  They favored symbolism over specific policy prescriptions. Mr. Cruz on Friday appeared at a shooting range in Johnston, Iowa, emphasizing Americans' right to bear arms in these newly dangerous times.
  ''We need to target the bad guys,'' Mr. Cruz said of the San Bernardino attackers, in a room whose back wall was filled with replicas of historic guns, including a Thompson submachine gun. ''But on the flip side, what keeps us safe is we are free people who have a God-given right to protect our homes and our families and our lives.''
  By Friday night, as federal investigators discovered an online pledge of support to the Islamic State from one of the shooters, there was little dispute that the bloody rampage had rattled the nation in a way that previous mass shootings had not -- and had changed the contours of the presidential race.
  David Gergen, an adviser to four presidents, both Democratic and Republican, described a fear he has not seen since the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.
  ''I talk to people who worry that they will be shot on the streets of New York,'' he said in an interview. ''I had one friend say it's worse than 9/11. It just seems like all of us are vulnerable.''
  He called it a signal event in the campaign, though one whose impact was prone to be misread. In the weeks since the Islamic State-inspired attacks in Paris, Republican voters are flocking not to the candidate with the most experience managing national security, but to an outsider with no government résumé: Donald J. Trump. A CNN poll on Friday showed that Mr. Trump's support had jumped nine points since mid-October.
  Mr. Gergen predicted, warily, that could accelerate. ''There is this extra dimension working in Trump's favor: Americans are looking beyond particular policy for the personality that looks like somebody strong enough, tough enough, big enough to provide security.''
  He added: ''It's almost animalistic. The human instinct is to seek safety.''
  In Iowa on Friday, Dave Shetterly showed up to hear Mr. Cruz, armed with his gun and vigilance about terrorism.
  ''I am not fearful but I am cautious,'' he said. ''I watch. I observe.''
  Mr. Shetterly (who left his gun in his car) said he was supporting Mr. Cruz because his approach to national security was muscular and unambiguous. ''He doesn't give you a lot of rhetoric like President Obama has done,'' he said. ''He calls it what it is. It's terrorism. It's an Islamic terrorism state.''
  In the days since the killings in San Bernardino, Republicans have raced to fill the role of the terror-combating commander in chief, sometimes with a mix of bravado and bluster and oneupmanship. Mr. Rubio attacked Mr. Cruz for a vote he said weakened the government's ability to collect so-called metadata, calling such intelligence gathering crucial to national security.
  Mr. Christie made an unusual boast: Long before the authorities made clear they were treating the massacre as a terrorism investigation, he said he had instantly recognized it as such.
  ''Let me tell you, as a former prosecutor, from the time I began to watch the events unfold last night,'' he said on Thursday, ''I am convinced that was a terrorist attack.''
  The crowd erupted into applause.
  Mr. Christie shook his head in mock disbelief. ''The president,'' he said, ''continues to wring his hands and say 'We'll see.' But those folks dressed in tactical gear with semiautomatic weapons came there to do something.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/05/us/politics/gop-candidates-seize-on-shootings-in-california-as-proof-of-terror-threat.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Ted Cruz, a Republican candidate for president, on Friday appeared at a shooting range in Johnston, Iowa, and said, ''We need to target the bad guys.'' Hillary Clinton called for fighting terrorist networks and people radicalizing others on the Internet. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRIAN FRANK/REUTERS
 CHARLIE NEIBERGALL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A17)       

Load-Date: December 7, 2015


End of Document