Shooting in Munich kills 9, injures 10; Authorities call rampage terrorism, say shooter appeared to act alone.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 23, 2016 Saturday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 987 words
Byline: By Michael Faulhaber and FrankJordans Associated Press
Body


Police guard the site with guns as others escort people from the Olympia Einkaufszentrum mall in Munich, Germany. After gunfire broke out, the city sent a smartphone alert declaring an "emergency situation" and telling people to stay indoors.
People leave the Olympia Einkaufszentrum mall in Munich, southern Germany, on Friday after several were killed or injured in an attack. Authorities called it an act of terrorism. SEBASTIAN WIDMANN / AP
People run from the mall; the attack started just before 6 p.m. The city transit system shut down and police asked people to avoid public places. It was the third major act of terrorism in Western Europe in eight days. AP
MUNICH - Munich police gave a "cautious all clear" early Saturday morning, more than seven hours after a gunman opened fire in a crowded shopping mall and at a nearby McDonald's, killing nine people and wounding at least 10 others in a rampage authorities called an act of terrorism.
A body found near the scene was that of the shooter and he appeared to have acted alone, officials said. Munich police chief Hubertus Andraes said the man was an 18-year-old German-Iranian from Munich and his motive was still "fully unclear."
Witnesses had reported seeing three men with firearms near the Olympia Einkaufszentrum mall, but police said on Twitter that "as part of our manhunt we found a person who had killed himself - the person is likely to have been the attacker who, according to the current state of the investigation, acted alone."
They lifted a shutdown of all public transport in the Bavarian capital, and said more details would be disclosed at a press conference later in the morning.
After gunfire broke out at the mall, one of Munich's largest, the city sent a smart-phone alert declaring an "emergency situation" and telling people to stay indoors, while all rail, subway and trolley service was halted in the city.
It was the third major act of violence against civilians in Western Europe in eight days. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the previous attacks, in the French resort city of Nice and on a train in Bavaria.
While police called the mall shooting an act of terrorism, they said they had "no indication" it involved Islamic extremism and at least one witness said he heard a shooter shout an anti-foreigner slur.
The attack started shortly before 6 p.m. at the McDonald's across the street from the mall, which was filled withpeopledoingtheirweekend shopping. As dozens of shots rang out, terrified shoppers ran from the scene, some carrying babies and pushing strollers.
Video showed two bodies with sheets draped over them not far from the restaurant. Another video posted online showed a gunman emerging from the door of the McDonald's, raising what appeared to be a pistol with both hands, and aiming at people on the sidewalk, firing as they fled in terror.
Witness Luan Zequiri said he was in the mall when the shooting started Friday. He told German broadcaster n-tv that he heard the attacker yell an anti-foreigner slur and "there was a really loud scream."
He said he saw only one attacker, who was wearing jack boots and a backpack.
"I looked in his direction and he shot two people on the stairs," Zequiri said.
He said he hid in a shop, then ran outside when he believed it was safe and saw bodies of the dead and wounded.
Germany's Interior Ministry said Munich police set up a hotline for concerned citizens. Residents of Munich opened their doors to people seeking shelter, using the Twitter hashtag #opendoor to invite them in.
Also on Twitter, police asked people to refrain from speculating about the attack. Germany's interior minister cut short his holiday in the United States to go back to Berlin late Friday to meet with security officials.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel was being regularly briefed on the attack, said her chief of staff, Peter Alt-maier.
"All that we know and can say right now is that it was a cruel and inhumane attack," Altmaier said on German public channel ARD. "We can't rule out that there are terrorist links. We can't confirm them, but we are investigating along those lines too."
He noted that Friday was the fifth anniversary of a massacre in Oslo, Norway, by a far-right extremist that killed 77 people, 69 of them at a youth summer camp.
"You can only have absolute security in an absolute surveillance state, and nobody wants that; it would be the opposite of our free western European way of life," he said. "But, and this became clear again today, we can't talk down this danger. It's a danger that many countries are exposed to, especially in the west, and that's why it's important to give our security agencies the instruments they need."
Police responded in large numbers to the mall in the northern part of Munich, not far from the city's Olympic Stadium in the Moosach district of the Bavarian capital.
It was also not far from where Palestinian attackers opened fire in the Olympic Village in 1972, killing 11 Israeli athletes. Five guerrillas and a police officer were also killed in that attack, which prompted the creation of the GSG9 anti-terrorism unit.
The city saw an even worse attack in 1980, when 13 people were killed and more than 200 injured at Munich's annual Oktoberfest in a bombing blamed on a student with ties to a neo-Nazi group.
It was the second attack in Germany in less than a week. On Monday, a 17-year-old Afghan wounded four people in an ax-and-knife attack on a regional train near the city of Wuerzburg, then injured a woman outside as he fled. All survived, although one man remains in life-threatening condition. Police shot and killed the attacker.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the train attack, but authorities have said the teen likely acted alone.
Gun attacks in Germany are uncommon. Firearm ownership is widespread but guns are strictly regulated, with purchasers required to take training courses in order to be granted a permit.

Load-Date: July 23, 2016


End of Document