Shooting nets terrorism charges
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 18, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 1
Length: 538 words
Byline: JIM WINTER TH digital content editor , jwinter@wcinet.com
Body


A Dubuque man has been charged in relation to a report of shots fired Wednesday afternoon in Dubuque.
Michael C. Lewis, 25, of 37 W. 15th St., is charged with one count of going armed with intent and two counts of terrorism.
At about 3:15 p.m. Wednesday, Dubuque police officers responded to the area of West 15th Street between Central Avenue and Iowa Street for a report of shots fired. Upon arrival, officers located a .45-caliber shell casing on the porch steps that lead into the duplex at 35/37 W. 15th St., according to the criminal complaint. Additional casings were found in the front yard of the duplex. A parked vehicle in front of 35 W. 15th St. had several bullet holes in its tire, body and glass on the passenger side, which was facing the duplex.
According to the criminal complaint, a bullet also is believed to have struck a third-floor window of the Operation: New View building, 1473 Central Ave., which is directly across an alley from 35 W. 15th St. Officers found a casing in the stairwell.
Assistant Police Chief Terry Tobin said the building being struck led to one of the terrorism charges, with the other stems from a family that was walking on Central Avenue toward 15th Street and had to move to an alley to avoid the gunfire.
"Terrorism covers acts of intimidation or coersion occurring," Tobin said. "One of those ways is firing off a firearm or gun."
Multiple witnesses interviewed by officers put Lewis in the common hallway of the duplex. Those witnesses say they saw Lewis fire multiple shots in the direction where the car was struck.
"We feel pretty confident Lewis was the one who fired the gun," Tobin said.
Lewis was arrested Friday, June 14, and is being held in Dubuque County Jail on a rioting charge related to a disturbance in the area of 14th and Iowa streets on Monday, June 10. After his arrest, officers interviewed Lewis about the incident on June 12.
According to the criminal complaint, Lewis claimed another man fired the shots toward his building, and he ran. Lewis said he was stressed out by an ongoing feud between two groups in the neighborhood, and he said the "other side" had been constantly circling the area just prior to the shooting. Lewis continued to deny being the shooter.
Witnesses to the June 12 incident said they also saw Lewis fire shots during an incident on June 10.
One witness said Lewis fired the shots into the air. Officers did find .45-caliber shell casings at the scene of that incident.
According to the criminal complaint, Lewis also denied being involved in that incident.
Lewis is being held on a $10,000 bond. The charges of terrorism and going armed with intent were served on Lewis Monday morning in the Dubuque County Jail. He will make an initial court appearance on the new charges today. Going armed with intent is a class D felony punishable by no more than five years in prison and a fine of between $750 and $7,500. Terrorism is a class B felony punishable by a period of confinement of not more than 50 years.
Tobin said he was not aware of any other incidents in the area over the weekend, although he had not reviewed all the shift reports. He said investigation into the incidents continues, and there could potentially be other charges made.

Load-Date: June 18, 2013


End of Document