Shooter's 'target list' prompts domestic terrorism case in attack on California festival
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
August 9, 2019 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 579 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"Due to the discovery of the target list, as well as other information we have encountered in this investigation, the FBI has opened a full domestic terrorism investigation into this mass shooting".
Investigators have yet to determine a motive and are trying to determine whether his "fractured ideologies" played a role in the shooting, said John F. Bennett, special agent in charge of the FBI's San Francisco office.
Legan was killed by police during the shooting.
The gunman was wearing body armor when he fired 39 total rounds into the crowd, Chief Smithee said.
Bennett said he "couldn't rule out" whether Legan was driven by white nationalism. Bennett says the Federal Bureau of Investigation is still working to determine the motive behind the shooting.
The gunfire at theGilroy Garlic Festival, a popular event that annually draws thousands of visitors, sent tremors through the small city and drew national attention. Officers fired 18 rounds at Legan and hit him multiple times, but those wounds were not fatal, officials later said.
This screenshot of Santino William Legan's Instagram account shows a selfie of Legan, who opened fire with an "assault-type rifle" on July 28 at theGilroy Garlic Festival inGilroy, Calif., killing three. That contradicted an earlier police report that Legan had been fataly shot by threeGilroy Police Department officers who responded to the scene in less than a minute.
"We see that in the far right, but we also see it in anarchists", Levin said.
Actor Danny Trejo helps save boy trapped in vehicle
Trejo described the accident to NBCLA , saying; 'A lady ran a red light and crashed into that Explorer, flipped it over'. Danny Trejo was in the right place at the right time when he witnessed a vehicle accident in Los Angeles.
A separate shooting that killed 22 people at a crowded El Paso, Texas, store over the weekend is also being handled as a domestic terrorism case.
Family members of Legan released a statement saying they were "deeply shocked and horrified" by his actions.
"These organizations across the country include religious institutions, federal buildings, courthouses, political organizations from both major political parties, and theGilroy Garlic Festival", Mr. Bennett said.
"We have uncovered evidence that the shooter was exploring violent ideologies", he said.
The statement goes on to say that "it is impossible to reconcile this with the son we thought we knew".
"Having a belief system and also committing an act of violence does not necessarily make that an act of terrorism nor does it give a clear motive", Mr. Bennett said.
Authorities have identified the three victims killed in the attack as six-year-old Stephen Romero, 13-year-old Keyla Allison Salazar and Trevor Deon Irby, 25. However, the organizations on the list were "nationwide", not specifically Santa Clara County-based, he added. He had a 75-round drum magazine that fit into his weapon, and there were 71 rounds left in the drum when he died. Legan also had two 40-round magazines, and an additional 40-round magazine was found loose on or near him, Smithee said. Making domestic terrorism a federal crime "would ensure that FBI Agents and prosecutors have the best tools to fight domestic terrorism", he said.
Authorities said they found more ammunition, a rifle scope, flashlight and shovel in a bag in a nearby creek. One post was a photo of people walking around the Garlic Festival, and another post made a reference to a white supremacist text.

Load-Date: August 9, 2019


End of Document