Shooting at Planned Parenthood should be labeled domestic terrorism
Indiana Statesman: Indiana State University
December 2, 2015 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 700 words
Byline: Joe Lippard
Body


On Black Friday, while most Americans took part in the age-old tradition of trampling each other for a blender, a man named Robert Lewis Dear decided to start a shootout at a Colorado Springs Planned Parenthood. A six-hour standoff left nine people wounded and three dead, including a police officer and a mother of two.
A law enforcement official told CNN that Dear talked about "baby parts" when he was arrested, as well as expressing anti-abortion and anti-government views. While it has been said that this doesn't explicitly point to a motive (investigators are still going through evidence), John Suthers, mayor of Colorado Springs, told CNN, "You can certainly infer what (the motive) may have been in terms of where it took place and the manner in which it took place."
Some of Dear's neighbors said that he kept mostly to himself. According to the New York Times, Dear often adorned his house with crosses and claimed to have read the Bible "cover to cover." One of his neighbors, Zigmond Post, said that Dear gave him pamphlets strongly opposing President Obama, but that the pamphlets were strictly political with no racist overtones.
So it seems, by accounts of law enforcement and his neighbors, that Dear may have had some sort of conservative political motive in his attack. If the GOP hadn't paraded around faked videos talking about Planned Parenthood "selling baby parts" as "proof" that Planned Parenthood was evil, would Dear have been motivated to attack the clinic?
This possible motive has been discounted by several members of the Republican Party. Ted Cruz called Dear a "transgender leftist activist" in an attempt to deflect the possibility that he could have had anything to do with inspiring Dear to act how he did. Dear is described as anti-abortion and anti-government by law enforcement; he claims to have read the whole Bible and he even referenced "baby parts" when he was arrested. I am astounded at the mental gymnastics Cruz is able to perform in order to blame liberals and the LGBT community for Dear's actions. I feel like it's safe to say that Dear was not a liberal, and the El Paso County Clerk and Recorder's office confirmed that Dear had been identified as female on a voter registration as a result of a clerical error, not because Dear was actually transgender.
Mike Huckabee had a much more reasonable response. "What he did is domestic terrorism, and what he did is absolutely abominable," Huckabee said. He continued, "Especially to us in the pro-life movement, because there's nothing about any of us that would condone or in any way look the other way on something like this." Huckabee is simply incorrect, however. Many "pro-life" people on Twitter tweeted their support for Dear. Cruz considers himself to be pro-life, and he's turning his head the other way and trying to blame transgender individuals for Dear's actions.
Many news stations are questioning whether or not they should call Dear's attack "terrorism." What frustrates me about this is that if Dear had any trace of Muslim leanings, no media outlets would hesitate to call his attack on Planned Parenthood "terrorism."
The Federal Bureau of Investigations defines domestic terrorism as an act that is intended "to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or to affect the conduct of a government by mass destruction, assassination or kidnapping." If we are to believe the police reports that indicate that Dear talked about "no more baby parts" after being arrested, it appears that this shooting was, indeed, an act intended to intimidate a civilian population. It is even possible that Dear was trying to influence Congress' actions as a result of his shooting. So why are some in the media refusing to call Dear's actions an act of domestic terrorism? Many media outlets are staunchly opposed to calling any politically-motivated attack perpetrated by men who aren't Muslim "terrorism." Had Robert Lewis Dear been a Muslim, I am willing to bet that the people who insist that Dear isn't a terrorist would immediately demand that all Muslims denounce his actions and insist that everyone call it "Muslim terrorism."

Load-Date: December 2, 2015


End of Document