SHULTZ DECLARES HE OPPOSES GIVING MORE ARMS TO IRAN
The New York Times
November 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 1074 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that he was opposed to sending any more military equipment to Iran, but he conceded that he could not speak for the Reagan Administration on this issue.
Breaking his silence on the secret Iranian operation, Mr. Shultz appeared to contradict President Reagan and White House officials who have asserted that the policy has produced positive results, such as a lessening of terrorism by Iran.
Mr. Shultz said Iran continued to sponsor terrorist acts and had been implicated in the recent kidnappings of three Americans. On Thursday, President Reagan said in a nationally broadcast speech, ''Since U.S. Government contacts began with Iran, there's been no evidence of Iranian Government complicity in acts of terrorism against the United States.''
Opposes Arms Shipments
Asked if he believed more arms shipments should be sent to Iran, Mr. Shultz said, ''Under the circumstances of Iran's war with Iraq, its pursuit of terrorism, its association with those holding our hostages, I would certainly say, as far as I'm concerned, no.''
But when he was asked, ''Do you have the authority to speak for the entire Administration?'' he replied, ''No.''
It is rare and potentially embarrassing for a Secretary of State to publicly advocate a course of action and then admit that his views are not necessarily those of the Administration for which he is the chief foreign policy spokesman.
Because of Mr. Shultz's known opposition to the secret provision of arms to Iran, when he was publicly assuring other nations that the United States was trying to block such arms shipments, there has been speculation that this might ultimately provoke Mr. Shultz to resign.
 
Resignation Issue
Appearing on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation,'' Mr. Shultz was asked if he had considered resigning over the Iranian issue. He did not deny such intentions, but replied: ''Oh, I talked to the President. I serve at his pleasure, and anything that I have to say on that subject, I'd just say to him.''
There were these other developments on Iran:
* Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, the national security adviser, who was in charge of the operation, said that William J. Casey, director of Central Intelligence, would be the Administration's chief witness at Congressional hearings on Friday.
* Mr. Reagan held an unpublicized meeting on Saturday at Camp David, Md., with his top advisers to discuss how to handle the Iran problem. No agreements were reached, with Mr. Shultz reportedly at odds with others.
* The Joint Chiefs of Staff were not informed of the operation in advance, Admiral Poindexter said, because they had no need to know about the secret shipments of military equipment.
* Robert C. McFarlane, who preceded Admiral Poindexter in his job, and who made a secret visit to Teheran last May for Mr. Reagan, acknowledged that some of the ''moderates'' he spoke with in Iran might now be in danger of being executed.
Mr. Shultz seemed to be still at odds with the White House over the results of the operation. This has left the appearance of an Administration with its policy uncoordinated. It was to bring some unanimity that Mr. Reagan and his top advisers discussed the issue at Camp David before the arrival of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, but apparently no hard decisions were reached.
This comes when a possible conflict looms with Congress. Both the House and Senate Intelligence committees have scheduled closed door hearings for Friday.
Admiral Poindexter said today that Mr. Casey would be the chief Administration witness before the committees because the Iran operation was primarily an ''intelligence'' matter. Members of both committees have asked that Admiral Poindexter, Mr. McFarlane and Lieut. Col. Oliver North of Admiral Poindexter's staff, testify as well.
Admiral Poindexter, who appeared on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' said, ''We are very anxious to discuss in great detail with the appropriate Congressional committees under the appropriate circumstances,'' but he suggested that it was unlikely he or other White House aides would testify at a formal hearing. Traditionally, under the broad mantle of ''executive privilege,'' aides to the President do not have to testify before Congressional committees.
Mr. Shultz's problems with the Iran policy are a major source of concern to the White House, in the face of looming Congressional hearings. On Saturday, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said in an interview over the Cable News Network that Mr. Shultz would testify because he ''is always our point man and our leader of the Cabinet in the foreign policy area.''
An aide to Mr. Shultz said that while he might be asked to testify, Mr. Shultz could not be the primary witness because he had so little to do with it.
Mr. Shultz said on ''Face the Nation'' that he had no quarrel with Mr. Reagan's decision taken 18 months ago to ''probe'' the possibility of altering Iran's policies. But as to the subsequent decision to provide a limited quantity of military equipment as a good faith ''signal'' to Iran, Mr. Shultz said, ''We have a policy of not sending arms, and the President decided that he would go ahead and send this signal.''
As to the Iranian attitude on terrorism against the United States, he said there was some indication that this ''has improved.'' But he added, ''I want to quickly say that we must look on the terrorism matter as an international matter, not just something limited to Americans.''
Mr. Shultz's remarks were quite different in tone and substance from those of Admiral Poindexter and Mr. McFarlane in recent days.
Admiral Poindexter said today, for instance, that although the situation was ''iffy'' at the moment, ''I'm basically an optimist, as the President is, and we will keep working on getting the hostages free.''
The Presidential order setting the Iran program in motion is in a classified finding that explains the reasons for the operation and orders the Central Intelligence Agency not to report it to Congress.
The New York Times reported Saturday that the classified executive order said that Congress would not be told of the operation because of the ''extreme sensitivity'' and ''security risks'' involved in the program, according to a source who saw the order. The same day, The Washington Post reported an interview with Admiral Poindexter, in which he said, ''The finding only existed in its original form in my safe.''

Graphic

 
Photos of Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Robert C. McFarlane, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, and Director of Central Intelligence William M. Casey (UPI; AP)


End of Document