SHULTZ URGES 'ACTIVE' DRIVE ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
June 25, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 733 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 24
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that governments opposed to terrorism must do a better job of infiltrating terrorist groups and be willing to take ''appropriate preventive or pre-emptive actions.''
In the Reagan Administration's fullest public discussion to date on its antiterrorist program, Mr. Shultz said, ''Experience has taught us over the years that one of the best deterrents to terrorism is the certainty that swift and sure measures will be taken against those who engage in it.''
On April 3 Mr. Shultz first said publicly that Western countries had to consider pre-emptive action against terrorist groups, particularly those that were ''state supported.''
But at the London economic summit meeting earlier this month, Mr. Shultz's advocacy of what he calls ''active defense'' was not reflected in the communique on terrorism that was issued. Officials at the meeting said the Europeans and the Japanese were wary of even talking about taking specific measures against terrorism.
Sec Geroge Shultz urges governments to take 'swift and sure' action against terrorism, by improving infiltration methods and by considering pre-emptive action against groups, especially those that are 'state supported,' speech to Washington conference sponsored by Israeli-based Jonathan Institute; cites Libya, Syria, Iran and North Korea as instigators (M)'The League of Terror'
Today, however, in a speech to a conference on international terrorism, sponsored by the Israeli-based Jonathan Institute, Mr. Shultz called for more active measures against what he called ''the league of terror.''
He cited Libya, Syria, Iran and North Korea as members of this ''league'' and also cited the Palestine Liberation Organization for terrorist actions. He said the Soviet Union and its allies provided ''financial, logistic and training support for terrorists worldwide.''
The Russians, he said, ''use terrorist groups for their own purposes, and their goal is always the same: to weaken liberal democracy and undermine world stability.''
Mr. Shultz spoke tonight, and the text of his remarks was made available by the State Department in advance. Others who spoke included Yitzhak Rabin, former Prime Minister of Israel, who called in his prepared remarks for close international collaboration against terrorism.
The Jonathan Institute was named for Jonathan Netanyahu, the Israeli commando leader who died in the 1976 attack on the Entebbe Airport in Uganda.
 
Question of Economic Sanctions
Mr. Shultz said economic sanctions ''impose costs on the nation that applies them,'' a reason Europeans cited in criticizing such moves.
Other countries should also be discouraged from ''paying blackmail to terrorist organizations,'' he said.
Such steps, as well as new legislation introduced in this country to reward those informing on terrorism, are largely passive, Mr. Shultz said.
''Can we as a country - can the community of free nations - stand in a solely defensive posture and absorb the blows dealt by terrorists?'' he asked.
''I think not,'' he said. ''From a practical standpoint, a purely passive defense does not provide enough of a deterrent to terrorism and the states that sponsor it. It is time to think long, hard and seriously about more active means of defense - about defense through appropriate preventive or pre- emptive actions against terrorist groups before they strike.''
He said, ''We will need to strengthen our capabilities in the area of intelligence and quick reaction.''
''Human intelligence will be particularly important, since our societies demand that we know with reasonable clarity just what we are doing,'' he said. Human intelligence refers to the use of agents, some of whom are infiltrated into an enemy organization.
As to the use of ''swift and sure measures'' to deter terrorism, Mr. Shultz said ''clearly there are complicated moral issues here, but there should be no doubt of the democracies' moral right, indeed duty, to defend themselves.''
He expressed anger at what he said was ''the insidious claim that 'one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.' ''
''It is not hard to tell, as we look around the world, who are the terrorists and who are the freedom fighters,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''The resistance fighters in Afghanistan do not destroy villages or kill the helpless. The contras in Nicaragua do not blow up school buses or hold mass executions of civilians.''


End of Document