Shultz Vigorous in Defending Decision Denying Arafat Visit
The New York Times
November 30, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 477 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz, under foreign pressure to reverse himself, stood firm today and vigorously defended his decision denying a visa to Yasir Arafat.
At the same time, senators from both parties supported Mr. Shultz and signed a letter commending him for what they described as his courage in denying a visa to Mr. Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Mr. Shultz said the worldwide criticism of him and his decision showed that many people did not fully appreciate the danger of terrorism to ''civilized society.''
''I think it was the right decision,'' he said. ''I stick by it.''
The pressure on Mr. Shultz came from Arab countries, from the Soviet Union and from some of the United States' allies in Western Europe.
 
'Concern About Terrorism'
In various ways, they suggested that Mr. Shultz erred Saturday when he announced that he would not permit Mr. Arafat to enter this country to make a speech at the United Nations because he ''knows of, condones and lends support to'' acts of terrorism.
''I'm sorry to see that opposition,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''I guess I'd have to say I wasn't surprised. I thought about it very carefully. To some extent, the opposition suggests how important it was to decide what was decided and to make it so clear what the basis was, the basis being our concern about terrorism.
''I am afraid that it's too easy for people to forget what an important problem that is and what a threat it is to civilized society,'' Mr. Shultz added. He spoke at a ceremony marking the start of work on a new home for the Foreign Service Institute, a school that trains American diplomats.
''If we have made the point that we really care and are concerned, that's good,'' Mr. Shultz said.
''At the same time,'' he said, ''as far as the ability of Palestinians to speak for themselves, they can do that in New York,'' through their observer mission at the United Nations. ''We have no problems with that. We want to hear what they have to say.''
 
Bush Not Consulted
President-elect Bush has said that he was not consulted on the visa decision, but Vice President-elect Dan Quayle was among 28 Republican Senators who signed the letter commending Mr. Shultz. Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate Republican leader, also signed the letter, which was drafted by Senators Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona.
The letter to Mr. Shultz, still being circulated for the signatures of Democratic senators, said that ''we are extremely pleased to learn of your decision to deny'' Mr. Arafat's application for a visa.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said today that President Reagan was ''aware of the reaction of various other countries to the decision'' on Mr. Arafat. ''But he remains firm in his belief that the Secretary of State made the right decision,'' Mr. Fitzwater added.


End of Document