SHULTZ AND WEINBERGER DISAGREE ON USING FORCE AGAINST LIBYANS
The New York Times
January 17, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 1037 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger continued to disagree publicly today on using force against terrorist provocations in general and Libya in particular.
The development came as Washington moved to deal with a new public threat from Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader. On Wednesday, Colonel Qaddafi vowed to help train Arabs for ''suicide missions.''
Mr. Shultz, urging firm action against the Qaddafi Government, said today that ''when we identify the source'' of terrorism, ''such as Qaddafi, who is clearly identified, then we have to go after it.''
No 'Absolute Certainty'
On Wednesday, Mr. Shultz said the United States ''cannot wait for absolute certainty and clarity'' before using force against terrorists or countries, like Libya, that support them.
Later today, Secretary Weinberger, reiterating his view that caution was needed in using force against terrorists, criticized those who seek ''instant gratification from some kind of bombing attack without being too worried about the details.''
The statements were the latest airing of a dispute that has been going on between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger for nearly two years. It does not seem to have caused any particular concern to President Reagan, who says he welcomes hearing differing points of view from his most senior advisers.
 
Dissension on Arms Issue
Meanwhile, officials reported that dissension was continuing within the Administration over how to respond to what some officials have charged are arms control violations by the Soviet Union. [Page A8.] Mr. Weinberger, warning against ''indiscriminate'' use of military force to hit terrorist targets, said such an attack must satisfy ''the basic question of whether what we are doing will discourage and diminish terrorism in the future.''
The Defense Secretary, speaking at his first news conference in four months, said the United States had ''a good idea'' where some terrorist training camps were situated and was militarily prepared to attack them, but only if the use of force would discourage future terrorist acts.
Mr. Weinberger suggested that his differences with Mr. Shultz were ''just a matter of emphasis.''
''I don't think there's any doubt that if we find a very good, appropriate target for response to terrorist actions that anybody would have any hesitancy about dealing with it,'' he said.
''I don't think,'' he added, ''that Secretary Shultz has in mind spraying any target that somebody mentions might be a target. And I don't have any intention of not responding when it's appropriate.
''There have been lots of attacks made in retaliation from time to time,'' he said, clearly referring to Israeli military reprisals for terrorist attacks.
But those ''haven't eliminated terrorism or terrorist attacks on the people who made the immediate retaliation,'' he said.
Mr. Weinberger cited the Navy's successful interception of the Achille Lauro hijackers last year as his model for military response to terrorism. In that case, he said, the culprits were clearly identified and the interception was carried out without ''collateral damage.''
''Collateral damage,'' he added, ''is the euphemism for how many women and children you kill in your attempt.''
 
Said to Already Train Terrorists
Over the last four days, Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger have come out publicly with their differences over how to respond to Libya.
Today, Mr. Shultz said Colonel Qaddafi's declared readiness to help train terrorists was misleading, because he already was doing so.
''It isn't some new thing he's going to start,'' Mr. Shultz said in a televised CBS News interview. ''He's been doing this. That's the real point, and we're trying to isolate him, isolate him economically, isolate him diplomatically, make him the pariah he really is.
''And we're calling on others to look the facts in the face and see where they think their interests are,'' he said. ''Now, I have said in response to terrorism that we must be against it, we must not just sit around and talk about it or huddle in a corner, and when we identify the source, such as Qaddafi, who is clearly identified, then we have to go after it.''
 
Not Ruling Anything Out
He said he would not discuss military actions that might be taken against Colonel Qaddafi, ''other than the fact that self-defense is a perfectly legal basis for action, and we should not rule any options out.''
In the Administration debate between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger over the proper use of force, Mr. Reagan has consistently come out so far on Mr. Weinberger's side. That is, he has opposed using force until there was certainty that the target was precisely linked to the terrorists who carried out a particular action.
The public aspects of the debate have been more general, with Mr. Shultz being careful not to criticize any particular aspect of Mr. Reagan's policies.
Differences between secretaries of state and defense are not new in Washington, but they have been acute during this Administration, particularly over dealing with terrorism and over relations with the Soviet Union. In the latter case, Mr. Weinberger has been much less interested than Mr. Shultz in seeking to negotiate new accords with the Russians.
 
Qaddafi Speech in Tripoli
Colonel Qaddafi made his comments on providing training for ''suicide operations'' in a rambling two-hour speech on Wednesday to a ''people's congress'' in Tripoli. In the address, which was monitored and translated by United States Government listening posts overseas, he said he would accept the recommendations of various congresses, which are a kind of Libyan public forum, to train Arabs who are in Libya on ''suicide missions.'' He said he would provide ''the trainers who will begin to train all members of the Arab people's congresses in the Arab territory on suicide operaitons.''
Since the United States began to focus attention on Libya after the Rome and Vienna airport attacks on Dec. 27, Colonel Qaddafi had denied that Libya had provided training camps for the Abu Nidal Palestinian group, which Washington has said is responsible for those attacks. But he has said that he would be willing to provide such facilities for anti-Israel Palestinians if asked to do so.


End of Document