SHULTZ PRESSES FOR BILL PROHIBITING AID TO TERRORISTS
The New York Times
June 14, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 726 words
Byline: By LESLIE H. GELB
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 13
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz, describing terrorism as a substantial and growing problem, called today for new and broader laws to prosecute Americans engaged in ''training, supporting, or inducing'' terrorist activities.
 He immediately ran into a crossfire from members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, who questioned whether the legislation was necessary and whether its general language might lead to abuses of civil liberties and double standards on foreign policy.
Was the Palestine Liberation Organization a terrorist group and would Saudi Arabian support for it mean that Riyadh would be considered a Government sponsoring terrorism? Mr. Shultz was asked. And what would be the legal status of Americans providing arms to the Saudis? Would the Soviet Union be designated as a Government supporting terrorism, or, some members queried, would only smaller countries unfriendly to the United States be singled out?
Sec George Shultz, describing terrorism as substantial and growing problem, calls for new and broader laws to prosecute Americans engaged in 'training, supporting or inducing' terrorist activities; House Foreign Affairs Committee members question whether legislation is necessary and whether its general language might lead to abuses of civil liberties and double standards on foreign policy (M)
Mr. Shultz, attended by a large entourage of experts from the State Department and responding in his usual brief manner, acknowledged the complexity of the issues and promised to work them out with Congress. ''I don't think I've oversold'' the proposed bill, he quipped at one point in response to a cautionary remark by Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa.
 
Support for Terrorists
Mr. Shultz told the committee there were over 500 attacks by international terrorists last year, of which more than 200 were against Americans. ''We also know that some Americans are engaged in supporting the terrorist activities of foreign states and groups that engage in terrorism,'' he said.
But when asked by several committee members to cite specific instances where American involved with terrorists could not be charged under existing laws, he responded: ''Maybe the Department of Justice would have a better handle on this than I do.''
Current laws allow for criminal action against Americans illegally providing goods such as arms, but not services, to certain countries. The Administration proposed bill would extend grounds for criminal action to provision of services.
Under it, the Secretary of State would designate countries supporting terrorism, and Americans would be subject to imprisonment and fine for giving training, support or encouragement to these states. A second Administration proposal would provide monetary rewards for people providing information about terrorists.
In his prepared statement and his answers to questions, Mr. Shultz did not repeat what other Administration officials had said before about taking pre- emptive or retaliatory action against terrorists and countries sponsoring terrorism, nor did he reiterate his own prior statement on the inadequacy of ''purely defensive postures.''
 
'Active Defenses' Cited
Responding to a direct question from Representative Daniel A. Mica, Democrat of Florida, about these previous statements, he said that on some occasions ''certain forms of active defenses will be necessary.'' Then, he added: ''I don't think we want to reach to questions of broad pre-emptive strikes and that kind of thing at this time.''
One State Department official said privately that several leaders at the economic conference in London last week reacted negatively to Administration talk about possible military action. He expressed the view that Mr. Shultz did not want to ''sound any new alarms on the matter'' so soon after the conference's declaration on terrorism. The seven leaders of the industrialized democracies condemned terrorism and promised to cooperate more in combatting it.
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, remarked that it was importnt to have standards on who the new law applied to. Did it apply to Saudi Arabia because of its relations with the P.L.O., or to nations aiding the Islamic guerrillas fighting Soviet forces in Afghanistan? No, Mr. Shultz responded. These ''concepts are difficult and messy and we have to proceed with care,'' he said.


End of Document