SHULTZ ASKS MOVE AGAINST TERRORISM
The New York Times
April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 807 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 3
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the Western countries had to consider pre-emptive action against ''known terrorist groups'' and face up ''to the need for active defense against terrorism.''
Identifying Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea as countries involved in ''state-supported terrorism,'' Mr. Shultz said that ''we have no choice but to address ourselves boldly'' to ways of halting the rise in what he called ''a form of warfare.'' He said traditional methods of enhanced security and better intelligence were no longer adequate by themselves.
In a speech at a meeting of the Trilateral Commission, a group of prominent citizens of North America, Western Europe and Japan who meet to discuss world affairs, Mr. Shultz offered no specific plan, but his aides said there had been considerable discussion in the Administration on the need to take more forceful action against terrorist groups without waiting for them to strike.
US State Sec George Shultz, identifying Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea as countries involved in 'state-supported terrorism,' calls on Western countries to consider pre-emptive action against 'known terrorism groups' and face up to need for 'active defense against terrorism'; says traditional methods of enhanced security and better intelligence are no longer adequate to thwart terrorists (M)
But, as Mr. Shultz said, there was a question of ''what evidence do we insist upon before taking such steps.''
 
Questions for a Free Society
''How do we combat this challenge?'' Mr. Shultz asked. ''Certainly we must take security precautions to protect our people and our facilities; certainly we must strengthen our intelligence capabilities to alert ourselves to the threats.''
''But it is increasingly doubtful that a purely passive strategy can even begin to cope with the problem,'' he said. ''This raises a host of questions for a free society: In what circumstances - and how - should we respond? When - and how - should we take preventive or pre-emptive action against known terrorist groups? What evidence do we insist upon before taking such steps?''
''As the threat mounts, and as the involvement of such countries as Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea has become more and more evident, then it is more and more appropriate that the nations of the West face up to the need for active defense against terrorism,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''Once it becomes established that terrorism works - that it achieves its political objectives - its practioners will be bolder and the threat to us will be all the greater.''
 
Concern About Gulf War
Mr. Shultz's speech came as Administration officials were expressing increasing concern about Iranian activities, both in support of terrorist groups in the Middle East and in the war against Iraq. John Hughes, the State Department spokesman, said that although the United States was neutral in that conflict, it was particularly opposed to the supply of military equipment to Iran because of that country's refusal to agree to any formula for ending the war.
State Department officials said, however, that there was no plan to change the policy of not selling arms to Iran or Iraq, even though one senior official acknowledged there was now ''an illogic'' in the American position.
He said intelligence showed that Iraq was unable to push back the Iranians, who were continuing to mass hundreds of thousands of troops for what is expected to be a major push to cut the road from Baghdad to Basra and to capture Basra, the important oil terminal. Officials said that among the nations that have supplied arms to Iran and Iraq was China, although the Chinese deny such involvement.
 
Billion Dollars in Sales
According to an Administration official, in January, when Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China was in Washington, Mr. Shultz said the Iran-Iraq war was the most dangerous situation in the world and urged China not to sell arms to either side. The Chinese leader said Peking was not doing so.
But American intelligence, the official said, has determined that in the last year China has sold more than a billion dollars worth of arms and early- model Soviet airplanes to Iran through North Korea. The Chinese have reportedly sold even larger amounts to Iraq. An Administration official said South Korea had also sold some military equipment, such as artillery shells, to Iran.
In his speech, the text of which was made public this afternoon, Mr. Shultz said the United States was ''relatively well prepared'' to deter an all-out Soviet attack in Europe.
''But day in and day out, we will continue to see a wide range of conflicts that fall in a gray area between major war and millennial peace,'' he said. ''Terrorism - particularly state-sponsored terrorism - is already a contemporary weapon directed at America's interests, America's values and America's allies.''


End of Document