Shut Guantanamo, British official urges; The detention camp for terrorism suspects violates U.S. traditions of justice, the attorney general said.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
May 11, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A29
Length: 452 words
Byline: Beth Gardiner, Associated Press
Body


The U.S. prison camp at Guantanamo Bay is a discredit to the American tradition of freedom and should close, Britain's attorney general said yesterday.
"The existence of Guantanamo Bay remains unacceptable," Lord Goldsmith said in a speech. "It is time, in my view, that it should close... . The historic tradition of the United States as a beacon of freedom, of liberty and of justice deserves the removal of this symbol."
Goldsmith's criticism was far stronger than that of Tony Blair whenever the British prime minister is asked about Guantanamo, where about 500 terrorism suspects have been detained for as long as four years.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said: "At some time in the future we would like nothing better" than to close the prison. But he said the United States did not want to release dangerous people prematurely, only to have them resume attacks on U.S. and other personnel.
Blair often has said the prison is an anomaly that eventually will have to close, but he has gone no further. He always prefaces his criticism by saying that it is important to understand the threat the United States faces and that many of those imprisoned were picked up on battlefields in Afghanistan.
Goldsmith, whose job is to advise the British government on legal matters, made no such qualifying comment.
"Not only would it in my personal opinion be right to close Guantanamo as a matter of principle," he said. "I believe it would also help to remove what has become a symbol to many - right or wrong - of injustice."
Blair's office was aware of the planned speech earlier yesterday. Asked about reports that Goldsmith would criticize the U.S. government over the camp, Blair's official spokesman said the prime minister believed there was a "genuine dilemma" because U.S. officials believed many of the detainees were dangerous and could not be released.
The Guantanamo camp, opened after the Sept. 11 attacks, has prompted widespread international criticism. The United States says those detained are "enemy combatants" to whom normal legal rules do not apply.
U.S.-Australian Deal on Detainee
The United Statesand Australia have signed a pact to allow an Australian terror suspect held at Guantanamo to serve his sentence in his own country if convicted, the Australian government said yesterday.
David Hicks was detained in Afghanistan in December 2001 while allegedly fighting with
the ousted Taliban regime. He has been held at Guantanamo since 2002.
He has pleaded not guilty before a U.S. military tribunal to charges of terrorist conspiracy and aiding the enemy.
The deal, signed Tuesday, will allow Hicks to apply
to serve any prison time in Australia if convicted.
SOURCE: Associated Press

Load-Date: May 11, 2006


End of Document