Shut for over 6 years, Syria's national museum reopens
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 29, 2018 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 414 words
Byline:  By ALBERT AJI Associated Press writer  
Body


DAMASCUS, Syria - Syrian officials, foreign archeologists and restoration specialists attended the reopening of Syria's National Museum in the heart of Damascus on Sunday, more than six years after the prominent institution was shut down and emptied as the country's civil war encroached on the capital.
The reopening of the museum was hailed as a return to normal life by Syrian officials, eager to cash in on the Syrian armed forces' military victories against armed groups, who had recently shelled Damascus and threatened the seat of the government in the capital, coming within miles of the presidential palace.
Over successive military advances, and with the backing of allies Russia and Iran, Syrian troops moved in on rebel holdouts on the outskirts of Damascus expelling the armed groups to the north and restoring calm.
"The opening of the museum is a genuine message that Syria is still here and her heritage would not be affected by terrorism," Syrian Minister of Culture Mohamed al-Ahmad told reporters and visitors. "Today, Damascus has recovered."
Among antiquities on display are murals from the second-century Dura-Europos, textiles from Palmyra and statues of the Greek goddess of victory.
Syria's conflict, raging since early 2011, has been detrimental for the country's rich heritage.
Authorities shut down museums and stored over 300,000 artifacts, but some sites were destroyed by the Islamic State, damaged by fighting or looted.
Head of the General Directorate for Antiquities and Museums, Mahmoud Hammoud, said four of the five sections of the museum will be opened to showcase hundreds of archaeological findings that date back to the prehistoric, historical, classical and Islamic eras. He said some artifacts restored or seized by Syrian authorities will also be on display.
More than 9,000 artifacts were restored and reclaimed since the war began, he said, noting that the museum needs renovation and funds. He said hundreds of thousands of important artifacts and sculptures were smuggled abroad during the crisis.
Visitors would be able to watch as specialists restore artifacts reclaimed from Palmyra, which Islamic State militants overtook, destroying some of the world's most famous monuments.
Bartosz Markowski, a Polish specialist in conservation of sculpture and architectural detail, said he was working in Palmyra before the war broke out.
For Markowski, reopening the museum was "symbolic."
"When life is coming back, we are opening the museums," he said.

Graphic

 
 In this Feb. 23, 2016 file photo, Jihad Abu Kahrlah, an archeologist at Syria's National Museum, holds an artifact delivered from the Daraa Museum to Damascus, Syria. Syrian officials have reopened the country's National Museum in Damascus, more than six years after the prominent institution was shut down. Syria's Culture Minister Mohamed al-Ahmad told reporters Sunday, Oct. 28, 2018 that the reopening sends a "genuine message" that Syria's heritage has not been affected by "terrorism." (AP Photo/Hassan Ammar, File) 

Load-Date: October 31, 2018


End of Document