SICK DOCS PRESCRIBE TERRORISM. Brit bombers may have teamed up to hit Glasgow after London strike was thwarted
Daily News (New York)
July 4, 2007 Wednesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 9
Length: 460 words
Byline: BY DAVE GOLDINER DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER With News Wire Services
Body


THE SAME TWO doctors may have planted the London car bombs and driven the flaming Jeep into Glasgow Airport, security sources said yesterday.
Saturday's airport attack came just 14 hours after the failed London bombings.
But it's unclear whether the suspects - doctors Bilal Abdulla and Khalid Ahmed - might have launched the second attack out of frustration after authorities thwarted the first one.
Eight people, including at least six foreign-born doctors, have been rounded up in the probe into the botched terror attacks.
Britain remains on "critical" terror alert - the highest level - even though some security officials said they believe the main plotters have been nabbed.
A terminal at Heathrow Airport was closed yesterday because of a bomb scare, stranding travelers, including some Americans heading home for Independence Day.
Investigators say the two botched attacks involved markedly similar explosive devices, leading them to conclude quickly that the attacks were linked.
But the attack in Scotland did not employ the same relatively sophisticated triggering device found in the two London car bombs, a clue that could indicate the docs hurriedly decided to mount a second strike.
Police have not said how the two doctors are linked to the other suspects or what roles the others might have played in the plot, which came to light when cops found two propane-, gasoline- and nail-laden cars in the capital's nightclub district.
Besides Abdulla and Ahmed, who was critically injured when the Jeep burst into flames, the suspects include a Jordanian doctor and his medical assistant wife and two Indian doctors. Another doctor and a medical student are thought to be from the Middle East.
All the suspects worked for Britain's National Health Service, some together at hospitals in England and Scotland.
The Guardian newspaper reported today that investigators believe the plotters were directed by a single mastermind based outside Britain, but do not yet know the identity of the "guiding hand."
Experts and officials doubt the suspects could have hatched the plot themselves overseas before immigrating to Britain, especially because they come from far-flung homelands.
"I think that's a planning impossibility," said Bob Ayres, a former U.S. intelligence officer. "A much more likely scenario is they were here together. They discovered that they shared some common ideology, and then they decided to act on this."
Dr. Shiv Panbe, former chairman of the British International Doctors Association, said he shared public disgust that medical doctors could be involved in a plot that could have killed scores.
"It is very upsetting news," Panbe said. "It is an abuse of trust and respect. Everyone should be able to love their doctor."
dgoldiner@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Cops bust one of would-be bombers after Saturday attack at Glasgow Airport. Security sources are linking perps in Scotland with Friday's attack in central London. Photo by Universal and Sport

Load-Date: July 4, 2007


End of Document