Sigma Delta Chi Lists 1981 Award Winners
The New York Times
April 13, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk; List
Length: 424 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: CHICAGO, April 12
Body


Distinguished Service Awards for 1981 were announced today by the Society of Professional Journalists-Sigma Delta Chi.
Three of the recipients, two reporters for The Detroit News and a photographer for The Associated Press, also received Pulitzer Prizes today.
David L. Ashenfelter and Sydney P. Freedberg of the Detroit paper received the society's general reporting award for exposing the circumstances surrounding the deaths of several Navy seamen. Ron Edmonds of The Associated Press was recognized in news photography for his pictures of the assassination attempt on President Reagan.
Distinguished Service Awards for 1981 were announced today by the Society of Professional Journalists-Sigma Delta Chi.
Other awards, by category, were these: Editorial Writing: Jon T. Senderling, of The Dallas Times-Herald, for a series focusing on Texas political reform.  Washington Correspondence: Jerome Watson, of The Chicago Sun-Times, for a series of reports dealing with the Reagan Administration.  Foreign Correspondence: Richard Ben Cramer, of The Philadelphia Inquirer, for coverage of the plight of starving refugees in Somalia.  Editorial Cartoon: Paul Conrad, of The Los Angeles Times, for depicting President Reagan questioning the need for assistance of a poverty-stricken child.  Public Service in Newspaper Journalism: The Los Angeles Times, for a continuing series examining crime and its effects on victims and the public at large. The series was written by Mike Goodman, John Hurst, Richard E. Meyer, Gaylord Shaw, David Treadwell and Kay Mills.  Magazine Reporting: Seymour Hersh in The New York Times Magazine, for two reports on the American role in terrorism abroad.  Public Service in Magazine Journalism: The National Geographic, for two special issues on acid rain and the issue of energy.  Radio Reporting: KVET-AM, Austin, Tex., for coverage of a destructive flood.  Public Service in Radio Reporting: WJR-AM, Detroit, for reports on corruption and unethical practices in Federal court bankruptcy cases.  Editorializing on Radio: Michal Regunberg, WEEI, Boston, for a series of editorials on Boston's financial crisis.  Television Reporting: WHAS, Louisville, Ky., for coverage of city sewer explosions.  Public Service in Television Journalism: WNBC, New York, for exposing illegal adoption practices.  Editorializing on Television: Jack Hurley, WHIO, Dayton, Ohio, for editorializing on the degradation of Dayton's jails.  Research About Journalism: Robert W. Desmond, author of a fivevolume series on international news gathering.


End of Document