SIKH BLOODBATH Wis. slaying of 6 'domestic terrorism' Panic as shots rake temple
Daily News (New York)
August 6, 2012 Monday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 942 words
Byline: BY LINDA SPICE, in Oak Creek, Wisc. and ANTHONY BARTKEWICZ and MAGGIE HAYES NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE FBI WILL lead the investigation into Sunday's Sikh temple shooting outside Milwaukee that killed seven and wounded three more in an act that authorities quickly identified as "domestic terrorism."
The death toll included the gunman, who was shot and killed after ambushing two officers responding to the shooting inside the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin. His name was not released. The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel identified him as a white man in his 30s.
Hours after the attack, NYPD Commissioner Raymond Kelly dispatched extra officers to Sikh temples throughout the five boroughs "out of an abundance of caution," his spokesman said.
A wave of 911 calls on the second mass shooting in as many months began at 11:15 a.m. Eastern time, reporting gunfire inside the temple, a sanctuary for a congregation numbering about 400.
Two cops responding to those frantic calls were attending to a victim in the parking lot when the gunman opened fire on them, Oak Creek Police Chief John Edwards told reporters.
One of the officers, a 20-year veteran of the department, was shot repeatedly, but his partner returned fire, killing the shooter.
The wounded cop underwent surgery and is expected to survive. Two others were treated for gunshot wounds at Froedtert Hospital in Milwaukee, one of whom required "a complex procedure," according to the hospital. All remained in critical condition Sunday night.
Hours later, authorities evacuated four blocks of a suburban neighborhood of single-family homes and duplexes 6 miles away from the temple. Police and FBI agents swarmed the area in Cudahy, Wisc. with an armored truck, trailer, HAZMAT unit and police dog. A neighbor told the News that they were warned that there might be explosives in the area.
Earlier, the scene outside the temple was complete panic, with conflicting reports of multiple gunmen and a possible hostage situation, a result of a barrage of 911 calls.
SWAT teams moved into the building, and the media was requested not to broadcast images of their whereabouts, lest the second gunman be alerted to their movements.
Eventually, police realized that only one gunman was responsible for the carnage. Two victims were dead outside near the slain suspect.
Inside was a horrific site as four Sikhs lay dead, and others were bleeding from their wounds.
Jaspreet Singh's mother was not among the dead, having hidden in a pantry when the gunfire began. She quickly pulled out her cellphone to call family members who were on their way to the temple, whispering, "Don't come!"
Singh's mother was still talking to investigators Sunday night.
The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported that has many as 25 women and 10 children hid in a closet in the temple basement for an hour, waiting for a sign that the mayhem was over.
The president of the temple was wounded while trying to tackle the gunman, CNN reported.
"It's too hard, it shakes my heart, a lot of people died," said Mohinder Dillon, whose aunt and uncle were also at the temple during the attack.
By terming the attack "domestic terrorism," authorities quickly identified the incident as a targeted attack. That shocked locals in the growing Sikh community.
"There have never been any problems with this temple," Oak Creek Alderman Dan Jakubczyk said in a statement released by the Sikh Coalition, an advocacy group. "They've been a plus to this city and to my district."
For at least one member of the Sikh community in Richmond Hill, Queens, the violence hit home: Mohan Singh Khatra's 70-year-old uncle was among the dead in the senseless attack.
Through a translator, the chairman of the Sikh Cultural Society said he had spoken to his relative just last night, and that he was expecting to stay at his house for a wedding. Now, he, along with other members of the society, may instead have to attend a funeral.
"I'm still in shock. It's a bad situation, it's really sad," said Khatra. "He was a noble man. Although he didn't speak good English, he still tried to communicate with his Caucasian neighbors. That's just what kind of man he was."
Others in the neighborhood, who were celebrating the Sikh saint Isher Singh Rarewale, were stunned by the attack.
"Whatever happened there was not right," said Joginder Singhriar, a preacher at Baba Makhan Shah Lubana Gurdwara Sikh Center on 101st Ave. "What we are doing is something right in the name of God, and what happened is not fair."
The attack quickly reverberated throughout the worldwide Sikh community, which has over 20 million members.
"It is very upsetting, especially when the attack is on a Sikh place of worship. This will affect every Sikh all over the world," said Dr. Gurmit Singh Aulakah. "We have a special identity. We believe in the equality of all human race. In our place of worship, anybody from any religion can come here and worship."
Some speculated that the gunman was motivated by prejudice.
"If he did it because of any hatred against the Sikh community, it's even more shameful," said Harpreet Toor. "Instead of understanding various cultures, doing something like that, it's really very hurtful."
Others presumed that the violence was another example of misdirected anti-Islamic sentiment.
"My opinion is that it's a racial attack. When people see some guy with a turban, they misidentify him," said Gurdev Singh Kan, the president of the Sikh Cultural Society. "Whatever happened is so bad."
Sikhism is the fifth-largest religion in the world. Its followers often wear turbans and do not cut their beards, leading them to sometimes be mistaken for Muslims. Sikhs have been the victims of misdirected hate crimes and prejudice as a result of the 9/11 attacks, according to the Sikh Coalition.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: August 6, 2012


End of Document