SIKH BLOODBATH Six slain in act of 'domestic terrorism' Tattooed killer stroms temple
Daily News (New York)
August 6, 2012 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 900 words
Byline: BY LINDA SPICE, in Oak Creek, Wis. and MAGGIE HAYES and BILL HUTCHINSON NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Anthony Bartkewicz
Body


THE NATION was stunned Sunday when a symbol of American freedom - a Wisconsin house of worship - became the scene of a "domestic terrorism" bloodbath.
A lone tattooed gunman, believed to be an Army veteran, unleashed a barrage of bullets in a Sikh temple in surburban Milwaukee that left six dead before cops gunned him down in a shootout.
The country's second mass shooting in as many months, following the Colorado movie-theater massacre, sent shockwaves all the way to New York, where NYPD Commissioner Raymond Kelly dispatched cops to Sikh temples throughout the city. He said the move was made "out of an abundance of caution."
The gunman, whose name was not immediately released, is believed to be white and in his 40s. CNN reported he had a 9/11 tattoo on his arm, and ABC News, citing anonymous sources, reported he was a "skinhead" or "white supremacist."The diabolical ambush commenced at10:30 a.m. as members of the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin were filing in for meditation.
Witnesses said the killer was armed with a semiautomatic handgun and was wearing a white T-shirt and black pants with pockets to store ammunition.
Moments after shots left wounded Sikhs splayed on the floor of the temple in Oak Creek, 911 dispatchers were flooded with emergency calls, many claiming they were under attack from multiple gunmen.As congregants dove for cover and terrified women hid with children in closets, blaring sirens drew the shooter out of the sanctuary to confront arriving cops.
A 20-year veteran police officer was shot several times when he got out of his cruiser to aid two wounded victims outside the temple, officials said.
A second officer arriving to the chaotic scene engaged in a gunfight with the suspect, killing him on the spot, said Oak Creek Police Chief John Edward.
"Because of the heroic actions of our officers, they stopped this from being worse than it could have been," said Edwards.
Mindful of the earlier 911 calls, police feared at least one more gunman was inside the temple holding hostages. A SWAT team was quickly assembled to sweep through the building in search of other shooters. None were found.
Inside was a horrific scene of four temple members lying dead, and others bleeding.
The president of the temple, Satwant Singh Kaleka, 65, was shot while trying to tackle the gunman, CNN reported. Kaleka, a married father of two adult sons, later died, his family told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.
Kaleka's son, Amardeep, said he got a call from his father's cell phone soon after the shooting broke out. It was a priest telling him his father had been shot.
"He told me right away that right now my father can't speak. There's too much blood coming out of his back area and we have to get ambulances in there right away," Amardeep Kaleka told ABC News.
For at least one member of the Sikh community in Richmond Hill, Queens, the violence hit home: Mohan Singh Khatra's 70-year-old uncle, Subheg Singh Khatra, was among the dead.
Through a translator, Khatra, chairman of the Sikh Cultural Society, said he had spoken to his uncle Saturday night, and that he was expecting to stay at his house for a wedding. Now, he may instead have to attend a funeral.
"I'm still in shock," said Khatra. "He was a noble man. Although he didn't speak good English, he still tried to communicate with his Caucasian neighbors. That's just what kind of man he was."
In Oak Creek, Jaspreet Singh said his mother survived the killing spree by hiding in a pantry when the gunfire began. She quickly pulled out her cell phone to call family members who were on their way to the temple, whispering, "Don't come!"
As many as 25 women and 10 children hid in a closet in the temple basement for an hour, waiting for a sign that the mayhem was over, the Journal Sentinel reported.
A four-block radius around the temple and single-family homes and duplexes as far as 6 miles away were evacuated, as bloodied victims were carted off to the hospital.
The wounded cop underwent surgery and is expected to survive. Two others were treated for gunshot wounds at Froedtert Hospital in Milwaukee. All remained in critical condition Sunday night.
FBI agents and local police served a search warrant on a duplex in nearby Cudahy, Wis., believed to be the gunman's residence.
Armored trucks, HAZMAT units and police with dogs converged on the duplex as cops ordered neighbors to evacuate their houses, suggesting there may be bombs inside the dwelling.
Kurt Weins said he rented the duplex about a month ago to a man matching the suspect's description. Weins told the Journal Sentinal the man was from Chicago and had no record of violence in Wisconsin.
"I had him checked out and he definitely checked out," Weins said.
FBI officials said they were investigating the shootings as "an act of domestic terrorism," but insisted no motive had been established.The attack quickly reverberated throughout the worldwide Sikh community, which has more than 20 million members.
Some speculated that the gunman was motivated by bigotry."My opinion is that it's a racial attack. When people see some guy with a turban, they misidentify him," said Gurdev Singh Kan, the president of the Sikh Cultural Society. President Obama and his GOP rival Mitt Romney issued statements expressing their condolences.
"At this difficult time, the people of Oak Creek must know that the American people have them in our thoughts and prayers," Obama said.

Graphic

 
Man prays as awaits news of family member in massacre at Sikh temple (l., below) in Milwaukee. Photo by AP EPA

Load-Date: August 6, 2012


End of Document