SINN FEIN'S LEADER IN U.S. FOR PEACE TALKS
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 1, 1994 TUESDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1994 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 468 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


After years of being banned from the United States, the leader of the Irish Republican Army's political wing arrived in New York on Monday to attend a conference on peace in Northern Ireland.
Organizers called the visit a "historic breakthrough."
Security was tight as Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein since 1983, arrived at John F. Kennedy International Airport at 4:45 p.m. He was given a two-day visa for today's conference, which will focus on the Joint Declaration signed in December by the British and Irish governments.
"I think we are at a very critical part of the entire peace process," Adams said after he arrived. "The IRA can make a positive contribution to that peace process. Our job has to be to move the process forward and make sure the opportunity is not squandered."
A visa for Adams, 44, was blocked at least eight times over the last two decades because of British objections and U.S. policy requiring a special waiver for leaders of organizations known or suspected of supporting terrorism.
This time he won out after lengthy deliberations involving President Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
Boarding an Aer Lingus flight in Dublin, Adams said his views were "quite simply and straightforward - I want an end to violence."
The IRA seeks an end to British rule over Northern Ireland and that province's unification with the Republic of Ireland. In the December declaration, Britain said it had no strategic or economic interest in Northern Ireland and agreed to unification if a majority of the people there favored it.
As leader of Sinn Fein, Adams was invited to join in the December pact, but has thus far declined.
Of four other political leaders invited from Northern Ireland for today's conference, two agreed to attend and two refused.
The Rev. Ian Paisley, the extremist Protestant leader, refused. Ulster Unionist Party leader James Molyneaux declined, saying he would not join any event with "apologists for terrorism."
Expected to attend were John Hume, leader of the Social Democratic and Labor Party, which is supported by a majority of Northern Ireland's Catholic voters; and John Alderdice, a leader of the Alliance Party, which draws both Catholic and Protestant support.
The conference is sponsored by the National Committee on American Foreign Policy, a private group that includes former diplomats such as former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
American supporters of the Irish cause hailed Adams' visit as an important step toward a U.S. role in seeking to end the bloodshed that has killed 3,200 people, Catholic and Protestant, in Northern Ireland in the past 25 years.
Britain tempered its objections to a visa this time with a statement from Prime Minister John Major's office acknowledging Adams' public rejection of violence and stated desire for peace.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, (Gerry) Adams

Load-Date: August 30, 1994


End of Document