Six counties in 60 seconds
Chicago Daily Herald
January 8, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 15
Length: 713 words
Body


Palatine man pleads guilty:
A 25-year-old Palatine man, who police say resisted arrest after a disturbance last month, pleaded guilty to the charge. In exchange for Andrew Castillo's guilty plea to the misdemeanor charge, Cook County Judge Joel Greenblatt sentenced him to one year of conditional discharge, which is similar to probation, and ordered him to perform 100 hours of community service. Greenblatt also ordered Castillo to pay $349 in fines, court records show. Authorities say officers responding to a call of a domestic disturbance encountered Castillo kicking an apartment door and yelling at the occupants. Castillo refused to obey officers, whom he reportedly tried to bite and head-butt, police said.
Parks pension deal now law:
Gov. Pat Quinn has signed a pension-reform measure for the Chicago Park District. The legislation Quinn signed Tuesday is designed to deal with a $971 million deficit in the district's pension program. When lawmakers approved it in November, experts hailed it as example of compromise for what was then an elusive solution to the five state pension systems' $100 billion hole. The legislation requires employees to put 3 percent more of their salaries into their pensions and reduces annual cost-of-living adjustments to 3 percent or half the rate of inflation — whichever is less. The deal was reached between administrators and the Service Employees International Union. Lawmakers agreed last month on a statewide reform measure, which Quinn also signed.
Prison a must for Warner?
Prosecutors say the billionaire creator of Beanie Babies should do at least some prison time for failing to report $25 million in income he hid in Swiss bank accounts. A Tuesday filing by the government in federal court in Chicago doesn't suggest a specific length of prison time for H. Ty Warner. But it says probation asked for by the defense wouldn't be appropriate. Prosecutors acknowledge Warner has donated millions to charity over the years. But prosecutors' filing adds, "Charity is not a get-out-jail card." The 69-year-old pleaded guilty last year to tax evasion. The judge could sentence him for a maximum of five years in prison at next week's sentencing hearing. Beanie Babies first appeared in the '90s, triggering a craze for the toys.
Jury selection in NATO trial:
The process of selecting a jury began Tuesday for the trial of three young activists charged under Illinois terrorism laws with plotting Molotov cocktail attacks during NATO's 2012 summit in Chicago. The case in Cook County circuit court will focus scrutiny on the rarely used state terrorism statutes, which critics say are unconstitutionally vague. Would-be panelists began filling out questionnaires Tuesday, and they'll be questioned one by one later. Opening statements are expected to happen next week, the Cook County state's attorney's office said. Brian Church, 22, of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Jared Chase, 29, of Keene, N.H.; and Brent Vincent Betterly, 25, of Oakland Park, Fla., have pleaded not guilty to conspiracy to commit terrorism, arson and other charges. Defense attorneys argue that undercover police posing as activists, nicknamed "Mo" and "Gloves," entrapped their clients, enticing them into acting in ways they otherwise wouldn't have contemplated. All three defendants have been held in jail since their arrests just before the 2012 alliance gathering. They're being held on $1.5 million bail. If convicted, each could be sentenced to decades in prison.
Hawks, Blues to help victims:
Former players for the Chicago Blackhawks and St. Louis Blues will play a charity hockey game to benefit victims of November's deadly tornadoes. The game will be Jan. 15 at the Peoria Civic Center. The money will go to the Salvation Army Tornado Relief Fund. Tickets are $10. The game is being called "Skate Strong." A special pregame ceremony is planned. The Journal Star reports that tentative Chicago Blackhawks alumni who will play include Denis Savard, Dave Mackey, Reggie Kerr, Murray Bannerman, Reid Simpson, Denis Cyr, Cliff Koroll and Grant Mulvey. Former St. Louis Blues players include Kelly Chase, Reed Low, Jeff Brown, Terry Yake, Gino Cavallini, John Wensink, Alex Brooks and Steve Martins. About two dozen tornadoes struck Illinois on Nov. 17, killing seven.

Load-Date: January 9, 2014


End of Document