SIX SENTENCED TO DEATH IN JORDAN FOR TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
September 19, 2000, Tuesday


Copyright 2000 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a6
Length: 454 words
Byline: JAMAL HALABY, Associated Press writer
Body


AMMAN, Jordan -- A military court on Monday sentenced six Muslim militants to death by hanging for planning terrorist attacks against U.S. and Israeli targets in Jordan. Four of the six remain at large and were tried in absentia.
The three-man State Security Court acquitted six other men and handed down prison terms ranging from seven and a half years to life on the remaining 16 defendants.
The ruling absolved all 28 men, including 12 fugitives tried in absentia, of "affiliation with an illegal organization" al-Qaeda allegedly led by Saudi militant Osama bin Laden.
Bin Laden, who has taken refuge in Afghanistan, is wanted by the United States for the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed 224 people.
The accused, who had pleaded not guilty and denied links to bin Laden, claiming their confessions were obtained under duress, often interrupted the verdict with calls of "Allahu Akbar," or "God is great."
They stood in the dock wearing dark blue prison uniforms and long beards, some clutching the Muslim holy book, the Koran.
Of the 16 men appearing in court, 14 were Jordanians of Palestinian origin, one was an Iraqi and the other an Algerian. Of the 16 in court, two were sentenced to death. The four others sentenced to death are fugitives.
Col. Tayel Raqad, the presiding judge, said "the charge of being affiliated with an illegal group does not apply to any of the defendants."
Jordanian officials had maintained the men were a sophisticated group with a global network behind them.
Raqad, however, said that the men weren't organized and were "merely exchanging ideas on carrying out terrorist attacks against Jews."
He said the six sentenced to die "had a determined will to carry out terrorist attacks against American and Jewish interests in Jordan."
The targeted sites, the prosecution said, included Mount Nebo, where tradition says Moses saw the promised land, and a Christian settlement along the Jordan River said to be the site where St. John the Baptist baptized Jesus.
The prosecution had charged the 28 men with "conspiracy to carry out terrorist attacks" against Israeli and American tourists.
The U.S. and Israeli embassies in Jordan declined comment on the verdicts.
Sameeh Khreis, one of 11 defense lawyers, said capital punishment "was too harsh because there were no crimes that had been actually carried out."
Special military forces toting machine guns were deployed around the court building and some streets were closed.
Yasser Abu Ghalous, 17 one of the six acquitted said: "I am so happy that this nightmare is over. My preoccupation with the trial made me fail in my high school exams this year," said the 12th grader, hugging family members. "Now I can start my life anew."

Load-Date: September 20, 2000


End of Document