Six animal-rights activists go on trial; They are charged with terrorism, stalking and conspiracy in the harassment of a testing firm, its employees and others.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
February 8, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: SOUTH JERSEY; Pg. B01
Length: 544 words
Byline: Wayne Parry, Associated Press
Body


Six members of a Philadelphia-based animal welfare group went on trial yesterday in U.S. District Court, charged with animal enterprise terrorism, conspiracy and interstate stalking as part of a plan to drive an animal-testing company out of business.
The group, Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty, acknowledges it wants Huntingdon Life Sciences shut down but denies committing any crimes or encouraging anyone else to do so.
They are the first people charged in New Jersey under the federal Animal Enterprise Protection Act, which was expanded in 2002 and equates their alleged activities with domestic terrorism.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles McKenna said the group went well beyond accepted boundaries of free speech, disseminating all the information anyone would need to harass people it identified as targets for "direct action." These included Huntingdon employees and firms, such as insurers, bankers, accountants and others, that did business with Huntingdon.
"The SHAC Web site would list your name, your address, your telephone number," McKenna told the jury during opening statements. "They would list the name of your spouse, your children, where they went to school, what kind of cars you drive, and they would brand you a target. They wanted to make your life a living hell."
But defense attorneys told the jury that their clients were guilty of nothing more serious than being annoying.
"Advocating obnoxiously is not a crime," said Eric Schneider, the attorney for Kevin Kjonaas, the group's president. "You will hear that Kevin was very passionate about animal rights, treating animals with kindness and respect and without unnecessary cruelty. Kevin is being persecuted for these very beliefs."
The indictment lists numerous acts of vandalism, harassment and intimidation that followed postings on the Web site, including overturning a Huntingdon employee's car in his driveway and throwing rocks through his windows; smoke-bombing two Seattle insurance companies that did business with Huntingdon, leading to the evacuation of two high-rise office buildings; spray-painting and threatening to burn down the homes of several officials of companies doing business with Huntingdon; and attacking Huntingdon's computer network.
McKenna said several high-profile companies had been forced to stop doing business with Huntingdon, which has a research laboratory in Somerset County, because unknown individuals attacked their operations or workers after postings on SHAC's Web site.
But Schneider said organizing boycotts of companies was an American tradition.
Lawyers for the defendants said the government would not be able to prove their clients had directed anyone else to commit crimes.
But McKenna said the defendants had known exactly what would happen after they listed targets online, "knowing that other people would go out and commit horrendous acts. They knew it because it happened time and time and time again."
"They were the commanders," he said. "They got their foot soldiers to go out and do their dirty work."
In addition to Kjonaas, defendants Lauren Gazzola, Jacob Conroy, Joshua Harper, Andrew Stepanian and Darius Fullmer could face up to 13 years in prison and fines of $750,000 each if convicted.
The trial is expected to last about six weeks.

Load-Date: February 9, 2006


End of Document