Six Injured, Including Police Officer, and Suspect Is Fatally Shot in Glasgow
The New York Times 
June 27, 2020 Saturday 00:16 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; europe
Length: 699 words
Byline: Elian Peltier
Highlight: Dozens of armed police officers responded in force to the city center, though details of the episode were unclear. The police were not treating it as a terror attack.
Body


Dozens of armed police officers responded in force to the city center, though details of the episode were unclear. The police were not treating it as a terror attack.
Six people, including a police officer, were injured and a male suspect was fatally shot by the police at a hotel in the Scottish city of Glasgow on Friday, according to the Scottish police. 
While few details were immediately available, the police said the attack was not being treated as terrorism, though the investigation continued. 
Steve Johnson, assistant chief constable of the Greater Glasgow police, said in a statement posted on Twitter that police officers had responded to an incident at the Park Inn hotel in central Glasgow at 12:50 p.m. and had reached the scene within two minutes. The hotel houses asylum seekers.
The attacker was shot, and the injured people were taken to the hospital. The police officer, aged 42, was in critical but stable condition, the police said. The police gave the ages of the five others injured as 17, 18, 20, 38 and 53, but did not release their names.
Images shared on social media showed at least a dozen police vehicles and armed officers swarming the scene around the Park Inn hotel on West George Street, in an area of the city that is filled with shops and restaurants. More than 100 asylum seekers had been housed at the hotel for the past few weeks during the coronavirus crisis, rights groups say, but it is unclear if any of them were among those attacked, said Anna Pearce, a volunteer at the Asylum Seeker Housing Project, a non-profit group. 
Mr. Johnson said that while police officers remained at the scene, the situation was under control and the police were not currently looking for any other suspects.
“Armed police officers attended the incident and I can confirm that a male suspect was shot by an armed officer,” he said, in a statement posted to Twitter. 
Although the Scottish police didn’t mention a stabbing, the Scottish Police Federation said on Twitter that an officer had been stabbed and that the person’s family had been notified.
Footage shared by LBC, a British radio station, showed people being evacuated from the Park Inn hotel, and other videos shared on social media showed the area around the hotel being cordoned off by police.
Additional images showed a man who appeared to be injured lying on the steps at the entrance of the hotel in a pool of blood.
An eyewitness, Matthew Nesbitt, told Sky News that the man lying on the stairwell had been bleeding from his torso and appeared lifeless.
“The police got there so quickly, their response was incredible,” Mr. Nesbitt, a tech company employee, said. 
Craig Milroy, who witnessed the aftermath of the incident from a nearby office building, told The Associated Press that he saw four people taken away in ambulances and a wounded man lying on the ground. 
“He was on the ground with someone holding his side,” Mr.  Milroy said. “I don’t know if it was a bullet wound, a stab wound, or what it was.”
Police officers then rushed by and told Mr. Milroy to go back inside and lock the door. A portion of the street around the hotel remained closed and people were asked to avoid the area.
Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, said on Twitter that reports from the scene were “dreadful.”
Prime Minister Boris Johnson said in a post on Twitter that he was “deeply saddened” and thanked the emergency services for their response.
Britain has faced a string of stabbing attacks in recent years, several of which have been called terror attacks. On Saturday, a man killed three people in a stabbing attack in Reading, west of London, in what the British authorities have described as a terrorist incident. In February, a man was killed after he stabbed several people in south London, officials said, and in November, a former prisoner who had recently been released after he was convicted of terrorism offenses fatally stabbed two peoplearound London Bridge. 
PHOTO: Emergency vehicles in Glasgow on Friday. Although the Greater Glasgow police did not specify the nature of the attack, the Scottish Police Federation said on Twitter that an officer had been stabbed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JATV SCOTLAND, VIA REUTERS)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document