Skeptical of New Link to Terrorism, U.S. to Pursue Dialogue With Iran
The New York Times
June 6, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 5; Column 3; Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 274 words
Byline: AP 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 5
Body


The State Department said today that it continued to support a dialogue with Iran despite accusations that Iran was responsible for the attack on Pan Am Flight 103 that killed 270 people on Dec. 21, 1988.
The accusations were made by an Iranian defector, Ahmad Behbahani, 32, who told the CBS News program "60 Minutes" on Sunday that he was an intelligence official involved in Iranian terrorism for a decade or more before his defection to Turkey.
An administration official expressed strong doubt about Mr. Behbahani's credibility. The official said he was not free to discuss the reasons except to note that Mr. Behbahani would have been about 20 in 1988, too young to have been involved in planning or executing a mission like the Pan Am bombing.
Mr. Behbahani was interviewed in Turkey, whose secret service, the National Intelligence Agency, said he was seeking asylum in the United States. Mr. Behbahani said he had proposed the operation, enlisted a Palestinian terrorist living in Syria and imported and trained Libyan agents for the bombing. His motive, "60 Minutes" said, was to avenge the mistaken shooting down of an Iranian airliner by a United States Navy cruiser five months earlier. That downing killed 290 people.
Two Libyan defendants are on trial in the Netherlands for the bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland.
Mr. Behbahani also said Iran planned the bombing of a barracks in Saudi Arabia that killed United States Air Force personnel in 1996.
A State Department spokesman, Philip Reeker, said Washington learned of the defection last week.
"Right now," he said, "we are assessing credibility of any information that may be provided."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 6, 2000


End of Document