Skittish Over Terrorism, Some Voters Seek a Gutsy Style of Leader
The New York Times
December 3, 2015 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 1346 words
Byline: By PATRICK HEALY
Body


''Get off my plane,'' growls the president of the United States to a terrorist hijacker in the 1997 movie ''Air Force One,'' before snapping the enemy's neck and shoving him out the cargo door.
Triumphal music swells. The good guys have won. And no less than Harrison Ford has shown what a president can do if he is Han Solo and Indiana Jones rolled into one. 
  With the Islamic State suddenly rivaling the economy as their top concern in recent polls, many voters are looking for wartime strategies from the 2016 presidential candidates. But after seven years of a cerebral President Obama, there is no denying that some also want a leader who radiates gutsiness and a take-charge resolve. Not simply the ''strong leader'' that pollsters ask about, but someone who makes them feel safe on a visceral level.
  Older voters point to Ronald Reagan, standing up to the Soviet Union. Others find inspiration in film, America's dominant cultural form, and the grit of a Bill Pullman in ''Independence Day,'' a Jamie Foxx in ''White House Down.'' No one expects a president to be an action movie star, but anxious voters want a leader who will go to courageous lengths to protect the United States against attacks like the ones in Paris on Nov. 13.
  ''In scary times, you want heroes as presidents,'' said Barbara Hovland, the Republican chairwoman in the Mason City area of Iowa. ''Who doesn't want a president who can take care of himself, his family and the country at the same time, like Harrison Ford did? When Donald Trump said recently in Iowa that he would cut off the heads of ISIS, the crowd went wild.''
  Mr. Trump and Hillary Clinton, and to a lesser extent Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, were the candidates most mentioned as likely to strike fear into the hearts of America's adversaries during interviews with about 20 voters in Iowa and New Hampshire, which hold the first nominating contests in February.
  ''We need someone who understands that ISIS is 10 times more dangerous than Al Qaeda was,'' said Dean Nason, a Republican in Wakefield, N.H. ''Movie presidents make you feel good. Trump makes people feel good. And Hillary Clinton, she may have problems, but she knows how to survive.''
  Yet the desire to feel in control, at a time of turmoil, is having ugly consequences in the eyes of some voters. Many Republican officials are trying to stop Syrian refugees from entering the United States, and some have used incendiary language about Muslims, which some voters see as stoking the recent violence and threats against mosques in Connecticut, Florida, Nebraska and Texas.
  Mr. Trump's talk of a national database to track Muslims drew widespread denunciations, and his combative language has spilled over at some of his rallies, like one in Alabama on Nov. 21 where several white men punched and kicked a black man who was chanting, ''Black lives matter.'' In Minneapolis a few nights later, five  people were shot during a Black Lives Matter protest. Four people have been charged in connection with the shooting.
  ''I have more fear of Americans who want to take charge and take things into their own hands than I do of international terrorists coming into our country,'' said Kim Van Es, the Democratic leader in Sioux County, Iowa. ''These Americans are already here.''
  Mr. Trump, in an interview, had no regrets about the Alabama crowd's roughing up the black man, saying, ''People were very angry at his disruptions, and their feelings matter, too.'' He said he ''understood'' that his tough talk could stir passions, but he instead attributed the violence to Americans' pent-up frustrations, which he said a president has to face, and not to some deep-seated racism or ill will.
  ''Americans are very tired of feeling pushed around,'' Mr. Trump said. ''We're losing with ISIS, immigration, China, Russia, the border, good jobs. We can have victories. Victories don't just have to be in the movies.''
  While Mrs. Clinton denounced Mr. Trump last week for ''trafficking in prejudice and paranoia,'' she is calibrating her own gung-ho style of leadership to people's insecurities.
  She has proposed more aggressive actions in Syria -- like imposing a no-fly zone and ordering more airstrikes -- than Mr. Obama has taken. And while some voters see Mr. Obama as weak because he is unwilling to risk American troops and avoids blunt language like the Republican catchphrase ''radical Islamic terrorism,'' Mrs. Clinton is open to more Special Operations troops in Syria and has been using the phrase ''radical jihadism'' to try to counter the buzzwords of the right.
  Many Democrats now say they believe that Mrs. Clinton would be a more formidable commander in chief than any of the men running in either party. This itself is a notable development, given how much time she spent in the 2008 campaign trying to convince Americans that a female president could be a strong leader. Back then, her campaign ran an ad saying that voters could trust her with emergency 3 a.m. phone calls, and her aides half-joked that she was manlier -- using a saltier anatomical reference -- than Mr. Obama and John Edwards combined.
  ''I get the sense that Hillary hates backing down, that she really believes in fighting, and I think our enemies would realize that she would make life harder for them,'' said Darlene Nulk, a teacher and Democrat in Lee, N.H.
  Several polls in the wake of the Paris attacks found that terrorism and Islamic militants had risen significantly as the most important issues for voters, after months when the economy and unemployment were top concerns. In a Bloomberg Politics national poll taken in mid-November, a majority of voters picked Mr. Trump over Ben Carson as best suited to fight ''Islamic terrorism'' and deal with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
  Mr. Trump usually performs better than his rivals and Mrs. Clinton in polls assessing strong leadership qualities. In two new Quinnipiac University polls in Iowa, which holds the first nominating contest, on Feb. 1, Mr. Trump was the overwhelming favorite for likely Republican caucusgoers for whom strong leadership is a candidate's most important characteristic. In a poll released last week, Quinnipiac found that among Democrats, 94 percent saw Mrs. Clinton as a strong leader. In a national poll last month, Quinnipiac found, 68 percent of independents rated Mr. Trump as a strong leader, while 57 percent said the same of Mrs. Clinton.
  But several Republican analysts said the rise in terrorism has helped Mr. Trump in the short term. He has rebounded recently in opinion polls, with voters praising his focus on keeping terrorists and undocumented immigrants from entering the country.
  ''Donald Trump was elected president tonight,'' the conservative commentator Ann Coulter wrote in a post  on Twitter in the hours after the Paris attacks.
  Others said Mr. Trump's remarks about Syrian refugees -- ''I want to know who the hell they are'' -- could not have been scripted better to appeal to Republican voters.
  ''His words are exactly what Americans want to hear,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster, citing a profanity that Mr. Trump used in promising to bomb Islamic State militants. ''Republicans want to kill our enemies before our enemies kill us,'' he added. ''They're not asking for a long résumé or a list of advisers.''
  Mr. Trump, like many Republicans, said Reagan -- a movie star who knew the persuasive power of performance -- was an inspiration in how he projected toughness. He said he, too, liked movies with heroic presidents. And he suggested that many Americans love movies and swagger more than politics and restraint.
  ''My favorite was Harrison Ford on the plane,'' Mr. Trump said of ''Air Force One.'' ''I love Harrison Ford -- and not just because he rents my properties. He stood up for America.''
  Mr. Ford, a lifelong Democrat, declined to comment.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/03/us/politics/voters-worried-about-terrorism-look-for-leaders-at-home-on-silver-screen.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Harrison Ford in the 1997 film ''Air Force One,'' in which he played a president who triumphed over a terrorist hijacker. (PHOTOGRAPH BY COLUMBIA PICTURES)       

Load-Date: December 3, 2015


End of Document