Slippery slopes
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
June 22, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,; IN OUR VIEW
Length: 405 words
Body


Earlier this month, the State Department admitted it goofed when it released a report that showed a 45 percent drop in terrorism incidents worldwide since 2001 and that no one died as a result of terrorist attacks in 2003.
When the report was issued on April 29, senior administration officials said it was evidence the Bush administration's war on terrorism was working.
J. Cofer Black, head of the State Department's counterterrorism office, pointed to the 190 acts of terrorism and predicted the trend would continue.
#SLOPES.LIB#
While the number of acts was not significantly different from the 2002 report (190 vs. 198), the assertion that no one died from terrorist acts in 2003 was immediately questioned by Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif.
That prompted a review and this statement from State Department spokesman Richard Boucher: "The facts that we had were wrong.
Secretary of State Colin Powell said the errors were not politically motivated but resulted from new data collection procedures.
Waxman accepted Powell's explanation. But no one has explained why the report wasn't scrutinized more closely before it was released.
Didn't anyone within the State Department question claims of zero deaths attributed to terrorist acts?
Was the report with its positive spin rushed to press before analysts had a chance to fully examine its claims?
Or is this a case of spinning stories for their headline value, knowing that the impact of the initial sound bytes and headlines far exceed the mea culpas that follow?
The State Department is prepared to release a new report today, showing the number of terror attacks jumped last year.
This is not the first time Powell has been embarrassed by mistakes and false claims.
Nor is it the first time the Bush administration has made public declarations only to retreat when the facts come out.
On his Web site, Waxman cites 237 specific misleading statements made by the administration about the threat posed by Iraq.
From mobile weapons labs to decreases in acts of terrorism to the actual costs of Medicare reform, this administration has a nasty habit of rushing to judgment before the facts are in.
The United States may well be winning the war on terrorism, and weapons of mass destruction may still be uncovered.
But with every claim the Bush administration makes, the ground shifts a little beneath our feet.
If they want people to believe them, they need to get their facts right in the first place.

Load-Date: June 23, 2004


End of Document