SMALL BOMBS PACKED WITH DEADLY POWDER
Daily News (New York)
April 16, 2013 Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2013 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 10
Length: 251 words
Byline: BY SHAYNA JACOBS AND BILL HUTCHINSON NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE DEADLY homemade bombs set off at the Boston Marathon finish line Monday were rigged with ball bearings and stashed in trash cans.
Two small explosives were ignited 12 seconds apart and were probably triggered by electronic timers or remote detonation devices, two explosives experts told the Daily News.
The first blast created a mushroom cloud and bloodied the sidewalk where it had been placed in a garbage can. The second bomb exploded about two blocks away.
The blasts killed three people and maimed scores of others. A terrorism expert briefed on the investigation told CNN that doctors were "pulling ball bearings out of people in the emergency room." The source told the network that preliminary tests showed no C-4 or other high-grade explosive material was used.
"They're most likely improvised," Bruce Hoffman, a Georgetown University terrorism expert, said of the bombs.
"They were designed to kill people. They weren't designed to bring down buildings."
Explosives expert Jimmie Oxley, who consulted with detectives on the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, said it wouldn't require much explosive material to create such blasts.
"A couple of pounds of smokeless powder put into a pipe bomb would do it," said Oxley, a professor of chemistry at the University of Rhode Island.
She said incendiary devices like the ones used in Boston could be made for $100 with instructions found on YouTube.
A triggering device could be anything from a simple electronic timer to a cell phone.
sjacobs@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Day for celebration was turned to terror by blasts near the finish line of the Boston Marathon. Victims (at l. and below) are covered in blood; at least 10 limbs were lost. First responders (below r.) rush to grisly scene on Boylston St. moments after the explosions. Runners and spectators (far r.) aid the wounded as shock spread across city. Bottom left, agents take items after search of home in Revere, Mass. Photos by AP; Getty; Reuters

Load-Date: April 16, 2013


End of Document