Snapshot of a Marine's daily life in Afghanistan Corporal's tally: 8 pairs of pants; 1,350 liters of water, 16 firefights WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 25, 2010 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 381 words
Byline: by TODD PITMAN • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


MARJAH, Afghanistan - In the first two months of a seven-month tour, Marine Cpl. Chuck Martin, 24, has been in 16 firefights.
He's done laundry twice, mailed five letters and received two. He's spent 378 hours on post and 256 hours on patrol. He's crossed 140 miles of thorny bomb-laced farmland and waist-high trenches of water on foot.
Along the way, he's ripped eight pairs of pants, ruined two pairs of boots and downed 1,350 half-liter bottles of water. His platoon has killed at least eight militants in battle and nine farm animals in crossfire. The rugged outposts he's lived in have been shot at 46 times.
"Tiring would be the best word to describe it," said Martin, of Middletown, R.I., summarizing his time in the insurgent-plagued southern Afghan district of Marjah so far. "There's no downtime. It's a constant gruel."
Martin's list, stored on a spreadsheet on his laptop, offers a snapshot of American military life in this rural battle- zone, where a new generation of young troops is growing up thousands of miles from home.
Since arriving in mid-July, troops from the 2nd Battalion, 9th Marines' Echo Company have spread out across 13 small, spartan outposts in northern Marjah, a vast patch of fields and ancient hardened mud homes without running water or electricity that one company commander likened to "200 B.C."
At many bases, Marines sleep outside on cots inside hot-dog shaped mosquito nets. There are no toilets, just "wag" bags; no showers, just pouches you can fill up with water warmed by the afternoon sun.
Fleas are such a problem that many Marines have taken to wearing flea collars made for cats or dogs around their wrists and belts.
For Sgt. Jeffrey Benson of Medina, Ohio, the hardest part is being away from his wife and 2-year-old son.
"Every time I call home, I feel like I'm missing something, missing another milestone," said Benson, 34, a squad leader.
On the front, Benson said, his biggest fear is of making a decision that will lead to one of his Marines' getting hurt. He said he worries about varying routes and patrol patterns to avoid insurgent attacks.
"I'm constantly double-checking things," he said. "Marines want to get into gunfights. But it's the small details - running into an ambush or running over an IED (bomb) - that I worry about most."

Graphic

 
 Photos by Todd Pitman • Associated Press  Photo - Marine Dominique Timal, 21, of Brooklyn, N.Y., prepares to return fire during a firefight last month with Taliban insurgents in Marjah, Afghanistan.  Photo - A Marine sleeps under an open mosquito net last month on a cot at the joint Afghan-American patrol base in the Marjah district in southern Afghanistan.   

Load-Date: October 26, 2010


End of Document