SNOWDEN REPORTER PROMISES MORE ARTICLES He says he has material on England's espionage
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
August 20, 2013 Tuesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2013 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 3
Length: 444 words
Byline: Bradley Brooks and Danica Kirka Associated Press
Dateline: RIO DE JANEIRO 
Body


An American journalist who has written stories based on documents leaked by former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden said Monday he'll publish with more fervor after British authorities detained his partner.
 London police detained David Miranda, who is in a civil union with reporter Glenn Greenwald, under anti-terror legislation at Heathrow Airport in London airport Sunday. Miranda arrived Monday in Rio de Janeiro, where he lives with Greenwald.
 A defiant Greenwald promised he was going "to write much more aggressively than before" about government snooping.
 "I'm going to publish many more things about England, as well," he said in Portuguese at Rio's international airport when Miranda arrived. "I have many documents about England's espionage system, and now my focus will be there, too. I think they'll regret what they've done."
 In Washington, White House spokesman Josh Earnest said the U.S. government was tipped off by U.K. counterparts that Miranda would be detained, but that the U.S. had not requested the action.
 Miranda said he wasn't threatened while detained at Heathrow, but confirmed that personal objects were taken from him.
 "I stayed in a room, there were six different agents, entering and leaving, who spoke with me," he said. "They asked questions about my whole life, about everything. They took my computer, video game, cellphone, memory thumb drives, everything."
 Miranda was held for nearly the maximum time that British authorities are allowed to detain individuals under the Terrorism Act's Schedule 7, which authorizes security agencies to stop and question people at borders.
 Keith Vaz, chairman of Parliament's Home Affairs Select Committee, told the BBC that "you have a complaint from Mr. Greenwald and the Brazilian government - they indeed have said they are concerned at the use of terrorism legislation for something that does not appear to relate to terrorism. So it needs to be clarified, and clarified quickly."
 Greenwald has written about NSA surveillance programs based on files disclosed by Snowden, who now has temporary asylum in Russia. The Obama administration wants Snowden sent back to the United States to be tried for the leaks.
 Miranda, a 28-year-old university student, was traveling home to Brazil after visiting Germany, where he met with Laura Poitras, a U.S. filmmaker who has worked with Greenwald on the NSA stories.
SIDEBAR:
U.S. CAN SEARCH DEVICES
 U.S. customs officials can search the electronic devices of anyone entering the U.S. without a search warrant. The Department of Homeland Security has said such searches help law enforcement detect child pornographers or terrorists.

Load-Date: August 23, 2013


End of Document