Snowe is right to call for new strategy in Afghanistan; The simmering front in the war on terrorism will require more than just additional troops.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 13, 2008 Thursday
FINAL Edition


Copyright 2008 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10; OUR VIEWS
Length: 273 words
Body


Sen. Olympia Snowe is right to add her voice to those calling for a new strategy in Afghanistan, which has seen violence increase in recent months.
On her way back from a three-day fact-finding visit to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Snowe told reporters that attacks on U.S. forces are not only growing in number, but also in sophistication, requiring a new approach.
Snowe, a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, did not specify what changes should be made, but it's clear that more troops alone will not be enough.
Defeating al-Qaida and the Taliban will require deeper penetration into tribal areas along the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan, an increase in Afghan military capability and cooperation among all the countries in the region.
Right now, al-Qaida is headquartered in the border area that is not really governed by either country. U.S. forces have made incursions across the border in pursuit of militants and has launched missile attacks at al-Qaida bases.
When civilian casualties occur, the populace appears to blame the attacking force, not the targets that are using them for cover. That is a recipe for continued insurgency.
A more productive approach would involve enough troops to hold territory and protect civilians from the insurgents. Non-military efforts to help the two countries extend their authority into ungoverned areas, providing better services to their people while reducing corruption would also have to have a role if we are to be successful.
Victory in Afghanistan will require a stable country that is at peace with its neighbors. Snowe is right to call for a new path to that goal now.

Load-Date: November 13, 2008


End of Document