Snow, terrorism dump on retailers February 24, 2003, Monday
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
February 24, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P8A
Length: 386 words
Byline: Anne D'Innocenzio The Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK - Spring is looking like another tough sell for the nation's ailing retailers.
Merchants' hopes for brighter days as spring sales get under way were dimmed by heavy snow that blanketed the Northeast during the Presidents Day weekend, wiping out the much-anticipated sales bonanza needed to jump-start the season.
Add the looming uncertainty about war with Iraq and a sluggish job market, and retailers are likely to stay in the doldrums.
The latest blow came as department and mall-based apparel stores were grappling with the government's heightened terrorist alert, which made consumers even edgier and sent many on buying sprees for batteries and duct tape at such places as Home Depot Inc. and Wal-Mart Stores.
"Consumers are having a hard time getting into spring, not knowing what is going to happen in March and April," said C. Britt Beemer, chairman of America's Research Group in Charleston, S.C. "It's been a yo-yo."
In fact, consumers like April Mason and Andrea Tortora said such factors have made them less interested in buying spring apparel, like micro-miniskirts.
"It seems too cold and snowy to think about spring clothes. I haven't walked into a department store since right after Christmas when I returned some gifts," said Mason, a 29-year-old public relations executive from New York City.
February is when stores clear out winter leftovers and do some regular-price selling of spring merchandise, but this month is winding up to be a wash for many retailers after a weak holiday and January period.
Michael P. Niemira, vice president at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd., expects same-store sales for February to be up a modest 0.5 percent from a year ago.
Niemira noted that last weekend's snowstorm, the worst in the Northeast since 1996, shaved about 0.5 percentage points from the monthly sales pace.
The bulk of the nation's retailers will be reporting their same-store sales on March 6.
Presidents Day weekend is one of the most important sales days of the year. Niemira estimates that last year, the holiday weekend accounted for 13.1 percent of the total month's sales in the Northeast.
And while stores like Macy's, which closed 25 of its 100 stores in its Eastern division on Monday, are repeating Presidents Day sales this weekend, many analysts don't expect merchants to recoup lost business.

Load-Date: February 25, 2003


End of Document