So-called anti-terrorism bill also slams the door on the persecuted
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
April 21, 1996, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 699 words
Byline: ANTHONY LEWIS
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


The case of Fauziya Kasinga, 19, who says she fled her native Togo to avoid the rite of female genital mutilation, has aroused much sympathy.
She arrived at Newark Airport in 1994, told officials she was using someone else's passport, sought asylum, was turned down and has been held in prison ever since. The Board of Immigration Appeals will hear her appeal on May 2.
But in the future we are not likely to know about desperate people like Kasinga. If their pleas for asylum are turned down by a low-level U.S. immigration officer, they will not be allowed to appeal - and review by the courts will be barred. They will be sent back at once to the land where they face persecution.
This extraordinary change in our law is part of the counter-terrorism bill awaiting President Clinton's signature. It is not directed at terrorists. It applies to anyone seeking asylum who arrives here with false documents or none - the situation of many people fleeing persecution.
The issue raised in Fauziya Kasinga's case, female genital mutilation, is an important one: Does that cruel practice come within the grounds for asylum? But the new summary process of exclusion will affect many more people seeking asylum for traditional reasons: the man fleeing a Nigerian government that executed his political colleagues, for example, or the Vietnamese who escaped from a re-education camp.
The asylum provisions effectively impose the absurd presumption that anyone who flees a country without proper papers is not a genuine refugee. By that test, Fidel Castro's daughter was not a true refugee because she fled Cuba with a false passport. Nor were Jews who fled the Nazis without papers.
Political refugees are not the only losers. The bill trashes the American tradition of courts as the arbiters of law and guarantors of freedom. I have seen a good deal of nastiness in the work of Congress over the years, but I do not remember such detailed and gratuitous cruelty.
The bill gives virtually final authority to immigration officers at 300 ports of entry to this country. Each is directed to interview people seeking asylum and exclude them if he finds that they do not have "a credible fear of persecution." That phrase is unknown to international law.
The officer's summary decision is subject only to "immediate review by a supervisory office at the port." The bill prohibits further administrative review, and it says, "No court shall have jurisdiction" to review summary denials of asylum or to hear any challenge to the new process. (Our present system for handling asylum applications works efficiently, so there is no administrative need for change.)
Stripping away the protection of the courts may be the most alarming feature of the legislation. It is reminiscent of the period after the Civil War, when a Congress bent on punishing the South took away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to consider cases that radical Republicans thought the court would decide against their desires.
Political asylum is one saving grace in a world of too much political brutality. Why should Americans want to undermine the asylum concept? And why should a bill supposedly aimed at terrorists be used as a vehicle to keep the victims of official terrorism from finding refuge?
Why should senators as decent as Orrin Hatch, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, stand still for such harshness? The asylum restrictions originated in the House and were kept in the bill by conferees, so the Senate was presented with a fait accompli.
A motion by Sen. Patrick Leahy to send the terrorism bill back to conference on that issue failed, 61-38.
Clinton has been so eager for an anti-terrorism bill that he is not likely to veto this one, over the asylum sections any more than over the gutting of habeas corpus. But he could call on Congress to reconsider the attack on political asylum.
The Senate will in fact have another chance to consider the issue when it takes up the immigration bill, which has in it a similar provision for summary exclusion of asylum-seekers. On reflection, Hatch and others should see the threat to victims of persecution and to our tradition of law.  Anthony Lewis is a columnist for The New York Times.

Notes

OPINION; COMMENTARY

Graphic

 
SIGNATURE

Load-Date: April 23, 1996


End of Document