Sochi threat centuries old; The Winter Olympics in the Russian city of Sochi open this week under a cloud of concern about terrorism. What is the source of the threat, and what precautions are Russian and Olympic officials taking?
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 3, 2014 Monday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: IDEAS & VOICES; Pg. A8
Length: 935 words
Body


Roots of terror
The Olympics are supposed to be about peaceful competition between the world's nations. The roots of the terror threat go back to a much less civil competition that began roughly 250 years ago, when Peter the Great ruled Russia. Eager to expand Russia's reach, Peter staked a claim on the sea's north shore, including a mountainous tribal area then ruled by the Ottoman Empire, whose seat of power, today's Turkey, is on the sea's south shore.
The Christian czar's quest to control the mainly Islamic territory, part of the rugged Caucasus region, set off a century-long struggle with the legendarily fierce tribesmen known collectively as Circassians, who would have preferred to have no outside ruler at all. In the early 1800s, Sochi was established on the Black Sea, just below the towering mountains, and populated with Russian settlers to help enforce the czarist claim.
When the Circassian War finally came to an end in 1864, the Russians rounded up hundreds of thousands of Circassians and exiled them via ports that included Sochi. Many died in what has been termed a genocide.
Conflict continues
The Circassian War by no means ended the conflict between Russia and Caucasus factions. Breakaway attempts occurred periodically, and especially under the rule of Soviet leader Josef Stalin, any perceived disloyalty was brutally suppressed.
After the Soviet Union collapsed, an independence movement in one of the Caucusus territories, Chechnya, prompted a harsh reaction from Russian President Vladimir Putin, whose efforts to suppress the rebellion sparked wars in 1999 and 2004. There was also a wave of terrorism against Russian targets, including a 2002 hostage-taking in a Moscow theater that left 130 people dead, another hostage-taking at a Russian school in the Caucusus city of Beslan in 2004 that cost the lives of 380, and a 2010 suicide bombing in Moscow that killed at least 39 people.
In addition, Chechnya was also the birthplace and, along with neighboring Dagestan, the alleged terrorist training ground of Dzokhar Tsarnaev, the surviving brother from the duo police say set off the bombs at last April's Boston Marathon that killed three people and maimed dozens of others.
Islamic separatists see the staging of the Olympics in Sochi during the 150th anniversary of the deadly deportations as a direct affront by Putin, their mortal enemy who wants to use the Games to showcase a peaceful and powerful Russia. The Associated Press quoted a Chechen rebel leader, Doku Umarov - dubbed "Russia's most wanted man" - as urging his forces to "use all means to prevent" what he termed the Olympics' "satanic dances on the bones of our ancestors."
Security jitters
In late December, suicide bombers hit bus and railroad stations in Volgograd - formerly Stalingrad - about 400 miles from Sochi, killing 32 people. And earlier this month, anxiety spiked as the U.S. and other Olympic teams received emailed threats. The International Olympic Committee said the emails were hoaxes. But amid reports that Russian authorities were hunting so-called "black widow" suicide bombers, including one who may be in So-chi, the U.S. State Department issued a travel alert warning the more than 10,000 American athletes and spectators planning to attend the Games to be vigilant and avoid unnecessary risks. That includes avoiding the wearing of red, white and blue apparel outside the secured Olympic grounds.
Olympic organizing committee CEO Dmitry Chernyshenko quickly reassured a nervous world that the site of the Sochi Games will be "most secure venue ... on the planet" - a claim that appears to be no exaggeration. Checkpoints are scattered throughout the city and at every venue, and hundreds of intimidating, fur-hatted Cossack troops are part of a division's worth of soldiers patrolling the streets. Russia's legendary intelligence apparatus is working to sniff out any threat, assisted by a contingent of FBI agents and U.S. bomb-sniffing technology.
For its part, the U.S. is positioning warships off Sochi's coast to evacuate Americans, if necessary, and has transport planes on standby at European bases.
'Still coming'
In addition to sending aid, U.S. officials are bolstering Russia's security claims with statements of confidence. McClatchy Newspapers reported that Vice President Joe Biden, speaking on NBC's "Today'' show last week, said he would send his family to the Games "with some caveats, to make sure they kept their eyes open, listen ... register with the State Department and pay very much attention." And Rep. Michael Mc-Caul, R-Texas, the current Homeland Security Committee chairman, told CBS' "Face the Nation" that "If we do not support our team and show up, I think the terrorists are winning."
But Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., former chair of the House Homeland Security Committee, said it was too risky.
"If I were an athlete, I would go, I'm almost certain. But as a spectator, no, I would not," King said on CNN's "Anderson Cooper 360."
As for the U.S. athletes, none so far has said their worries outweigh their desire to compete in events for which they have spent much of their lives preparing.
Justin Faulk, a defenseman for the U.S. Olympic hockey team, told Mc-Clatchy that his mother, brother and another guest going to Russia to watch him play are "more worried about it than I am."
"They're still coming," he said. "They thought about it for a day or two and decided to stick with their plans."
Sources: McClatchy Newspapers, BBC, New York Times, Sydney Morning Herald, Associated Press, CNN, CBS News, Fox News, USA Today, Deutsche Welle, Voice of America, Independent

Load-Date: February 3, 2014


End of Document