Software company tries to survive terrorism probe; Ptech Inc.: Business slows drastically after the firm is raided by federal agents
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 12, 2003 Sunday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. d10
Length: 1186 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: QUINCY, Mass.
Body


Life has quieted down at Ptech Inc. in the month since the software firm was raided by federal agents. But it's a bad kind of quiet: Business has slowed, and 17 of 27 workers have been let go.
Those who are left are confronting hateful voice message and e-mails. The bank accounts of four employees of Middle Eastern descent have been canceled, without explanation.
"I feel like I'm not allowed to dream," chief executive and co-founder Oussama Ziade said in a recent interview.
Ptech is similar to a thousand other software startups, but its fortunes turned on a distinction: It has connections to Middle Eastern people and groups that have attracted attention from federal authorities investigating the funding of terrorist groups like al-Qaida.
Ptech calls itself an injured bystander in the war on terrorism. Ziade says the company has been assured neither it nor any employees are the target of government investigations, and the government has said Ptech's software poses no threat to clients like the FBI and Pentagon.
Ptech says its connections simply reflect how networking takes place. Investors introduce other investors. Employees refer other employees. It's hardly surprising, the company maintains, that expatriate Middle Easterners should have their own network.
Still, some anti-terrorism experts are troubled by the company's ties to groups under suspicion by the U.S. government.
"It's more a question of what kind of people are we giving access to our government institutions," said Matt Epstein, of the Investigative Project, a Washington, D.C., research group focused on international terrorism. "If it's the same guys our government is investigating, that's a problem."
Ptech was born in 1994 when Ziade, who had come from Lebanon to study at Harvard, teamed up with co-founder James Cerrato to develop software.
The idea was to help the military and other large organizations create a visual picture of how their assets - people and technology - work together. Then the software could show how little changes, like combining two departments, might affect the whole. Ptech even thought it might help the new Department of Homeland Security.
Ziade did what any entrepreneur would do: he made calls, milked connections, hoped for a break.
One came from BMI, a New Jersey company that had leased computer equipment to the pair and that introduced Ptech to Sarmany Ltd., an investment company backed by Saudi financier Yasin al-Qadi. Sarmany invested $$ @5 million in Ptech, a quarter of the $$ @20 million Ptech raised from about 50 investors. 
Al-Qadi visited Ptech in 1994, and he and Ziade met several times in Saudi Arabia.
"What we tried to do is keep him interested, because he's connected to a lot of VCs (venture capitalists) in Saudi Arabia," Ziade said.
But al-Qadi wouldn't bite on another round of funding. Ptech figured it had seen the last of him.
A month after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, however, al-Qadi's name surfaced on a U.S. government list of individuals and groups suspected of funding terrorism. His assets were frozen.
Ptech officials say they debated whether to volunteer to authorities that al-Qadi was a long-ago investor. Because al-Qadi was never a shareholder of record, Ziade said, company lawyers suggested nothing needed to be done.
Ptech's attention was focused on surviving the post-Sept. 11 slump.
Customers and potential investors closed up their checkbooks. Ptech got a federal disaster loan but still had to lay off workers. It was also a troubling time for the handful of Muslim employees.
"Their religion was being hijacked, and they were troubled by that," former chief financial officer George Peterson said. "The employees who had to travel were concerned about being profiled."
Last August, the company's problems escalated.
According to Peterson, a Dubai-based investor who had committed $$ @7 million to the company pulled out, apparently worried that a lawsuit filed by victims of the terrorist attacks could freeze U.S. assets of Middle Eastern investors. 
That same month, another former chief financial officer called to say she had been questioned by federal authorities about al-Qadi. Ptech said it called the FBI and offered full cooperation, but got no response.
Ptech heard nothing from the government until federal agents said they wanted to take a look around the firm's offices Dec. 6.
Al-Qadi has denied funding terrorism. Ziade also said Ptech had no business dealings with al-Qadi after he appeared on the government list.
Al-Qadi is not the only link between Ptech and groups that have attracted authorities' attention:
* In a 1998 FBI affidavit, al-Qadi was said to have provided a loan related to a complex land deal in Chicago that was used to fund Hamas, the Palestinian terrorist group.
The loan was instructed to be repaid to Qadi International, care of BMI, the company that introduced Ptech to Sarmany, and "Attn: Gamel Ahmed." Ahmed was Ptech's comptroller for about a year-and-a-half in the 1990s.
* Last March, federal authorities raided businesses controlled by Sterling Advisory Services, whose chief executive was Yaqub Mirza, a man who also served on a Ptech advisory board. Ziade said a six-month background check turned up nothing but praise for Mirza.
Ptech declined to say whether Mirza was an investor, but papers filed in Virginia and obtained by the Investigative Project indicate Sterling controlled a company called "Ptech Fund LLC."
After the raid, Mirza offered to resign from Ptech but the company declined.
"I learned about it, and I called the other board members and talked to other people in management and talked to other companies (whose boards) he sits on," Ziade said. "They told me in America people are innocent until proven guilty."
Mirza eventually resigned in September.
* Until August, Ptech employed Suheil Laher, listed as an officer at Care International, a Massachusetts charity that has reportedly been investigated by authorities for possible financial ties to terrorists.
Ptech still employs Muhamed Mubayyid, Care's treasurer, who donated $$ @360 to the Alkifah Refugees Center in New York, according to a receipt obtained by the Investigative Project. The center was named by federal prosecutors as the center of the conspiracy to bomb the World Trade Center in 1993. 
A note on the donation's receipt reads: "Make checks payable to Dr. Abdullah Azam." Azam is believed to have been a mentor of Osama bin Laden.
There is no indication the money was used for anything besides charity. Through an e-mail, Mubayyid declined to comment. The FBI and Customs Service also declined to comment.
To Ziade, the connections are inconsequential. BMI introduced Sarmany; Mirza was recommended by other entrepreneurs; Laher was referred by a co-worker who attended the same mosque.
"It's a small world," Ziade said. "You have a small community here."
These days, Ziade is trying to rebuild his company and its reputation. New business has dried up, and a research firm advised clients to take business elsewhere because Ptech would likely be "distracted." Ptech itself has told customers it may consider reorganizing under a new name.

Graphic

 
photo

Load-Date: January 12, 2003


End of Document