Soft market pressuring property rates; Lack of catastrophes, increased capacity help renewing buyers
Business Insurance
January 14, 2008


Copyright 2008 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: SPOTLIGHT: PROPERTY/CASUALTY MARKET REPORT; Pg. 11
Length: 1090 words
Byline: KRISTIN GUNDERSON HUNT
Body


Two mild hurricane seasons in a row and an increase in capacity have pressured pricing for U.S. commercial property insurance, with rate decreases generally in the double digits for renewals this year, experts say.
``The market is in general softening,'' said Michael Hudson, managing director of property placement for North America at Marsh Inc. in Los Angeles.
While hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma slammed the United States in 2005, no hurricanes hit the mainland in 2006 and only one struck in 2007. Humberto came ashore in Texas last September as a short-lived Category 1 hurricane.
``The lack of events triggered this,'' Mr. Hudson said.
While commercial property rates vary from company to company, Mr. Hudson said his clients this year are seeing median rate reductions of 12% and some are receiving rate reductions of more than 30%.
Suzanne Douglass, managing director of property in Bermuda for Willis North America, said she has seen rate declines of 15% to 20%. In some cases, rates have dropped 30% to 40%, she said.
In part, declining rates this year are being driven by increased capacity, Mr. Hudson said.
Such conditions have made for a relatively uneventful renewal season for some risk managers, said Carolyn Snow, director of insurance and risk management for Louisville, Ky.-based Humana Inc., which renewed its coverage on Jan. 1. The company saw double-digit rate decreases last year and slightly larger double-digit rate declines for its 2008 property coverage. She said Humana maintained the same coverage and deductibles.
``It's actually a pretty boring renewal, which is a good thing,'' Ms. Snow said. ``We don't look for big swings. We hope for a modest decline in rates each year or coverage improvements.''
Ms. Snow said Humana's acquisition of two coastal properties last year and its heavy property concentration in Florida likely affected its inability to obtain more coverage enhancements this year. At the same time, she said, Humana received no additional restrictions in coverage this year.
Willis' Ms. Douglass said some hospitality and gaming risks with large catastrophe exposures are struggling to increase their coverage.
Properties with a poor loss history, those considered at greatest risk of terrorism or areas prone to natural catastrophes can't always get the desired amount of coverage, said Tim Rose, president of Liberty Mutual Group's Liberty Mutual Property unit in Weston, Mass.
``Poor risks or heavily exposed risks really don't change with the market,'' Mr. Rose said. ``A lot of value right on the water is still a lot of value right on the water. A terrorism risk is still a terrorism risk, whether the prices are up or down or capacity is greater or not.''
Wayne Salen, director of risk management for Labor Finders International Inc. in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., said he can attest to the challenges of obtaining insurance such as windstorm coverage.
Despite building the company's Florida headquarters after the hurricanes of 2005 to be a one-story ``bunker'' with 150 mph-rated windows and emergency power generation, Labor Finders caught no break on rates last year and this year. The company renews its policies annually in January.
Mr. Salen said rates rose 20% for the 2006 renewal and have remained stable. He said prices for windstorm coverage in Florida are still high and few insurers are willing to write the coverage at what he sees as a reasonable amount.
```Windstorm-resistant' doesn't appear to have (much) bearing on the marketplace (in Florida),'' Mr. Salen said. ``They look at the value and they look at the location. If you can maintain your current pricing, I think you're doing pretty well down here.''
He did say, however, that Labor Finders' headquarters is its only major Florida exposure, and its other U.S. properties have experienced rate declines and coverage enhancements.
Still, for large policyholders and even those with large exposures, increased capacity can be achieved, Marsh's Mr. Hudson said.
George Stratts, Boston-based executive vp of Lexington Insurance Co., a unit of American International Group Inc., said its capacity for terrorism coverage jumped from $100 million to $250 million and its builders risk capacity doubled to $100 million. In addition, Lexington's critical catastrophe capacity for California earthquakes, Gulf Coast and Florida wind damage, and in some cases Northeast wind damage doubled to $50 million.
Ms. Douglass said some companies with coastal exposures have been able to double the $50 million to $100 million range in property catastrophe coverage they obtained last year. She said while the increased capacity still hasn't allowed companies with coastal exposures to obtain the $500 million in coverage they could have acquired two years ago, the progress is welcome.
``The loosening of terms and conditions is allowing our clients to gain back some of the coverage they've lost,'' Ms. Douglass said.
Al Tobin, managing director and national property practice leader for Aon Corp.'s national property practice in New York, said it would take a significant monetary event or series of events for the capacity to substantially shrink again in the near future.
Even in a soft market, though, brokers and insurers say the same rules apply when it comes to acquiring property insurance: It is vital that buyers provide as much accurate information as possible to potential insurers.
Buyers should provide insurers with precise and comprehensive property location and value information, construction and protection details, any information needed to aid the catastrophe modeling process, up-to-date loss histories and solid engineering information, said Ms. Douglass.
``Anybody who thinks they can slip back into the ways of the past and not provide enough information is doing themselves a disservice,'' she said.
Brokers say one of buyers' biggest concerns today is finding an insurer they can rely on for the long term, even if capacity tightens.
Ms. Snow said having a reliable property insurer is a priority for Humana.
``Our philosophy is to find a good company and stay with it and work with it,'' Ms. Snow said. ``When the times are good, it hopefully will share those results with you. We've had a good, steady relationship (with our insurer) and at the end of the day that's all you want.''
Another looming concern, Mr. Hudson said, is the uncertainty surrounding a future disaster.
``I think everybody is concerned when and where the next catastrophe will be and the impact it will have on the insurance market,'' Mr. Hudson said.

Load-Date: January 19, 2008


End of Document