Softer rates, catastrophes don't dim reinsurer outlook: Fitch
Business Insurance
September 12, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: SPOTLIGHT: SURPLUS LINES; Pg. 35
Length: 719 words
Byline: DOUGLAS McLEOD
Body


Reinsurer financial strength ratings should remain stable for at least another year, though large losses from Hurricane Katrina and other factors could change that outlook, Fitch Ratings predicts.
While the global reinsurance industry's financial trends have been favorable, rates have been softening and competition will likely increase through 2006 and 2007 in a normal turn of the market cycle, Chicago-based Fitch projects in a report on industry conditions.
Reinsurers' financial results should remain relatively healthy despite this and despite expected heavy catastrophe losses, the rating agency says.
Hurricane Katrina remains one of several wild cards in the financial ratings outlook, though.
The storm will take ``a material amount of capital out of the sector,'' and will actually have the positive effect for reinsurers of firming rates on southeastern U.S. property exposures, said Mark Rouck, a Fitch analyst.
Initial insured loss estimates for Katrina ranged from $9 billion to $25 billion at the time Fitch prepared its report. Worse-than-expected losses could lead the rating agency to revise its stable ratings outlook, Fitch said.
Global reinsurers have benefited from adequate premium levels and strong capitalization over the last couple of years, and their results should remain ``reasonably healthy'' this year, according to Fitch.
Over the next 12 to 24 months, the agency expects to affirm financial strength ratings for the vast majority of reinsurers, with a roughly equal number of upgrades and downgrades in a smaller number of cases.
This would continue the trend of the last two years and mark a change from 2002 and 2003, when dozens of reinsurers were downgraded amid reserve adequacy and other concerns.
Market competition is one area where changes could affect the industry's stable outlook, Fitch says. Katrina's impact on reinsurance rates remains uncertain, but excess market capacity will likely make it more difficult to maintain profitable books of business in the next two years, Fitch predicts.
The market in 2006 will probably be more competitive than this year, and competition in 2007 will reach the point where reinsurers will have to employ ``cycle management strategies,'' including exiting unprofitable lines and returning capital to shareholders through dividends and share buy-backs.
Fitch has been ``pleasantly surprised'' by reinsurers' underwriting discipline to date, and hasn't seen any signs yet of a ``feeding frenzy'' among reinsurers eager to use excess capital, Mr. Rouck pointed out.
A soft market cycle, meanwhile, will fuel another trend: increased merger and acquisition activity and diversification by reinsurers unable to produce profitable organic growth.
Reinsurers are more likely to try to acquire books of business and underwriting teams from rivals than to expose themselves to potential legacy liabilities by buying the companies themselves, Fitch noted.
Still, the industry's track record in merger activity and diversification into unfamiliar lines of business is ``mixed at best,'' and the trend could become a negative factor in Fitch's outlook, the agency said.
Federal and state regulatory investigations of finite reinsurance transactions could also become a rating question for some reinsurers.
Finite products are only a small part of the overall market, and falling demand for the products will probably produce only a drag on earnings for some reinsurers. Reduced interest in finite reinsurance will probably also produce more demand for traditional reinsurance coverages, Fitch said.
A small number of specialist finite reinsurers may see their ratings cut, though, as a result of possible large declines in premium volume or legal action, Fitch reported.
Changes in reinsurers' terrorism exposures could also alter the industry's stable outlook.
If the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act is not extended beyond its year-end 2005 expiration, demand for commercial terrorism reinsurance will grow, creating both opportunity and substantial risk for reinsurers, the agency noted.
The industry's stable outlook assumes a limited exposure to terrorism risk, Fitch said.
The report, ``Mid-Year 2005 Global Reinsurance Review and Outlook: Steady as She Goes, but Do Troubled Waters Lie Ahead?'' is available on the rating agency's Web site, www.fitchratings.com.

Load-Date: September 14, 2005


End of Document