Softer View of Suspect in U.S. Case on Terror
The New York Times
April 30, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 959 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


It was around a year ago that the government unsealed charges against a Tunisian citizen named Ahmed Abassi, saying he had come to the United States to develop a network of terrorists and commit acts of terror. Prosecutors said he had ''radicalized'' one supposed terrorist and spoken of killing 100,000 people through bioterrorism.
But at a hearing on Tuesday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, a prosecutor told a judge that the government was now prepared to allow Mr. Abassi, 27, to plead guilty to two counts that did not involve terrorism.
The prosecutor noted that the government also might not seek a special terrorism enhancement under the advisory sentencing guidelines, which would mean Mr. Abassi's recommended sentence would not exceed six months.
The prosecutor, Michael Ferrara, did not elaborate as to why the government's portrayal of the defendant had changed since his arrest.
But Mr. Abassi's lawyer, Sabrina Shroff, told Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum that her client had been ''entrapped,'' and she suggested that the government's recordings of his conversations with an undercover agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation would show that he was not the terrorist the authorities had made him out to be.
The authorities tried to ''build up a case that they thought would be the case of the century, which never came to bear, because Mr. Abassi refused to engage in any concrete plan of terrorism,'' Ms. Shroff said.
The government is often given great leeway in how undercover agents or informants obtain evidence against terrorism suspects; arguing entrapment rarely works as a defense tactic. In the case of Mr. Abassi, who has pleaded not guilty, the fairness of the government's tactics in the investigation has, however, been a running theme.
''The fact that he repeatedly told their undercover officer that no, he would not go and blow up a building and he would not do anything in the present time is very, very important,'' Ms. Shroff told the judge in a January hearing.
The office of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney in Manhattan, has said in court papers that Mr. Abassi came to the attention of law enforcement during an investigation by the F.B.I. that revealed he had ''radicalized'' one of two men arrested last year in Canada and charged with participating in a plot, linked to Al Qaeda, to derail a passenger train.
Mr. Abassi entered the United States in March 2013 and remained under constant surveillance by law enforcement while he maintained regular contact with a man who was the undercover F.B.I. agent, prosecutors have said.
In a recent hearing, Ms. Shroff said Mr. Abassi's arrival followed promises made by the undercover agent in phone calls to Mr. Abassi's family members in Tunisia, so they would allow him to come to New York.
''During these calls, the undercover takes great pains to reassure Mr. Abassi's parents that he is going to give Mr. Abassi a job,'' Ms. Shroff said.
''He's going to sponsor him and give him a visa,'' she added. ''He's going to give him a good life in the United States.''
Prosecutors have said that after Mr. Abassi arrived, he was secretly recorded discussing ''his desire to engage in terrorist acts against targets in the United States and other countries,'' to provide support and money to Al Qaeda in Iraq and other terrorist groups, and to recruit people for terrorist acts.
Mr. Abassi also suggested a plot to contaminate the air or the water with bacteria as a way to kill up to 100,000 people, prosecutors said.
In mid-April 2013, Mr. Abassi talked with the undercover agent about how he might obtain a work visa to remain in the United States and engage in ''projects'' related to terrorism, prosecutors said.
The government has said there are more than 100 hours of recordings of Mr. Abassi and the agent. Mr. Ferrara, the prosecutor, said in January that many of the conversations were irrelevant. ''Sometimes they go out to dinner and they talk about the food,'' he said.
But Ms. Shroff, a federal public defender, suggested that the tapes supported her position. ''They certainly go to show that he does not have the mind-set that they want him to have,'' she said.
Spokesmen for the United States attorney's office in Manhattan and the F.B.I. declined to comment on Tuesday, as did Ms. Shroff.
Mr. Abassi was arrested on April 22 of last year and was charged with two counts of making false statements on immigration forms to facilitate an act of international terrorism. Each count carries a maximum prison term of 25 years. In statements made before his arrest, he lied to agents about his activity, prosecutors said.
Over the next week, Mr. Abassi voluntarily waived his Miranda rights and his right to a speedy court appearance and was questioned on a near-daily basis, prosecutors said.
Ms. Shroff has challenged the government's interrogation tactics, claiming in court that the F.B.I. essentially baited Mr. Abassi by telling him that he could call his wife, who lived in Canada, if he would be more forthcoming.
When Mr. Abassi would begin speaking to his wife, Ms. Shroff said, the call would be cut off. ''They would say, 'We will give you another call if we deem your information valuable,' '' Ms. Shroff said, adding, ''It goes to the voluntariness of Mr. Abassi's statement.''
The government's offer would call for Mr. Abassi to plead guilty to a false-statement count and a second, misdemeanor charge, and for him to be deported after completing his sentence. ''Mr. Abassi would not be asked at the time of the plea, if he accepted this offer, to in any way admit that either of these crimes touched on a crime of international terrorism,'' Mr. Ferrara said.
Judge Cedarbaum scheduled a hearing next week to give Mr. Abassi time to consider the offer.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/30/nyregion/milder-view-of-suspect-in-us-case-on-terror.html

Load-Date: April 30, 2014


End of Document