Soldiers charged in parking lot blasts; 3 face domestic terrorism counts.; Police: Military training explosives thrown into crowd.
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 10, 2010 Tuesday
Main Edition


Copyright 2010 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 2B
Length: 458 words
Byline: Ty Tagami, Mike Morris

Staff
Body


Three U.S. soldiers face charges related to domestic terrorism in connection with blasts in a Dawsonville parking lot.
Being held Monday in the Dawson County jail, the soldiers --- Thomas Daniel Campbell, 21, of Dahlonega; Jeremy Wade Morgan, 34, of Dawsonville; and Nicholas Gregory Wendt, 25, of Dahlonega --- were accused of throwing military explosives into a crowd at a grocery store parking lot.
The men are on the support staff at Camp Frank D. Merrill, Dawson sheriff's Lt. Tony Wooten said. The camp near Dahlonega serves as home to the 5th Ranger Training Battalion and focuses on training for small-unit mountain combat, according to globalsecurity.org.
No one was injured when two ground burst simulators were tossed early Sunday from a car. The military uses the explosives in place of hand grenades during training.
Wooten told The Atlanta Journal-Constitution that 911 operators received a call about 1:30 a.m. Sunday from a woman who "stated that they believe that someone threw two pipe bombs at them."
"A large group was standing around talking, and a Cadillac with three occupants pulled up, threw two devices and fled," Wooten said.
He said the Cadillac fled up Ga. 400 and deputies who were in the area and heard the explosions "were able to see them on 400 as they attempted to turn off their lights and elude us."
The Cadillac pulled onto a side road off Ga. 400.
Deputies later found a dozen undetonated devices they believed had been thrown from the Cadillac before it stopped, Wooten said.
He said investigators had not determined a motive for the incident.
"All we know is the opportunity was there and for whatever reason, they threw the devices at them," Wooten said. "From our investigation, they don't know each other; there was no hostility; they had not done anything to each other. There was nothing to provoke it."
All three were charged with 16 counts of aggravated assault and 16 counts of reckless conduct. Morgan and Wendt also were each charged with one count of domestic terrorism and two counts of cruelty to children first degree, because two of the people in the crowd were under the age of 18, Wooten said. Wooten said Campbell also was charged with fleeing and eluding, driving with no headlights, reckless driving and one count of being a party to a crime of domestic terrorism.
According to the website globalsecurity.org, the ground burst simulator is used "to create battle noises and flash effects during training. It produces a high-pitched whistle that lasts two to four seconds. The detonation produces a flash and loud report."
"There's not a lot of shrapnel in it," Wooten said. "It's basically made out of gunpowder and paper. But still, the damage from getting hit from one of those would not be pleasant."

Load-Date: August 10, 2010


End of Document