Solicitor general steps down to return to private practice Olson was known for his work on war on terrorism
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 25, 2004, Friday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P16A
Length: 490 words
Byline: LOS ANGELES TIMES
Body


WASHINGTON - Theodore Olson, whose arguments before the Supreme Court in 2000 were a critical factor in the election of George W. Bush as president, is resigning as solicitor general to return to private practice, the Justice Department announced.
Olson was nominated as solicitor general in June 2001, six months after successfully representing candidate Bush in the Supreme Court case involving a recount of the vote in Florida.
The court's decision resulted in Bush winning Florida, and the state's electoral vote gave him the White House. Olson was confirmed after a hard-fought partisan battle in the Senate.
Supervising the government's appellate work in the federal courts, Olson has helped craft administration legal arguments on issues from campaign-finance reform to affirmative action.
But he is best known for his work in the war on terrorism, publicly pushing for the tough new anti-terrorism laws that became the USA Patriot Act. His wife, Barbara, a Washington lawyer and author, was aboard the hijacked plane that crashed into the Pentagon on Sept. 11, 2001.
In a prepared statement Thursday, Attorney General John Ashcroft called Olson "a dedicated patriot."
"His judgment and legal skill have greatly benefited the American people in so many ways, but particularly in our fight against terror," Ashcroft added.
Olson, 63, could not be reached for comment, but in a statement he praised Bush and Ashcroft for their efforts in the war on terror.
The statement did not give a reason Olson was leaving, but said that the move was effective next month, after the current Supreme Court term ends. He is expected to rejoin his old Los Angeles law firm, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher.
Olson's departure is the latest in a series of resignations over the last year by top officials who helped shape the Justice Department's response after the Sept. 11 attacks, which killed nearly 3,000 people.
Some of the legal arguments the department has used in terrorism cases are now themselves under attack. Next week, the Supreme Court is expected to decide two such cases in which Olson's office argued for giving the president broad power in dealing with suspected terrorists, even those who may be U.S. citizens.
They include the case of Jose Padilla, a former Chicago gang member accused of plotting to explode a "dirty bomb" on behalf of al-Qaida, who was locked up in a military jail and denied a lawyer for months after being declared an "enemy combatant" by Bush.
The other case involves the rights of suspected al-Qaida and Taliban detainees being held at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
Not counting the pending cases, Olson's tenure was marked by an unusual degree of success before the Supreme Court.
He argued more than 20 cases, including the court's decision Thursday enabling the White House to keep secret records of a task force, headed by Vice President Dick Cheney, that in 2001 produced findings friendly to the energy industry.

Load-Date: June 26, 2004


End of Document