SOLIDARITY ACTIVISTS CALL WORK STOPPAGE IN MEMORY OF PRIEST
The New York Times
November 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 347 words
Byline: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN
Dateline: WARSAW, Nov. 1
Body


A group of Solidarity leaders in the northern port of Gdansk called today for a one-hour work stoppage next week in memory of the Rev. Jerzy Popieluszko, the outspoken pro-Solidarity priest who was abducted and slain, apparently by Government security men.
The Government, which has strongly denounced the slaying, announced earlier this week that three Interior Ministry officers had confessed to abducting the priest Oct. 19. His body was found Tuesday. The results of an autopsy conducted Wednesday have not been announced.
Group of Solidarity leaders in northern port of Gdansk call for 1-hour work stoppage in memory of Rev Jerzy Popieluszko, pro-Solidarity priest who was slain, apparently by Polish Government security men (S)
The Gdansk group, which includes Andrzej Gwiazda, once a rival to Lech Walesa for Solidarity leadership, issued an appeal that said, ''If we remain silent on this horrible crime and if we endure it without a protest, a terrible fear will paralyze our thoughts, words and acts.''
''Let us not be scared,'' they said, adding that protests by people in mourning ''will not disturb public law and order in our country.''
The appeal urged participation in religious mourning, and urged that Poles turn off their lights and put lit candles in their windows from 9 to 9:15 each evening and wear black mourning badges. A general one-hour work stoppage was called for next Friday both to honor the slain priest and to demonstrate against police terrorism.
The call came as Roman Catholic Church officials announced plans for a memorial service and funeral procession on Saturday for the priest. The church said a funeral mass would be said at the church where Father Popieluszko preached his monthly sermons supporting the banned Solidarity union.
Today was All Saints' Day, a national and religious holiday. At a church near the city's major cemetery, Jozef Cardinal Glemp, the Primate of Poland, said of the three men held in the priest's killing, ''They are condemned and belong to the saddest part of mankind who ignore God, God's grace and are combatting God.''


End of Document