Solution sought to terror risks; Risk managers see need for government involvement
Business Insurance
May 8, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: SPOTLIGHT: RIMS 2006 TRENDS & DEVELOPMENTS; Pg. 15
Length: 1312 words
Byline: GLORIA GONZALEZ
Body


HONOLULU-A practical, long-term solution to handling terrorism risks must include continued federal government involvement in any type of reinsurance program, risk managers say.
While the exact form of that involvement may not need to mirror the current backstop under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act of 2005, terrorism is not a risk that the private insurance market can effectively handle on its own, they say.
For most risk managers, the priority is to have a workable solution in place before the expiration of TRIEA so that they can avoid the same market uncertainty they encountered during last year's protracted debate on the renewal of the original measure, the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002.
If a permanent solution is not in place prior to expiration, insurers will have little or no appetite for terrorism coverage for workers compensation and property exposures, said several risk managers gathered at the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.'s annual conference in Honolulu last month.
``With the renewal of TRIA, we have a market that is flowing well,'' said Janice Ochenkowski, director of global risk management for Jones Lang LaSalle Inc. in Chicago and treasurer of New York-based RIMS.
TRIA has served its purpose, by helping to stabilize a terrorism insurance market that was characterized by limited capacity and unaffordable pricing before the passage of the measure, risk managers say.
``Without TRIA, there are many workers comp carriers that will just perceive the risk as too great to write that business,'' said Michael Fenlon, director of external affairs for RIMS. ``I don't have a crystal ball, but I'm really concerned that coverage may not be available to some of those large employers that need it. I think it would also be a problem for small employers.
``There will not be a market for coverage on the property side in my opinion,'' added Mr. Fenlon, who is also the risk manager for the United Parcel Service Inc. in Atlanta. ``Companies can be self-insured, but that means they're exposed. If there's an event, it could put a company out of business.''
Terry Fleming, director of the division of risk management for Montgomery County, Md., said he buys TRIA coverage for his $4.5 billion in property assets in the Washington area, but self-insures his workers comp risk-a major exposure for his organization, which has 50,000 employees. ``I'm hoping that the extension or a permanent solution will allow me to get some excess workers comp coverage and get that exposure off the table for me,'' he said.
Risk managers got a glimpse of the market reaction to a world without TRIA last year. Mr. Fleming noted that his property terrorism insurer had a clause in its contract stating that if TRIA was not extended, it would not guarantee that it would offer the coverage, an issue many of his fellow risk managers encountered. ``That's a significant problem for anybody with a large property portfolio like we have,'' he said.
Michael Liebowitz, director, risk management, for Bridgeport Hospital & Healthcare Services Inc. in Bridgeport, Conn., and president of RIMS, said he buys TRIA-supported coverage on some lines where it's offered, but some insurers said that they would sunset their terrorism coverage if TRIA was not extended. Mr. Liebowitz then began grading the insurers in terms of price and overall property coverage on a grid and the absence of TRIA coverage lowered the scores of several insurers, he said.
Going forward, there is widespread agreement among risk managers that the federal government needs to be involved in a long-term solution to the terrorism exposure.
RIMS advocates a list of nine key principles for a long-term solution and two of its key points are that the private market will not provide adequate coverage for acts of terrorism without TRIA and the federal government must act as a reinsurer.
``The private insurance market is not going to be able to do this alone,'' Mr. Fenlon said. ``The government is going to have to be involved. This is a societal risk. We definitely think it's going to have to be some type of joint effort.''
``To think that the federal government would not be involved in a large event is to be ignorant,'' Mr. Fleming said.
While most risk managers might prefer to have a completely private market solution to the terrorism risk, this is not feasible because in order for the risk to be insurable, insurers must be able to reasonably estimate losses and that is virtually impossible in the case with terrorism, Mr. Fenlon said. There is no way to predict the frequency or severity of such events so there is no way to price the product appropriately, he added.
``With the federal government acting as a reinsurer under the current approach, there is at least some level of certainty that is brought into the equation that allows private carriers to at least somewhat predict their maximum exposures,'' Mr. Fenlon said.
If Congress refuses to provide a backstop beyond the expiration of TRIA, it should provide financial and tax incentives to encourage the capital markets to help insurers build the capacity to write terrorism coverage, Mr. Fleming said.
A possible solution to covering terrorism risks could be the creation of a pool to handle the risk similar to pools in other countries, some observers say. In particular, the United Kingdom's Pool Re is often cited as a possible model for a permanent solution in the United States.
A government-backed mutual reinsurance company in which membership is optional, Pool Re provides insurance company members with reinsurance cover on an all-perils basis for U.K. terrorism losses related to commercial property and business interruption.
``Certainly, we think there are probably some very good components of these pools that may be part of a workable solution here,'' Mr. Fenlon said, adding, though, that RIMS has not reached the point of identifying which components would work best in the U.S. system.
From what he knows of the U.K. pool, it seems to work well as the pool is fully funded and has not paid out a lot of claims, Mr. Liebowitz said. ``That seems to be the method of financing this exposure that seems to work the best,'' he said.
Ms. Ochenkowski, though, is skeptical about whether the U.K. pool would be a good model for the United States. ``I think Pool Re doesn't fit the American view of the way to handle the problem,'' she said. ``I think the purely subsidized pool would probably take a lot more time than we have.''
Widespread agreement exists on other features of a permanent solution for the terrorism exposure, including the need for inclusion of coverage for nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological risks. ``There's really not a market for that coverage-there's not a market on the property side. In the workers comp area, carriers cannot exclude these risks, so while there technically is a market, the question is if TRIA goes away, will the carriers continue to write workers comp,'' Mr. Fenlon said.
There is also consensus among risk managers on the need to eliminate the distinction between foreign and domestic terrorism, particularly because of the need to certify the source of a terrorist attack in order to trigger the TRIA provisions. ``If that's ever tested, it might be extraordinarily difficult to make that determination or to make that determination in a manner which is reasonable to everyone,'' Ms. Ochenkowski said.
Risk managers all agree that a permanent solution needs to materialize sooner rather than later. ``Whatever the mechanism is, we have to make sure that we push to work on that now, and not get to the 11th hour again like we kind of got before with TRIA's extension and encourage that market vehicle to be in place in whatever shape or form it takes,'' said Ellen Vinck, vp of risk management and benefits at BAE Systems Ship Repair Inc. in San Diego.

Load-Date: May 15, 2006


End of Document