Somalia shuns terrorism link
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
November 20, 2001, Tuesday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 727 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


MOGADISHU, Somalia -- Even before Somali organizations were shut down by the Bush administration for allegedly funneling cash to Osama bin Laden, the 15-month-old government here was struggling -- with little success -- to reunite a country devastated by a decade of clan-based violence.
Now, Somalia faces a potential financial calamity, further international isolation and a rebounding reputation as a safe haven for terrorists.
Mogadishu's dusty streets are ringed by bullet-ridden buildings, heavily armed young men zoom around on the back of pickup trucks and the rusting remains of a U.S. helicopter lie in a cactus bush -- a stark reminder of the fate suffered by 18 U.S. soldiers on a peacekeeping mission there in 1993.
"We had all kinds of terrorism by warlords and . . . some very small groups of religious fanatics . . . because of the absence of law in the country," President Abdiqasim Salad Hassan said in a recent interview with The Associated Press. "But that was history . . . right now I don't think there are local or international terrorists in Somalia."
Abdiqasim acknowledges that his young government has little control beyond the city limits of Mogadishu but insists officials know what is going on in the countryside.
He denied persistent rumors that bin Laden visited the country during the 1990s and called for an international investigation into allegations that the country harbors terrorists.
"There were very strong rumors that bin Laden was here for a very short time and he fought with the Americans," said Mohamed Qanyareh Afrah, a powerful faction leader who joined Abdiqasim's government. "You hear rumors, but Somalis are very good rumor mongers."
Jamal Ahmed al-Fadl, a former bin Laden soldier, testified this year during the U.S. Embassy bombings trial that bin Laden sent fighters to Somalia to battle U.S. troops who were part of Operation Restore Hope.
The testimony, coupled with Somalia's lawlessness and the U.S. crackdown on the country's private financial networks, make the Horn of Africa nation one of the few places where bin Laden may try to seek refuge.
"Somalia is viewed, along with Yemen, as the most likely destination for bin Laden should he escape Afghanistan," said Jonathan Stevenson, an analyst at the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies. "He thought about basing himself there in 1999," but could not trust Somalis who would put clan loyalties before any foreign organization.
Abdiqasim said his government -- Somalia's first since the 1991 ouster of dictator Mohamed Siad Barre -- has not had "any clue from the American side" as to why the Al-Barakaat financial services network, a Somali Internet company, and Al-Itihaad -- a secretive Islamic group that controlled pockets of Somalia in the 1990s -- have been tied to bin Laden. All three appeared on U.S. lists of organizations and individuals suspected of funneling funds for bin Laden and his al-Qaida network.
What Abdiqasim can be sure of is that closing Al-Barakaat's money networks will affect a major part of Somalia's economy, complicating chances for a successful return to stability. The company management has vehemently denied the accusations and Abdiqasim said Al-Barakaat should be treated as innocent until proven otherwise.
The business, an informal system that allows Somalis abroad to send money to their impoverished relatives in Somalia, rakes in an estimated $500 million each year.
By contrast, the government, which hasn't started collecting taxes, has struggled through its first year with $15 million in grants from Saudi Arabia and Qatar and small loans from Muslim businessmen.
The only way to get the economy running may be to try to convince the United States that it has no connections with terrorism.
In New York last week, Somalia's U.N. ambassador, Ahmed Abdi Hashi, proposed "an international committee of inquiry under the auspices of the U.N. Security Council to investigate these allegations."
Hashi said the committee should help Somalia comply with a Security Council resolution requiring nations to stop financing, supporting, and providing sanctuary to terrorists.
"The international community is under moral obligations to come to the aid of these states in the form of post-conflict peace building and national reconstruction so that they do not become vulnerable to the evil forces of terrorism."

Load-Date: November 20, 2001


End of Document