Somali Terrorism Suspect Appears in Civilian Court
The New York Times
September 9, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 28
Length: 400 words
Byline: By COLIN MOYNIHAN
Body


A Somali accused of supporting Al Qaeda made his first public court appearance in New York on Thursday, a prelude to a highly anticipated international terrorism trial in civilian court.
Attention has focused on the two months that the defendant, Ahmed Abdulkadir Warsame, spent in extralegal detention on a United States naval vessel. He was questioned there by military interrogators, who did not issue a Miranda warning.
Some Republican lawmakers criticized the Obama administration for not sending Mr. Warsame to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to face a military trial.
But administration officials have said they do not want to send another prisoner to a detention site that the president wants to close.
Indeed, on Thursday, John O. Brennan, the deputy national security adviser, told reporters in Washington that no new prisoners would be sent to Guantanamo Bay.
Mr. Warsame's hearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan lasted less than five minutes and consisted of little more than a statement by prosecutors for the United States attorney's office, who outlined their progress in producing discovery material, some of it classified.
The trial of Mr. Warsame is likely to explore complicated legal questions about how terror suspects are detained and prosecuted, and whether those suspects should receive civilian or military trials.
An indictment unsealed in July accused Mr. Warsame of helping Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula and the Shabab, an allied Islamist insurgent group in Somalia.
He was captured by United States forces on April 19 while on a fishing skiff between Yemen and Somalia, and he was brought to New York in early July.
A separate group of law enforcement interrogators eventually took over the questioning from military personnel, and a Miranda warning, advising him of his right to remain silent, was given. Mr. Warsame agreed to continue speaking and provided ''productive'' information, officials said.
During his appearance on Thursday, Mr. Warsame smiled and seemed at ease.
He sat between his lawyers, Priya Chaudhry and Lee Ginsberg, and at one point assured the judge, Colleen McMahon, that his command of English was good enough that he did not need a translator.
As the proceeding ended, Mr. Warsame, wearing a dark blue prison suit, an orange T-shirt and orange sneakers, rose and shook hands with both of his lawyers. Then he walked through a door that led to holding cells.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 9, 2011


End of Document