SOME OFFICIALS QUESTION NEED FOR SUMMER TERRORISM WARNING/ FBI SAYS IT'S JUSTIFIED, SHOWS COMMITMENT TO THWARTING AN ATTACK
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 28, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6; REACTION
Length: 323 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


FBI and Justice Department officials on Thursday defended their decision to warn the public about the potential for a devastating terrorist attack on the United States this summer, saying it was justified by intelligence and essential to avoid missteps that occurred before the Sept. 11 attacks.
Their defense came amid questions from lawmakers and some Bush administration officials with access to the same intelligence. They said Wednesday's announcement by Attorney General John Ashcroft and FBI Directo r Robert Mueller was overblown and caused unnecessary public concern.
Republican Rep. Christopher Cox of California, chairman of the Homeland Security Committee, said the Ashcroft-Mueller news conference mistakenly led some to believe the nation's threat level had been increased. He called it "regrettable" that Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge did not join Ashcroft and Mueller.
"Their separate public appearances left the impression that the broad and close interagency consultation we expect - and which the law requires - may not have taken place in this case," Cox said.
Homeland Security Department spokesman Brian Roehrkasse reiterated Thursday that his agency has not seen any change in the "steady stream of threat reporting."
"We do not have any new intelligence or specific information about al-Qaida planning an attack," he said.
Cassandra Chandler, assistant FBI director for public affairs, acknowledged that intelligence about the threat has been coming in for some time. But she said it now is being backed by a higher degree of corroboration.
She said the announcement demonstrates to Americans and the world that the FBI is focused on trying to thwart an attack.
New publicity about seven al-Qaida suspects being sought - six of whom h ave been pursued by the FBI for months - had generated more than 2,000 tips to an FBI Web site since Wednesday afternoon. It normally receives 200 terrorism-related leads every day.

Notes

NATION - NATIONAL FOCUS

Load-Date: May 28, 2004


End of Document