Some worried about terrorism at state Capitol
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
October 12, 2001, Friday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 565 words
Byline: BRIAN WITTE, Associated Press
Body


A member of the state Board of Animal Health admits he reads 'too many terror and mystery stories.' Still, Kenneth Throlson says he would feel safer if the board moved out of the Capitol.
 The city's tallest building, he worries, could be a prime terrorist target.
'I know we don't have much in North Dakota that they might want,' Throlson said at a board meeting this week. 'But the tremendous chaos they would cause if they hit every state Capitol -- I, for one, would feel better having it (the board) over with the USDA.'
 A month after terrorism attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon killed thousands, Throlson isn't the only one worried about what could happen at the prominent 19-story Bismarck building.
 'We've thought about that a few times, ourselves,' State Veterinarian Larry Schuler said. 'The fact that the Capitol building here is such a high-profile building in the state, it is a potential target for terrorists.'
 At the Board of Animal Health meeting, members discussed the possibility of moving to the Agriculture Department's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service office as part of a reshuffling to relieve overcrowding in some areas. The discussion focused on such advantages as efficiency and a better working environment. But the terrorism fear was there, as well.
 Agriculture Commissioner Roger Johnson, who talked this week about the potential for moving the Board of Animal Health, said the board likely will stay put for now. However, he said, he would like to explore a move to increase efficiency.
 Talk of bringing state and federal agencies together in the same offices came up months ago, when officials were thinking about better cooperation among agencies, he said.
 Doug Friez, Gov. John Hoeven's recently appointed homeland security coordinator, said security at the Capitol has been a focus since Sept. 11.
 Friez said Thursday that state officials have imposed tighter restrictions on access to the Capitol, limiting the number of public entrances and enhancing 24-hour surveillance
 'There's been some fairly significant activity prior to this, but I think on a daily basis, it's probably getting more and more noticeable,' Friez said.
 Not everyone who works in the building is worried.
 Roberta Tjaden, a data coordinator for the state Agriculture Department on the sixth floor, said she feels no more vulnerable at the Capitol than anywhere else.
 'It doesn't bother me at all,' she said. 'I've never even twice thought about it.'
 Tracy Unterseher, who works in the building as the state's trauma coordinator, said she was nervous on the day of the attacks because she could not be home with her children in case they needed her. But she felt safe in the Capitol.
 'There's bigger potential places to do damage than hitting our Capitol building,' she said.
 Marvin Schott, a custodian at the Capitol, said he still feels 'kind of scared' about the potential for terrorism attacks, though that fear has diminished some since Sept. 11.
 He said he has reported suspicious-looking packages while cleaning up, though they turned out to be nothing dangerous.
 'I'm always looking around corners,' he said.
 Betty Eggers, who works next door to the Capitol at the state Department of Transportation, said she does not spend a lot of time worrying about terrorism, but she keeps an eye out for unusual activity.
 'Terrorists are still out there,' she said.

Load-Date: October 12, 2001


End of Document