Some responses to terrorism complicated by Muslim sentiment; Malaysia: Malay and Indonesian officials must pay attention to radicals at home
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 21, 2001 Sunday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. b15
Length: 709 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: SHANGHAI, China
Body


Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad accuses Israel of committing terrorist acts against Palestinians. He wants U.S. attacks in Afghanistan to stop, but says he faces his own threat from radical Islam.
It's a volatile mix for an APEC meeting dominated by talk of terrorism.
In Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim nation, President Megawati Sukarnoputri faces growing anti-U.S. sentiment but urgently needs American economic and political support.
Both leaders are struggling with a dilemma: How to join the U.S.-led anti-terrorism fight without alienating their mostly Muslim populations or feeding support for Islamic radicals.
President Bush and other leaders at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum are keeping such sentiments in mind as they try to fashion a joint anti-terrorism statement.
In draft form, it denounces the Sept. 11 attacks and promises anti-terror measures. But it avoids mentioning Islam, Afghanistan or the chief suspect - Saudi-born Osama bin Laden.
U.S. officials say they accept that Indonesia and Malaysia have to limit support for action that could anger Muslims.
"We respect that a country like Malaysia has internal challenges and tensions it must deal with," Robert Zoellick, the U.S. trade representative, said after meeting Mahathir this week.
Mahathir and Megawati condemned the Sept. 11 attacks, as did tiny Brunei, the region's other Muslim-majority nation. But their support for the U.S.-led campaign is tempered by political and personal conflicts.
Mahathir, in office since 1981, sees himself as a champion of Muslims and the developing world. Though he welcomes foreign investment, he is renowned for testy comments about the United States and Israel.
Megawati has to tread lightly to avoid offending Muslim allies. She took office in July and relies for support on Muslim parties that want her to tone down her initially outspoken endorsement of U.S. military action.
Malaysia and Indonesia are among the Islamic world's most tolerant, open societies - democracies where Muslims coexist with Hindus, Buddhists and Christians.
In Indonesia, public opposition to American action in Afghanistan was limited until this week to hardline Islamic groups. But on Friday, 6,000 members of a Muslim political party staged a peaceful protest in the capital, Jakarta, suggesting that unease was spreading in the mainstream.
In Malaysia, Mahathir said he would have supported the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon if they had targeted Israel, which he accuses of committing terrorist acts against the Palestinians.
Yet Mahathir says he also faces his own threat from Islamic radicals. Malaysian authorities have detained a group they say wanted to overthrow the 76-year-old leader and impose an Islamic theocracy.
On Oct. 12, Malaysian police broke up an anti-American protest outside the U.S. Embassy in the capital, Kuala Lumpur. There have been no demonstrations since then.
Both leaders express unease about U.S. attacks in Afghanistan, which Mahathir says will only harden terrorist sentiment. He wants the United Nations to draft a new definition of terrorism to satisfy both Western fears and Muslim concern about Israel and the Palestinians.
In a one-on-one meeting Saturday, Mahathir urged Bush to "solve the Palestinian issue" as part of the fight against terrorism, the Malaysian news agency Bernama reported.
"I explained to him to remove the causes of terrorism and I singled out the problem in Palestine as the most important cause," Mahathir was quoted as saying. "I explained to him the anger and frustration of the Muslim world."
Last week, Mahathir urged U.S. authorities to share any evidence of terrorist activity in Malaysia, following a news report that terrorists tied to bin Laden's network and based in the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia are among the likely targets of future American action.
Malaysia is worried about being portrayed as a haven for Muslim extremists. Mahathir's government says it will cooperate with any investigation.
Official action by Indonesia has been more restrained. Its central bank has refused to comply with U.S. demands to freeze assets linked to bin Laden, saying it contravened Indonesian law, the state news agency Antara reported Saturday.

Load-Date: October 24, 2001


End of Document