SOME AREAS COULD PROFIT FROM 'WAR ON TERRORISM'
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 21, 2002 Monday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: METRO BUSINESS; Pg. D-10; VIRGINIA'S ECONOMY
Length: 449 words
Byline: Christine Chmura, * Dr. Christine Chmura is president and chief economist at Chmura Economics & Analytics. She can be reached at (804) 649-3640 or receive e-mail at cchmura@chmuraecon.com,  
Body


When communism started to crumble in the late 1980s, many analysts expected the United States to experience a "peace dividend."
According to this theory, money previously spent on defense would boost economic growth as it was diverted to other sectors, such as technology.
It quickly became apparent, however, that the peace dividend slowed economic growth in many localities as base closures and defense industry consolidations led to layoffs concentrated in pockets around the nation.
In contrast, the "war on terrorism" should boost economic growth in areas that already receive a substantial amount of government, and particularly defense, contracts. From that perspective, Virginia should benefit.
The latest data, which reflects fiscal year 2001, indicate that Virginia companies received government contracts totaling $26 billion. Only California, with contract awards of $27.4 billion, ranked higher than Virginia. Even Texas, which has a much larger population than Virginia, received only $14.7 billion in awards in 2001.
Defense Contracts
Seventy-one percent of the contract awards received in 2001 by firms in Virginia was from the Department of Defense. Given the location of the Pentagon in Northern Virginia and military bases in Hampton Roads, it is no surprise that the largest award amounts went to the following five localities (in order of award amount):
*Fairfax County,
*Newport News,
*Arlington County,
*City of Fairfax, and
*Norfolk.
Similarly, the following five companies in Virginia, which received the largest Defense Department contract awards in 2001, are near the Pentagon and the Hampton Roads bases:
*Newport News Shipbuilding (now Northrop Grumman Newport News): $5.6 billion;
*Northrop Grumman Corp.: $756.6 million;
*Science Applications International Corp.: $536.8 million;
*Lockheed Martin Corp.: $435.4 million; and
*WorldCom Inc.: $347.8 million.
Employment still declined
Defense contract awards for 2002 will not be released until early next year. Anecdotal evidence indicates that some companies in the commonwealth are benefiting from the increase in defense spending.
Nonetheless, contract awards were not large enough to keep employment in the state from declining during the recent recession.
From recent peak employment levels in December 2000, Virginia employment contracted by almost 62,000 jobs through July, a decline of 1.7 percent. Nationally the peak-to-trough decline was 1.3 percent.
In the short term, an outbreak of war is likely to dampen economic growth in Hampton Roads if additional aircraft carriers are sent to the Middle East.
Increases in defense spending over the longer run, however, will undoubtedly lead to more contracts for Virginia's businesses.

Load-Date: October 23, 2002


End of Document