Some lawmakers bristle at Bush plan to cap terrorism spending
Air Force Times
November 19, 2001 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2001 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: GEN; Pg. 1119
Length: 540 words
Byline: By Rick Maze; Times staff writer
Body


The newest front in the war on   terrorism is the battle of the budget. President Bush surprised congressional leaders Nov. 6 with a   vow to veto spending bills if lawmakers try to spend more than $40   billion on the federal response to   the Sept. 11 attacks.
The veto threat, delivered in a   meeting that lawmakers believed   would include horse-trading on   spending priorities, creates serious   obstacles for the 2002 defense appropriations bill.
Lawmakers had hoped to attach   a terrorism supplemental-funding   bill to the $317 billion defense bill   that would have given more money   to the military, law-enforcement   and intelligence agencies, public- health programs and other needs   related to the war on terrorism.
For the most part, Republican   leaders rallied around Bush,   agreeing to limit extra spending to   $40 billion. But Democrats, especially Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va.,   chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, left the meeting   undeterred. He dared Bush to veto   a bill on the grounds that it spends   too much to protect Americans   against terrorism.
The Senate has delayed work on   the 2002 defense appropriations   bill until after Thanksgiving, while   trying to reach a compromise on   counterterrorism spending.
Even House Republican leaders   who publicly agreed with Bush   said they privately told White   House officials that the veto threat   is a mistake.
Rep. C.W. "Bill" Young, R-Fla.,   the House Appropriations Committee chairman, said he will support Bush's $40 billion emergency   spending cap for now because he   expects Congress to focus on terrorism spending early next year.
However, he also expects Democrats to offer amendments to exceed   the cap by spending more on defense and domestic programs, particularly for New York City.
"The military is underfunded   and I wish we could spend more,   but I see the president's point   about being careful," Young said.   "We can come back later and try to   get the military more money."
It's possible Bush could support   more money in the 2003 defense   budget or in a war supplemental- funding bill next year, but for now   he wants Congress to stick to the   $40 billion cap on emergency   spending, said White House   spokesman Ari Fleischer.
Bush's point, Fleischer said, is   that Congress won't even be able to   spend all the money it wants to approve for counterterrorism efforts   this year.
One Republican who isn't giving   up on more defense spending is   Rep. Duncan Hunter of California.   The chairman of the House Armed   Services research and development panel said Nov. 8 he is trying   to get lawmakers to add $32.3 billion to the 2002 defense budget for   a variety of immediate needs.
The $32.3 billion includes items   the services list as unfunded priorities and immediate upgrades in   readiness and security proposed by   Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, Hunter said.
Hunter's plan would allocate   $10.3 billion to the Air Force, $7.1   billion to the Army, $6.1 billion to   the Navy and $602.7 million to the   Marine Corps. Defense-wide programs would get the remaining   $8.2 billion. Money would go for a   variety of programs to improve the   war effort and protect troops from   new attacks, Hunter said.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document