Some terror cover hard to find: GAO; Large urban buildings require complex programs to cover risks
Business Insurance
July 14, 2008


Copyright 2008 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 320 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Certain commercial property policyholders continue to face problems finding terrorism coverage at prices or limits they consider reasonable, according to the Government Accountability Office.
In a report sent Friday to the chairmen and ranking members of the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs and the House Financial Services committees, the GAO said that ``commercial property terrorism insurance coverage appears to be available nationwide at rates policyholders view as reasonable.'' But some policyholders, particularly those that ``own large, high-value properties in areas where many large buildings are clustered, particularly in urban areas viewed as at high risk of attack,'' are experiencing ``challenges,'' the GAO said. The GAO said high-risk areas include ``Manhattan and to a lesser extent certain areas of other major cities such as Chicago and San Francisco.''
The GAO said that those policyholders have responded in several ways, including buying coverage ``from a large number of insurers in complex insurance programs, adding to what can be a time-consuming and onerous process.''
Others are buying standalone coverage or self-insuring, the report said.
``Policyholders said that, through such approaches, they have generally been able to meet their current requirements for terrorism insurance coverage,'' according to the GAO.
The report said that policyholders, insurers and analysts alike attributed their ability to find coverage to both the federal government's terrorism insurance backstop and the soft property market.
The GAO prepared its report by gathering and analyzing data on insurance and reinsurance industry capacity, terrorism insurance take-up rates and terrorism insurance pricing. It also interviewed more than 100 industry participants ranging from policyholders to regulators in various parts of the country.
The GAO plans to issue a more detailed report later this year.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: Some policyholders in Manhattan and other urban centers have a tough time finding reasonably priced terrorism coverage, according to a report.

Load-Date: July 18, 2008


End of Document