SOME ISRAELIS PLAN PEACE RALLY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 4, 1989, SATURDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 12C
Length: 372 words
Body


JERUSALEM (AP) - Israeli peace advocates began on Friday a series of meetings and rallies with Palestinians in the occupied territories, but Jewish settlers said they would stop the rallies by force unless the army stepped in.  Meanwhile, Israel again urged the United States to halt its negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization. Israel cited an attempt at infiltration from Lebanon on Thursday by guerrillas from a radical PLO group.  Four guerrillas were killed and one escaped.  Nine Israeli leftists met with 15 prominent Palestinians in Gaza City on Friday to discuss ways of ending the uprising, which has cost the lives of 388 Palestinians and 17 Israelis since Dec. 8, 1987.  The meeting was the first in a series of discussions aimed at organizing talks between left-wing legislators and Gaza leaders. Israeli sources who participated declined to give details of the meeting.  Jewish settlers in the West Bank said unless the army stopped a peace rally planned for today by members of the leftist Peace Now movement, the settlers themselves would block it.  Israel radio said the army planned to close the territories to prevent violence. Army representatives refused to comment.  Organizers described the rally as an effort to promote free political activity in lands that Israel has occupied since the 1967 war. For the rally, hundreds of Israelis would be bused to meetings with Palestinians.  Uri Ariel, head of the West Bank Settlers' Council, said the rally would ''legitimize terror'' and demanded that the army prevent it.
In thwarting the infiltration Thursday in southern Lebanon, Israeli soldiers killed four guerrillas of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, led by Naif Hawatmeh. The infiltration attempt was the second attributed to the radical PLO faction in a week.  ''In our opinion, this infiltration attempt and Hawatmeh's statement that he does not see himself committed to stopping terrorism against Israel requires the United States to reconsider its position on the PLO,'' the Foreign Ministry said Friday.  The United States opened contacts after PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat statement in December, when he publicly renounced terrorism and recognized Israel's right to exist.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document