Some expect Pakistan to be less cooperative; People oppose war on terror and could pressure new government
USA TODAY
February 19, 2008 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 689 words
Byline: Paul Wiseman and Zafar M. Sheikh
Body


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- Pakistan's democratic opposition grabbed an overwhelming lead over the allies of pro-U.S. President Pervez Musharraf in Monday's high-stakes parliamentary elections, according to state television. The results could leave Pakistan's next government facing intense public pressure to reduce its cooperation with the U.S. war on terrorism.
As results poured in overnight, Pakistan Television reported that the Pakistan Peoples Party of slain opposition leader Benazir Bhutto had grabbed 68 of 268 seats being contested in the National Assembly, the lower house of the parliament. The Pakistan Muslim League of former prime minister Nawaz Sharif won 62. The former ruling party, allied with Musharraf, had 27. Full results might be released later today.
Ruling party spokesman Tariq Azim conceded today that the party did not "do at all well."
Musharraf was not on the ballot, but a solid victory by opposition parties might lead Pakistan to reverse his policies against Islamist militants, says retired lieutenant general Hamid Gul, former head of the intelligence service. "The election is a referendum against Musharraf's policies," Gul says. The war on terrorism "is not our war. Why are we fighting this war?"
Under pressure from the United States after the 9/11 attacks, Musharraf reversed Pakistan's support for the fundamentalist Taliban regime in neighboring Afghanistan. He also assisted U.S. military operations against the Taliban, rounded up al-Qaeda terrorists on Pakistani soil and dispatched 90,000 troops to fight Taliban tribesmen who attack U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan from sanctuaries in Pakistan.
In return, the United States has provided more than $10 billion in aid, the majority of which went to Pakistan's military. President Bush has repeatedly praised Musharraf as an ally in the fight against extremism.
Pakistan's campaign in areas such as the tribal lands on the North West Frontier -- which pits Pakistani troops against fellow Pakistanis -- has become increasingly unpopular. A poll of 3,485 Pakistani adults last month by the non-partisan, U.S.-government-funded International Republic Institute found that 89% say Pakistan should stop cooperating with the United States' war on terrorism, up from 43% in September 2006. "Using weapons on our people is not the answer," says home builder Mohsin Abbasi, 31.
The poll results reflect the widespread impression here that Pakistanis are fighting for U.S., not Pakistani, interests. "People want change," tour operator Jamil Mir, 52, says outside a polling station in Rawalpindi. "We have been fighting others' war."
Gul says the government that emerges from Monday's election will have to heed public opinion: "They will have to politely decline some of the requests the Americans (have) been making." Gul says the Pakistani military should reach a permanent peace deal in the North West Frontier and stop fighting the Taliban tribesmen there.
"Even the political allies of Musharraf are trying to keep distance" from his support for the war on terrorism, Gul says.
Parliamentary candidate Sheik Rashid Ahmed, previously a minister in Musharraf's government, said Monday that he opposed the president's decision to stage a raid on a radical mosque in Islamabad last July. Still, Ahmed lost his seat, independent Dawn News television reported.
Terrorism expert Sajjan Gohel of the Asia-Pacific Foundation think tank in London says the Taliban is too radical to negotiate with. He says previous truces between militants and the Pakistani army "ended in farce. Not only did the Taliban stay there, but they escalated their attacks."
Gohel says the United States may find an elected Pakistani government to be a better ally than Musharraf, a former army chief who seized power in a coup in 1999.
In an interview with the Associated Press on Saturday, Asif Zardari, co-chairman of the Pakistan Peoples Party, promised to convince the public that fighting extremists is "our own war." Zardari, the widower of Bhutto, said Musharraf's policies "made people think and realize that we are fighting a war for the sake of the Americans, which is not true." 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Aamir Qureshi, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: February 21, 2008


End of Document