Some of the controversies
USA TODAY
August 28, 2007 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 347 words
Byline: Kathy Kiely
Body


Controversies involving Attorney General Alberto Gonzales:
Electronic surveillance
As White House counsel, Gonzales participated in a hospital bedside meeting aimed at persuading then-attorney general John Ashcroft to reauthorize a controversial and still partially classified eavesdropping program designed to thwart terrorist attacks. Ashcroft was recuperating from gall bladder surgery. His deputy, James Comey, described the meeting as "an effort to take advantage of a very sick man." The electronic-surveillance program later was reauthorized in a revised form, but the American Civil Liberties Union says it still gives the government too much authority to spy on Americans.
Terrorism/due process
Critics said guidelines Gonzales drafted for the treatment of terrorism suspects after the 9/11 attacks undermined the United States' traditional respect for human and civil rights. Former secretary of State Colin Powell, for example, protested a 2002 memo in which Gonzales called the Geneva Conventions on the treatment of prisoners of war "obsolete" and "quaint." In 2005, the memo was cited repeatedly during Gonzales' confirmation hearings as attorney general.
U.S. attorney firings
Members of Congress, including top-ranking Republican Sens. Jon Kyl of Arizona and Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, have questioned the dismissals of nine federal prosecutors who had received high ratings from the Justice Department in performance reviews. Monica Goodling, a former aide to Gonzales, told Congress some of the attorneys were fired to make way for political appointees.
Testimony to Congress
At a contentious hearing on Capitol Hill last month, senators from both parties accused Gonzales of trying to keep members of Congress in the dark about the debate within the Bush administration over the extent of the warrantless surveillance program. "He did not tell the whole truth," Specter said afterward. Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont and other Democrats have said Gonzales could be the subject of a perjury investigation in connection with his comments on various intelligence activities. 

Load-Date: August 28, 2007


End of Document