SON'S JAILING RACKS SOUTH AFRICAN M.P.
The New York Times
June 10, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 811 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, June 4
Body


On his way to Parliament this morning, Alex Boraine stopped by the security police headquarters to ask about his son. Even before he put the question about where his son was being held he knew what the answer would be.
As he later recalled it, the major who received him replied, ''I'm afraid I can't tell you that.'' Then Mr. Boraine asked an even more futile question about whether he and his wife could be allowed to see their son, Andrew. That would not be possible, he was told.
South African MP's concern over jailing of activist son described
Mr. Boraine is a member of Parliament for the relatively liberal Progressive Federal Party. Andrew, a 22-year-old student of history and economics at the University of Cape Town, is president of the National Union of South African Students.
Eight days ago he was taken from the organization's office here by two security men who said they were acting under a law allowing the police to detain a prisoner without disclosing where, let alone why.
It was the second time in a year that the younger Mr. Boraine had been detained under the law, which sets a 14-day limit on preventive detention. When the 14 days were up last time, the security police simply filled out a form that enabled them to hold him under another law, known as the Terrorism Act. This puts no limit whatsoever on the period of time a prisoner can be held in these circumstances.
 
58 Days Alone in Bleak Cell
Andrew Boraine was held 58 days in solitary confinement in a windowless cell. His warders were not permitted to speak to him, so the only human contacts he had were with his interrogators. They occasionally taunted him with questions about whether he believed the stories of torture in South African jails but subjected him to no physical abuse.
The father believes that his status as a member of Parliament offers some protection to his son. But images of Andrew in an interrogation room stay with him, even when he is exchanging casual greetings with members of the governing National Party in the corridors of Parliament.
''You try to carry on, to do your work, to live normally,'' he said. ''But there's another kind of clock operating for you. Each time the phone rings, each time there's a knock at the door....'' He could not complete the thought.
When the news finally comes it may be of his son's release or the lodging of criminal charges against him. Either way it could be a wait of hours, or months.
 
'Bad During the Nights'
''It's especially bad during the nights,'' he said. ''You sleep very badly.'' Nothing has been said about the reason for the arrest but it is presumed to be related to a rally the younger Mr. Boraine addressed at Witwatersrand University in Johannesburg last week at which some students, mainly blacks, burned a South African flag.
Andrew Boraine had nothing to do with the burning, which outraged most white South Africans, but he was conspicuous in a series of protests timed to coincide with officially sponsored celebrations of South Africa's 20th anniversary as a republic.
A black priest, two black laborers and a student of mixed race classified as colored were arrested, presumably for the same reason.  A series of bombings, attributed to the banned African National Congress, also coincided with the anniversary celebrations, which were planned as a display of national unity but turned out to be just the opposite.
 
A Theory of Conspiracy
If the security police could now trace some kind of connection between those who protested by giving speeches and those who protested by setting off bombs, it would simply be confirming a conspiracy theory that has already been presented on the single television channel of the state-owned broadcasting company.
Sunday night the regular television newscast was extended to nearly twice its normal length for a special report in which campus activism, flag burning and terrorism were presented as different aspects of a single menacing phenomenon. To illustrate the thesis the television reporter read quotations from past presidents of the student movement now headed by Andrew Boraine.
The Minister of Education and other party leaders were then interviewed on the flag burning and student protests. But the spokesman on education for the official opposition was not asked to take part, possibly because the program was designed to cast suspicion on his son.
The security police had long been on the lookout for links between white student groups and black underground movements. To this end it has recruited informers among student activists and even put young agents of its own through college with a mission to penetrate student groups.
On his first spell in jail, Andrew Boraine's chief interrogator was a security police captain named Craig Williamson, who managed, in his student days, to get elected as vice president of the National Union of South African Students.


End of Document