Sonoma County Muslims alarmed by House hearings
The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
March 10, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 556 words
Byline: Jeremy Hay, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif.
Body


March 10--The Congressional hearings that start Thursday into the threat of homegrown terrorism among Muslims in America have infuriated and alarmed Islam's adherents in Sonoma County.
"It's a new McCarthyism and they're going after Muslims," said Said Mansour, president of the Islamic Society of Santa Rosa, summoning the ghost of the Wisconsin senator's 1950's inquisition of Americans he believed to be communists.
Others said the hearings would be counter-productive.
"The best option for the U.S. government is to enlist the help of Muslims to identify who really are the radicals in their community," said Saleem Ganiy, a Santa Rosa engineer.
"Yet this hearing is going to alienate them; it's going to personally alienate me," said the Sri Lankan-born engineer.
The hearings were called by Rep. Peter King, R--New York. Since the Sept. 11 attacks, King has inveighed against American Muslims for in his view not speaking out strongly enough against terrorism and not cooperating with federal investigators.
The hearings have stoked controversy nationwide with critics say they unfairly target a single community.
Among some non-Muslims in Sonoma County, views on the hearings were carefully calibrated.
"I have no problem with investigations into what's perceived to be a potentially radicalized threat, regardless of where it comes from," said Terry Tomasini, a director of the North Bay Patriots group aligned with the tea party political movement.
But, he added, "I don't think it should stop there, any community, any organization, any religion that looks like it is attempting to radicalize followers to threaten the United States should be looked at."
Threats from homegrown terrorism are as real as they are from overseas, said Louis "Pete" Peterka, vice president of the chapter of the Military Officers Association.
"We try really hard not infringe on anybody's rights. But we have to stop threats to our citizens," he said. "So I think we have to have some really thorough hearings to see how deep the threat is."
But Peterka said the hearings should be broader in scope, and noted that extremists are a minority.
"I think we should be looking at everyone, as widely as possible," he said, "because the American Muslim is not the problem, it's the radical Muslims. We have to realize that there are radicals in every religion."
Those Muslim residents who fear the hearings will stigmatize an entire class of Americans said the process is the wrong way to start.
"I was really appalled when I found out about them because it reminded me about McCarthy," said Jackie Ganiy, Saleem Ganiy's American-born wife, who converted to Islam three decades ago.
"I thought we'd moved past targeting a specific minority based on flimsy facts," she said. "I'm having a hard time figuring out why we're being targeted."
Referring to King's public record of support for the Irish Republican Army during the 1980's, she said: "He doesn't seem to have a problem with Christian Irish terrorism."
To see more of The Press Democrat, or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.pressdemocrat.com. Copyright (c) 2011, The Press Democrat, Santa Rosa, Calif. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For more information about the content services offered by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services (MCT), visit            www.mctinfoservices.com.

Load-Date: March 10, 2011


End of Document