Sorrow from tragedy spreads around the globe
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 28, 1996, Sunday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 318 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


The pipe bomb exploded on U.S. soil but was felt in each of the 197 countries with athletes in Atlanta for the 1996 Olympic Games.
World leaders, horrified and angry, called for tough, united action against terrorism after the blast early Saturday during a rock concert at Olympic Park, killing one person and injuring more than 100.
An Associated Press report
"This repugnant violation of the spirit of the Olympic Games must be denounced around the world," United Nations Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said.
Israel, the target of an attack that left 18 people dead at the Munich Games of 1972, when Palestinians seized Israeli athletes, sent its condolences to Americans.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said "terrorism has no borders and must be fought without compromise."
The Palestinian Authority sent "condolences to the families of the victims and to the American government."
Europeans awoke to live reports from Atlanta as the bomb went off and watched replays all day. German TV showed American swimmer Janet Evans as the bomb exploded in the background, her carefree expression turning fearful.
Pope John Paul II spoke of an "act of senseless violence" and expressed his "deep sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims."
British Prime Minister John Major said the British people "will share the anger of the American people at this dreadful desecration of the Olympic spirit, but they will also share their determination not to be deterred by this evil act."
Italian Deputy Premier Walter Veltroni praised the International Olympic Committee's decision to continue the Games, telling RAI state TV that "to interrupt the Games would be, in some way, an act of surrender to terrorism."
French President Jacques Chirac is hosting an anti-terrorism conference of the Group of Seven industrialized countries and Russia this week, bringing together top diplomatic and security officials.

Notes

TERROR STRIKES OLYMPICS

Load-Date: July 30, 1996


End of Document