SOUTH AFRICA RECASTING ITS SECURITY LAWS
The New York Times
May 15, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 948 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: CAPE TOWN, May 14
Body


While South Africa's attention was focused this week on proposals for constitutional revisions that would give some nonwhites a role in the central Government, the ruling National Party was busy pushing a new version of its body of security laws through the all-white Parliament.
The new acts, which will add to the many restrictions already placed on political demonstrations as well as on the reporting of what are deemed to be matters of internal security, were presented as a refinement of the existing security laws. The authorities thus retain their full arsenal of arbitrary powers to ban organizations and publications; to silence individuals and bar them from political activities, or to detain them indefinitely without any charge or recourse to lawyers or the courts.
The Government of Prime Minister P.W. Botha draws a connection between the proposed political changes and the maintenance of such controls. ''In times of reform, the conflict potential is normally higher than in other times,'' the Minister of Internal Affairs, Jan Christian Heunis, told foreign journalists. ''Because we are a society in transition, it is unavoidable that tensions will rise.''
CAPE TOWN, May 14 - While South Africa's attention was focused this week on proposals for constitutional revisions that would give some nonwhites a role in the central Government, the ruling National Party was busy pushing a new version of its body of security laws through the all-white Parliament.Internal Security Bill
Evidence that the proposed constitutional changes will not mean greater tolerance of opposition could be found in the fine print of an omnibus act called the Internal Security Bill, which was presented to Parliament today by the Minister of Law and Order, Louis Le Grange, as a ''new deal.'' The bill repeals 28 earlier security laws, such as the Suppression of Communism Amendment Act and the Terrorism Act, and then re-enacts their main provisions.
Helen Suzman of the opposition Progressive Federal Party, who has led the fight against every new piece of security legislation in the last two decades, opened the debate by denouncing the new bill as ''a totally repulsive measure'' that ''perpetuates an undeclared state of emergency in South Africa.''
The bill enacts recommendations presented by a judicial commission, known as the Rabie Commission, that was given a mandate to examine the security laws in the light of legal principles and the needs of the country. Critics acknowledge that it contains certain minor improvements on the laws it replaces in terms of language that is slightly less vague and procedures for administrative review. But none of this, they contend, will make the police any more accountable for the psychological and physical pressures to which political detainees are subjected during long interrogation sessions.
 
The Commission's Proposals
The commission, which was headed by Justice P.J. Rabie, who has since been made Chief Justice of the highest court, made no attempt to examine the methods of interrogation used by the security police or to say what methods were acceptable. It was also silent on the use of solitary confinement.
But it proposed that the Minister of Law and Order be required to authorize any detention that lasts longer than a month and that after six months the police be required to tell a board of review why the prisoner cannot be released. The review board would consider the case in secret, and the detainee would not be entitled to a lawyer or to know what the police said.
The Internal Security Bill incorporates these proposals. Mrs.  Suzman noted, however, that the review board cannot order the release of the detainee. It can only make a recommendation to the Minister, but the bill provides that ''the Minister need not give effect to any recommendation made to him by a board of review.'' If the Minister turns down a recommendation for easing or ending the detention, the case goes automatically to the Chief Justice for review under the bill's provisions.
But the only grounds for overruling the Minister made available to the Chief Justice are to find that he has acted in bad faith or exceeded his powers. The bill also provides for regular visits to detainees by inspectors, magistrates and doctors, but these take place now under existing regulations. Detainees seldom complain, Mrs. Suzman declared, because ''they remain in the hands of those they complain about.''
Three other bills now before Parliament also emboody proposals of the Rabie Commission. The Demonstrations In or Near Court Buildings Prohibition Bill does just what its title says. Usually when members of banned movements of resistance to white rule such as the African National Congress go on trial, sympathizers turn up to chant slogans and sing the movement's songs; to do so from now on will be to court arrest.
The Intimidation Bill seems to have been designed for use against those who promote labor or student strikes. Under this bill, a mere threat of assault designed to make someone ''assume or abandon a particular standpoint'' can be punishable by jail terms of up to 10 years.
Finally, a Protection of Information Bill provides jail sentences of up to 10 years for the unauthorized disclosure of information relating to ''a security matter or the prevention of combating of terrorism.''
But there were two hints of increased flexibility, if not leniency. The Internal Security Bill eliminates the practice of setting mandatory minimum sentences on security charges, and this week the Minister of Justice, Kobie Coetsee, announced that the Government was now for the first time prepared to consider parole for prisoners convicted on such charges.


End of Document