SOUTH AFRICAN INQUEST HALTED BY DISPUTE
The New York Times
April 14, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 778 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, April 13
Body


An inquest into the death of a white trade unionist in the custody of the security police was halted today on its first day by objections from a lawyer for the police to the presentation in open court of an affidavit the dead man signed on the last day of his life.
Dr. Neil Aggett, a young physician who worked for a predominantly black trade union, was said by the police to have committed suicide by hanging in the early hours of Feb. 5. About 14 hours earlier, the magistrate conducting the inquest was told, he signed a statement in which he declared that he had been assaulted by the security police and subjected to electric shocks during interrogation sessions.
Pieter J. Schabort, a lawyer retained by the police to protect their interests in the course of the Aggett inquest, argued tenaciously for an hour and a half today that the dead man's affidavit was inadmissible because the question of whether he was assaulted before his death had little or no bearing on the central question of how he died.
An inquest into the death of a white trade unionist in the custody of the security police was halted today on its first day by objections from a lawyer for the police to the presentation in open court of an affidavit the dead man signed on the last day of his life.
The dead man was likened by the lawyer to an ''interested'' party in an automobile accident whose affidavit would not be admissible in a civil proceeding unless he was available to give evidence. The police interrogators named in Dr. Aggett's statement have now given affidavits of their own, Mr. Schabort said, denying the charges.
 
'Grossly Unjust' to Policemen
It would be ''grossly unjust'' to these officers, he contended, to allow those charges to be aired at the inquest since the prisoner's death had deprived the police representative of ''the opportunity of cross-examining the witness.''
That argument was received with incredulity by a lawyer representing Dr. Aggett's family, George Bizos, who said the family did not accept the police version of his death. Even if it could be shown that he had hanged himself, Mr. Bizos said, his affidavit could support a finding that his suicide had been ''induced,'' which is a crime under South African law.
After hearing the arguments, Magistrate Pieter Kotze ruled that he would allow Mr. Bizos to make use of the Agett affidavit in questioning the medical officer who performed the autopsy on the dead man. Mr. Bizos had said that he wanted to see whether the bruises and abrasions that had been discovered on the body were consistent with the assaults Dr. Aggett had described.
Mr. Schabort, the lawyer for the police, then asked for a recess and subsequently announced his intention to appeal the magistrate's ruling in a further effort to suppress the dead man's affidavit.  This move forced an adjournemnt of the inquest.
 
Held Without Charge
The argument in the small, crowded magistrate's court seemed as classic illustration of the odd interplay between arbitrary power and the rule of law in the South African system.
Dr. Aggett was held without charge under the Terrorism Act, which denies a prisoner access to a lawyer, his family or the courts for an indefinite period. Yet he was permitted to give an affidavit charging that he had been assaulted while in custody, and that affidavit was made available by the authorities to the lawyer representing his family.
As a result, his interrogators, who were beyond the reach of law when he was alive, were now being challenged in court on their version of his death.
 
Banning Order Served
Arbitrary power was able to make itself felt just outside the courtroom this morning when a recently released Terrorism Act detainee named Michael Smithers was served with what is known as a banning order during a tea break, hardly an hour after Mr. Bizos had given the court copies of an affidavit by him.
The contents of the affidavit were not divulged but Helen Suzman, an opposition Member of Parliament who was present at the inquest, said she understood that mr. Smithers was the author of a note smuggled out of jail shortly after Dr. Aggett died that she then read to Parliament.
The note described an interrogation session in which Dr. Aggett had been stripped naked, forced to run in place and then beaten with a rolled newspaper. The banning order made it crime for Mr. Smithers to attend meetings or be quoted in print. But it could not stop him from being called as a witness in the inquest.
More than 40 persons have died over the past two decades while being detained without charge by the security police. Dr. Aggett, who was 27 years old, was the first white ever to die in these circumstances.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: Photo of the coffin of Dr. Neil Aggett


End of Document