South Garo Hills Police Apprehended Senior GNLA Cadre
The Sentinel
October 15, 2019 Tuesday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 307 words
Byline: A Correspondent
Body


SHILLONG: The South Garo Hills police on Sunday apprehended a senior cadre of the Garo National Liberation Army (GNLA).

According to South Garo Hills district Superintendent of Police (SP), Abraham T Sangma, they had received inputs that some GNLA cadres along with militant groups like ULFA and Bangladeshi criminals are trying to regroup and revive militancy in Garo Hills under the leader of the apprehended cadre Nikrak M Sangma alias Kaltush.

Nikrak has been hiding in Bangladesh for several years and has been evading the law enforcement agencies.

He was apprehended on the afternoon of October 13 by a specially constituted police team from the Rongara area.

"He had crossed over to India from Bangladesh and was returning back when he was intercepted by the South Garo Hills police team en-route to Bangladesh," the South Garo Hills police chief said.

Sangma said that he was moving around in the guise of a local villager when he was identified and arrested very close to the Indo-Bangladesh border.

Nikrak joined the GNLA in 2011 and he belonged to the third batch of GNLA and crossed over to Bangladesh in the year 2015.

"Since then he was operating from Bangladesh and was supplying materials like uniform, weapons and ammunition to GNLA, prior to the death of Sohan D Shira, the commander-in-chief of the GNLA in February 2018," the SP said.

Sangma also said that while after the death of Sohan, most of the GNLA cadres surrendered before the police, Nikrak continued to stay in Bangladesh and indulged in anti-national activities by supporting other militant groups and Bangladeshi criminals in activities like extortion, criminal intimidation and organizing kidnapping of Indian nationals for ransom.

"The accused is wanted in several terrorism-related cases in different districts of Garo Hills, including South Garo Hills," the SP said.

Load-Date: October 16, 2019


End of Document