SOUTH AFRICA BOMBS DON'T DETER VOTERS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 28, 1994, Thursday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 327 words
Byline: Dan Radmacher
Body


THE LAST THREE days in
South Africa have been a miracle. Millions of people risked their
lives to vote, most for the first time.
Desperate and cowardly racists tried to intimidate voters with
bombs. In the two days before voting began Tuesday, 21 people were
killed and more than 150 injured in attacks in areas populated by
blacks. On the first day of voting, a bomb went off at
Johannesburg's international airport.
This is a pitiful attempt by a handful of white extremists to
hold on to the corrupt and anachronistic system of apartheid wherein
5 million whites controlled all the power in a nation with 30 million
blacks.
It failed.  Today marks the final day of voting.  Nelson Mandela
is expected to become president when his African National Congress
wins a majority of the votes.
Mandela called on Tuesday for all South Africans to resist the
terrorism.  "Today marks the dawn of our freedom.  Standing
together, let us send a message loud and clear: we will not let a
handful of killers steal our democracy."
And, indeed, South Africa did not let terrorism diminish this
historic event.  Millions of voters lined up to vote, braving
lunatics and fanatics.  Some voters left hospital beds to reach the
polls.  Others came in wheelchairs.  Whites and blacks stood together
in many polling places waiting for their turn to decide the fate of a
nation.
It was a proud moment that the fanatics could not overshadow.
Blacks and whites together are working to build a new nation.  It is
sad that some extremists of both races have resorted to violence in a
futile attempt to halt the process.
South Africa faces a difficult future.  The remnants of
apartheid will not be easily overcome.  Thirty million blacks who
have been denied basic human rights and economic opportunity will
have to adjust to their new positions of power.  We hope they can do
this while still respecting the rights of the minority.
The United States should do everything it can to nurture and
support this emerging democracy.

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document