Southeast bomb 'like terrorism'; 
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
August 12, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 Lincoln Journal Star All Rights Reserved
Section: NEBRASKA; Pg. B2
Length: 313 words
Byline: MARGARET REIST Lincoln Journal Star
Body


A weekend explosion at the newly renovated Southeast High School went way beyond vandalism, as far as Principal Pat Hunter-Pirtle is concerned.
"It's like terrorism," he said. "It was a bomb."
Police are trying to find whoever tied 20 camping-style propane tanks together, doused them in gasoline and set them on fire. They also used aerosol cans, according to the fire inspector.
Just one propane tank exploded into a fireball at the south end of the building at about 1:15 a.m. Friday, causing $10,000 to $12,000 damage.
Imagine, Hunter-Pirtle said, what would have happened if all 20 had exploded.
"There were two custodians in the building," he said. "I worry they could have been killed."
The custodians were in another part of the building and didn't hear the blast, but they smelled the smoke.
The tanks were outside, in a doorway that couldn't be seen from the street. It was among the areas recently finished as part of a $26 million renovation.
Southeast was the first of four high schools renovated as part of a $250 million bond issue passed by voters in 2006. Work on the other three is continuing.
The doorway and windows at Southeast will have to be replaced. Some floors and classrooms have water damage. Those will be ready to go by the time school starts, though Hunter-Pirtle doubts the door will be replaced by then.
Investigators don't have any suspects and have no reason to think the explosion was the work of whoever threw five Molotov cocktails at vehicles and houses during May, Assistant Police Chief Jim Peschong said.
Hunter-Pirtle said he didn't think the vandal was someone out simply to create mischief.
"I could be wrong, but I don't think this is just a prank by a kid," he said. 
Reach Margaret Reist at 473-7226 or mreist@journalstar.com
GET INVOLVED
Anyone with information about the Southeast High School explosion should call Crime Stoppers at (402) 475-3600.

Load-Date: August 13, 2009


End of Document