Southeast Asians Consider Pact Against Terrorism
The New York Times
January 12, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 426 words
Byline: By CARLOS H. CONDE
Dateline: CEBU, the Philippines, Jan. 11 
Body


Ten Southeast Asian countries meeting here are hammering out a regional antiterrorism agreement, officials said Thursday, the day after a series of terrorist bombings in the southern Philippines underscored the need for such a measure.
  ''The terrorists merely accomplished the opposite of what they wanted,'' said Victoriano Lecaros, a Philippine government spokesman. ''The attacks only emphasized the need to address terrorism in Southeast Asia. There is now a renewed urgency to deal with terrorism.''
Leaders of the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, will consider the measure, the Asean Convention on Counterterrorism, at their annual summit meeting here on Saturday. The agreement aims to improve information and intelligence sharing among the group's members and encourage them to adopt domestic antiterrorism laws, officials said.
  ''Global terrorism has assumed new forms of virulence, and we will make sure that the community is more secure and resistant to the threat of terror,'' said Alberto Romulo, the Philippine foreign minister.
  Bombs ripped through three southern cities here on Wednesday night, killing eight people and wounding dozens, the police said. No group claimed responsibility, but two radical Islamist groups, Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah Islamiyah, are suspected, an official said, because they were behind similar bombings in the past.
  Foreign ministers meeting here before the summit meeting discussed the convention on Wednesday night. Opponents of the antiterrorism agreement fear that it could be used to suppress human rights.
  One result of the discussions was that Indonesia invited several countries, including the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Australia, to meet in March to discuss terrorism.
  The attacks Wednesday in the southern region of Mindanao, where there is an active Islamist separatist movement, followed claims by President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo in recent weeks that her government had made progress fighting terrorists.
  ''They were trying to send a message,'' said Oscar Calderon, the chief of the national police, referring to the attackers. ''They wanted to embarrass the government because of the meetings in Cebu.''
  The Philippine police and military have been receiving help from the United States and Australia in fighting Abu Sayyaf, which has been giving refuge to Jemaah Islamiyah members. Jemaah Islamiyah is a Southeast Asian terrorism network that originated in Indonesia and was said to be behind the 2002 Bali bombings that killed more than 200 people.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 12, 2007


End of Document