South American Area Is Cited As Haven of Terrorist Training 
 The New York Times
October 10, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 28
Length: 754 words
Byline:  By TIMOTHY L. O'BRIEN 
Body


The Bush administration's point man on terrorist financing said on Thursday that the training and financing of terrorists remained a problem in the region of South America where the borders of Paraguay, Brazil and Argentina intersect.
     The official, David Aufhauser, the Treasury Department's departing general counsel, said in a telephone interview that despite two years of efforts by Western intelligence and law enforcement agencies to dislodge terrorist cells there, the border region was home to a "rich marriage of drugs and terror." 
 Mr. Aufhauser added that he expected antiterrorist operations in the area to begin to bear fruit soon. Other Western officials have said that the region, a nexus of drug and arms trafficking, money laundering, counterfeiting and smuggling centered around the Paraguayan city of Ciudad del Este, has been a primary source of support for Hezbollah, Hamas and other Muslim extremist groups.
Mr. Aufhauser, who plans to leave office next week having overseenefforts to combat terrorist financing since the Sept. 11 attacks, said that "Pakistan continues to be a place of great mystery and a source of substantial funding" of terrorism. He also cited Southeast Asia, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Saudi Arabia as principal conduits for terrorist money.
Mr. Aufhauser's departure follows other recent announcements of resignations by senior members of the federal antiterrorism effort, including the head of the F.B.I.'s counterterrorism office. Those officials have worked long, stressful hours and confronted the remaking of agencies that had been ill-prepared for such work before the attacks two years ago.
Mr. Aufhauser is praised by his counterparts at other law enforcement and intelligence agencies as being even-handed, dedicated and nonpartisan, and he is credited with dismantling many bureaucratic barriers and rivalries that previously prevented agencies like the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency and the Treasury Department from working together effectively.
Mr. Aufhauser said that White House had made combatting terrorist financing a priority and had forced federal agencies to cooperate more readily to move that effort forward. Indeed, many of his responsibilities as the coordinator of terrorism financing issues have been assumed by Frances F. Townsend, the deputy national security adviser for combating terrorism. Ms. Townsend reports to Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, giving terrorism financing issues firm footing within the White House itself.
Critics of terrorist financing initiatives have said that the effort has lacked a single, clear advocate in the White House, someone who both has the president's ear and is known to foreign diplomats and law enforcement officials as their primary contact within the federal bureaucracy.
Mr. Aufhauser, 54, said that cutting off money remained one of the best defenses against terrorism because that prevented militants from planning and organizing effectively.
"It has the most profound leveraging, exponential effect of any resource we devote to defending the nation," he said.
But he also noted that the chief cure for terrorism was economic aid to impoverished nations or populations because it "addresses hopelessness."
"No father kills who thinks his children have a future," Mr. Aufhauser said.
The roots of terrorism in the Muslim world have also been entwined with the politics of oil, religious differences and other longstanding grievances with the West, many of which have taken hold most strongly in Saudi Arabia, a frequent target of Mr. Aufhauser's criticism during his tenure as general counsel. Mr. Aufhauser, one of the White House's main liaisons with Saudi Arabia, has described that country as the "epicenter" of terrorist financing.
Noting that Saudi Arabia has made great strides in countering terrorism at home, Mr. Aufhauser cited examples yesterday of what he believes to be continuing problems within the country, particularly the use of major Saudi charities as funnels for terrorist money. He conceded that Saudi authorities had begun a criminal investigation of the Al Haramain Charitable Foundation, but he said the inquiry was centered on the misappropriation of money by Al Haramain's directors and not on the sponsorship of terrorism -- despite evidence that Al Haramain is a terrorist financier.
"Why is it limited to the graft?" Mr. Aufhauser asked. "Why isn't the funding of terrorism a priority for a criminal investigatory matter?" 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 10, 2003


End of Document