South Africa Sentences 4 Dissidents
The New York Times
December 9, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 540 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, Dec. 8
Body


A Pretoria judge today sentenced four South African blacks prominent in the domestic campaign against apartheid to prison terms ranging from 6 to 12 years for treason, formally ending one of the longest political trials in South Africa's history.
Another defendant, convicted of the lesser charge of terrorism, was sent to prison for five years. But the judge, Kees van Dijkhorst, suspended five-year prison sentences for six co-defendants on condition that they not take part in further political activities or talk to the press.
The treason and terrorism charges on which the defendents were convicted had their roots in violence that broke out in 1984 after South African blacks protested their exclusion from a new Constitution drafted by the white minority that granted limited political participation to Asians and those of mixed race but not to the country's black majority.
A series of demonstrations in four black townships in the southern Transvaal in September 1984 spun out of control, causing rioting and deaths.
 
Convicted Nov. 18
The 11 defendants were convicted on Nov. 18 by Justice van Dijkhorst after he accepted the Government's contention that demonstrations and speeches could entail treasonable activity. Eight other defendants were acquitted by the justice, as were three defendants earlier in the three-year trial.
Almost all the men had been active in the United Democratic Front, an umbrella organization of anti-apartheid groups that has since been severely restricted under South Africa's current state of emergency decree. The length of the trial has effectively immobilized the leadership of the front.
The judge ruled that the front had acted as the internal wing of the outlawed African National Congress, another major anti-apartheid organization that was banned in 1960. Defense witnesses had testified that the United Democrataic Front arose independently and was not a front for the African National Congress.
The crimes of treason and terrorism carry a maximum penalty of death. Justice van Dijkhorst said he was imposing lighter sentences because some of the men had already served time in jail and because he wanted to heal the wounds created by the violent incidents for which the men were blamed in 1984.
 
Tutu Criticizes Sentences
But the sentences did not satisfy the defendants' supporters, who have said the men were being railroaded into prison because of their political convictions and leadership abilities. None of the defendants was directly linked by the prosecution to a specific incident of treason or terrorism.
Government opponents expressed concern that the judicial precedent of the broadest interpetation of treason could be used against them too.
''If what these guys have done is treason, then we are guilty of treason,'' said the Angican Archbishop, Desmond M. Tutu, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate. ''I am not going to hold back in what I intend doing.''
The longest sentence, 12 years, was given to Mosiuoa Patrick Lekota, the publicity chairman of the United Democratic Front. Popo Malefe, the front's general secretary, and Mabolele Moses Chikane, its regional secretary in the Transvaal, received 10 years each. The three men have already spent more than three years in jail without bail.

Graphic

 
Photo of Masechaba Lekota being comforted by friends (Agence France-Presse)


End of Document