SOUTH AFRICA CURBS THE PRESS OVER DETAINEES
The New York Times
June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 597 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG, June 26
Body


The police made public the names today of three journalists detained for interrogation under the security laws. The action came after newspapers had been prevented for two days from identifying the imprisoned men.
It was believed to be the first time the authorities had tried to use a broad power to prohibit the identification of detained people on the ground that it would interfere with efforts to ''combat terroristic activities.'' An amendment to the Police Act two years ago gave the police the authority, already held by the armed forces, to forbid the publication of news on that basis.
JOHANNESBURG, June 26 - The police made public the names today of three journalists detained for interrogation under the security laws.
Parliament has just approved another bill, called the Protection of Information Act, that goes even further. This week it took an order from the police to silence newspapers that wanted to report the names of the arrested journalists. But after the new act is signed into law by the state president, the onus will apparently be on newspapers to seek permission to report on detentions.
The bill provides jail sentences of up to 10 years for the unauthorized disclosure of information relating to ''a security matter or the prevention or combating of terrorism.''
A person arrested without charge for interrogation in a security matter already has no recourse to a lawyer, the courts or relatives.  Indefinite detention is possible under the provisions of the old Terrorism Act, which have been retained in a newly enacted omnibus statute called the Internal Security Act. Thus the ability of newspapers to report arrests has been virtually the only assurance an arrested person has had that the security police might eventually have to account for the way in which they used their arbitrary power to detain him.
This limited safeguard has often been ineffectual, for it depends on the ability of the newspapers to find out about arrests under the security laws. The police are under no obligation to disclose such arrests.
It was widely feared by South African journalists that the prohibition on publication this week was a kind of trial run for what may now become a routine practice. The action of the police seemed designed to call attention to their new powers and the obligations journalists now have, for the names of the three detained journalists had already been broadcast by at least one radio station and carried by the South African Press Association, the national news agency, when instructions were first given to The Natal Mercury forbidding it to print the names.
The South African Society of Journalists said the use of the Police Act power meant that people could now disappear without trace. The detainees' parents support committee, a group that has been trying to arouse concern on the issue of detention, saw the prohibition on publication as a response to recent charges of torture and maltreatment. ''The state, instead of taking steps to prevent abuse,'' it said, ''seeks to extend further its veil of secrecy.''
The arrested journalists named by the police today were Joe Thloloe, a former reporter on The Sowetan who was barred last year from writing for newspapers, or even entering the premises of a newspaper, under what is known as a banning order; Quariash Patel, a reporter on The Natal Daily News; and Vas Soni, a copy editor on a Durban paper called The Post.
Mr. Thloloe was vice president of a black journalists union, the Media Workers Association of South Africa, when he and most of its other officers were banned last year.


End of Document