Southern Illinois U. members sponsor memorial for Spanish attacks
University Wire
March 22, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Daily Egyptian via U-Wire
Length: 406 words
Byline: By Rachel Lindsay, Daily Egyptian; SOURCE: Southern Illinois U.
Dateline: CARBONDALE, Ill. 
Body


Lawson Residence Hall at Southern Illinois University filled with the sound of 40 people clapping their respect and farewell to the nearly 200 victims and more than 1,750 wounded of the terrorist attack in Madrid, Spain, earlier this month.
The applause, a Spanish tradition led by Lourdes Albuixech, SIUC foreign language professor and Madrid native, followed the more familiar moment of silence and almost 45 minutes of discussion on terrorist motives and European perspectives of the United States.
Colin Robinson, an alumnus whose wife is from Madrid, tried to bring the tragedy into perspective. He pointed out that of the 290 people the auditorium could hold, two-thirds of those would have been killed by the attacks.
He said not only were adults the victims of the crime, but university scholars, grade school and high school students, children and even an unborn baby also died in the attack.
William Turley, a political science professor, said the United States should show solidarity for the Spanish people. He also explained why he thought the Spanish slogan "Your war, our people" was a divisive way of thinking.
Turley said while the Spanish blame the U.S. war on terrorism for the attacks, this was not the case. He said terrorism happens because sometimes it works.
"Islamic terrorists do not strike only against the friends and allies of the United States or even against the West," he said. "Turkey, Morocco, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia are Muslim victims of terrorists."
Ted Weeks, a history professor, agreed that the United States should show its support and solidarity against terror, just as the world did after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. He said the attacks on Spain should be important to the world because terrorism does happen worldwide.
"Often the world seems very far from us here," he said. "And so I would just like to give a few reasons why the attacks a couple of weeks ago should matter."
Weeks said the world is a small place and terrorism is indiscriminant. He said the United States had a responsibility to work with the international community to condemn the causes of terrorism. He also said it should do so as an equal instead of a big brother.
"We should work together to root out intolerance and fanaticism in our society and in our own hearts," Weeks said in conclusion.
A question-and-answer session ensued after the speeches, followed by a moment of silence for the victims.
(C) 2003 Daily Egyptian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 22, 2004


End of Document