SOVIET DEFENSE MINISTER SAYS WEST IS TRYING TO REOPEN THE COLD WAR
The New York Times
February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 591 words
Byline: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MOSCOW, Feb. 21
Body


Marshal Dmitri F. Ustinov, the Soviet Defense Minister, accused the West today of conducting an offensive against detente and trying to reopen the cold war.
The charges, published in the Communist Party newspaper Pravda two days before the opening of the party's 26th congress, were part of a press campaign that has been building up for the last month.
The campaign is believed designed to lay the groundwork for the congress and for its keynote speech, to be given by Leonid I.  Brezhnev, the party leader, at the first session on Monday. He is expected to call for renewed sacrifices in the face of what is seen here as Western hostility.
Soviet defense minister says West is trying to reopen the cold war
Marshal Ustinov, a defense industry administrator who was given military rank when he became Defense Minister in 1976, is a member of the ruling 14-man Politburo. His article, which occupied more than half of page 2 in this morning's Pravda, can be taken as a definitive statement of party attitudes.
He said that the Soviet armed forces had to perfect their combat readiness to defeat ''attempts of imperialist reaction to aggravate the international situation again, to plunge international relations back into the times of the cold war.''
''The imperialists,'' he said, ''are working out various aggressive military and political doctrines, directed against the countries of the socialist community, and are continuing intensive material preparations for a new world war.''
Marshal Ustinov, who is 74 years old, accused the West, and particularly the United States, of carrying out subversive activities in Poland to destabilize the country, discredit the Communist system and weaken the Warsaw Pact.
He said American charges that Moscow sponsored world terrorism were an ''evil-minded deception'' designed ''to smear national liberation movements with which the Soviet Union and other countries express their solidarity.''
''Terrorism,'' he said, ''is the weapon of extremism and neofascism, one of the darkest symptoms of the moral and political crisis of capitalist society, the incarnation of lawlessness, while the national liberation struggle has a progressive character, and its legality has long been recognized by the international community and confirmed by resolutions of the United Nations.''
He denied that the Soviet Union was increasing its nuclear strength. That idea, he said, is the ''creation of imperialist circles'' seeking ''to cover up the predatory, aggressive actions of the capitalist armies in order to substantiate the 'need' of escalating the arms race and of an unrestrained buildup of nuclear arsenals.''
''They are doing their utmost to whip up an atmosphere of mistrust and fear, of hostility among peoples,'' he said.  In another development, the Government press agency Tass accused two American military attaches of drunkenness and sexual misconduct during a visit to the Ukrainian town of Rovno, near the Polish border, in mid-January.
One of the officers, Maj. James R. Holbrook, was suddenly and without explanation transferred to Washington last month. The other, Lieut. Col. Thomas A. Spencer, is still assigned to the embassy.
According to Western sources, the incident involved an attempt to entrap Major Holbrook, possibly with the use of drugs. The sources said that he had been placed in a sexually compromising situation by agents of the security police, who then attempted to recruit him as a spy. The attempt failed and Major Holbrook reported the incident to his superiors here, the sources asserted.


End of Document