SOVIET PROPOSES ANTITERROR EFFORT TO WEST
The New York Times
April 1, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 664 words
Byline: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, March 31
Body


The Soviet Union has asked several Western governments to cooperate with it in fighting international terrorism and has suggested that they negotiate extradition treaties providing for the return of terrorist suspects, according to French and other diplomats.
Over the last few weeks, these sources say, the Soviet Union has made such proposals to France, Britain, West Germany and most other major Western countries. The United States reportedly has not been approached directly but has been told about the Soviet moves both by the Soviet authorities and by Western allies.
On each occasion Soviet officials have stressed that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Government is strongly opposed to terrorism in all its forms and to any government that supports it.
On several occasions, the Soviet officials have suggested negotiating extradition treaties that would oblige a country to return citizens of the other country wanted for terrorist offenses, although what the Soviet Government perceives as terrorism may not jibe with the views of other nations.
Western diplomats point out, for example, that the Kremlin officially regards the anti-Soviet Afghan guerrillas as terrorists.
 
Cautious Western Response
The diplomats say this is the first time the Soviet Union has begun what appears to be a concerted diplomatic campaign to convince Western governments that it disapproves of terrorism and is ready to cooperate with them in combating it.
Western governments have responded cautiously to the Soviet overtures so far, officials here report, saying they want concrete evidence that Moscow has changed its attitude toward terrorist movements. The United States has frequently accused the Soviet Union and its close allies of assisting terrorist groups in the past.
Western diplomats also fear that the Soviet authorities might try to use extradition treaties with the West to seek the return of dissidents who have gone to the West and other opponents of the Soviet Government.
As a result, several Western governments have told the Soviet Union to demonstrate its sincerity by using its influence with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, to curb his country's reported support for terrorists.
 
A French Request
France has also asked the Russians to use their influence with Syria to bring about the release of French hostages believed held by Moslem militants in Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon.
So far, Western officials say they have had no positive response from the Soviet Union on either Libya or Syria.
Soviet citizens abroad have not been immune to terrorism either. Four Soviet diplomats were abducted in Lebanon in October 1985. One was killed and the others were eventually freed.
The Soviet campaign has not been confined to Western governments. At a private meeting in Rome on March 11 and 12, Vladimir P. Suslov, head of the Second European Department of the Soviet Foreign Ministry, told a group of former ministers of both industrial and developing countries that the Soviet Union is firmly opposed to terrorism and to those who support terrorism, according to participants.
Mr. Suslov spoke at a meeting of the policy board of the Inter-Action Council, a body of retired senior officials led by former Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West Germany. The group meets regularly to review international affairs and make recommendations to world leaders.
 
Soviet Motives Are Considered
The policy board was preparing for the next meeting of the council, to be held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in late April, when the 30 members of the council will be discussing international terrorism.
Western analysts are divided over why the Soviet Union has decided to undertake the diplomatic campaign on terrorism.
Some argue that it is part of a wider campaign by Soviet leaders to improve the Soviet Union's image in the world by seeking to present themselves as being open, reasonable and peace-loving.
Others say they suspect the Soviet authorities are also worried by internal terrorism and dissent.


End of Document