Soviets Agree to Discuss Terrorism, Drugs and Environmental Issues
The New York Times
April 7, 1989, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 647 words
Byline: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 6
Body


The Soviet Union has agreed to meet with the United States to discuss cooperation between the two Governments on the issues of terrorism, narcotics trafficking and protection of the environment, Administration officials said today.
The officials said Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d made the proposals on cooperation in these areas to Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, at a meeting in Vienna last month.
''The Secretary popped the question on Shevardnadze and he said, 'Fine, let's do it,' '' an Administration official said. The meeting has not yet been scheduled.
At his confirmation hearings, Mr. Baker said he hoped to develop a closer relationship with the Kremlin on what he termed ''transnational'' issues.
The Soviet role in international terrorism has been the subject of intense debate among American intelligence analysts over the last decade. Under William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence for most of the Reagan years, the Central Intelligence Agency concluded that Moscow did have a hand in training terrorists.
Some C.I.A. analysts, as well as officials at other intelligence agencies, were less certain about whether the Soviet authorities had any direct ties to terrorist group. There was, however, a consensus among analysts that Moscow has provided support to most of the countries identified by the United States as state sponsors of terrorism.
 
The Indirect Link
Herbert Meyer, the vice chairman of the agency's National Intelligence Council from 1982 to 1985, said he found the evidence of Soviet involvement in terrorism compelling.
''There is no question that in the past, the Soviet Union has been a key player in state-sponsored terrorism,'' Mr. Meyer said. ''They have provided support through training facilities and other means. If the Soviet Union still supports those states which engage in terrorism - Iran, Libya, Syria, Yemen, North Korea - then the idea of cooperation is insane.''
''On the other hand, if the Soviet Union has withdrawn all support to state-sponsored terrorism, including the shutting down of all training camps in Eastern Europe and elsewhere, that is an enormously important news story that I have not yet read.''
An Administration official said, however, that he has found the evidence of a direct Soviet link to terrorism less persuasive, although he said that many of the ''national liberation'' movements backed by the Soviet Union in past years have engaged in violent acts. ''In that sense,'' he said, ''they certainly have blood on their hands.''
William H. Webster, the current Director of Central Intelligence, alluded to the Soviet Union's new willingness to cooperate with the United States on counterterrorism today at a breakfast meeting with reporters.
 
'Less Confrontational'
Asked to assess the latest activities of the K.G.B., Mr. Webster said that the pace of espionage had increased under Mr. Gorbachev, but that the agency's style was ''less confrontational.''
''We find them everywhere,'' Mr. Webster said. ''There's been no pulling back on intelligence collection in this country and other parts of the world.'' He said efforts to steal Western technology continue to be intense.
But Mr. Webster said the K.G.B. had made some gestures in line with the new Soviet approach to foreign affairs, like the recent meeting between Vladimir A. Kryuchkov, the head of the K.G.B., and Jack F. Matlock Jr., the American Ambassador in Moscow.
Yuri V. Dubinin, the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, has not yet asked for a similar meeting, Mr. Webster said.
The director appeared to take a skeptical view of any meeting between his agency and the K.G.B. on the subject of terrorism.
He said: ''They're sort of testing the waters. There's some suggestion that perhaps we might do something together about terrorism, and that raises another issue about our relations with their intelligence agency.''

Graphic

 
Photo of William H. Webster, Director of Central Intelligence (NYT)


End of Document