SOVIET CALLS HAIG SPEECH 'WARLIKE'
The New York Times
April 27, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 493 words
Byline: By ANTHONY AUSTIN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MOSCOW, April 26
Body


The official Soviet press agency, Tass, accused Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. today of showing what it characterized as excessive belligerence unsuited to his job as America's top diplomat.
Tass said Mr. Haig made ''warlike calls'' in his speech in Washington last Friday to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, in which he said that ''the greatest danger to the world'' today stemmed from Soviet promotion of violence as the instrument of change.
The Soviet press agency contended that, on the contrary, it is Washington's ''hegemonic, militaristic policy'' that is fanning tensions in various parts of the world.
Soviet press agency Tass accuses US defense secretary Alexander Haig of making 'warlike calls' in speech to US press
On the subject of Poland, Tass accused Mr. Haig of having taken an ''instigatory line'' in his speech. Without saying which of his remarks it objected to, the agency said he took ''the line of crude interference in the internal affairs of Poland, of opposing measures for normalizing the situation in that country that are being taken by its legitimate Government.''
 
'A Spirit of Confrontation'
Mr. Haig, in his speech, said recent Soviet restraint on Poland was probably a reaction to the stand taken by the Western alliance, and he warned again that Soviet intervention would bring ''severe and lasting consequences.''
The main point of the Soviet commentary, however, was a reproach of Mr. Haig for his continuing in ''a spirit of confrontation with the Soviet Union.''
Reflecting the evidence of recent months that, despite President Reagan's tough attitude toward Moscow, the Soviet leaders hope to work out businesslike arrangements with his Administration, Tass said:
''The question arises: Are there not signs of a dangerous inertia in these statements by Haig, who only recently parted with his uniform as supreme commander of the armed forces of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Europe?
''Has he forgotten that he now holds the post that puts him in charge of diplomacy, whose essence and task is to facilitate the development of cooperation and mutual understanding between peoples, and not the opposite?''
 
Response to Haig on 'Terrorism'
Tass reiterated the often repeated Soviet objection to the argument made by Mr. Haig and other Reagan Administration officials that Soviet support for the so-called national liberation movements was tantamount to support for ''international terrorism.''
It was in that context, the Soviet press agency said, that Mr.  Haig made his ''inconsistent references to the alleged use of force by the Soviet Union.''
''The primitive character of such a train of thought is obvious,'' Tass said. In fact, it contended, Mr. Haig made his ''groundless'' charges in an attempt to justify the ''hegemonic, militaristic policy'' of the United States in Europe, the Middle East, Southwest Asia and Latin America, including support for the ''bloody ruling junta'' of El Salvador.


End of Document