SOVIET SEEKS TO JOIN WITH WEST AGAINST TERRORISM
The New York Times
December 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 488 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BONN, Dec. 18
Body


The Soviet Union has begun telling some Western European governments that it is prepared to join forces in combating terrorism, according to highly placed West German officials.
Some experts detect Soviet concern that it and its allies are becoming overly identified with terrorist movements - and that terrorist organizations could pose long-term problems for Soviet interests.
One senior West German official said that two recent trials in London and West Berlin, suggesting strongly that Syrian intelligence agents were embroiled in terrorist outrages, had prompted the latest overture, which he said had taken place in Moscow several weeks ago.
''It's because Syria - a country they fully support, a country they're fully identified with - was caught red-handed supporting terrorism,'' the official said. ''This embarrassed them and worried them a lot.''
Another highly placed German official said the Russians' anti-terrorist stance appeared to be part of ''the new look'' under Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, and said other Western European governments had been sounded out on the possibility of cooperation. There has been no official response to the Soviet offer, he said.
Western intelligence officials say they have seen no signs that the Russians or their Eastern European allies have actually started to crack down on suspected terrorists, who often move freely in Communist Europe. A German intelligence official said there were strong indications, for example, that some Arab terrorists are trained in East Germany.
In East Berlin, however, Western diplomats say there have been some signs that the authorities have started to put certain Arab diplomats and others under tighter surveillance. Arab diplomats crossing into West Berlin, one diplomat said, are now regularly questioned by East German border guards about their reasons for leaving the eastern side of the city and how long they intend to remain on the western side.
Moreover, the Libyan People's Bureau in East Berlin has been reduced in size following American accusations that it was behind the April 5 explosion in a West Berlin discotheque that killed 3 people and wounded 230 others.
One reason for the evolution in Soviet thinking on terrorism, analysts say, was the protracted trial in Rome of Mehmet Ali Agca, a Turk accused of attempting to assassinate Pope John Paul II in 1981 with the backing of Bulgarian intelligence agents.
The trial ended on March 29 with three Bulgarians being acquitted for ''lack of proof,'' but both the ambiguous verdict and the enormous publicity given to the reported Bulgarian connection was highly damaging to the prestige of one of the Soviet Union's most faithful allies.
The Russians have found that they are not exempt from terrorist violence. In September 1985 four Soviet diplomats were kidnapped in Beirut and one was murdered; in 1984, the Soviet Embassy in the Lebanese capital came under rocket attack.


End of Document