Soy Madrid
University Wire
March 17, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 Michigan Daily via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 667 words
Byline: By Ari Paul, Michigan Daily; SOURCE: U. Michigan
Dateline: ANN ARBOR, Mich. 
Body


Imagine my shock and disbelief when I saw the carnage that took place at Madrid's Atocha train station. When I hear about acts of terrorism around the world -- in Israel, Iraq or Russia -- I fail to really comprehend what it's like because I'm so detached from these places. But Madrid was different. Like the World Trade Center, I had been there before. I stood on Atocha's platforms. I rode on one of those red and white trains. That shook me up.
But my grief turned to anger when I saw the way the American press had decided to distort the tragedy in Madrid. MSNBC ran headlines effectively assigning blame to al Qaeda. A cartoon in the Daily showed Osama bin Laden squeezing Spanish blood from his beard. Conservative pundits have been quick to talk about terrorism only as it pertains to the Arab and Muslim world even after the Madrid bombings.
The truth is that no one can be sure at this point who pulled off last week's massacre. Spanish authorities said that the leftovers of the explosives looked like bombs ETA had used before, but ETA has not been known to solely target civilians or create a disaster of this magnitude. Plus, ETA has denied responsibility, but who said terrorists were known for telling the truth? There is some evidence pointing to al Qaeda, but at this point, it is fairly weak. Could it have been small terror cells from North Africa? Splinter separatist groups from the Basque country? Anti-E.U. nationalists? It's anyone's guess.
But according to the American discourse, the trial is over, with all prosecution and no defense, and the verdict puts the blame on Muslim terrorism. Again, it is very much possible that this was the work of Muslim terrorists, but Americans' knee-jerk reaction to blame Arabs and Muslims for any act of terrorism is a dangerous one. Remember the Oklahoma City bombings? People on the news spouted things like the "Mideast comes to the Mid West," and immediately accusations went around about Arab terrorism. But lo and behold, the culprits turned out to be (d'oh!) two white, Christian warriors trained by a terrorist network based right here in Michigan.
But what was the anti-Arab political machine really angry about? The Socialists' victory in the Spanish elections after the bombing, of course. Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, the leader of the Spanish Socialist Party, has threatened to pull Spain's troops out of Iraq unless a more multilateral approach to the conflict is implemented swiftly.
Former Bush speechwriter David Frum lamented, "Terrorism has won a mighty victory in Spain. The culprits who detonated those bombs of murder on 3/11 intended to use murder to alter the course of Spanish democracy -- and they have succeeded." Jim Donovan told the BBC, "How can (Zapatero) say in one breath he will remove the troops from Iraq and then say his priority is to fight terrorism?"
Bush liked to tout the fact that he had a handful of countries like Spain on his side when he was making his case for war to present the world with some kind of coalition. He had, indeed, formed alliances with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi (possible ties to the mafia), British Prime Minister Tony Blair (who is accused to misleading his country to war) and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon (a bona fide war criminal), while mass anti-war protests erupted in Rome, London and Tel Aviv. The people of Spain were -- and still are -- undoubtedly against the war in Iraq. Last week's act of terrorism vindicated a claim anti-war advocates have been purporting ever since Bush's war plans hit the pages of The New York Times -- that a war in Iraq would not hinder terrorist activities and would only inflame anti-Western sentiment. We were right, and the Spanish people paid dearly for Aznar's decision to be an obedient marionette to Bush. In return, the Spanish people kicked the bum out in exchange for a man who actually represents the opinions of the population. Frum is wrong. This is what we call democracy.
(C) 2003 Michigan Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 17, 2004


End of Document