SPACE NEEDLE BASH CANCELED AFTER A DECADE OF PLANNING
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
December 29, 1999, Wednesday


Copyright 1999 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. b2
Length: 376 words
Byline: AMALIE YOUNG, Associated Press writer
Body


PORTLAND -- The New Year's Eve millennial gala for 750 people at the Space Needle has been canceled.
Party organizer Wendy Warren told The Associated Press Tuesday night that the party event almost 10 years in the planning has been called off. She would not give a reason for the decision.
"It has always been a joint decision," she said, referring to the 11 families involved. Asked if the decision was related to fears of terrorism, she declined to comment.
The cancellation followed Seattle Mayor Paul Schell's decision Monday to call off the after-dark New Year's Eve festivities at the Seattle Center as a precaution. City officials and others expressed worries about possible terrorist activities following the arrest of an Algerian national with a trunkful of explosives at Port Angeles.
A source close to the families said they met Tuesday and some members said they were afraid to be in the Space Needle that night because of the possible threats of terrorism reported so heavily by the news media.
The families said the decision was not based on anything told to them by Seattle police, the FBI or the Seattle Center.
According to KATU-TV, the Seattle Center had told the family that if the party was canceled, they would be able to work out a deal to cover the cost of the gala.
Space Needle spokeswoman Mary Bacarella said late Tuesday night that she knew nothing of any decision to cancel.
The close-knit gang of friends and family in Oregon scored a Northwest coup when they locked up the Space Needle for the New Year's Eve celebration of the century. They started working on the party nearly 10 years ago.
The group had spent years in happy anticipation, careful planning and installment-plan payments. But fate changed the rules in recent months.
One of the group William "Tiger" Warren died along with his three young sons in a small plane crash Thanksgiving weekend. He was the brother of party organizer Wendy Warren.
Then, the fears of terrorism surfaced with the arrest of Ahmed Ressam on Dec. 14.
Warren and the 10 other hosts had invited relatives and friends a total of 750 people, some traveling from Europe and Africa to wander from the Skyline level to the the flying-saucer-like Needle restaurant at the top and the observation deck above that.

Load-Date: December 29, 1999


End of Document