Spain's Basques suffer setback
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 15, 1986, Friday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 9
Length: 1080 words
Byline: By Kathy White, Special to The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Madrid
Highlight: Terrorism splits moderate Basques, central government
Body


''In the Basque country, violence is the work of a small minority. Yet there is no denying a general feeling of unease,'' says Ramon Labayen, mayor of San Sebastian, the elegant northern resort town.
Now in the midst of its annual festival, San Sebastian residents are bracing themselves for possible trouble, such as the rioting that went on during a similar festival last week in Vitoria, the Basque capital.
Earlier this summer when France handed over to Spain five members of the Basque separatist guerrilla organization ETA (an acronym for Basque Homeland and Liberty) and expelled the alleged head of the group to Africa, a chain of violence was set off. In years past, France has generally granted asylum to ETA members.
Attacks included a car bomb that killed 12 civil guards, the bloodiest act by ETA since the return of Spanish democracy 10 years ago, and a bold rocket attack on the Defense Ministry in Madrid.
Open disagreement over the expulsion issue has also ended the period of reconciliation between the federal government in Madrid and the regional Basque government. For the Basque country and its demand for more autonomy, Madrid's insistence on stepping up the fight against terrorism is something of a setback.
''The Basques are a people who have had to fight for survival. The Basques today are committed to the process of recovering their political rights,'' says Mr. Labayen, a member of the moderate Basque Nationalist Party.
The new crisis comes after a year and a half of ''detente.'' The new Basque premier, Jose Antonio Ardanza, readily opened up a dialogue with Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez.
Much to Madrid's satisfaction, a legislative pact between the Nationalists and the Socialists in the Basques' regional Parliament brought more open support from the Basque establishment in the fight against terrorism.
Until then, Basque Nationalists had often used the terrorism issue to demand more autonomy. They claimed that terrorism would certainly continue until greater independence was granted. And with more autonomy, they argued, the Basques themselves could control terrorism.
In April this year a report by an international commission on Basque violence urged that the option of negotiation with the terrorists be kept open.
Encouraged by the report, Basque Nationalist leaders also thought the time was ripe for talking with ETA. The crackdown by the new conservative government in France on Basque activities promised to seriously weaken the organization by ending its safe haven across the border. Nationalist party leader Xabier Arzalluz repeated throughout the spring: ''ETA wants to negotiate.''
But the government in Madrid says it isn't interested in negotiating and is intent on taking forceful steps to wipe out the terrorists. A government spokesman says Madrid adamantly rejects negotiating with a separatist organization that has killed 451 people since 1977.
Among several reported attempts by the government to talk with ETA, the most publicized one was the offer made by Interior Minister Jose Barriounuevo in August 1984 to lay down arms and reenter society. While hundreds of ETA members have trickled back into Spain under the amnesty process, ETA leaders have held out, insisting on political gains for negotiating an end to the violence. Spanish officials saw the latest attacks as a bid by ETA to establish a position of negotiating strength.
After a series of deadly bombings and shootings by ETA in Madrid this spring, the government welcomed French collaboration in handing over ETA members and did nothing to stop the expulsion from France to Africa of Txomin Iturbe Abasolo, considered ETA's top leader.
On a national level, the government has all the support it needs for its tough stance on terrorism. The government would be hard pressed to go against public outrage over ETA violence and take what many would see as the weak approach. At this point, the government would rather have the backing of the whole country than help the Basque cause by negotiating.
In the Basque region, Nationalist leaders feel crushed. A key figure with moral authority in ETA, ''Txomin'' was thought to be more amenable to sitting down with the government. With him in Africa, some Nationalist leaders fear that a new generation of terrorists could crop up, further removing the option of negotiation.
Under a 1979 statute for autonomy, the Basque region - like Spain's other regions - has its own Parliament, but it enjoys more powers. While paying a contribution to Madrid for services, the Basques levy their own taxes; run their own TV and radio stations; run their own schools; and make sure Euskera, the Basque language, is taught. Still, the feeling is that the transfer of powers has only been partial and too slow in coming.
The radical Herri Batasuna (''United People'') party, which has recently been legalized although it challenges Spain's Constitution, has always rejected the autonomy statute. Considered ETA's political arm, Herri Batasuna argues for a solution to the violence on the basis of ETA's five-point program.
The program includes a general amnesty, withdrawal of the national police force, and self-determination - an ill-defined concept about which Herri Batasuna has remained elusive. The Nationalists' aim in recent talks with the party was to try to pinpoint Herri Batasuna's demands.
Herri Batasuna also demands that neighboring Navarre Province be incorporated into the Basque region, strengthening the Basque claim to self-determination. Historically, the whole Basque region was once part of the kingdom of Navarre which extended down from France. Today, the mountainous region north of Pamplona retains its Basque identity. Yet its own peculiar brand of nationalism and the reluctance of its population on the whole to join the troubled Basque country make the fusion of the two regions highly improbable. Still, Navarre has been a rallying cry for all nationalists as much as the fight against the central government.
In crises, Basques tend to fall back on radical language to rally their feelings of solidarity. The breach with Madrid and the Nationalist Party's drop in support - as shown by the loss of two of its eight seats in June's general elections - will now force the Nationalist Party to reassert its claims and distance itself from its Socialist partners. Some observers in the Basque country believe the Nationalists are building up to break their pact with the Socialists and call for early elections.

Graphic

 
Picture, Basques looking out over the Atlantic: waves of terrorism batter Spain's government and Basque moderates. STAFF/FILE; Map, Basque provinces, JOAN FORBES -- STAFF


End of Document