Spain wearies of Basques' terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 1, 1996, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 815 words
Byline: WILBUR G. LANDREY
Dateline: MADRID
Body


Britain and Ireland may have made a little progress this week toward a  negotiated end to the terrorism of the Irish Republican Army, but here in  Spain the confrontation continues unabated with Basque terrorists who are  every bit as ruthless and determined.
Like the IRA in Northern Ireland, the terrorist organization ETA (Basque  Homeland and Freedom) has been fighting for the independence of the Basque  region in northern Spain for 25 years.
Like the IRA, ETA has appeared to be a declining force with waning popular  support. Like the IRA also, it has always been able to come back with a  sensational attack.
LANDREY
In the run-up to what are expected to be landmark elections in Spain on  Sunday, ETA has carried out two assassinations, one of a prominent politician  in The Basque Country and another of a major university professor in Madrid.
Both were friends of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez, who came to office 13  years ago as an eager young socialist leader hoping to end Basque terrorism.
He will now probably be handing the problem over, almost undiminished, to  the man likely to replace him, Jose Maria Aznar of the rival center-right  Popular Party. Aznar himself narrowly escaped injury in an ETA car bomb attack  last April.
"Even though ETA's central control has been weakened through dispersal, I  don't think there has been much progress in combating it either on the police  or political level," said Carlos Taibo, a political scientist at the  Autonomous University of Madrid.
Rafael Vera, the former state security chief, believes that ETA, which once  had 500 underground fighters, now has only about 150. But, he added, just  arresting them would not end the organization, since more would take their  place.
Ironically, he is now under indictment for allegedly having allowed or at  least known about the secret use of foreign mercenaries to fight an illegal  "dirty war" against ETA 10 years ago in which innocent people were killed.
Reports have been circulating that ETA may be planning another major attack  this weekend. Security precautions have been reinforced accordingly, and in  the Basque provinces in the north, six more ETA suspects were jailed  Wednesday.
The differences are many, but both the IRA and ETA also have political  wings talking peace - Sinn Fein in Northern Ireland, the Herri Batasuna party  here - even though both deny that they are only stooges for the men with guns.
"If any of our party members belong to the ETA, we don't know about it,"  insists Carlos Rodriguez, a soft-spoken savings bank employee in Bilbao, one  of the centers in the northern Basque Country.
"We think that its violence is the answer to the violence by the Spanish  government," he said. "We don't justify it, but we don't condemn it either.  It will end when the political problem is solved."
One day in the mail, he recounted, the party got two copies of a videotape  explaining last summer's ETA proposals for a cease-fire. According to  Rodriguez, Herri Batasuna then sent them to Gonzalez and King Juan Carlos.
But Herri Batasuna also included a fragment in its campaign video for  television showing armed, hooded men. When party leader Jon Idigoras and his  second-in-command, Floren Aoiz, refused a judicial summons to explain that to  Baltazar Garzon, Spain's leading prosecutor, he jailed them.
Like Catalonia in the south, the Basque region enjoys some autonomy gained  under Gonzalez's government, including the right to collect its own taxes. The  Basques are an ancient people with a distinct culture and a language  apparently unrelated to any other. What ETA is demanding is "the right to  self-determination and the territorial integrity of the Basque homeland,"  that is, independence.
For Javier Ruperez, a Popular Party official and former diplomat who may  become Spain's next foreign minister, no Spanish government could accept such  "conditions put forward by terrorists that could mean the breakup of the  Spanish state."
If the Popular Party wins Sunday as expected, he said, ETA prisoners no  longer would get out of prison along with others, as is often customary here,  after serving only a third of the 30-year sentences that are the maximum  penalties in Spain.
One more similarity stands out between the IRA and ETA. Most people are  thoroughly sick of them both.
After the latest ETA assassinations, a million demonstrators, led by  Gonzalez and Aznar together, surged through Madrid streets last week  condemning them.
But the thing about violence is that counter-force alone often isn't enough  to stop it - and that sometimes, sadly, it pays.
ETA can't help but have noticed that Britain and Ireland offered their  latest cautious concessions only after IRA carried out another sensational  bombing in the center of London.
Alone, neither force nor concession work. The right mixture remains to be  found in Spain, and maybe in Ireland.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE MAP; locates the Basque Country in Spain

Load-Date: March 1, 1996


End of Document