SPAIN'S TERROR ONUS ON SOVIET;
News Analysis
The New York Times
May 11, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk; analysis
Length: 896 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, May 10
Body


In November 1979, Andrei A. Gromyko, the first Soviet Foreign Minister to visit Madrid, reportedly made an extraordinary private offer to his Spanish counterpart at the time, Marcelino Oreja.
If Spain discontinued its plans to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Gromyko reportedly said, the Soviet Union would be prepared to help in combating Spain's most trying domestic problem, terrorism.
But, according to Spanish officials, Mr. Gromyko also implied that a decision to go forward with NATO membership might leave Spain's young democracy vulnerable to more terrorist actions.
 
Soviet Aid to E.T.A. Hinted
Even before Mr. Gromyko issued this reported threat, some Spanish politicians and intelligence officials were convinced that Moscow was assisting the Basque terrorist group E.T.A., a Marxist-Leninist organization whose avowed aim is to create an independent, socialist Basque nation. Former Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez, who resigned in January, was among the most convinced.
James Markham news analysis discusses Soviet link with Spanish terrorist group; Spain's entry into NATO is threatened
Now his successor, Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, has publicly made the same accusation, just as a savage outbreak of terrorism has badly shaken the nation's institutions that were already wobbly from the attempted military coup in February.
In a televised speech Friday, Mr. Calvo Sotelo spoke of the ''international'' dimension of Spanish terrorism, which he asserted was directed at preventing Spaniards from taking ''the place that corresponds to us as a free nation'' in the rest of the world. The Prime Minister did not mention the Soviet Union by name, but a senior aide said that he was alluding to the Soviet Union and its ''satellites.''
A similar accusation was made in January by President Sandro Pertini of Italy. As with Mr. Pertini, Mr. Calvo Sotelo may find that it is one thing to assert that the Soviet Union is abetting terrorism and another thing to prove it. The evidence tends to be indirect.
 
8 Diplomats Have Been Expelled
It is known for example, that E.T.A. guerrillas have been trained in Cuba and Southern Yemen, both Soviet clients. In 1978, according to Spanish intelligence, a correspondent for the Soviet newspaper Izvestia met with an E.T.A. leader in southern France. Since Spain re-established full diplomatic relations with Moscow in 1977, eight Soviet diplomats and officials have been expelled from Spain, sometimes amid talk of connections to separatist groups in the Basque region or the Canary Islands.
What is more evident is why the Soviet Union might want to support terrorism in Spain. Since 1977, Soviet diplomats and visiting dignitaries have consistently argued that Spain should remain outside of NATO. When he was here, Mr. Gromyko publicly urged Spain to maintain its ''independent'' foreign policy.
If Spain does become the alliance's 16th member, NATO would be significantly strengthened in military terms.  But one clear criterion for Spanish membership in NATO is that its democratic institutions should be alive and well. The attempted coup in February stirred doubts in some European nations about the wisdom of bringing an unstable Spain into the alliance - doubts that have so far been muffled.
 
Coup Would Have Repercussions
Should another coup successfully overturn the 1978 constitution and install a Latin-American-style dictatorship, Spain would almost certainly be blackballed from NATO. A successful coup would also shelve Spanish entry to the European Economic Community, dealing a sharp blow to Western European economic integration.
A right-wing military junta in power in Madrid would also put enormous strains on Portugal's fragile democratic institutions, in the view of many Western European diplomats, and the repercussions would be felt in Italy and Greece.
Moreover, in dealing with a military junta in Madrid, the Reagan Administration would encounter new strains with its other Western European allies, which could be expected to condemn forcefully a right-wing takeover and ostracize Spain as it did when Franco ruled.  The United States, which has a defense treaty with Spain that expires in September, has important air and naval facilities in the country.
Some Spaniards fear that the Reagan Administration would place a higher value on its strategic bases in Spain than it would on the nature of the regime in power, as long as that regime remained friendly to Washington. This belief explains the outcry that followed an off-the-cuff remark by Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. on Feb. 23 that the unfolding coup was ''an internal matter.'' That slip-up obliged Mr. Haig to make a special trip here last month to emphasize American support for Spanish democracy.
 
Moving Quickly Toward NATO
The aborted coup demonstrated just how fragile Spain's new institutions are. Mr. Calvo Sotelo has decided to hasten Spain's entry into NATO - a vote in Parliament will probably be held in the fall -with the hope that the move will immunize the army against further plots.
The stepped-up terrorist offensive -seven policemen and soldiers, including a general and a colonel, were slain last week - looks to many in the Government as the start of a last-roll-of-the-dice attempt to destabilize the nation and provoke another coup. It is as if the Government and the terrorists are locked in a desperate foot race.


End of Document