SPAIN DISMISSES A GENERAL FOR DFEENDING PLOTTERS
The New York Times
September 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 735 words
Byline: By JOHN DARNTON
Dateline: MADRID, Sept. 15
Body


A senior general who expressed certain opinions unpopular with the Government in a magazine interview is losing his command of one of the country's nine military regions.
In the interview, the officer, Lieut. Gen. Fernando Soteras Casamayor, said among other things that army officers jailed for taking part in a bungled coup in February 1981 were ''gentlemen'' motivated by patriotism.
The dismissal, announced after a Cabinet meeting Wednesday evening, was the sternest action taken so far against a high-ranking Spanish officer by the Socialist Government, which reversed decades of army-supported right-wing rule when it took office in December
It followed a letter-writing campaign, begun in June, by right-wing army officers. The letters, appearing in the extreme right-wing daily newspaper El Alcazar, demanded clemency for the jailed coup plotters. Thirty army and civil guard officers are serving sentences of from one to 30 years.
Spain's Socialist Government dismisses Lieut Gen Fernando Soteras Casamayor after he was quoted in magazine as saying that army officers jailed for taking part in bungled coup in February 1981 were 'gentlemen' motivated by patriotism; dismissal follows letter-writing campaign by right-wing army officers demanding clemency for failed coup plotters; Soteras Casamayor headed military region in northwest, an area well known for its right-wing sentiment; photo (M)7 Officers Are Disciplined
So far seven officers have been disciplined for expressing their views in El Alcazar in what most Government officials see as a concerted effort to put pressure on the Government. But most of the penalties meted out so far have been relatively mild, usually two weeks of house arrest, and those involved have been retired officers or of lesser rank than General Soteras Casamayor.
Because the army, and especially its senior officers, who fought the left in the 1936-1939 civil war, is a holdover from the Franco dictatorship and conservative in outlook, the Government has taken pains not to offend it but at the same time not to appear intimidated.
General Soteras Casamayor, a much-decorated 63-year-old officer slight in stature and with a pencil-thin mustache, headed the Seventh Military Region in the northwest, centered in Valladolid. The region is so well known as an area of right-wing sentiment that its nickname is ''Fachadolid,'' derived from the slang word for fascist, ''facha.''
In the interview in the current issue of Interviu magazine, a racy weekly whose articles seem to concentrate on disasters, gossip, sex and Nazism, General Soteras Casamayor suggested that the civil authorities were dealing leniently with demonstrators in the Basque region who destroy the Spanish flag, an emblem that is particularly sacred to the armed forces.
 
Army's 'Mission' Noted
He said that some small steps had been taken to combat terrorism, but that perhaps it was necesssary to ''be more hard.'' His time spent in a military academy in France and as a military attache in West Germany, when the Baader-Meinhof terrorist organization was decimated, had convinced him that firm police action could be effective, he said.
''The Government will always have the backing of the army to eradicate terrorism once and for all,'' he added.
The ''mission'' of the armed forces, General Soteras Casamayor said, was ''to guarantee the sovereignty and independence of Spain and to defend its territorial integrity and the legal order.'' He did not mention upholding the Constitution.
In speaking of the attempted coup, in which troops stormed the Parliament and held lawmakers hostage for 17 hours, the general said that the deed might be condemned but that it had a certain ''motivation'' given the difficulties Spain then faced.
 
'A Patriotic Motive'
''Those gentlemen, which they are, found a reason for their action in the situation before Feb. 23, and there can be no doubt that they were guided by a patriotic motive,'' he said. He added that most army men would be pleased to see them released. He also said, in reply to a question, that a ''state of irritation'' existed in the army today, but that ''rumors of sabers'' - another coup plot - were unfounded.
The interview was reprinted in El Alcazar. In announcing the Government's decision, Eduardo Sotillos, the Government spokesman, cited the ''unauthorized remarks'' in the article.
The general's replacement is Lieut. Gen. Ricardo Rivas Nadal.

Graphic

 
photo of Lieut. Gen. Fernando Soteras Casamaoyr


End of Document