Spanish dignitary rouses debate at UCLA
University Wire
January 25, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Bruin via U-Wire
Length: 563 words
Byline: By Charlotte Hsu, Daily Bruin; SOURCE: U. California-Los Angeles
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


Students, professors and other guests traded ideas about terrorism and security with Spain's former secretary of state for foreign affairs Monday, turning a speaker event into a lively debate on those subjects.
Ramon Gil-Casares, Spanish secretary of state for foreign affairs from July 2002 to April 2004, said the international community must work in harmony to destroy terrorist organizations. But audience members preferred to talk about the roots of extremism and why politicians often refuse to address them, leading to a 50-minute discussion after Gil-Casares had finished speaking.
Gil-Casares began his talk saying the first step in solving the problem of terrorism is acknowledging it as a real threat.
"It is understandable and human to not want to see a problem that exists ... because we don't know how to deal with it," he said.
"My name is Ramon Gil-Casares," he said. "I'm a terrorist target, and so are you."
He said he shared President Bush's belief that the war in Iraq shows governments around the world are serious about halting extremist attacks.
Gil-Casares conceded his view was likely to be unpopular on this campus, and guests pounded the former minister with questions about why governments don't work harder to address terrorism's causes.
The question-and-answer session quickly became a friendly but serious back-and-forth between the former diplomat and the audience, with UCLA extension student Inago Lazarre spurring much of the conversation.
She asked Gil-Casares why he and other politicians appear reluctant to discuss the social situations that lead groups to make demands and to commit extremist acts when those demands aren't met.
"I actually felt insulted by his speech," Lazarre said. "We know the background. We wanted a little more analysis."
Responding to Lazarre's lengthy inquiry and similar ones made by other guests, Gil-Casares said considering terrorists' requests can be dangerous.
Giving weight to complaints could indirectly promote the use of terrorism by unfairly prioritizing the needs and wants of militant organizations over those who use peaceful means of protest, he said.
Sam Conedera, a graduate student in history, said he was surprised by the feistiness of the audience and felt Gil-Casares made his points well.
The former diplomat's visit came at a time when political tensions are rising over the issue of terrorism in his nation. The Financial Times reported that demonstrators "roughed up" Spain's Socialist defense minister Saturday, protesting what they perceive to be clement treatment under his party of prisoners from the violent Basque separatist group ETA.
Gil-Casares said Spain's success in recent years in suppressing extremist ETA acts shows using harsh measures against terrorist groups can yield results.
He said after speaking in both Spain and the United States, his impression of Monday's crowd was favorable.
His party lost national elections last year after some linked the March 11 terrorist bombing of Madrid's subway with Spain's collaboration with the United States in the Iraq war. Gil-Casares said terrorists began planning those attacks prior to the start of combat in Iraq, a fact that didn't seem to sway public opinion.
He said the UCLA audience was well-mannered, and that he came expecting a challenge.
"I'm sort of used to it," he said. "My position's not very popular."
(C) 2005 Daily Bruin via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 26, 2005


End of Document