SPANISH UNITE AGAINST TERRORISM AND FOR A VICTIM
The New York Times
October 22, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 536 words
Byline: By NINA DARNTON
Dateline: MADRID, Oct. 21
Body


Hundreds of thousands of people marched through the streets here tonight in a silent demonstration to protest the death of an army captain kidnapped and killed by Basque guerrillas.
 Simultaneous demonstrations occurred in cities throughout the country as up to a million people took to the streets. In Madrid, members of all political parties united behind a banner opposing E.T.A., the Basque guerrilla organization. It read, ''Against Terrorism, Against E.T.A., For Freedom, For Peace, For Spain and Its Constitution.'' The police estimated the number of demonstrators in Madrid varied from 300,000 to 500,000 people.
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez did not attend the demonstration. A spokesman said he was monitoring developments throughout the country. Deputy Prime Minister Alfonso Guerra led the march in his place.
 
A Reminder to the Army
The nationwide demonstrations against terrorism and in support of democracy and the Spanish Constitution were widely seen here as a reminder to the army, which was enraged by the murder of the officer, that the people of Spain support their elected Government.
The march ended a national day of protest. At noon, factories, businesses, schools and hospitals throughout Spain observed a minute of silence to honor the captain, a pharmacist. In some cities, cars and buses stopped and people stood silently with heads bowed. Immediately afterward, the nation's drugstores closed for two hours.
A similar demonstration is planned Saturday in the Basque city of Bilbao. Two contending factions decided to march together, and a large turnout is expected. They came together Thursday night after the terrorists took another victim, a 50-year-old baker they accused of being a police informer.
On Thursday the Socialist Government announced plans to station more policemen in the Basque region and to consider tougher penalties for terrorist activity. The slain military officer was Alberto Martin Barrios, a 39-year-old father of three.
 
The Kidnappers' Demands
Captain Martin Barrios was seized Oct. 5 on his way to work by a small faction of the E.T.A. called the Eighth Assembly of the group's political-military wing. He was the 33d person killed by Basque terrorists this year. He is the 37th military officer to have been killed since 1970 and the first to have been kidnapped.
The kidnappers demanded the release of nine guerrillas facing court- martial in Catalonia for a 1980 attack on a garrison near Barcelona. A few days later they also demanded that an E.T.A. communique condemning the trial be read over state-owned national television. The Government rejected both demands.
Faced with a 36-hour deadline to broadcast the communique and with the frantic pleas of Captain Martin Barrios's family, many major newspapers printed the communique. The state television broadcast a short resume of it and promised to broadcast all of it when the captain was released.
The deadline passed without word from the Eighth Assembly. On Wednesday morning, responding to a phone call, Red Cross workers went to the outskirts of Bilbao were they found the body in an abandoned cabin. He had been gagged and shot in the head at close range. He had several days growth of beard, the police said.


End of Document