SPANISH JUDGE CHARGES 10 FROM AL-QAIDA;
 BIN LADEN AMONG THOSE TARGETED FOR 9/11 TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 18, 2003 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 462 words
Byline: DALE FUCHS, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: MADRID, Spain
Body


He has already tried to prosecute the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet, as well as dozens of military officers accused of atrocities in Argentina's so-called "dirty war." Now, Spain's most renowned judge, Baltasar Garzon, has set his sights on Osama bin Laden.
 Garzon yesterday charged bin Laden, the leader of al-Qaida, and nine people identified as members of the terror network with committing the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and other acts of terrorism.
"Even though international detention orders have been issued by other countries," Garzon said his own order was needed "to help ensure they are brought to justice when they are located and arrested." His comment was in the 700-page document that outlines the case against the 10 charged yesterday as well as 25 other men, some already in custody.
 Garzon further justifies the order on the grounds that the terrorist acts were "planned partially in Spain," which, he writes, "has long served as a base for preparation, indoctrination, support, finance and organization for the al-Qaida network."
 Mohamed Atta, one of the main Sept. 11 hijackers, is believed to have met with another planner of the attacks, Ramzi Binalshibh, in Spain in 2001. And U.S. authorities have warned that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, al-Qaida's chief of operations, had a viable network in Spain. Binalshibh and Mohammed are both in U.S. custody.
 The document Garzon released yesterday lays out the case that Tayssir Alouni, a correspondent for al-Jazeera, an Arab broadcast network, and 11 other men arrested since November 2001 constituted an active Spanish al-Qaida cell that was instrumental in planning the Sept. 11 attacks. As evidence, he cites various phone conversations between the men and al-Qaida leaders.
 The Spanish magistrate, a former junior minister under the former Socialist government, has a high-profile history of pursuing cases beyond Spain's boundaries, thanks to a Spanish constitutional provision affording "universal jurisdiction" in prosecuting crimes against humanity.
 In October 1998, Garzon persuaded British authorities to arrest Pinochet, hoping to have him extradited to Spain for trial on charges of human-rights abuses. The general was later deemed unfit to stand trial.
 This spring, Garzon successfully petitioned Mexico to extradite a former Argentine military officer, Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, accusing him of committing atrocities under the Argentine dictatorship, which lasted from 1976 to 1983. Cavallo is in jail awaiting trail.
 In July, the judge asked Argentina to arrest 39 officers and one civilian accused of genocide, torture and terrorism during that country's dirty war. But the Spanish government, saying it believed that Argentina would prosecute those cited, decided not to press the case.

Load-Date: September 18, 2003


End of Document