SPANIARDS URGED TO UNITE AGAINST TERRORISTS
The New York Times
July 29, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk
Length: 299 words
Byline: By PAUL DELANEY, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: MADRID, July 28
Body


Spain's ruling Socialist Party, which has come under increasing pressure to do more to curb the latest wave of terrorism, asked Spain's other parties today not to exploit the resulting tensions for political purposes.
''The greatest error we can commit right now is to turn the fight against terrorism into a fight based on party interests.''
Jose Maria Benegas, a leading Socialist Party official, declared in a statement that ran 12 pages.
Two groups have taken responsibility for most of the violence, which has been directed mainly at the police, Civil Guard and other military and Government targets. One group, E.T.A., is demanding an independent Basque homeland; the other, Terra Lliure, wants a separate state in the Barcelona region.
The most recent incident occurred Monday when a small bomb went off at a restaurant near Barcelona. No one was hurt. #20 Shoppers Killed In the worst such incident this year, 20 shoppers were killed on June 10 when a car bomb exploded in a supermarket parking garage in Barcelona. The police have scored some gains in what has become a war against the terrorists. Last week they raided an apartment outside San Sebastian, killing a woman suspected of being a member of E.T.A. Eight other suspects were arrested.
That death has come under question because according to forensic evidence the suspect was shot in the neck at close range.
Today, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez defended the police in the raid and asked for ''a little understanding and solidarity for those who risk their lives in the fight against the enemies of the state.''
Twice this year the Government has announced major crackdowns on terrorists and the arrest of suspects, but bombs have kept exploding. The paramilitary Civil Guards have been the main targets, particularly in northern Spain.


End of Document