Spate of bad news derails market;
War talk, terrorism, sales dropoff add up to across-the-board slide
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 6, 2002 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Business;
Length: 440 words
Byline: TOM WALKER
Body


In a stock market where nobody wants to buy, any bad news is enough to send stock prices lower --- and Thursday's market had enough to send all the major stock indexes lower.
The news included disappointing economic reports, a falloff in retail sales, more terrorism and threats of war.
"Economic news kept investors cautious in trading," said strategist Bernie Schaeffer, chief executive of Schaeffer's Research. The day's news "reads like a train wreck," he said.
AJC
The Institute of Supply Management --- the nation's purchasing managers --- said the index of U.S. service activity weakened in August to 50.9.
That was down from 53.1 in July and well below the 54.0 reading analysts had forecast. A reading below 50 means the sector is no longer expanding.
Major retailers such as Wal-Mart Stores also announced that their August sales were disappointing, rising less than company executives had expected. They blamed unusually hot weather for curbing the sales of fall apparel.
The government also said the four-week average for first-time jobless claims increased by 5,250 to 400,000 --- the highest since June 8. Analysts said the trend in claims indicates an increase in layoffs.
On the plus side, the nation's important productivity rate --- the amount of output per hour of work --- expanded faster in the second quarter than originally reported, or 1.5 percent vs. 1.1 percent.
The government also said July factory orders rose by 4.7 percent, which was close to analysts' forecasts, after falling 2.4 percent in June.
Economic news has become a major source of concern for investors in recent months. The fear is that a weak economy that could dip into a second recession spells weak corporate profit growth, and that hurts stocks.
The threat of terrorism and prospects of war against Iraq also roiled the market Thursday, especially on news that Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai was the target of an assassination attempt. He survived, apparently unharmed.
The big losers in Thursday's trading included retailers, airlines, semiconductors, networking and computer services stocks.
Tech stocks were hurt by investor worries about what chip leader Intel would announce after the market closed. The company's announcement will likely have an impact on today's trading.
The Nasdaq composite fell 41.31 points, or 3.2 percent, on Thursday to 1,251.00, just 45 points above its recent bear market low.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which dropped more than 200 points in the first hour of trading, lost 141.42 points, or 1.7 percent, for the day, closing at 8,283.70. Standard & Poor's 500-stock index fell 14.25 points, or 1.6 percent, to 879.15.

Load-Date: September 6, 2002


End of Document