SPC plays role in war on terror
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 1, 2005 Monday 1 North Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: METRO & STATE; Pg. 1B; Newspaper
Length: 1061 words
Byline: ADRIENNE P. SAMUELS
Dateline: ST. PETERSBURG
Body


Anti-terrorism training may seem an odd occupation for a community college.
Yet the federal government's homeland security network has sunk millions of dollars in recent years into an organization called the National Terrorism Preparedness Institute at St. Petersburg College.
Housed in the college's facilities on 34th Street S, the institute - known as NTPI - develops a range of instructional materials and programs for the military, the departments of Defense and Justice and for the nation's first-responders.
NTPI's materials provide instruction on searching boats for weapons. Another manual, produced for the Army, shows troops how to react to "improvised explosive devices," the bombs that have mauled troops and civilians in Iraq and were used in the London transit bombings.
The NTPI also hires subcontractors with specialized training to teach first responders - firefighters, law enforcement and paramedics - how to deal with attacks on U.S. soil.
The institute even creates monthly videos on a variety of homeland security subjects, making them available to homeland security teams via the internet and in directed telecasts.
In its seven-year existence, NTPI has received $30-million in federal funding and government contracts. And while the staff of 32 quietly goes about its business in the academic environment of a college, it gets a thumbs up from many in the homeland security community.
"They've done a great deal of very successful work," said Teresa Embrey, a manager in training technology development with the Technical Support Working Group, part of the intelligence and anti-terrorism network funneling money to the NTPI.
"They've done the prep work for the suicide bomber training support package. They do very nice products and they're very efficient," she said.
It's not uncommon for the federal government to outsource such sensitive contracts, said Jeff David, deputy director of the federal Combating Terrorism Technology Support Office.
"What we're trying to do is find the best place to develop this type of training," David said. "DOD (Department of Defense) isn't necessarily staffed or trained to do it."
Take, for example, the St. Petersburg-based institute's work with Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri, an Army training center for military police. The institute is developing strategies to help MP's learn to psychologically support each other during and after a catastrophic event.
The military does train its own in national security matters, but the institute is often called upon to create "best practices" manuals.
"We will work with their subject matter expert and take their raw material and put it into a course format," said retired Army colonel Bill Janes, a 24-year service veteran who oversees NTPI and its annual budget, which this year is $5-million.
"They provide the expert. We're able to bring psychology expertise to train and help the Army," Janes said.
The national Technical Support Working Group, an agency representing numerous federal departments pooling money to research and develop anti-terrorism and intelligence solutions, has called on NTPI repeatedly.
NTPI's guides for searching small watercraft for weapons were shipped to troops stationed in the Middle East.
"In that case we worked with the Navy, but the Coast Guard helped us develop it," said Janes.
The Technical Support Working Group estimates some $6-million has been approved for its ongoing contracts at NTPI.
SPC' terrorism preparedness institute was created in 1998 after U.S. Rep. C.W. Bill Young, R-Indian Shores, and St. Petersburg College president Carl Kuttler discussed ways to bolster both the college and homeland defense.
At the time, Young chaired the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense.
"We both came to the same conclusion that this was something we needed to do and SPC was an ideal place to do it," Young said. "The whole theory behind homeland security was to have local first responders be able to respond to an act of terrorism."
The NTPI's first year was funded through a National Guard line item in the federal budget. Later, the college bid for contracts, many of which were updated and increased over time. Now Congress earmarks some funds for NTPI.
The institute develops two internet-accessible shows targeted at first responders: Comnet and Live Response. The shows are taped monthly. July's Live Response features the Citizens Corp program for homeland security, which encourages civilians to join support groups for local police and firefighters.
Individual police and fire fighting agencies register via the internet to view the shows at no charge, then determine how to make the programming available to their employees.
By concentrating anti-terror course work with institutions such as the NTPI, the government is better positioned to oversee the consistency of the training across the country, said Branda Napper, spokeswoman with the Office of Domestic Preparedness.
After NTPI develops its materials, which can include instructor manuals and accompanying video or DVDs, the work usually is reviewed by defense officials. Then, in Technical Support Working Group's case, the materials are sold via the TSWG Web site to qualified law enforcement and security agencies.
Other materials are sent straight to the military branch that requested them.
NTPI's work squares with the mission of St. Petersburg College, said Kuttler, a recognized innovator who has expanded the school's offerings to include a handful of four-year degrees and partnerships with out-of-state universities.
"The key to a college is to react to its community. And you keep changing as the community changes," said Kuttler.
SPC may soon offer a four-year degree in the homeland security field, Kuttler said. Though still in the planning stage, the study program would be suited to emergency operations workers and managers, he said.
Because it relies on grant funding and federal appropriations, the NTPI walks an economic tightrope. Staff must stay small in case contracts run out. Work done for the military must balance with the NTPI's public education mission.
It's a complex operation, said J. C. Brock, campus executive officer of SPC's Allstate Center, where NTPI is based.
He estimates the NTPI has spent about $10-million of its allocation. The rest will be doled out as "task orders" are completed.
"Our biggest concern is sustainability," he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, JAMIE FRANCIS; (2003) Niel Batista, Emergency Management Coordinator for Miami-Dade Office of Emergency Management, is shown through a TV monitor as he and others participate in Live Response, a satellite TV program produced by the National Terrorism; Preparedness Institute at St. Petersburg College.

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document