Spc. David W. Taylor
The Sebree Banner (Kentucky)
April 12, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 The Sebree Banner


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 301 words
Byline: The Sebree Banner staff
Body


Spc. David W. Taylor, 20, Dixon, died Thursday, March 29, 2012, in Kandahar province, Afghanistan.
David was assigned to Delta Company, 2nd Battalion, 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 4th Brigade Combat Team, 82nd Airborne Division, Fort Bragg, N.C., supporting Operation Enduring Freedom.
He was awarded the National Defense Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Afghanistan. Campaign Medal with Bronze Service Star, Army Service Ribbon, Overseas Service Ribbon, Parachutist Badge Basic, Expert Marksmanship Badge (rifle), Overseas Service Bar, Army Commendation Medal (posthumous), Army Good Conduct Medal (posthumous) and NATO Medal (posthumous).
He was preceded in death by his father, Kevin G. Taylor, who died June 25, 2008; his grandmother, Carolyn Bumpus, who died March 13, 2012; and his grandfather, Larry Taylor, who died June 20, 2011.
Survivors include his mother, Sarah Whitledge Taylor of Poseyville, Ind.; two sisters, Tamara Taylor of Madisonville and Christina Abell of Henderson; his grandmother, Laura Snyder Klutey of Henderson; his grandfather, Daniel L. Whitledge of Morganfield; his step-grandfather, Terry Bum-pus of Morganfield; one aunt, Donna Robbins and her husband, Tim, of Henderson; three cousins, Mason Taylor, Sydney Taylor and Morgan Robbins, all of Henderson; and one nephew, Jackson Abell of Henderson.
Services were Tuesday at Rudy-Rowland Funeral Home. The Rev. Dwayne Wilson officiated. Burial was in Roselawn Memorial Gardens, with full military rites performed by 2nd Battalion, 508th Parachute Infantry Regiment, Fort Bragg.
Pallbearers will be Earl Stone, Michael Stone, Josh Newman, Zack Whitledge, Steven Hargrove, Nick Hoover, Alex Butler and Trevan Butler.
Honorary pallbearers will be Allan Guinto, Jeremy Stills, Jeremy Fisher and Jacob Mayfield.

Load-Date: July 2, 2013


End of Document