Speakers at U. Southern California say terrorist policies inconsistent
University Wire
October 1, 1999


Copyright 1999 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Length: 515 words
Byline: By Meridith Cooper, Daily Trojan
Dateline: Los Angeles
Body


Because terrorism is difficult to define, the United States' reactions toward it are inconsistent and short-sighted, three Los Angeles professors said Thursday at a conference held by the USC Center for International Studies and the Muslim Public Affairs Council.
"Since the 1960s, the U.S. has condemned terrorism without asking why," said Richard Dekmejian, a political science professor. "There is no emphasis on the context."
U. Southern California
Dekmejian suggested that the United States should concentrate on the root of the problem rather than attacking terrorism without understanding what causes people to bomb buildings, hijack planes or hold people hostage.
"People in most cases do not do violence for enjoyment. They do violence because something caused them to," Dekmejian said. There are reasons for terrorist activity, and the reasons are usually based on the United States' policies and its super-power status, he said.
He was joined by other professors who concentrated on different issues related to terrorism. Reuven Firestone, a professor from the Hebrew Union College-Institute of Jewish Studies, dedicated his discussion to Jewish views of terrorism and the problems with defining terrorism.
There are many new interpretations of classical texts, and many conflict with each other, he said.
"It is quite clear to me that if you simply look at different Biblical and Koranic texts, you can find radically different positions on (terrorism)," Firestone said.
Other points of view were shared as well, namely those of Islam by Khaled Aboul Fadl, a professor with the UCLA law school.
"The Koran says, 'Do not respond to injustice with injustice.' The normative values do not rely on terror-inducing means," he said.
However, there are many Muslims who turn to terrorism to solve their problems because "terrorism is not the most destructive form of violence, but it is the most symbolic," Aboul Fadl said.
He also said that there is no clear line between the appearances of terrorist and war-time practices.
"Which is more terrifying - state-sponsored airplanes lobbing missiles at civilian areas or a bomb going off in a building?"
Another criticism of the United States' anti-terrorism policies is that they are not the same for all countries.
"We are not consistent. When violence is done by friends and allies, we don't call them terrorists," Dekmejian said. "But when it's done by enemies, that's terrorism."
He also pointed out the differences between domestic and overseas threats of terrorism and the kinds of activity of which the United States should be more aware of.
"The domestic threat is very overexaggerated. It's overseas where there's a threat," Dekmejian said. "Also, the U.S. should be more afraid of patriot militias than the people who did the World Trade Center bombings."
About 30 faculty members and students attended the conference.
"I wanted to see how things like this are taught in the United States," said Joan O'Donoghue, a sophomore majoring in international relations who came to USC from Ireland.
(C) 1999 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 1, 1999


End of Document