Speaker predicts 'mega-terrorism'; Weapons of mass destruction dot the globe and are not secure
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 12, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Tristate; Pg. a3
Length: 457 words
Byline: MARY NEVANS PEDERSON
Body


There are weapons of mass destruction all around the world that terrorists are looking to buy or steal, says Michael Intriligator, of Economists Allied for Arms Reduction. He predicts "mega-terrorism" attacks in the future.
Intriligator spoke at Thursday's Great Decisions series at the Dubuque Golf and Country Club. He is a professor of economics at the University of California, Los Angeles, with degrees from Yale University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Intriligator says countries with weapons of mass destruction, including so-called "rogue nations," are not an immediate threat to the stability of the world, but the more than 200 terrorist groups worldwide are.
"September 11th was a warning shot. It was the beginning," said Intriligator. "Among the terrorist groups, there is a kind of competition. Sort of, 'Can you top this?' They are looking for publicity and recognition."
Though the terrorist group that bombed trains in Madrid on Thursday used conventional weapons, Intriligator could see such groups using biological, chemical or nuclear weapons in the future.
While some experts dismiss Intriligator's ideas as old-fashioned scare tactics, he says those critics are unrealistic about how the world has changed. Russia has huge stockpiles of uranium and plutonium and no way to dispose of or protect them, Intriligator said. It is also in desperate financial straits.
"It's part of the supply and demand system - Russia has the supply and the terrorists have the demand," he said.
However they obtain the weapons, Intriligator thinks terrorists would have little trouble bringing them into the United States.
"They could smuggle them in easily - in the hundreds of bales of marijuana that come across the borders every month or in container ships or cruise ships. They won't repeat the 9/11 methods. There are many other ways," Intriligator said. "With all our Homeland Security initiatives, we're still just sitting ducks."
Intriligator recommends that the United States work more closely with its allies and the United Nations; try to cut off money streams (mostly funds paid for foreign oil) to terrorist groups; pay to secure nuclear material in Russia; and listen to terrorists and try to understand their grievances.
"Contrary to popular opinion, their anger does not arise from poverty and ignorance. They are trying to right wrongs and restore dignity," he said.
Though a number of countries, from North Korea to India, have nuclear weapons, they are not likely to use them except in self-defense, Intriligator said.
"They want the weapons to protect their turf from American hegemony. They don't have direct grievances with the American people. They realize if they attacked us, we would clobber them," he said.

Graphic

 
Mug - Michael Intrilligator

Load-Date: March 12, 2004


End of Document