SPEAKUP
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 19, 2004 Monday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2004 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A11
Length: 312 words
Body


* Re "Local GOP mess should spur reform," July 9: The shady deals of local Republicans pale next to President George W. Bush's troubling financial connections to Enron, Halliburton and the mutual-fund industry.
 With his buddy Kenneth Lay in hot water, and most of his administration being accused of shenanigans, I'm shocked that George W. Bush didn't think of getting a trial lawyer for his sidekick.
* Someone needs to remind Sen. John Kerry that we are in the Middle East due to terrorism that the Clinton administration chose to ignore, not for oil.
Why is President George W. Bush flaunting John McCain, since he never wanted him for any position in his own administration?
 George W. Bush has taken bold steps in fighting terrorism, which is something that Bill Clinton failed to do and something that Sen. John Kerry is not willing to do.
 July 19th is here. Perhaps Michael Moore would like to announce doing a film on Chappaquiddick?
 Re "Local GOP mess should spur reform," July 9: The shady deals of local Republicans pale next to President George W. Bush's troubling financial connections to Enron, Halliburton and the mutual-fund industry.
 With his buddy Kenneth Lay in hot water, and most of his administration being accused of shenanigans, I'm shocked that George W. Bush didn't think of getting a trial lawyer for his sidekick.
 Someone needs to remind Sen. John Kerry that we are in the Middle East due to terrorism that the Clinton administration chose to ignore, not for oil.
 Why is President George W. Bush flaunting John McCain, since he never wanted him for any position in his own administration?
 George W. Bush has taken bold steps in fighting terrorism, which is something that Bill Clinton failed to do and something that Sen. John Kerry is not willing to do.
 July 19 is here. Perhaps Michael Moore would like to announce doing a film on Chappaquiddick?

Load-Date: July 20, 2004


End of Document