Speaker supports the war on terror: Advocate laments apathy of generation
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
October 18, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 514 words
Byline: Ken Newton, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Oct. 18--WESTON, Mo. -- David Beamer rejects the idea that war in Iraq creates more terrorists. Instead, he believes it creates "more dead terrorists."
The Florida resident, father of a man killed in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, laments that Americans of the "microwave generation" have lost patience with the mission in Iraq and the war against terrorism.
"People continue to hit the snooze button," he told a gathering here Tuesday. "That's a concern."
Mr. Beamer came to Weston as part of a speaking tour for Progress for America Inc., an issue advocacy organization with a current focus on supporting the fight against terrorism. He is the central presence on one of the organization's television ads shown in Missouri in recent weeks.
His son, Todd Beamer, died when he and other passengers stormed the cockpit of hijacked United Flight 93, causing the jetliner to crash in a Pennsylvania field rather than continuing to an attack on the nation's capital.
Speaking to about 70 people at the town's American Legion post, Mr. Beamer said the war against terrorism is actually a war for freedom, and it only ends when every terrorist is dead or defeated. The enemy's ideology, he said, stands in direct opposition to the beliefs of most Americans.
"It's not our fault that they're angry," the speaker said. "We didn't start this war, but we do need to finish it."
The war, he said, started not with the Sept. 11 attacks but decades ago, with hostage taking and assaults on U.S. embassies and military personnel abroad. "Same enemy, same ideology, same purpose," he pointed out.
Mr. Beamer celebrates the United 93 rebellion as a victorious counter-attack against terrorists on American soil. He mentioned several times that 1,497 days had passed since Sept. 11, 2001, and the United States has yet to see another homeland attack. The war in Iraq, the speaker said, disrupts the terrorist's operations.
His message found a receptive audience.
"What happened on Sept. 11 affected all of us," said Lynn Johnson, chief of the West Platte Fire Protection District, which helped sponsor the event. "We might need a boost."
Jeff Elsea of Weston added, "For me, it's just keeping this fresh in my mind. It's a tremendous message."
Mr. Beamer, a native of Ohio and on extended sabbatical from a software company, said the United States needs to present a united front to the terrorists. The enemy, he said, remains incapable of negotiation.
"They don't know how to sing 'Kumbaya,'" he said.
Progress for America claims non-partisanship as part of its tax-exempt status, and Mr. Beamer said he takes no position in his speeches on any candidate seeking office. The commercial in which he appears is airing on broadcast stations in Missouri and Ohio, two states with high-profile U.S. Senate races.
Copyright (c) 2006, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: October 18, 2006


End of Document