SPECTER OF TERROR;
U.S. INDICTS EGYPTIAN CLERIC AS HEAD OF GROUP PLOTTING 'WAR OF URBAN TERRORISM'
The New York Times
August 26, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Column 5;; Biography
Length: 1661 words
Byline: Omar Abdel Rahman

By MARY B. W. TABOR

By MARY B. W. TABOR
Body


The Federal Government charged yesterday that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, an Egyptian cleric known for his fiery Islamic sermons, led a terrorist group that orchestrated the World Trade Center bombing, a second plot to blow up New York City tunnels and buildings, and the 1990 killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the Jewish militant.
In a sweeping new indictment, a Federal grand jury for the first time linked those terror plots together, along with plans for murders, kidnappings and the bombing of American military installations. Beginning as early as 1989, the indictment said, the men aimed "to levy a war of urban terrorism against the United States."
 
Seditious Conspiracy Charged
 Twelve men had already been arrested in the foiled plot to blow up the United Nations building, the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, and the Manhattan offices of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The 27-page indictment tied that plan to others and brought in three new defendants: Mr. Abdel Rahman; El Sayyid A. Nosair, who was charged with murdering Rabbi Kahane but acquitted; and Mohammed Abouhalima, the brother of one of the Trade Center bombing defendants.
All 15 men are now charged with crimes including seditious conspiracy,based on a little-used law that forbids efforts to overthrow the United States Government or hinder law enforcement.
 
Killing of Mubarak Also Plotted
 The indictment charged that the New York City bomb plots and other acts were all planned by a single terrorist organization and that Mr. Abdel Rahman explicitly gave the orders. Mr. Abdel Rahman, along with three others, is also charged with plotting the assassination of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
The indictment also reopens the case of Rabbi Kahane's assassination. Mr. Nosair was acquitted of state murder charges, but was convicted of assault and weapons possession. The new indictment seeks to avoid trying Mr. Nosair twice for the same crime by charging him with the Federal offense of committing a murder to aid a larger conspiracy. [Page B4.]
In seeking the indictment of the sheik, the Justice Department reversed a decision of two months ago. Attorney General Janet Reno decided to prosecute him based on a broad approach to the case that does not charge the cleric with directly taking part in the Trade Center bombing or other terrorist acts. [Page B4.]
Instead, the indictment, using the sedition law, accuses him of being a leader of a continuing conspiracy, but offers only vague details of his role in any individual act.
Mr. Abdel Rahman "was a leader of the organization with whom others consulted in pursuing and planning bombings, murders and other acts of terrorism in furtherance of the objectives of the conspiracy," the grand jury charged in the indictment filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The indictment also charged that the 55-year-old blind cleric mediated disputes between the terrorists, protected the group from infiltration by law enforcement agents and "provided instruction, whether particular acts of terrorism were permissible or forbidden."
Those acts, according to the court papers, also included plans to murder a New York Assemblyman, Dov Hikind, and a State Supreme Court justice, Alvin Schlesinger, who had sentenced Mr. Nosair to prison on weapons charges in connection with the Kahane murder.
Though defendants in the Trade Center bombing were named as co-conspirators, they were not charged in yesterday's indictment. The Trade Center bombing on Feb. 26 killed six people.
Andrew McCarthy, an assistant United States Attorney, said that the Trade Center case was only "a small part" of the conspiracy and would be tried separately starting next month.
 
Extradition Sought by Egypt
 Reports of the new charges against the sheik, who is known as a vehement foe of Egypt's secular government, came after nightfall in Cairo, but were a prominent part of local television and radio broadcasts in that country. Egyptian officials are seeking to extradite Mr. Abdel Rahman on charges that he incited a 1989 riot there.
The sheik, who has been in Federal custody as he fights efforts to force him to leave the United States, has denounced and denied any involvement in the terrorist plots, though his followers have been charged in both cases. The sheik is now expected to be held for prosecution here.
Ronald L. Kuby, a lawyer for two of the defendants in the foiled bomb plot, said the indictment was an attempt to "create an atmosphere of fear and intimidation."
 
Conspiracy Is Derided
 "What they have done is take every allegation, every rumor, evey loose end and created a vast mythical Islamic conspiracy," he said. "They've created a case that is so big and complicated that it is impossible to defend, impossible to understand and impossible for any of these defendants to get a fair trial."
Barbara Nelson, a lawyer for Mr. Abdel Rahman, declined to comment, saying she had not yet seen the indictment and refused an offer to be read portions of it.
Most of the men charged in the terror plots have been followers of Mr. Abdel Rahman, who preached at mosques in Brooklyn and Jersey City since he first began visiting the United States in the mid-1980's. He arrived in 1990 on a tourist visa that Government officials now say was a slip-up.
The cleric has been in Federal custody in Otisville, N.Y., since July, when he surrendered to immigration officials. Though his name surfaced as a possible conspirator immediately after the Trade Center blast, he was only taken into custody after several local and Federal politicians protested and has been held on charges of violating immigration law.
Mr. Abdel Rahman had been living in self-imposed exile in the United States since he was acquitted a decade ago in Egypt on charges that he sanctioned the 1981 assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt.
The new indictment said that in late November or early December of 1991, Mr. Abdel Rahman asked an informer to murder President Mubarak.
 
Nosair Seen as Martyr
 Mr. Nosair, for his part, is considered something of a martyr by young Muslim radicals. He was acquitted of state murder charges in Rabbi Kahane's slaying but was convicted of a related weapons offense. Many of the men charged in the two bomb plots were known to have supported Mr. Nosair during the Kahane murder trial and visited him later in prison in Attica, N.Y.
In addition to charging Mr. Nosair in the two bomb plots, the new indictment accused him of murder in aid of racketeering in the slaying of Rabbi Kahane, as well as attempted murder of a United States postal worker who was standing nearby. Both charges are Federal crimes.
In addition, the indictment charged that in May of 1992, Mr. Nosair asked an informant how to plan for his escape from Attica state prison, how to construct bombs and how to target Jewish people for assassination, including Mr. Hikind, the state assemblyman, and Justice Schlesinger.
The indictment also said that two other defendants, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali and Mohammed Abouhalima, helped Mr. Abouhalima's brother, Mahmoud Abouhalima, a defendant in the Trade Center bombing, flee the United States after the fatal blast.
 
A New Arrest
 It also charged Mohammed Abouhalima and a man who had been arrested in connection with the foiled bombing but not previously charged, Abdo Mohammed Haggag, with conspiring to murder Mr. Mubarak. Mr. Haggag was also charged with involvement in the second bomb plot.
Mohammed Abouhalima, the only one of the three new defendants not in custody, was arrested at his home in Avenel, N.J., yesterday.
The grand jury charged that Mr. Nosair, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny and Mr. Siddig Ali and others met several times and discussed the construction of paramilitary training camps and the construction of bombs.
The indictment said Mr. Siddig Ali "surveilled" U.S. military installations for future bombings. It also said Mr Siddig Ali told a government informer that he had recruited a pilot to help bomb the presidential residence in Egypt and a United States Embassy.
The indictment also charged that other members of the group besides Mr. Nosair were involved in the Kahane killing and that Clement Rodney Hampton-El, a defendant in the foiled bomb plot, had a budget of $176,930 to train other Muslims at paramilitary camps and had a list of weapons to be used there, including assault machine guns and sniper rifles.
Yesterday's indictment, as well as several earlier ones, have relied heavily on secretly recorded tapes provided by the informer, Emad Salem, who provided prosecutors with hundreds of hours of audio and video recordings of the alleged terrorists.
In late June, Mr. Salem, an Egyptian, led Federal agents to a Queens garage, where several of the men said to be mixing explosive chemicals. Defense lawyers charge that Mr. Salem entrapped their clients, luring them into the plots, then taping them making incriminating statements. All of the men have pleaded not guilty.
Prosecutors have said the Government infiltrated the alleged terror ring as long ago as November 1991 but did not get information about the trade center before the attack. They declined to comment yesterday on where the new information contained in the indictment, which includes charges that the conspiracy began in 1989, had come from.
The charges of seditious conspiracy, in addition to allowing prosecutors to bring in evidence that is not specifically related to actual terrorist acts, also carry harsher penalties. It was last used successfully by Federal prosecutors in Chicago in 1986, when members of a Puerto Rican separatist group made a failed attempt to free their leader from prison.
Just before the new indictment was unsealed yesterday, security was increased outside the Federal courthouse in lower Manhattan. More than 150 police officers, Federal marshals and prison guards were assembled and trucks carrying barricades were parked in front as Mr. Nosair was brought in to be held for arraignment, scheduled for today.

Graphic

 
Photo: Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, left, was named in a Federal indictment as the leader of a terrorist plot that included El Sayyid A. Nosair, right, who now faces a second trial in the slaying of Rabbi Meir Kahane. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times; 1990)
 
Chart: "CHRONOLOGY: The Road of the Sheik"
 Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the militant Muslim cleric from Egypt, has been involved with fundamentalist Islamic issues for more than 20 years. He entered the United States three years ago. He was charged yesterday with being a leader in a wide-ranging conspiracy that included the bombing of the world Trade Center and other crimes.
 
1981: President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt is assassinated. Mr. Abdel Rahman, as the religious leader of underground extremist groups known collectively as Islamic Jihad, is charged with inspiring the killing.
 
1984: Mr. Abdel Rahman is acquitted of involvement in Mr. Sadat's killing but remains under house arrest.
 
1986: Egypts gives Mr. Abdel Rahman permission to travel abroad. He is issued the first of four visas to enter the United States.
 
JULY 18, 1990: Mr. Abdel Rahman arrives at Kennedy International Airport.
 
NOV. 5, 1990: Rabbi Meir Kahane, the Jewish militant, is slain. Mr. Abdel Rahman is linked to the man charged with the killing.
 
JAN. 31, 1991: Mr. Abdel Rahman applies to the Immigration and Naturalization Service's office in Newark to become a permanent resident as a minister of religion under the name Omar Ahmed Ali. His application is supported by documents filed by the Magjid-al-Salaam mosque in Jersey City.
 
APRIL 9, 1991: Immigration authorities approve permanent resident status for the sheik.
 
MARCH 6, 1992: Immigration authorites rescind Mr. Abdel Rahman's permanent resident status.
 
JUNE 11, 1992: Immigration authorites recieve an applicatioin for political asylum from the sheik.
 
OCT. 27, 1992: The first hearing on Mr. Abdel Rahman's request for asylum is held in Newark. The hearing is recessed until Jan. 29, 1993.
 
FEB. 26, 1993: A bomb explodes at the World Trade Center causing six deaths, more than 1,000 injuries and over $500 million in damages. The suspects who are arrested have close ties to Mr. Abdel Rahman.
 
MARCH 1993: A Federal immigration judge refuses to grant Mr. Abdel Rahman political asylum. Immigration authroities order the sheik deported. His lawyer files an appeal.
 
JUNE 24, 1993: Eight men are charged in aplot to bomb the United Nations building, the Holland and Lincoln in tunnels and the Federal Bureau of Investigation's office in New York City. At least seven of the suspects are linked to the sheik.
 
JULY 1, 1993: The Justice Department moves to detain the sheik on immigration charges. He surrenders and is placed in Federal custody in Otisville, N.Y.
 
AUG. 18, 1993: The Sheik's lawyer says he might abandon his attempt to stay in the United States if he could be sent to Afghanistan.
 
AUG. 25, 1993: Mr. Abdel Rahman is charged with heading a terrorist organization and giving the orders leading to the World Trade Center bombing and the foiled plot to blow uptunnels and buildings in New York.
 
(pg. B5)

Load-Date: August 26, 1993


End of Document