SPECTER SHIFT ENDS JEWELL HEARINGS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 7, 1997, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 326 words
Byline: KEN FOSKETT, COX NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The status of Senate hearings into the Olympic Centennial Park bombing and the FBI's handling of the Richard Jewell investigation is in doubt because of a committee shakeup involving Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa.
Specter chaired the Senate Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on terrorism and last month presided over the first of what were to be several hearings devoted to the Atlanta bombing. But under new rules adopted by Republicans in the Senate, Specter is barred from chairing two legislative committees at the same time.
Specter will be named the new chairman of the Veterans' Affairs Committee when Congress officially convenes today. Although he will remain on the Judiciary Committee, he will be ineligible to continue as chairman of the terrorism subcommittee.
There are no guarantees that the Senate Judiciary Committee and its chairman, Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, will even re-create the terrorism subcommittee in the 105th Congress.
All subcommittees cease to exist with the close of the old Congress. A decision on what subcommittees will be revived in the new Congress is expected in the next several weeks.
''The best you can say is that it's up in the air right now,'' said Jeanne Lopatto, spokeswoman for the Judiciary Committee.
Even if the terrorism subcommittee returns in the new Congress, there are no assurances that the new chairman and his or her staff will want to pursue the bombing investigation with the same enthusiasm as Specter, who conducted well-publicized hearings into the FBI standoff at Ruby Ridge and made oversight of the FBI a high priority.
Last month, Specter's terrorism subcommittee called FBI director Louis Freeh to testify about the progress of an internal Justice Department investigation into the leak that named Richard Jewell as a suspect in the bombing.
Jewell has since been exonerated.
 
At the time, Specter said he wanted to hold additional hearings into whether the FBI used improper tactics to interrogate Jewell.

Load-Date: January 10, 1997


End of Document