Specter's new role in Senate leaves park bombing hearings up in air
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 7, 1997, Tuesday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL OLYMPICS; Pg. 03A
Length: 344 words
Byline: Ken Foskett; WASHINGTON BUREAU
Series: This story ran only in the Metro Edition of The Atlanta Constitution.
Dateline: Washington
Body


The status of Senate hearings into the Centennial Olympic Park bombing and the FBI's handling of the Richard Jewell investigation is in doubt because of a committee shake-up involving Sen. Arlen Specter (R-Pa.).
Specter chaired the Senate Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on terrorism and presided last month over the first of what were to be several hearings devoted to the bombing. But under new rules adopted by Republicans in the Senate, Specter is barred from chairing a subcommittee like the one on terrorism if he also chairs a full committee.
Specter will be named the new chairman of the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee when Congress officially convenes today. Though he will remain on the Judiciary Committee, he will be ineligible to continue as chairman of the terrorism subcommittee.
There are no guarantees that the Senate Judiciary Committee and its chairman, Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), will even re-create the terrorism subcommittee in the 105th Congress.
All subcommittees cease to exist with the close of the old Congress. A decision on which subcommittees will be revived in the new Congress is expected in the next several weeks.
"The best you can say is that it's up in the air right now," said Jeanne Lopatto, spokeswoman for the Judiciary Committee.
Even if the terrorism subcommittee returns in the new Congress, there are no assurances that the new chairman will want to pursue the bombing investigation with the same enthusiasm as Specter, who also conducted hearings into the FBI standoff at Ruby Ridge, Idaho, and made oversight of the FBI a high priority.
John Ullyot, Specter's spokesman, said the senator will urge Hatch to call hearings into the park bombing as chairman of the entire committee. Lopatto said no hearings have been scheduled.
Last month, Specter's terrorism subcommittee called FBI Director Louis Freeh to testify about the progress of an internal Justice Department investigation into the leak that named Richard Jewell as a suspect in the bombing.
The FBI has since said that Jewell is no longer a suspect in the bombing.

Graphic

 
Photo: mug of Sen. Arlen Specter (R-Pa.)

Load-Date: January 8, 1997


End of Document