SPECTER OF TERROR;
New Threats Prompt Increases in Security
The New York Times
June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 29; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1155 words
Byline: By THOMAS J. LUECK

By THOMAS J. LUECK
Body


Life in New York City has changed in many ways, some small, some large, since terrorist bombings have been added to the list of urban fears.
A large potted fern is mysteriously absent from the elevator bank (because big plants can hide little bombs). There is an unexplained delay in the delivery of an oddly shaped package from the mail room (because someone was suspicious of its contents).
For drivers looking for parking places, the changes may be more obvious. Television cameras are suddenly scanning the faces and license plates of those entering underground garages, and security guards at some outdoor lots are instructing people not to park too close to the buildings (because car trunks can hide big bombs).
Experts in security say these shifts in the urban routine are an inevitable consequence of the terrorist attacks and threats that have rocked New York City this year.
First came the Feb. 26 bombing of the World Trade Center, killing six.  Then, with the arrests last Thursday of eight men charged with planning bombings and assassinations, antiterrorism became a permanent concern for building owners, corporate tenants, security organizations and the police, experts say.
 
'The World Has Changed'
 "The world has changed with the second incident," said Robert J. McGuire, a former New York City Police Commissioner who is now president of Kroll Associates, a company that advises building owners on security.
"We know now that the World Trade Center bombing was not unique and issues of security against terrorism have become very important," he said.
Many terrorism experts are warning against overreaction, however.
"There is presently no heightened sense of terrorist threat due to the recent arrests of eight individuals," said Raymond W. Kelly, the Police Commissioner, in a memo that the department faxed on Friday to the security directors of 900 New York City buildings and companies.
The Commissioner's memo added that the the security executives should "remain vigilant during the performance of their duties in and around the workplace."
But while urging calm, the message sent so quickly by Mr. Kelly reflects a ground swell of antiterrorist precautions and planning across the city. The 900 security executives he contacted are members of the Area Police Private Security Liaison program, known in police parlance as Apple, which was formed in 1986 and has grown rapidly in recent months.
 
Rethinking Security
 In its first six years, the group's membership never exceeded 700 security directors, all of them more concerned about break-ins and other domestic crime than international terrorism. Since the World Trade Center bombing, the group's membership has increased and terrorism is now high on its agenda.
"Everyone has decided to rethink security," said the coordinator of the program, Sgt. Charles Duffy of the New York City police. "The attitude used to be that 'this can't happen to us' -- but that has gone away."
Across the city, or at least among members of the Apple group, advice is being swapped on a variety of security procedures that were previously considered unnecessary.
One is how best to monitor public toilets, because they can be the repositories of bombs. Another involves large office plants -- should they be removed or simply trimmed?
Where most security personnel have become keenly aware of the threat of unobserved cars and trucks carrying bombs into underground garages, Sergeant Duffy said many are now monitoring the loading docks and remote entrances to corporate cafeterias and dining rooms, which can also provide entry for terrorists.
"This is a free country, and we should not create a fortress mentality," said Michael J. McNulty, vice president for protection and public services at Rockefeller Center. "The best defense is for New Yorkers to go about their business normally, and let terrorists know we are not intimidated."
 
New Antiterrorist Measures
 Still, since the World Trade Center bombing, Mr. McNulty and his staff have instituted several antiterrorist measures at Rockefeller Center. His office complex in midtown Manhattan, like the World Trade Center, the United Nations, the New York Stock Exchange and the Statue of Liberty, have sufficient international prestige to be regarded by experts as tantalizing targets for any terrorist group seeking recognition around the world.
The new measures at Rockefeller Center are largely confined to its two underground garages, one with spaces for 700 cars, the other accommodating 600 truck deliveries daily.
People entering the underground area with their cars now pass cameras that record their faces and license plates. When there is reason for suspicion, cars are stopped and their interiors inspected.
 
Electronic Scanning
 At the Statue of Liberty, managed by the National Park Service, the World Trade Center bombing prompted an overhaul of security.  Now, with the arrests of eight other suspected terrorists last week, "concern has certainly been heightened," said Larry Steeler, assistant superintendent of the national monument.
Among the procedures instituted since February, he said, were the use of electronic scanning equipment to investigate the contents of packages of visitors.
At another New York City monument, Lincoln Center, "We went into phase one security, and that means things were stepped up, immediately after the World Trade Center bombing," said David Rivel, the center's vice president for marketing and communication.
As at Rockefeller Center, he said the new security measures were confined mainly to underground parking areas. He declined to specify what measures had been taken, but said that suspicious vehicles were being stopped and inspected.
 
'We Just Don't Say a Thing'
 At most of New York City's best-known public buildings and corporate headquarters, officials declined to discuss security measures, because they maintain that publicity may simply draw the attention of potential terrorists.
"As a matter of policy, we just don't say a thing," Harold Holtzer, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, said Friday. Requests for information were denied by the New York Stock Exchange, the Museum of Modern Art, the Guggenheim Museum, the Empire State Building, the Chrysler Building, Macy's and others.
But security professionals said they believed the owners and managers of every large, internationally known New York City building and tourist attraction had expanded security measures.
At Epic Security Corporation, one of the city's largest providers of private security guards, Mark Lerner, the company's president, said demand for guards had not been higher since the Persian Gulf war in 1991.  Since January, he said, demand for guards has risen 10 percent.
"The increase has not been dramatic, but I'm convinced it will be permanent," he said. "People have waken up to the fact that dealing with the terrorist threat in New York is going to be part of the cost of doing business."

Graphic

 
Photo: Experts in security say new shifts in the urban routine are inevitable consequences of the terrorist attacks and threats that have surrounded New York City this year. A Port Authority police officer observed traffic on Thursday as it approached the New Jersey side of the Lincoln Tunnel. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

Load-Date: June 27, 1993


End of Document