SPECTER OF TERROR: PRECAUTIONS;
Security Was Stepped Up At Two Tunnels and Bridge
The New York Times
June 25, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section B;; Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Column 1;
Length: 561 words
Byline: By IVER PETERSON

By IVER PETERSON
Body


The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey tightened its guard over the George Washington Bridge and the Holland and Lincoln Tunnels this week after investigators warned it that those structures had been targeted for bombing by the suspects arrested yesterday.
But an official at the United Nations declared that the international agency had not been alerted before the arrests. The Federal Bureau of Investigation did not return calls about a possible discrepancy in alerting officials from the two organizations, thought to be the principal targets of what the authorities have termed a conspiracy.
Stanley Brezenoff, the executive director of the Port Authority, said in an interview that the Port Authority had been alerted before the arrests this morning, and that security had been sharpened.
 
Criticized in 1980's
 In the early 1980's the Port Authority was criticized by Scotland Yard, which it had consulted on security issues, for leaving the underground garage at the World Trade Center open to the public. The Port Authority decided at the time that the importance of keeping the garage open to visitors and deliveries outweighed the security risk, officials at the agency said. The bombing of the trade center in February, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000, was traced to an explosives-laden van parked in the garage. The explosive in that attack was of the same type that investigators found in a house in Queens where five of the suspects were arrested yesterday.
The Port Authority, which has maintained increased security at the trade center since the bombing, has long regarded its Hudson River crossings as potential targets for terrorism, a former official with the agency said yesterday. The bridges and tunnels are always open, and planning for the evacuation and ventilation of the tunnels in a disaster has preoccupied the agency since before the age of terrorism.
Indeed, the former official said, the Port Authority's security officials have considered the possibility of an explosives-laden truck being detonated in the middle of a cross-Hudson tunnel.
 
Roadbed Sensors
 The Port Authority some years ago installed sensors in the roadbeds of both tunnels that alert tunnel crews when a vehicle stops amid free-flowing traffic for more than a short time. Dozens of video cameras in the tunnels are used to monitor any stalled vehicles.
Mr. Brezenoff said the motion sensors were installed as much for monitoring traffic as for security reasons.
"There are cameras throughout the tunnels, and I don't mind reminding people that they are working all the time, so we always have an eye on what's happening in the tunnels," he said.
Because of a longstanding ban on the transport of explosives and compressed gas in the tunnels, the agency's police force also conducts periodic inspections of trucks entering the tunnels.
 
An Earlier Explosion
 But Port Authority officials refused to discuss a key question raised by today's arrest: How hard would it be to blow up a Hudson River tunnel?
Peter Yerkes, a spokesman for the agency, pointed out that the Holland Tunnel withstood the accidental detonation of 24 1/2 tons of carbon disulfide carried on a truck that caught fire in the tunnel in May 1949. According to contemporary records, the 1949 explosion ripped out nearly 300 feet of tile and concrete, but did not puncture the tunnel wall.

Load-Date: June 25, 1993


End of Document