Special deputies lending their expertise to sheriff's department
Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Kentucky)
December 26, 2014 Friday


Copyright 2014 Messenger-Inquirer
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 945 words
Byline: James Mayse, Messenger-Inquirer, Owensboro, Ky.
Body


Dec. 26--State law allows sheriff's departments to use special deputies -- unpaid volunteers with some law enforcement training -- to provide extra personnel at large events. The Daviess County Sheriff's Department uses special deputies, but for very specific purposes.
The sheriff's department's roster of special deputies includes two retired generals and a specialist in computer and cellphone forensics. Instead of helping provide security at county festivals, the special deputies examine cellphone data for evidence in criminal cases, provide leadership training, and teach counter-terrorism and active shooter tactics. One special deputy is even
on call as a pilot.
"Historically, we've shied away from special deputies altogether, although they are used in other jurisdictions," Sheriff Keith Cain said. "We've not utilized them primarily because of the liability attached to sheriff's departments.
"But what we decided to do is, if we had someone who had a unique talent who can serve the department and the community we serve," they would be asked to become special deputies, Cain said.
Cheryl Purdy, a retired high school teacher and an instruction in information technology at Owensboro Community & Technical College, is a special deputy who does cell phone data investigations for the department. D. Allen Youngman, a retired U.S. Army Major General, serves as the department's enhanced firearms training director, teaching deputies how to respond to active shooter situations. Retired Marine Maj. General Jerry Humble, who also served as Tennessee's director of Homeland Security, was appointed special deputy to teach leadership and to provide his insight on counter-terrorism and emergency planning.
Purdy recently testified for the department at the trial of Christopher Matthew Johnson, the Owensboro man charged with shooting his ex-girlfriend and her boyfriend in Whitesville in November 2013. On the stand, Purdy testified to finding that Johnson had a picture of the boyfriend on his phone, and that he had been looking at the Topix website thread "best criminal attorney in Owensboro," shortly before the shooting. Johnson was found guilty to two counts of first-degree assault.
Purdy said she joined the department after asking Cain to assist her in getting additional training on cell phone forensics. In addition to working at the sheriff's department, Purdy also does cell phone data searches for the Owensboro Police Department, and has done some cell phone investigation for the Kentucky State Police and the Logan County Sheriff's Department.
"I believe there have been 15 or 16 cases I've worked for the sheriff's office," Purdy said. "When you think about it, your smart phone is a digital record of your life -- where you've been and what you've done.
"I think it's my way of giving back," Purdy said. "Now it's become a passion. I think what I do makes a difference."
In the Johnson investigation, "the information she was able to obtain was critical," Cain said.
Humble, who also works as a leadership consultant, said he teaches communication techniques, how to understand different personalities and "good, basic leadership training."
"I'm also the Daviess County Sheriff's Department's aviation detachment," Humble said. He owns an airplane and is available to the department as the "official eyes in the skies, or prisoner transport."
In the Marines, Humble was commanding general of the Marine Corps Recruiting Depot at Parris Island, South Carolina, and commander of Marine forces in Korea from 1999 to 2001. In addition, Humble taught counter-terrorism tactics to the Royal Marines.
Many counter-terrorism tactics are "completely applicable" to law enforcement, Humble said.
"It's useful not only for terrorism, but for criminal activity in general," Humble said.
Of the counter-terrorism training, Cain said: "While we don't have a tremendous problem here, we aren't naive enough to think it can't happen here."
Humble also represents the department on the Joint Terrorism Task Force in Louisville.
Youngman was a special deputy under former Sheriff Harold Taylor and was an assistant county attorney before he returned to the military in 1987. Youngman also directed the close-quarters firearms training for National Guard soldiers who were preparing to deploy to the Afghanistan and Iraq.
"When I retired, Sheriff Cain called me and asked if I would be interested in being a special deputy," Youngman said. "He asked me to establish a little more focused (firearms) program.
"The program we designed is scenario-based training, which is not what most law enforcement agencies get," Youngman said. "Rather than standing and shooting at a paper target in the distance, this is a little more active."
One of the main goals of the department's firearms training is "helping the officer improve his decision-making skills," Youngman said. "... We feel very strongly the more trained an officer is, the more confident he is, and the less likely he is to make a mistake."
Cain said he and Youngman have also looked at the department's response plans for school shootings. In 2013, Youngman participated in discussions at the White House, led by Vice President Joe Biden, on how to reduce gun violence and school shootings.
"They're not patrolmen," Cain said of the department's special deputies. "... All three of these individuals are extremely qualified in their field of endeavor. We're extremely fortunate to have them on staff."
James Mayse, 691-7303, jmayse@messenger-inquirer.com
___ (c)2014 the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) Visit the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) at www.messenger-inquirer.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC

Load-Date: December 26, 2014


End of Document