SPECTER OF TERROR: ABOUT NEW YORK;
The Images of Horror That Wouldn't Go Away
The New York Times
June 26, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Column 5;
Length: 811 words
Byline: By Michael T. Kaufman

By Michael T. Kaufman
Body


IN common dread the city came together.
Suddenly, everywhere, a brand-new apocalyptic vision was being shared, one that exposed the vulnerability of this island long reaching for the sky.
As it turned out, it was nothing like the old bipolar nightmare of raining ICBM's that for decades had been steeped in so many imaginations. Nor was it like the threatening high-tech machinations of Blofeld and Smersh that we have seen foiled at the last minute of so many James Bond movies.
No, the new model of horror appeared as a garage band of pious amateurs, mixing fertilizer and diesel fuel into a concoction with which to punish New York and presumably chastise the custodians of modern civilization. If the authorities who caught them are to be believed, a handful of cabdrivers and clerks, apparently certain that God was on their side, were seriously planning a series of coordinated murderous explosions to humble and isolate New York.
Because somebody had already used a similar mixture to build the bomb that exploded at the World Trade Center, it seemed reasonable to accept the accounts and be frightened by them.
At the Lincoln Tunnel, one of the apparent targets, it was impossible to drive the 8,006 feet without visions of devastation at ground zero, of water, mud and fireballs. Always a claustrophobic journey, the drive yesterday had drivers looking for hatchways, catwalks and the closed-circuit television cameras with more self-interest than usual.
"I never saw a day like it in my 26 years on the job," Gazetta Culbreth, a toll taker, said during a break at the Weehawken plaza. "You just knew that everybody coming through had the exact same thing on their mind. Every last one of them. Some asked me if things were safe, sort of joking. But even those who kept quiet, you knew they were thinking about the bombs. I know it's what I was thinking when I came through from Manhattan to start my shift."
It was the tunnels that evoked the greatest horror. The tunnels attacked, burning, filled with gas and bodies, and Manhattan, the international city, the bellybutton of whatever world order there is, being torn from the rest of America. It was the tunnels that people talked about as they responded to the arrests and the news of the crushed plot, hardly mentioning the United Nations or the Federal offices that the plotters were also supposedly planning to bomb.
It was visions of the tunnels that had tormented Ramona Resto to the point at which she could not sleep. "I thought how I go across to New Jersey to shop for groceries," the 56-year-old woman said as she watched her young foster child play in Central Park. "I was so scared thinking that something like that could happen at any time."
Nearby, Elsa Rodriguez, 45, was watching a baseball game. "It's too scary," said the woman, who came here from Bolivia. She said her 8-year-old son was so frightened by the news that he turned to comic-book heroes for reassurance. "He told me, 'You know, mommy, maybe Superman can take care of New York.' "
"After the World Trade Center explosion, I thought it was over," said Edgar Blanco, 33, a sanitation worker who was spending his day off in the park with his 6-year-old daughter and 9-year-old son. "Now I realize that there are just too many of those people for the Government to detect."
There were some people in the park and elsewhere who said they thought that the attack on the World Trade Center and the purported plot to strike at the tunnels simply indicated that the city was no longer immune to terrorism. In fact, terrorism has never been a stranger here.
There was George Metesky, the so-called Mad Bomber, who during 16 years before his capture in 1957 left 37 pipe bombs that detonated in public places. True, he was not motivated by anything more than a grudge against Con Edison, but what he practiced was terrorism.
There were bombings in the mid-70's and early 80's for which Puerto Rican nationalists claimed responsibility. In one of these, at La Guardia Airport, 11 people were killed and 75 others injured. In another, at Fraunces Tavern, 4 were killed.
There was also the 1970 explosion at a town house at 18 West 11th Street in Greenwich Village where three people, all members of the Weather Underground, were killed, apparently while making bombs.
There have also been political murders and assassinations, most recently that of Manuel de Dios Unanue, the editor who exposed drug lords.
All these incidents involved terror of some sort and all evoked revulsion and panic. But clearly, something has happened in the last two days to suggest that New York, the most accessible city in the world's last remaining superpower, may be attracting a new, expanded, deadlier and even worse class of terrorist than it has been used to, people without expertise, money or scruples prepared to do the kind of damage once left to nations and armies.

Load-Date: June 26, 1993


End of Document