Speed and vengeance
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 12, 1995, Monday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 8A; EDITORIAL
Length: 434 words
Body


"We should not sacrifice certainty in the name of speed, or fairness in the  name of vengeance."
The argument of Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., against inflexible new limits on  death row appeals could just as easily apply to the Senate's hasty and  haphazard passage of a sweeping anti-terrorism package that conjures up  several concerns about constitutionality.
The legislation includes provisions to expand the government's authority to  tap phones and search personal records. But even more troubling is the habeas  corpus measure that was tacked on to the bill without adequate consideration.
ANTITERROR
It would give death row prisoners only one year from the time of conviction  to appeal their sentences in federal court and would allow them no more than  one appeal there, even if subsequent exonerating evidence is discovered.
The limits on death row appeals are among the legislation's most  contentious provisions. As Biden points out, "The death sentence is unlike  any other. There is no turning back once it has been imposed."
The measure was deemed relevant to the anti-terrorism bill after two  suspects held in the Oklahoma City bombing were charged with a federal offense  punishable by death. In a spineless last-minute about-face, President Clinton  gave in to Republican congressional leaders who demanded the habeas corpus  changes.
The habeas corpus change has consequences that reach far beyond the  anti-terrorism issue. The measure applies to all death row prisoners, not just  those convicted of terrorism. And it applies not only to federal prisoners,  but those held in state prisons as well.
For dozens of inmates who have been released from death row in Florida and  other states, having been wrongfully convicted or having proved their actual  innocence, such harsh and arbitrary deadlines would have meant wrongful death.  
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, who sponsored the habeas corpus measure, argued  that Congress' failure to adopt the limit would be evidence that the federal  government is "not serious at all about fighting crime."
Instead, Hatch and the other senators who rushed to include the measure in  the anti-terrorism package acted as if they are not at all serious about the  Constitution.
It's certainly understandable that Congress wanted to make a swift response  to terrorism after the Oklahoma City bombing. But the Senate and the president  were wrong to pile on so many constitutionally questionable provisions without  considering their full consequences.
Certainty and fairness, as Biden suggested, have indeed been sacrificed in  the name of speed and vengeance.  

Load-Date: June 13, 1995


End of Document