SPJC plays top training role in combating terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 15, 1998, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1998 Times Publishing Company
Section: CITY & STATE; Pg. 7B
Length: 933 words
Byline: AMELIA DAVIS
Dateline: ST. PETERSBURG
Body


Should terrorists strike here or any other place in the United States, those  who respond first will likely have been trained at St. Petersburg Junior  College.
A new program at the college will be the only one of its kind in the  country, teaching emergency workers how to respond to a terrorist act.
The choice of SPJC as the site for the National Terrorism Preparedness  Institute "speaks reams in my opinion," said Carl Kuttler, president of the  school.
It shows, Kuttler said, "We are known for having a significant curriculum  in law enforcement and public safety."
TERROR
George Buck, the 42-year-old former firefighter who heads the program,  expects to train 10,000 firefighters, police officers, emergency medical  services workers, Red Cross employees and others this year. Eventually, he  said, 40,000 to 60,000 people annually will receive training at the institute,  which has headquarters at the Allstate Center in St. Petersburg.
Participants will study the aftermath of such attacks as the bombing of  the federal building in Oklahoma City. They will learn how to plan for  handling such an attack if one should occur in the city they serve. They will  learn about the chemical and biological components of bombs and how to  counteract their effects on victims and rescue workers. They will study riot  control and the roles various agencies play in emergency situations.
"Terrorism is a worldwide concern," Buck said in a textbook he wrote last  year, Preparing For Terrorism. And because of the increasing availability of  weapons as well as the components of bombs and other explosives, "that threat  is likely to remain with us for the foreseeable future."
According to Kay Goss, associate director of the Federal Emergency  Management Agency, the number of terrorist bombings and bombing attempts in  the United States increased 400 percent between 1984 and 1994. In 1994, there  were 3,163 U.S. bombing incidents, including 1,916 explosions that killed 31  people, injured 308 and caused $ 7.5--million in property damage.
Then on April 19, 1995, came the most severe terrorist bombing ever to  occur in the United States. The Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma  City was destroyed, killing 168 people, 19 of them children.
Could such a horrible event happen here?
A bombing such as the one in Oklahoma City could happen anywhere, but  especially in Florida, Buck said. According to statistics compiled by a  monitoring agency at the Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Ala.,  Florida has 48 active "hate" groups, more than any other state. Several have  headquarters in the Tampa Bay area.
"God, rock 'n' roll and the Net fuel the rage," according to the  monitoring agency's most recent report.
Besides the known hate groups, there are untold numbers of individuals who  devote substantial time to perfecting terrorism attacks. The Unabomber, Buck  notes in his book, "terrorized the United States unchallenged by law  enforcement agencies for more than 17 years."
Last year, Congress recognized domestic terrorism as a very real threat to  public safety and authorized the Department of Justice through the National  Guard to establish the institute at SPJC. It is one of three sites that will  deal with the issue, said Maj. Alan Petty of the Florida National Guard in St.  Augustine. The SPJC site is the only one authorized to offer training to those  who will be first on the scene when disaster occurs. Others will have courses  designed mostly for military personnel and management.
Of the three sites, SPJC is the "premier program of its type," said U.S.  Rep. C.W. Bill Young, R-Indian Rocks Beach, who helped secure funding to  establish the institute. "Dr. Kuttler has been really aggressive in finding  ways to be productive in this area" of study.
Young said he has urged Congress for some time to "respond to the need for  anti-terrorism training. We have found that the National Guard is the logical  agency. There are guard units in almost all cities," Young said.
So far, the federal government has committed $ 750,000 to establish the  program and develop a curriculum. Buck plans to hire 13 faculty members to  teach classes at the Allstate Center, over TV or the Internet. Also, staff  members will go to different cities to conduct classes on site. Two men, one  who has a doctorate in chemistry, already have been hired, Buck said. So far,  30 students have enrolled, one from as far as Washington state.
The money is not in place yet for future years, but Young said he is  confident it is forthcoming.
Buck was hired by SPJC four years ago to head its EMS instructional  program. Before that, he spent 15 years as a firefighter and EMS worker,  retiring in 1991 after severely damaging a shoulder while rescuing a woman  from a flipped car. During a stint with the U.S. Fire Administration in  Washington, D.C., he was dispatched to Los Angeles to participate with other  EMS officials in the aftermath of the riots that followed the Rodney King  verdict. Buck, who has a doctorate in public administration, also has written  several books, including one about his year in Los Angeles.
"I've had offers from some major universities," Buck said, "but I like  it here."
He said SPJC administrators give him freedom to operate his program the way  he thinks is best.
"They know I know what I'm doing," Buck said. "They have no idea what  I'm doing."
As long as there is a trace of terrorism, Buck believes his institute will  continue at SPJC as an important resource for emergency workers.
"The threat is very real," Buck that. "Oklahoma City taught us that."

Load-Date: June 16, 1998


End of Document