Split Verdicts for Man Accused of Terrorism
The New York Times
June 10, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 468 words
Byline: By EMMA G. FITZSIMMONS and GINGER THOMPSON; Emma G. Fitzsimmons reported from Chicago, and Ginger Thompson from Washington.
Body


CHICAGO -- A federal jury on Thursday found a Chicago businessman guilty of supporting plans to attack a Danish newspaper that published cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad, but acquitted him of the more serious charge of helping to plot the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India.
After two days of deliberations, the jury also found the businessman, Tahawwur Rana, 49, guilty of a third charge, which involved providing support to the Pakistani militant group Lashkar-e-Taiba.
''The message should be clear to all those who help terrorists,'' United States Attorney Patrick J. Fitzgerald said in a statement. ''We will bring to justice all those who seek to facilitate violence.''
The mixed verdict deals a blow both to Mr. Rana, who faces a possible sentence of 30 years in prison, and the government, which expressed disappointment at the jury's decision involving the Mumbai charge. Prosecutors had built their case largely on the testimony of a Pakistani-American man, David C. Headley, who had confessed to playing a major role in the Mumbai attacks and testified against Mr. Rana to avoid the death penalty and extradition to India.
Mr. Headley's testimony made headlines around the world when he accused not just Mr. Rana but also Pakistani intelligence officers of helping to support the Mumbai attacks. The accusations threatened to exacerbate tensions among the United States, Pakistan and India, especially after American Special Forces discovered Osama bin Laden hiding out in a Pakistani military town.
Mr. Rana's lawyers focused their defense on shredding Mr. Headley's credibility by laying out the deceit that has defined most of his adult life. Mr. Headley, the 50-year-old son of a Pakistani diplomat and a Philadelphia socialite, had a substantial rap sheet long before becoming a terrorist, having previously been arrested for drug trafficking, and then serving as an informant for the Drug Enforcement Agency as a way to avoid lengthy prison sentences.
Mr. Headley confessed to scouting the locations for the attacks in Mumbai, which left more than 160 people dead, including 6 Americans. Mr. Rana and Mr. Headley had been friends since high school. Mr. Rana was accused of using his immigration business to provide cover for Mr. Headley's surveillance activities.
Mr. Rana, a Pakistani-Canadian father of three, was accused of providing similar support for a plan to attack a Danish newspaper. But that attack was never carried out.
Members of Mr. Rana's family cried when the verdict was read. Mr. Rana, however, showed no visible emotion. One of his lawyers said of him, ''I think he's in shock.''
Another lawyer, Patrick Blegen, said of the jury: ''Obviously we're disappointed. We think they got it wrong.''
Mr. Fitzgerald said a decision about Mr. Headley's fate remained ''a long way away.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 10, 2011


End of Document