Sports: Next target for terror?;
The media attention is great. And so are the crowds.
Threat of terrorism still hangs over international sports
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 25, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: SPORTS; Pg. E01
Length: 1349 words
Byline: Mike Jensen INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


Early last year, police investigating a people-smuggling operation in New Zealand made a startling discovery in the home shared by three suspects - a map of Sydney, Australia, with a small nuclear reactor in the city's western suburbs highlighted.
Sydney, of course, was where the Olympic Games were to be held a few months later.
The three men, all from Afghanistan, were arrested. A fourth was arrested in August, a month before the Games. All four are still in New Zealand, free on bond and awaiting trial. The Games were held without incident.
Did the New Zealand police thwart a terrorist plot aimed at the Olympics?
Bill Bishop, national crime manager for the New Zealand police, wonders. The possibility is still "in focus to us," he said in a telephone interview last week. "And it would be nave to suggest it is not uppermost in our thoughts."
*
For nearly three decades, ever since Arab terrorists massacred 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics, the threat of violence has hung like an evil cloud over international sports.
Wherever terrorist groups have operated, sporting events have often been seen as potential targets.
The very nature of large sporting events makes them attractive for terrorists, said Andrew Silke, a professor at the University of Leicester, in England. Silke, a forensic psychologist, specializes in the psychology of terrorists and has recently begun studying terrorism in sports.
"You have a guaranteed media presence and a very large number of people," Silke said. "Even something very, very minor is going to get a massive amount of publicity. . . . The daily risk is going to be very low to any given stadium. It's probably not going to happen. But it still calls for careful security arrangements."
Despite the potential for terrorism at sporting events, the sports world has not had many brushes with terrorism. "You could argue that sporting events are almost lucky they haven't been targeted more," Silke said.
Still, the sports world has seen the following incidents in recent years:
Two weeks before the 1998 World Cup soccer tournament, police in five countries - Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland - arrested nearly 100 suspected terrorists linked to an Algerian group with close ties to Osama bin Laden, who is being sought by the United States in connection with the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
In 1997, the Grand National, the most prestigious horse race in Britain, had to be postponed because of an IRA bomb threat.
In 1996, a bomb went off in Atlanta's Centennial Park during the Olympics, killing one person and injuring 111.
The organizers of major international sporting events have had to make terrorism a central part of their planning.
As a result of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the need to protect sporting events has become even more urgent and the security measures have become more stringent, as anyone who has attended a major-league baseball game will attest.
*
Increased security has become an inevitable feature of modern sports.
Benoit Dupont, a lecturer in policing studies at Australia's Charles Sturt University who has studied terrorism in sports, said government authorities must now consider sporting events "strategic assets to protect. I am not only talking here of the Olympics or the World Cup, but of national leagues' games."
Defending against terrorism will even influence the design of stadiums. In the future, more space will be devoted to security lines, said Bob Stiles, vice president for venue and event architecture for HOK Sport, a sports architectural firm.
Stiles was in charge of operations for the 1999 Women's World Cup and the 1994 World Cup, both of which were held in the United States. He also worked in operations at the Los Angeles and Atlanta Olympics.
"The clear thing is multiple layers of security," Stiles said. "To get speed, you need depth in your system."
He was impressed by the security operations at the 1990 World Cup, in Italy, where there was a line of security well away from the stadium. To get past the perimeter, a spectator needed a ticket. Then there were further checkpoints closer to the stadium.
Stiles also was impressed by the intelligence work of the Sydney Olympic organizers, although he was dismayed to find that "you could walk right through with a backpack . . . particularly if you had a credential. I breezed right through with a backpack full of camera equipment day after day."
Stiles was there studying the operations of the Games. He knew that organizers were concerned that backups at the main security checkpoints would cause congestion at the rail station on the grounds.
Throughout sports, a lot of the security issues come down to "people's willingness to be inconvenienced," Stiles said.
And a lot of issues, at least before the terrorism of Sept. 11, came down to how ready fans were to have their privacy invaded.
A face-recognition system was used at this year's Super Bowl, in Tampa, Fla. The company, Viisage Technology, put in the $50,000 system for free, according to its president, Tom Colatosti, to "showcase" the technology.
But, he said, the company got no business after the game.
"We think all the privacy concerns had scared them away," Colatosti said of his potential customers. "A lot of the criticism at the time - they called it the Snooper Bowl. They called it spying on fans."
*
At most professional sporting events in this country, teams are concerned not only with making people safe, but also with making them feel safe, so they want to come to the games.
While bags will be checked at games and parking will be limited close to stadiums and arenas, nobody is suggesting putting SWAT teams on the roof for NBA games.
The FBI, CIA, Secret Service, and other intelligence agencies will continue to be responsible for preventing professional terrorism. But the professional teams know they also have to increase security to protect fans from copycats.
Peter Luukko, president of Comcast-Spectacor Ventures, which operates the First Union Center and Spectrum, also is chairman of Global Spectrum, the division of Comcast-Spectacor that manages and operates 29 stadiums and arenas around the country. He said he had talked with a lot of arena managers around the Northeast in recent days.
Luukko said that after stopping people with bags and keeping cars farther from the arena, "basically, the security becomes a little more covert. Really, we're looking for something from the outside, an uninvited guest. . . . In the short term, I think you'll see more undercover police officers at events, and more observation of the crowds in the parking lots. It is more simple than at airports, where people are bringing baggage."
Checking bags will be important, said Dupont, the Australian terrorism expert, because "what you can do under the guise of a coffee jar or something like a soft-drink can - you can bring a lot of chemical weapons into the stadium."
*
Traditionally, the athlete has been more closely protected than the fan. However, athletes, and their families, may also be vulnerable to terrorism, especially in the form of kidnapping.
Kidnapping is nothing new in the world of sports.
Just before the 1994 World Cup, the father of the Brazilian star Romario was abducted by kidnappers who demanded a $7 million ransom. Instead of paying, Romario announced that he would not play if his father was not released unharmed.
There was huge worldwide publicity. Acting on a tip, police in Brazil found the father and freed him unharmed.
With all the security measures being instituted at stadiums and arenas, terrorists may look at other ways to strike - and kidnapping prominent athletes or their relatives may be among them.
"You have displacement," said Silke, the forensic psychologist teaching in England. "The terrorist will simply switch. If, for example, it is impossible to plant a bomb in a stadium, then maybe they'd think, what if they kidnapped Michael Jordan? Would that get massive publicity? And, of course, it would."
Mike Jensen's e-mail address is mjensen@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
KURT STRUMPF, Associated Press
Terrorism first rocked the sports world in 1972, when Arab attackers massacred 11 Israeli athletes at the Olympics in Munich.
ERIC DRAPER, Associated Press
Investigators in Atlanta inspected the scene of the Centennial Park explosion, which killed one person and injured more than 100 others during the Olympics.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document