Spotlight for Jan. 4, 2013
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
January 3, 2013 Thursday


Copyright 2013 Bangor Daily News
Length: 761 words
Body


More than 240 arrested in child porn crackdown
WASHINGTON -- U.S. special agents identified 123 victims of child sexual exploitation during a five-week-long global crackdown on child pornography that resulted in the arrests of 245 people in the United States and overseas, U.S. officials said on Thursday.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents launched "Operation Sunflower" to rescue child victims and find people who trade and produce child pornography. The operation took place across the United States and in six countries and involved children as young as 2 years old.
"This operation is ultimately a tale of the perverse, pervasive and violent exploitation of children, very young children, to satisfy the dark pleasures of a group of twisted adults," said ICE Director John Morton. "The grim reality is that online child exploitation is a very real part of our modern lives and is going on throughout the world right now on a grand scale."
ICE's Homeland Security Investigations special agents rescued 44 children directly from their abusers. Most of the 123 victims of exploitation were from the United States but about a dozen were in foreign countries.U.S. drone strike in Pakistan kills Taliban commander
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan -- A U.S. drone strike in northwest Pakistan killed a top Taliban commander responsible for engineering attacks on U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan, Pakistani military and intelligence sources said Thursday.
The death of Pakistani Taliban commander Maulvi Nazir deals a significant blow to insurgent ranks that use Pakistan's rugged tribal regions along the Afghan border as sanctuary from which to launch assaults on Western troops battling Afghan Taliban fighters. Though Nazir was affiliated with the Pakistani Taliban, he had long maintained a peace pact with the Pakistani military and had instead focused his efforts on U.S.-led forces in Afghanistan.
Nazir was in a house in Angoor Adda, a small village in the South Waziristan tribal region, when the drone strike occurred at about 10:40 p.m. Wednesday, killing Nazir and nine other people, military sources and local tribal leaders said.Suicide car bomber kills 27 Shiite pilgrims in Iraq
HILLA, Iraq -- A suicide bomber driving a car killed at least 27 Shiite Muslims at a bus station in the Iraqi town of Mussayab on Thursday, police and medics said, as they were gathering to return home from a religious rite.
The attack, which also wounded at least 60, underlines sectarian tensions that threaten to further destabilize the country a year after U.S. troops left.
Police said the bomber drove into a busy bus station where pilgrims were catching buses back to Baghdad and the northern provinces after the Arbain rite in the holy city of Kerbala, where thousands make an annual pilgrimage.
Mussayab is 40 miles south of the capital Baghdad.
"I was getting a sandwich when a very strong explosion rocked the place and the blast threw me away. When I regained my senses and stood up, I saw dozens of bodies," said Ali Sabbar, a pilgrim who witnessed the explosion.
Arbain has been a frequent target for militants since the U.S.-led invasion that toppled Sunni dictator Saddam Hussein, who banned Shiite festivals.
The latest violence followed nearly two weeks of protests against Shiite Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki by thousands of people from the minority Sunni community in the western province of Anbar, which shares a border with Syria.Britain extradites terrorism suspect to US
LONDON -- Abid Naseer, a terrorism suspect alleged to be part of an al-Qaida plot to blow up targets in the United States, Norway and Britain, was put on a plane Thursday afternoon to face trial in New York next week.
In a terse statement, Britain's Home Office confirmed that "Abid Naseer was extradited to America, where he is accused of terrorism offenses. His case is now a matter for the U.S. authorities."
Naseer, a 26-year-old Pakistani who arrived in Britain on a student visa, was first arrested in Manchester in 2009, along with 11 other Pakistanis, in police raids on suspected terrorism cells in northern England.
In July 2010, a U.S.-based inquiry uncovered evidence of his alleged involvement in a plot with American-based al-Qaida operatives to plant explosives in the New York subway system. Prosecutors demanded his extradition for trial in the United States.
Naseer's lawyers tried to block the extradition, and his case was referred to the European Court of Human Rights, which last month ruled that Naseer could be extradited.
He is expected to appear in a New York court Monday.

Load-Date: January 4, 2013


End of Document