Spying and surveillance is not for stopping terrorism
Indiana Statesman: Indiana State University
March 27, 2017 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 943 words
Byline: Steve Wininger
Body


One cannot walk very long in public without seeing a reminder that we are being watched.
For some, the presence of cameras gives them a sense of security, for others, it is a sense that "big brother is watching them."
Regardless of what you think about surveillance, whether it be cameras in public and private businesses, or the fact the government has the potential to listen in to any of your electronic communications, it is here, and most likely here to stay.
Does spying work?
In light of the recent terror attack outside the British Parliament, the level of surveillance used by British authorities and the number of cameras scattered throughout the country, London makes for a good example of how the surveillance state is not working to defeat terrorism.
In the United Kingdom, there is approximately one camera for every 14 people. That estimate, according to an article in the Telegraph, does not include the number of homes that have surveillance or the number of people that could be using a recording device in a public space at any given moment; it is almost impossible to walk in public without some form of surveillance device noticing you.
While it is impossible to watch that many cameras live at one time, one would think they could stop terrorists from carrying out their heinous atrocities. After all, it is terrorism that has prompted the surveillance state as we know it.
That was the reason of the passage of the United States of America Patriot Act in 2001, and the reason many other countries in the West stepped up their surveillance activities.
After the 2005 terrorist bombing in London, then Prime Minister Tony Blair swore that the U.K. "would stop at nothing to stop terrorism." Not only did the number of cameras increase, but also the amount of other types of surveillance, such as internet and phone communications.
After the attack at Westminster, a familiar pattern emerges. As with so many terror attacks, the government knew of the person, or persons, committing the act, admitting the person had been under previous investigation or surveillance.
According to British Prime Minister Theresa May, the attacker was born in Britain and known to intelligence (MI5).
Just after 9/11, other countries, in addition to the United States, enacted legislation to increase surveillance capabilities in the name of security.
Since then, terror attacks have continued. Too many times, as was the case in the London attack, the government admits they knew of the person before they carried out their terroristic acts.
Of the other western countries, most have experienced additional terror related attacks within their territories since they enacted legislation that increased surveillance and changed how terrorism is defined.
The list is too lengthy to elaborate here, but a simple internet search will, unfortunately, net many results throughout the world where terrorists are still operating, even though the premise of increased surveillance, tougher laws, greater state power and other measures has not stopped terrorism.
In June 2013, Edward Snowden went public about how the Obama administration was using a court order to spy on millions of Americans.
The revelation of data mining confirmed that the government had indeed overstepped its boundaries, at least in the eyes of many citizens and some in Congress and the Senate.
In January 2014, then President Obama explained in a speech in which he outlined revisions to the intelligence operations that there needed to be a conversation about the balance between security and liberty.
Obama mentioned that after 9/11, in a rush to answer the threat of terrorism, that government overreach and the possibility of losing some core liberties in pursuit of security became more likely.
It was the overreach by government that was taking place which prompted Snowden to go public with what the government was doing.
The USA Patriot Act was enacted into law quickly. Only one senator opposed it.
In 2006, during the debate for the reauthorization of the Patriot Act, Democratic Senator Russ Feingold voiced his concern about how the law could lead to a police state.
He warned of the ambiguous language, how the executive branch might interpret the language and how even the interpretations were becoming secret.
Has the excessive amount of surveillance and spying worked?
Since 2006, when the debate was taking place about reauthorizing the Patriot Act, several attacks by those sympathetic to, or part of terrorist organizations continued here and abroad.
One would think that with the level of surveillance, terrorism would virtually be eliminated.
Since the revelations by Edward Snowden, there have been 31 terror attacks in the United States, and only one of those has been thwarted.
Is terrorism being used as a catalyst for the police state that Senator Feingold warned about?
After the most recent terror attacks in the U.K., the Telegraph reported that as many as 5,000 soldiers could be deployed in Britain in the event of a terrorist attack.
While this may seem simple on the surface, the extent to what the government defines keywords is unknown. What is known is that what started out as protection and national security in the form of surveillance grew, and no one really knows the extent of the surveillance.
Could George Orwell's "1984" be coming to pass? Surveillance is now a regular part of society. How much further, in the name of security, are we willing to sacrifice our liberty?
One thing remains certain. Since 9/11, terror attacks have continued regardless of the security apparatus that's in place. How much more is needed to ensure security? How much more are you willing to give up?

Load-Date: March 27, 2017


End of Document