SPYING ON PEACE; FBI ROLE IN MERTON CENTER SNOOPING IS SHOCKING - Correction Appended
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 23, 2010 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-6
Length: 422 words
Body


Citizens of a liberal political persuasion must be the scariest people in Pennsylvania given the attention they seem to attract from authorities these days. In a little over a week, we've seen front-page stories about the surveillance of ordinary citizens because of the causes they support.
Gov. Ed Rendell canceled the state's $103,000 contract with a Philadelphia-based anti-terrorism firm because it collected information on Marcellus Shale protesters among others.
That bombshell was followed by the Justice Department's rebuke of the Pittsburgh office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In a 209-page report, Inspector General Glenn Fine took the local FBI to task for its surveillance of domestic groups and activities protected by the First Amendment.
The Garfield-based Thomas Merton Center came in for particular scrutiny by the FBI. An undercover field agent was dispatched to a Merton-sponsored rally in late November 2002.
That was a time when peace groups were protesting against the Bush administration's plans to invade Iraq. The Thomas Merton Center takes its name and social justice mandate from an American monk who preached and practiced nonviolence.
According to the inspector general's report, there was "no legitimate purpose for the FBI to attend the event." The report describes the surveillance as "ill-conceived 'make-work' " for a new agent.
In 2006, a congressional inquiry was launched once word got out that the Merton Center and other groups had been monitored by the FBI while exercising their First Amendment rights.
The FBI's Pittsburgh office came up with reasons to justify its actions in an attempt to put as good a face on the boondoggle as possible. The inspector general concluded that the Pittsburgh office of the FBI was simply inept.
Despite the lack of a legitimate purpose for being at the protests, the report ultimately backs up the FBI's contention that it was not spying on the Merton Center and other groups from January 2001 to December 2006.
Tell that to the people whose names and photos were entered into a database of potential troublemakers.
The inspector general hasn't let the FBI off the hook, though. It has urged that the FBI review the case to determine if those who made up rationales for its surveillance at rallies after the fact should be punished.
If ever there was a reason to fire someone, the trampling of peaceful citizens' First Amendment rights is up there. Someone's head has to roll to prevent the slide into the kind of country East German spies would recognize.
Correction


 Pennsylvania's contract with an anti-terrorism firm that monitored opponents of Marcellus Shale drilling was worth $103,000. An incorrect figure was used in Thursday's editorial "Spying on Peace."\  ** This story has been modified to correct the dollar amount of the contract. **
Correction-Date: September 24, 2010

Load-Date: September 28, 2010


End of Document