Spying on the People, by the People Comments
The Student Life: Pomona College
February 14, 2014 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 940 words
Byline: Matt Dahl
Body


Fri, Feb 14 at 10:58am
"Explosion at marathon finishline."
April 15, 2013. I was inupstate New York when I got the text from my dad. Out of town, but not out ofBoston. I was more than 300 miles away from home, in one of the most ruralparts of America, yet I had cell phone coverage-and so I might as well have been justdown the street.
Information came in bursts. A tidbit from Facebook. 140 characters from Twitter. A photo from The BostonGlobe mobile app. It came, and I began to piece together the horror that hadoccurred, learning of how a city tradition on a street I had walked alongdozens of times had taken a deadly turn. Nowadays, when an event happens-boom! It happens, and everyone knows about it. Like the aftershock of a bomb,the news travels almost instantly.
Was I afraid? Certainly. Entireblocks of my city were soon put under lockdown in an attempt to locate theperpetrators.
Was I angry? Of course. Red Soxslugger David Ortiz summed up the popular sentiment of Bostonian solidarity afew days later with the pithy phrase, "This is our fucking city!"
But what was I prepared to doabout it?
This was an act of terrorism, tobe sure-the very kind of terrorism the government has been trying to preventsince 9/11. This was terrorism because it inspired terror, something thegovernment is understandably keen to avoid. But events like these, especiallyon the scale of 9/11 and the Marathon bombing, are very rare indeed. TheWashington Post estimates that only 1 out of 20 million Americans are likely todie in terror-related activity annually, whereas gun-related deaths, forinstance, occur at a rate of about 1 in 25,000.
Yet the government's allocationof resources has been so disproportionately skewed toward counterterrorism that one begins to wonder if we are not actually lettingthe terrorists "win" by acting so terrified. This is not to say that terrorismis not a very real threat. But the aggressive means that our government employsto prevent it raise the question: Is it really worth it?
Since 9/11, the government hasespoused a very specific method of counterterrorism: the unprecedented use ofsurveillance to monitor and spy upon enemies of the United States. Was thiswhat we needed more of in the wake of the Marathon bombing?
My answer is no.
Just how wide the surveillancenet is already being cast was exposed in files published last May by formerintelligencecontractor Edward Snowden. Snowden's filesexposed the PRISM program that allows for secret scraping of private socialmedia data, and the National Security Agency's practice of collecting metadatafrom hundreds of billions of American phone calls.
American citizens today are facedwith a very real dilemma balancing these encroachments on their personalprivacy with the desire for security against terrorism. As we move forwardinto an age dominated by technology, "big data," and digital methods ofsurveillance, the question of how to respond to events like the Marathon bombing will arise more and more often as will this question: Is a democratic surveillance state ever possible?
It is, but it is difficult toachieve.
A democratic surveillance statewould be a state in which the people, through Congress, democratically checkedthe usage of surveillance, just as they would police any other issue. Thismay seem obvious, as it is, after all, one of the fundamental tenets of liberaldemocracy upon which this country was founded. But informed regulation is onlypossible if we know exactly what we are tacitly condoning.
As it stands now, Americancitizens have no idea just how much surveillance is going on, and just how muchsecurity is occurring as a result. The key to changing this is to increase thetransparency of the surveillance programs and bring control of NSA and CIAactivities into the public realm.
But that sounds awfully naïve.Why would our government ever voluntarily do that?
There are two reasons. Whistleblowerslike Chelsea Manning and Edward Snowden, working alongside organizations likeWikiLeaks, have shown that classified details of government spying willeventually get out to the public no matter what. Information is more entropicthan ever before. It is harder than ever to keep a secret at a time when online sharing seems almost second nature. If the U.S. government wants to reclaim itslegitimacy, and restore the ethos of a liberal democracy, it should embracethis fact, not run from it.
But secondly, our government isultimately for the people. Our representative republic may be slowly slippingaway, but President Obama's recent curtailing, however paltry, of the NSAprograms was only inspired by the popular outrage of the people. In the styleof Rand Paul, who filed a class action lawsuit against the government this Wednesday, we can all work to effect the justice we desire-and the government knows that.
The Marathon bombing is anexample of a case where crowd-sourcing technology proved to be invaluable in catching the perpetrators. But it also serves as a cautionary taleas to what would be necessary to prevent similar attacks in the future-afterall, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, one of the bombers, was an American citizen. 
To handlesuch problematic circumstances in the future, we must adopt a democraticallymoderated surveillance state going forward. The NSA can continue to pursue apolicy of regulated reconnaissance, because, after all, such programs do havemilitary defense merit. Citizens do want to be safe from attacks like the Marathon bombing. Just not at the expense of living under a system that we donot know enough about and do not trust.
Matt Dahl PO '17 hails from Newton, MA, and is a committed member of Pomona College Mock Trial.

Load-Date: February 14, 2014


End of Document