Sri Lankan faces terror charge in Australia, Australia/NZ News & Top Stories
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 3, 2018 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 420 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Australia has arrested and charged a Sri Lankan man with planning a terror attack after finding "symbolic locations within Sydney" listed as possible targets in his notebook, police said at a press conference on August 31.
Police alleged that Mohamed Nizamdeen, who is on a student visa and employed as a contractor at the University of New South Wales, was in possession of a document used in preparation for a terrorism offence.
"The community should feel safe knowing our law enforcement agencies are working together to investigate all individuals who come to our attention", Detective Acting Superintendent Mick Sheehy said.
'We have both psychologists and investigators looking at that document to try to interpret the intent and capability, but that is in essence the offence that is before the court'.
During the counter-terrorism search, a number of electronic items were seized for further examination.
Officers from NSW's Joint Counter Terrorism Team arrested Mohamed Nizamdeen at Kensington, in Sydney's south-east.
After arresting him at the University during the day, police executed a search warrant on his Zealand address in the middle of the night and plan to conduct further searches on campus on Friday.
Fortnite Week 8 - Search between 3 different oversized seats guide
This Fortnite challenge is a little tougher than normal, since elimination tasks typically require three kills, rather than two. The three oversized seats players will need to find are located in the southwest region of the Fortnite: Battle Royale map.
Nizamdeen is in Australia on a student visa that expires in September.
Australian Federal Police Detective Superintendent Michael McTiernan said the charges were "serious and significant".
He was not known to police and does not have any criminal history in Australia, police said, alleging that "any of the planning was into the future" with "no ongoing threat to the community". Offer: 7 NewsNizamdeen faced court on Friday and did no longer put collectively for bail.Police will insist the 25-365 days-aged became as soon as acting on my own.
Detective Superintendent McTiernan said the allegations were "serious and significant".
"There is a number of locations and individuals named in that document who are potential targets", he told reporters on Friday morning.
It is believed authorities were alerted to the man, after a university employee handed Nizamdeen's notebook into police. "From documentation, he was affiliates with ISIS", he said.
Nizamdeen will return to court on October 24.

Load-Date: September 4, 2018


End of Document