St. Joseph News-Press, Mo., Susan Mires column: Homeland Security pays off in the Heartland
St. Joseph News-Press (Missouri)
January 6, 2008 Sunday


Copyright 2008 St. Joseph News-Press
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS
Length: 487 words
Byline: Susan Mires, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo.
Body


Jan. 6--It's the kind of thing we all know -- and even like -- about Northwest Missouri, but it doesn't usually get printed on travel brochures.
We're not a prime terrorism target.
We do take the threat of terrorism seriously. With the clarity of distance, we realize that Sept. 11 was not an attack on New York or Washington, D.C., but an attack on the United States. I would venture to say that a lot more of the soldiers fighting terrorism in Iraq and Afghanistan come from places like Hamilton, Mo., and Horton, Kan., than Chicago or Los Angeles.
But we also understand that if hijackers start flying planes into the Corby Building, they must be 1,200 miles off course.
For this reason, the region is an unlikely destination for Homeland Security funding. Some watchdog groups have criticized the way security grants have been distributed, saying too much is given to small towns and not enough to metro areas.
Maybe we don't have flashing neon signs that attract attention from the caves of Tora Bora. But you know what we do have? Floods. Tornadoes. Heat waves. Ice storms.
When the Great Ice Storm of 2007 hit, the planning and preparation spurred by Sept. 11 paid off for this region. Within hours after the power going off, emergency shelters were opened in many towns. Communities were organized in their response, communicating with residents and with other towns to get resources where they were most needed.
Fifteen counties in the region received nearly $900,000 in 2006 for Homeland Security. Most of it went to training and equipment. The thing we've seen is that equipment and training can be put to use for any type of emergency -- from a dirty bomb to a flash flood to a child kidnapping.
Even with the federal funding, most of the disaster relief was provided by volunteers. Most shelters were located in community buildings and churches, with volunteers coming in from around the country to help with feeding and clean up.
Terrorist attacks have been blessedly rare in the United States. It makes sense to spend money on things that allow us to prepare for the inevitable natural disasters and also be useful for the remote possibilities. As the Hurricane Katrina catastrophe showed, it can be useful to have resources deployed around the country.
Just in case people need to flee the city from a disaster -- caused by an angry terrorist or raging Mother Nature -- they can be sure small-town America will have a shelter open for them.
Business editor Susan Mires writes a weekly column.
To see more of the St. Joseph News-Press or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.stjoenews-press.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, St. Joseph News-Press, Mo. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: January 6, 2008


End of Document