St. Charles man faces terrorism charge in Nebraska, allegedly had ties to neo-Nazi groups
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 6, 2018 Saturday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1073 words
Byline:  By Nassim Benchaabane St. Louis Post-Dispatch  
Body


An armed man from St. Charles who forcibly stopped an Amtrak train in Nebraska in October is an "alt-right Neo Nazi" who stockpiled weapons in his home, wanted to "kill black people" during recent protests in St. Louis and may have been behind two alleged hate crimes in the area, the FBI said.
Taylor Michael Wilson, 26, is facing a federal charge of terrorism attacks and other violence against railroad carriers and against mass transportation systems.
The charges stem from an October incident in which he allegedly broke into a secured area of an Amtrak train while armed, forced the train to stop and threatened Amtrak staff.
Federal court documents unsealed Wednesday detailed the charge and other allegations, including that Wilson pointed a gun at a black woman driving in St. Charles in 2016 and vandalized St. Louis restaurants with "Whites Only" signs in September.
Wilson had connections to "alt-right Neo Nazi" groups and phone documents that had racist messages or contained instruction manuals that investigators say "are often possessed and utilized by individuals and groups attempting or planning to commit criminal acts or acts of terrorism or violence."
Investigators found multiple weapons, ammunition and other tactical instruments in Wilson's home in St. Charles, including a fully automatic assault rifle and a gun that had been converted into a short-barrel rifle, both potentially violating federal gun laws.
In an affidavit, FBI Special Agent Monte Czaplewski said there was probable cause to believe that electronic devices and firearms possessed by Wilson "have been used for or obtained in anticipation of engaging in or planning to engage in criminal offenses against the United States."
Wilson was first arrested Oct. 22 by the Furnas County, Neb., Sheriff's Office after he broke into a secured area on an Amtrak train and triggered the emergency brakes, bringing the train to a stop in a rural area about 200 miles southwest of Omaha. The train, which had about 175 people aboard, was en route to Missouri from Sacramento, Calif.
An assistant conductor felt the train stop just after 2 a.m. and went to search for the cause, according to the affidavit. He found Wilson seated in the engineer's seat "playing with the controls."
As Amtrak staff attempted to physically subdue Wilson, he kept reaching toward the area of his front waistband and repeatedly yelled, "What are you going to do, shoot me?" the affidavit said. Amtrak staff restrained Wilson and called the Furnas County Sheriff's Office.
Wilson, who has a Missouri concealed carry permit, had a fully loaded .38 caliber handgun in his waistband and a speed loader full of bullets in his front left pocket, according to the affidavit. A backpack that passengers identified as belonging to Wilson had ammunition, a hammer, a fixed blade knife and a respirator-style mask similar to ones used in construction trades.
Wilson was also found with a business card for the National Socialist Movement, according to the affidavit. Investigators searched Wilson's phone and found a white supremacist banner with "‘Hands up don't shoot' is Anti-white fake news – Altright" and other "related postings and videos" and documents with titles including "100 Deadly Skills," "The Anarchists Cookbook" and "Poor Man's James Bond."
The documents "are often possessed and utilized by individuals and groups attempting or planning to commit criminal acts or acts of terrorism or violence," Czaplewski wrote in the affidavit.
Wilson was arrested and charged in Furnas County with felony criminal mischief and use of a deadly weapon during the commission of a felony.
Wilson did have a ticket for the Amtrak, according to court documents. His parents told investigators he was visiting California with a cousin and was returning to St. Charles to attend classes.
A judge ordered Wilson to undergo a competency evaluation in late October at his attorney's request. He was found competent to proceed, and was later released on Dec. 11 on bail, according to court records. He returned with his parents to their home in St. Charles .
After obtaining a warrant, investigators searched the home Dec. 21 and found a stockpile of ammunition and gun accessories including a tactical vest, 11 AR-15 rifle magazines, hundreds of rounds of ammunition, several additional handgun and rifle magazines, gunpowder and ammunition reloading supplies. Investigators also found a handmade shield and white supremacy documents and paperwork.
Wilson's father later turned over to investigators 15 firearms including handguns and rifles, ammunition and other accessories belonging to Wilson.
Wilson did not have a criminal history but was a suspect in a "road rage" incident in St. Charles in 2016, the affidavit said.
According to St. Charles police, a black woman told police April 16, 2016, that a white man in a green SUV had pointed a gun at her for no apparent reason while the two drove eastbound on Interstate 70, Czaplewski wrote in the affidavit. The car's license plate was traced to Wilson, who tried to turn himself in to police but would not say what he had done.
The report was placed in inactive status after police could not find the victim, the affidavit said.
A relative who had moved in with Wilson in a home in St. Charles last June told investigators that Wilson had been "acting strange." He said Wilson had joined an "alt-right" Neo-Nazi group that he found researching white supremacy forums online and traveled with members of the group to the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Va., and took a shield and bulletproof vest with him.
He said Wilson normally carried a .38 caliber handgun and had 20-25 guns, including an AK 47, AR-15s and an M-4 rifle.
The relative told investigators that Wilson "expressed an interest in ‘killing black people' and others besides whites, especially during the protests in St. Louis," the affidavit said. Wilson's relative alleged he and other members of his white supremacist group were behind the "Whites Only" signs put up on restaurants in The Grove in September. The relative also described a time when Wilson became angry and pointed a gun at someone while driving down the highway that matched the description of the alleged road rage incident in St. Charles, the affidavit said.
Wilson is now back in federal custody, according to court documents. He was arrested Dec. 23 after the complaint against him was filed in federal court in Nebraska.

Graphic

 
 Taylor Michael Wilson. Photo by the Lincoln Journal Star.  

Load-Date: January 8, 2018


End of Document