STAGE: 'HOW IT ALL BEGAN,' 60'S TERRORISTS STORY
The New York Times
June 19, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 3, Column 5; Weekend Desk; review
Length: 958 words
Byline: By FRANK RICH
Body


''HOW IT ALL BEGAN'' began as an improvisational exercise for third-year acting students at Juilliard. Its classroom origins, I'm afraid, remain all too clearly apparent in the polished version, directed by Des McAnuff, that opened at the Public last night. This documentary theater piece tries hard to deal with a volatile topic - contemporary urban terrorism - in a factual, objective manner. While the evening's studious approach is to be applauded, ''How It All Began'' could do with fewer facts and a lot more political and theatrical sophistication.
The project's starting point is a 1975 memoir by Michael (Bommi) Baumann that was published here in 1979 under the title ''Terror or Love?'' Baumann was a working-class kid who grew up to become a violent left-wing guerrilla in the West Germany of a decade ago. He founded the extremist June 2d Movement and subsequently went into exile; just this year was he arrested in England and extradited to Germany, where he now awaits trial. According to the program, the actors have augmented Mr. Baumann's autobiography with their own scrupulous research compiled from ''newspaper articles, personal interviews, political pamphlets, government statements and statistics, and pertinent books about Baumann's contemporaries.'' Out of this mass of material, they have tried to tell the story not only of Mr. Baumann, but also of such colleagues as Rudi Dutschke, Ulrike Meinhof, Georg von Rauch and Andreas Baader.
Frank Rich reviews play, "How it all Began," adaptation of Michael Baumann's autobiography
It's a potentially worthwhile notion. Though many of the real-life figures of ''How It All Began'' have now faded from view, their lives continue to have relevance in a world where terrorism shows no signs of abating. Unfortunately, the creators of this enterprise -who also include an ''editor,'' John Palmer - are overly awed by their own research. In their desire to show off all the information they've gathered about the terrorists' history, they have neglected to bring their characters alive as people. They have filled out Mr. Baumann's story without fleshing it out.
What we get are stylized re-enactments of famous violent acts, many quotations from the public record, and a few slight personal ''scenes'' (set in communes and bedrooms) that are as stereotyped as any in a 60's Hollywood movie about the counterculture. The only order imposed on this recitation of sometimes arcane minutiae is a chronological one. The company would rather tell us the date of every single event in Mr. Baumann's story than refract those events through an incisive point of view.
If a few observations about the terrorists do emerge, they're stated rather than dramatized. None of them is startling. We're told of the predictable conflicts between the proletarian protagonist and his intellectual, middle-class cohorts; we also see, in banal shorthand, how the hypocritical sexism of male radicals alienated their female peers. Much is made of the symbiotic relationship between Baumann's jerrybuilt ideology and his infatuation with rock music and drugs. Yet this connection is not so much explored as endlessly repeated - usually by the deployment of such pointedly chosen songs as ''My Generation,'' ''Working-Class Hero'' and ''Sympathy for the Devil.''
With the exception of the amiable but mechanical actor who plays the lead, the cast members (now all graduated from Juilliard) do as well as possible by their multiple non-roles. Mr. McAnuff, whose Dodger Theater production of Wolfgang Hildesheimer's ''Mary Stuart'' was a highlight of last season, tries hard to give the evening the look of theater. The splintered scenes pop up all over the place on Heidi Landesman's all-purpose set, a charred and bombed-out building facade. Slides are projected to show us actual news photographs of the people and incidents described, and the lighting by Fred Buchholz is exceptionally clever.
But ''How It All Began'' is still an evening in the library stacks - a steady accretion of unshaped, unassimilated details that tell us little we didn't know before arriving at the theater. If we learn anything besides a lot of proper names and dates, it's only that even a subject as explosive as terrorism can be turned into a tedious chalk talk.
 
Terror Tamed
HOW IT ALL BEGAN, an adaptation of the autobiograhy of Michael (Bommi) Baumann; written and compiled by Benjamin Donenberg, Jessica Drake, Paula Fritz, Brian Hargrove, Mary Lynn Johnson, Val Kilmer, Linda Kozlowski, Liane Langland, Des McAnuff, Gregory Mortenson, Patrick O'Connell, John Palmer, Kim Staunton, Pamela White and Richard Ziman; edited by Mr. Palmer; directed by Mr. McAnuff; scenery by Heidi Landesman; costumes by Leslie Calumet; lighting by Fred Buchholz; stage managed by Mo Donley; featuring the members of Group X of the Stage Division of the Juilliard School. A Dodger Theater Production presented by Joseph Papp. At the Public Theater's the Other Stage, 425 Lafayette Street.  Lead Singer, Antje, Farah Diba, Sohnlein and Bank Teller ..................................Kim Staunton Michael (Bommi) Baumann ....................Val Kilmer Rudi Dutschke and Tommi Weisbecker Benjamin Donenberg Georg von Rauch ........................Brian Hargrove Peter Urbach and Policeman ..........Gregory Mortenson Annekatrin, Benno and Astrid (Rosie) Proll Paula Fritz Fritz Teufel and Hans Werner ............Richard Ziman Rainer, Sergeant Kurass and Judge ...Patrick O'Connell Angela Luther ..........................Liane Langland Ulrike Meinhof ..........................Jessica Drake Gudrun Ensslin ......................Mary Lynn Johnson Andreas Hans Baader ...................Pamela M. White Hella .................................Linda Kozlowski


End of Document