Stakes high, Bush and McCain square off again on tribunals; The president backed down in the last round. The senator seems to have the advantage this time.
The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 17, 2006 Sunday


Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A03
Length: 882 words
Byline: Julie Hirschfeld Davis, BALTIMORE SUN
Body


Behind the big election-year fight over new rules for terrorism tribunals is Round Two of a showdown between a pair of Republican heavyweights: President Bush and Sen. John McCain of Arizona.
Bush was forced to back down last winter and accept McCain's blanket prohibition of "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment" of detainees. Bush said Friday that same language would be "a good way to go" in their latest fight.
But McCain is having none of that, and, once again, he seems to have the upper hand.
McCain appears to have enough votes to block Bush's plan, which, the senator says, would put "America's reputation" at risk. Bush implied that if McCain's side got its way, it would weaken the U.S. fight against terrorism.
"It's a debate that really is going to define whether or not we can protect ourselves," Bush said at a Rose Garden news conference.
For both men, the stakes could hardly be higher.
The struggle with McCain and a handful of like-minded Senate Republicans is threatening to rob Bush of a key element of his strategy for boosting the party's candidates in the fall elections: offering aggressive measures that showcase a tough-on-terrorism approach and painting Democrats as weak when they oppose them.
McCain isn't on the ballot this fall, but the fight with Bush could jeopardize the careful balance he has struck in attempting to advance his own presidential ambitions.
The 70-year-old senator stokes his considerable crossover appeal each time he wages a high-profile struggle with the president. But to win the party's nomination, McCain needs the conservative support that a tight alliance with Bush could enhance.
Analysts say Bush could stand to have McCain's stature on national security issues rub off on him at a time when his party's control of Congress is in jeopardy.
"McCain has more credibility on this issue than the president," said Donald J. Guter, a former Navy judge advocate general who is dean of Duquesne University's law school.
"For a lot of voters, a reasonable agreement is what John McCain says it is," said Dan Schnur, a California-based Republican consultant and former McCain campaign spokesman.
As top White House aides work to break the deadlock over how to treat and try detainees, McCain, who was tortured and spent 51/2 years in a North Vietnamese prison, is at the center of their efforts.
Bush "tries to shape these proposals always with Senator McCain's input," said Mark McKinnon, an adviser to both men, believing that, on national security issues, "it's better to have him" on the president's side.
The president says he needs wide latitude to interrogate and try terror detainees, including a measure that would essentially free the United States from international standards barring some forms of prisoner mistreatment. McCain is balking at the move, which he calls an effort to amend a treaty - known as Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions - and a move that could endanger future American captives.
McCain has teamed with two other Republican senators, John Warner of Virginia and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, on a rival measure that would set up military commissions where the accused would have some basic trial protections, such as the right to see evidence against them, and bar coerced statements.
The Senate Armed Services Committee approved the measure Thursday, with bipartisan support, the same day that McCain's office released a letter from former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in which the former Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman sided with the rebellious Republicans against Bush.
Bush argued that the rival measure would force the CIA to end its secret prison operation for detaining and interrogating high-value terrorism suspects, though he stopped short of saying Friday that he would veto it.
Bush was careful not to publicly criticize McCain. And White House spokesman Tony Snow disputed the notion that the two men were in a "battle royal" or a "shootout at the O.K. Corral" over the detainee issue.
Stephen J. Hadley, the president's national security adviser and point man in dealing with McCain over terrorism-related issues, has huddled with the Arizona senator in efforts to hammer out a deal.
It was Hadley who worked with McCain last year on an amendment barring prisoner treatment that "shocks the conscience" - a less stringent standard, some legal analysts said, than the one in Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, which also bans "humiliating and degrading treatment." Bush's detainee measure says the provision McCain wrote satisfies U.S. obligations under the Geneva Conventions.
By using McCain's standard, said Douglas W. Kmiec, a Pepperdine University law professor and former Reagan administration lawyer, Bush was aiming to win the senator's support.
"It gives [Bush] a level of legitimacy by striking an alliance with Sen. McCain and trying to strengthen that alliance," he said.
But McCain appears unwilling to accept any rules narrower than Common Article 3 - even ones he wrote himself.
"What shocks the conscience depends on the circumstances," Kmiec said. Bush's measure "allows for interrogators who suspect that somebody has information of an imminent and severe harm or threat to the security of the United States to engage in a proportionately more adverse interrogation practice."

Load-Date: September 17, 2006


End of Document