Standalone terrorism coverage available, affordable; Some say standalone capacity could be exhausted if TRIA is allowed to expire
Business Insurance
March 21, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 12
Length: 902 words
Byline: GLORIA GONZALEZ
Body


If the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act expires at the end of the year, risk managers will not be left completely without options if they want to buy terrorism coverage.
Standalone terrorism coverage, which is not supported by the government backstop, is available for risk managers and the price of the coverage, though sometimes high, is not always prohibitively expensive, observers say.
However, while there is sufficient capacity to meet most of today's demand for standalone coverage, the expiration of TRIA could fuel demand to such a level that standalone capacity might be exhausted, some observers say.
When Caesars Entertainment Inc. made its first foray into the standalone terrorism insurance market, for example, Lance Ewing, vp-risk management, found the market to be responsive and the pricing satisfactory.
''I found the standalone to be much easier with regard to the purchase of'' terrorism insurance, he said.
High limits for a price
The standalone terrorism insurance market has grown significantly in the last two years, observers say. New York-based American International Group Inc. and Lloyd's of London have traditionally been the main players in the standalone market and still provide a significant portion of the capacity.
AIG's Lexington Insurance Co. unit provides up to $100 million in terrorism capacity for property risks and up to $25 million for casualty coverages, said Charles Benda, practice leader for Lexington's homeland security practice, who works in New York and Boston.
Lloyd's entities offer about $400 million in terrorism limits, said Ben Garston, partner of London-based MAP Underwriting and chair of Lloyd's Market Assn.'s Terrorism Insurance Business Panel.
But recent increases in capacity in the standalone market have come from Pembroke, Bermuda-based AXIS Capital Holdings Ltd., Hamilton, Bermuda-based ACE Ltd., Bermuda-based Montpelier Re Holdings Ltd., and a few other players. Omaha, Neb.-based Berkshire Hathaway Inc. can also provide significant capacity-upwards of $500 million-although its pricing tends to be prohibitive, brokers say.
The influx of new capacity means standalone terrorism coverage with limits of less than $500 million is generally easy to secure, but securing limits above that level can be difficult and expensive, brokers say.
Policyholders can buy as much as $1.25 billion in capacity, if they are willing to pay the price, but that kind of demand is rare, said Will Farmer, director of Aon Crisis Management in London. ''Generally smaller limits have been the norm and Berkshire Hathaway has been barely active in the market in the last 12 months,'' he said.
Generally, pricing for terrorism coverage has fallen significantly from the levels that were charged shortly after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks because of the increase in capacity and a better understanding of the exposure, brokers say. ''I think the standalone market has become more competitive with TRIA,'' said Robert Blumber, managing director of Marsh's property practice.
Underwriters develop quotes for specific risks based on a variety of factors, including the location of the insured property, size of the organization and their aggregation of risks in particular geographic areas. ''There's no way to quantify the average premium,'' Mr. Benda said.
A building in Manhattan, for example, could potentially have a premium of 0.20% to 0.25% of its value while the premium for a building in a more remote area could be 0.02% to 0.04%.
Broad cover outside TRIA
Standalone terrorism policies cover terrorist attacks committed for political, religious and ideological purposes and they offer broader coverage than TRIA-backed policies because they cover acts of both foreign and domestic terrorism.
The policies exclude chemical, biological and nuclear risks because this type of terrorist attack ''would probably involve so much property we wouldn't be able to pay all the claims,'' said Mr. Garston of MAP.
Some insurers, however, do offer coverage endorsements that extend terrorism coverage.
Lexington, for example, offers its BioChem Shield, which is an endorsement to property terrorism coverage for consequences of biological and chemical attacks that result in property damage or business interruption claims, Mr. Benda said.
Lexington has also developed a product for contingent business interruption losses not covered in traditional standalone products. Under the policy, OpShield, an insured can buy coverage for business interruptions losses caused by damages to its suppliers or port.
A key question for the standalone market is how it will be impacted if TRIA ends. ''I think if TRIA is renewed, it will sort of be a status quo,'' Mr. Blumber said. ''I think what will happen if TRIA is not extended is there's going to be a very significant rush to the standalone market. I'm not sure the standalone market, as it stands right now with the capacity it has now, will be able to respond to the needs of our clients should TRIA go away.''
Brokers are already looking at alternatives, such as reserving standalone capacity, if TRIA expires. The standalone market has offered products that provide an option for coverage-at 20% of the annual premium-that insureds can pick up if TRIA expires, Mr. Farmer said. ''I think the smart buyers are trying to reduce uncertainty now by spending money so that whatever happens with TRIA, they'll be in reasonable shape,'' he said.

Load-Date: March 23, 2005


End of Document