Stand with Israel to combat all terrorism
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 27, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; LETTERS
Length: 307 words
Body


Editor, New Era:
The apocalyptic attack that took place against America two weeks ago was an attack on all civilization. We were chosen because we are the only superpower that remains in the world today.
#MART.S252770#We represent the quintessence of what the radical Islamic extremist groups hate and vilify: our affluent lifestyle, culture and capitalist values.
This has been further exacerbated by our sanctions and interference against primarily Muslim nations that give aid and succor to terrorism.
This attack would have occurred despite our policies and support for the State of Israel, our principal ally in the Middle East.  Recently, some individuals have suggested that we should stop aid to Israel. This would be an egregious error, since it would amount to playing into the hands of the terrorists.
For Israel is the only true democracy in the Middle East. It has always been a source of unwavering support for the United States and it is strategic to our national security.
Now more than ever, we should understand the daily struggle that Israelis must face against the reign of terror perpetrated by Islamic extremist groups. This in addition to the daily onslaught from many Arab newspapers, Arab intellectuals and in school textbooks, calling for the destruction of Israel, Jews and Americans.
This is the time for all Americans to stand strong with Israel and our allies everywhere to eliminate the scourge of terrorism.
At the same time, we must stop the discrimination and racial-profiling of Muslims, since the majority condemn and find these terrorist acts abhorrent. Even during a war, the Koran expressly forbids such extreme acts against civilians and innocents.
In order to succeed, we need to show solidarity among all people of good faith.
Dr. Robert A. Matlin
President
Lancaster Jewish Federation
Chair
Lancaster Jewish Forum

Load-Date: September 29, 2001


End of Document