Stand up for war against terrorism
University Wire
January 14, 2002


Copyright 2002 Vanderbilt Hustler via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 800 words
Byline: By Blake Dvorak, Vanderbilt Hustler
Dateline: Nashville, Tenn.
Body


We may be afraid to admit it, but the war against terrorism will get worse long before it gets better. USA Today reported recently that there are now more than 4,000 American ground troops in and around the region of Afghanistan. Last week, my home state of Illinois activated 1,300 National Guard soldiers who are now preparing to enter the war against terrorism. For now, we do not know if this means Afghanistan or elsewhere.
Even if we could avoid admitting it, this war is indeed a reality in our times. If we all secretly yearn to live in interesting times, we need only to open our eyes to see that history is now surrounding us. Even if we understand that some extraordinary historical event has occurred, something even more extraordinary and tragic might await us only weeks, or even days, away. That is the nature of war; we simply cannot know where it will lead.
Vanderbilt U.
The flood of American soldiers on their way to foreign shores tells us that war directly effects our homes. While I found myself lying lifeless on my couch, nursing the holiday hangover, my friend described over the din of a football game the new tactics he was learning to weed out stubborn terrorists from their fortified caves. His casual manner jarred my self-induced apathy.
Even if we believe our much-touted apathy is not a result of our backgrounds, nor our inherent selfish nature, but, rather, a reality of our times, we cannot avoid the friends who will soon find themselves in a place where a word like apathy has no meaning. We would rather believe that we live in uninteresting times.
Not all college campuses have students who feel this way. The University of Washington Student Senate rejected a resolution supporting the U.S. government's war against terrorism. Believing that the war is racist in nature and imperialist in action, they have chosen, as a single voice, to protest Operation Enduring Freedom.
A commendable effort, no doubt, and one that can easily be overlooked since I am pretty certain President Bush will not be changing his tactics anytime soon.
Nor do I believe that the official statement released by the students and faculty of Hampshire College will have a dramatic effect in any cosmic sense. An excerpt of the statement read: "'The War on Terrorism' is symptomatic of the racism of American society, in its disregard for the lives of people of color overseas..." and so on.
"We would rather believe that we live in uninteresting times. "It might be easy for us to shrug off these statements and symbolic acts as self-righteous students and faculty eager to rehash the glory days of campus activism. Sorry guys, this is not Vietnam.
Imagine, however, if the little ripple these schools created took on a more substantial form simply by strengthening their support base. Where's Berkley? Where's Brown? Not too far behind the University of Washington or Hampshire College, I imagine.
I must commend the efforts of these institutions, if only for their activism. They have recognized, at least, the significance of these times. While the Vanderbilt community sleeps on the couch in front of the football game, they have quietly pushed themselves awake to find their voice. It is time for Vanderbilt to get off its couch. If we do not act soon, the voices of dissent will continue to grow unabated, until the reasons for this present war have been forsaken and our troops return home to an ungrateful nation. We cannot allow our fellow students' protests to go unanswered.
As a supporter of the war, it is obvious that I am not alone. As a vociferous defender of our soldiers, our Marines and our own ROTC students, I hope to find a supportive campus.
As members of our own campus community, we should have given our full support to our government, our president and our troops, some of whom sit next to us in class, long ago. The fact that we have not done so means that we have failed as a community.
We failed first when we remained silent while bombs began to explode over the skies of Afghanistan. We failed again when Veterans' Day passed by without so much as whisper of gratitude on our part to the Vanderbilt veterans, and we continue to fail each day that this war lasts without some formal response from us.
The voices of protest will only grow louder if we cannot find the strength to answer them. Let the arbiters of morality forsake our men and women fighting overseas; they have their words, and we have ours. Chancellor Gee, faculty members, president and members of SGA, it is your duty to rally the strength of the Vanderbilt community. Our continued silence will only cause us to forget that war exists in our times; our ability to forget will only lead us to forsake those who are fighting it.
(C) 2002 Vanderbilt Hustler via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 14, 2002


End of Document