Standing tall in the face of terrorism
The Delta Statement: Delta State University
February 20, 2015 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 321 words
Body


Jessica Woods
Copy Editor
On Feb. 15, a carnival parade in Braunschweig, Germany was called off less than two hours before it was scheduled to begin due to what police spokesman Thomas Geese called a "concrete threat of an attack with an Islamist background."
According to an article on the website for the BBC, this parade, which is held the week before Lent, is one of the biggest in its region, drawing around 250,000 visitors each year.
Ulrich Markurth, city mayor, called this a "sad day for our city ... and a sad day for our democratic society."
Indeed it was. I can understand why the mayor and police force cancelled the parade and urged visitors to stay at home. However, I also understand the message this sends to any would-be terrorists: it is possible to achieve the desired effect through threats. Now, I'm not in any way saying that such threats should not be taken seriously.
I am saying that we should recognize at what point our reactions to these threats gives way to a culture of fear.
Stéphane "Charb" Charbonnier, one of the Charlie Hebdo cartoonists killed in the Jan. 7 shooting, once said that he would "rather live standing than die on my knees." According to an article on the website for The New York Times, Charbonnier said this in response to having his name on a list of Al Qaeda's targets for cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad nude.
For Charbonnier, continuing his work as a satiric cartoonist was his way of speaking out for freedom.
For others, like my aunt, it is doing what they believe is right in the face of danger; she's working as a nurse in Jordan.
We can all find our ways of standing against such terror. Exercise your freedom of speech and religion; this is what these terrorists want to rid us of the most.
It is imperative that just as these terrorists stand in their conviction of their beliefs about the way society should be. We stand taller in our conviction of our right to freedom.

Load-Date: February 20, 2015


End of Document