Stanford prof makes the connection between terrorism, media
University Wire
December 21, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 The Linfield Review via U-Wire
Length: 622 words
Byline: By Corinne Oates, The Linfield Review; SOURCE: Linfield College
Dateline: McMINNVILLE, Ore. 
Body


James N. Breckenridge spoke on the psychology of fear management and terrorism to about 30 students and faculty members in Pioneer 201 on Tuesday night. Breckenridge, whose speech focused on the relationship between terrorism and the media, was a guest of the psychology department. He is a professor and director of clinical training at the Pacific Graduate School Stanford Consortium and a consulting professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Stanford University School of Medicine, where he also teaches. Breckenridge also is a Distinguished Senior Fellow at the Center for Homeland Defense and Security at the Naval Post-Graduate School.
"Modern terrorism depends fundamentally on you knowing about it through the media," Breckenridge said.
Terrorists are essentially the same as everyone else, he said. "When we look at terrorists it doesn't seem to be the case that they're crazy," he said.
Rather, Breckenridge said, terrorist acts are attributed more to situational dynamics or a combination of group, social and personal beliefs and a need for a change or to make a statement.
He began his speech by arguing that by creating images and garnering media coverage in the United States, terrorists are successful because their actions are getting attention.
Breckenridge further discussed how people are naturally drawn to images and stories of violence as part of an instinctive need for knowledge about how to protect ourselves. He said part of the brain is drawn to negativity.
"We devote more attention, more cognitive response [to negative information]," he said.
Later in his speech, Breckenridge re-visited this point with his discussion on how images affect us and how we perceive risk. "People who have images are much more likely to think what they see in an image will happen," he said, referring to the drop-off in airplane travel sales after Sept. 11, 2001, because of a fear of plane crashes despite the low statistical probability. "The way we see risk is affected by our emotions."
Breckenridge said images are a large part of what we connect with mentally, as they stick with us better than words or stories. With images and stories, the more we are afraid of what we see, the more likely we are to perceive it as a risk. One of the images he referred to was the live broadcast of the planes crashing into the Twin Towers on Sept. 11.
To emphasize his main points and show accompanying images, Breckenridge used a Microsoft PowerPoint presentation that included news broadcast clips, newspaper articles and images and other media pieces.
Breckenridge said people are afraid of the negative events in the world, despite the low probability of anything like a terrorist attack or hurricane, because the media focus on the negative events. The two-hour lecture included a few stopping points for questions and ended with a short question-and-answer session during which audience members could to get involved in the discussion.
"I thought it the psychology he attributed to the willingness to commit suicide bombings and other such acts [was interesting]," sophomore audience member Corey Crowley-Hall said.
Breckenridge pointed out that although terrorists do recognize attacks shown through the media have an effect on people, he said he does not know if they recognize the full cognitive process that causes the effect and if they purposely work toward affecting individuals subconsciously.
"I liked it overall," junior audience member Abe Kaul said. "He made a lot of good points and he was a good speaker."
The psychology club will next host visiting speakers Bob Hitsemann and John Crabbe's speech "Behavior, addiction and the brain lecture" in Portland on Tuesday, Feb. 28.
(C) 2005 The Linfield Review via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 21, 2005


End of Document