Start lobbying on TRIA now
Business Insurance
March 22, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 8
Length: 300 words
Body


DEC. 31, 2005, may seem far in the future, but in Capitol Hill time, it might as well be next week.
Congress often moves slowly, particularly on matters of great importance.
And one of the most important matters it is likely to confront between now and the end of next year is whether the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act should be extended beyond its Dec. 31, 2005, sunset.
The terrible bombings in Madrid earlier this month should underscore for lawmakers that the risk of terrorism remains high.
That's why we encourage risk managers, insurers and everyone else with an interest in a federal backstop for losses from a catastrophic terrorism event to waste no time in making their case to Capitol Hill. Without that effort, other issues easily could divert congressional attention and a federal backstop could be lost. Without a federal backstop, there's no guarantee that insurance policies in force on Jan. 1, 2006, would provide any coverage for terrorism-related losses.
And we say ''backstop'' rather than ''TRIA'' deliberately. TRIA in its current form was not intended to be a permanent program. Members of Congress-remembering the often acrimonious debate over ancillary issues that dragged out final approval of TRIA more than a year from the legislation's introduction in the weeks following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks-might be wary of going through that process again.
Maintaining an uninterrupted federal terrorism insurance backstop for private insurers is the critical issue in this effort.
Efforts have begun to educate lawmakers on the importance of a federal backstop. That's a welcome development, and it must be strengthened.
A successful drive to maintain the federal backstop-whether through an extension of TRIA or some other means-is a must if the nation is to be ready for Dec. 31, 2005.

Load-Date: March 24, 2004


End of Document