STARVING TERROR THOSE WHO WOULD DROWN THE MIDEAST PEACE PROCESS IN BLOOD ARE FINDING THEIR OPTIONS MORE LIMITED
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
July 28, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A20; EDITORIAL
Length: 445 words
Body

"You just have to carry on," the British Jew said yesterday, as he picked through the debris caused by the bombing of his place of employment. And carry on they did at the Joint Israel Appeal in London, after a bomb smashed windows and injured only five people because it exploded in the empty middle of the night.
The toll was higher 12 hours earlier, when 14 people were hurt by a car bomb explosion near the Israeli Embassy in the swank Kensington section of London. The toll was higher still on July 18, when a bomb blew up a commuter plane in Panama, leaving 21 dead, mostly Jews. The death toll is at 105 and may still grow in Buenos Aires, as rescuers continue searching the remains of a Jewish community center destroyed July 17 by another car bomb.
The timing of these attacks is no coincidence, coming just before and even during the ceremonies ending the state of war between Jordan and Israel. Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin blamed Islamic terrorist movements determined to undermine the Arab-Israeli peace process, and he was not contradicted by his new partner-in-peace, Jordan's King Hussein.
Of course, this isn't the first time Arabs and Jews have paid the ultimate price for seeking to reconcile their warring tribes. King Hussein witnessed his grandfather's assassination in 1951 by Palestinian extremists. Anwar Sadat, the first Arab leader to sign a peace treaty with Israel, was killed by his opponents. And so on.
The signing of a declaration of principles between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization last September prompted a stream of violence that still sputters. The closer the peace gets, the more violent its critics tend to become.
Still, there is a more hopeful context to view Mideast terrorism. A deranged person shooting at a crowd in Hebron or Tel Aviv is one thing, but importing weaponry, personnel and strategy into nations like England and Argentina requires the kind of sophisticated support, resources and immunity that only a sovereign nation can supply. And there are fewer countries nowadays eager to foot the bill. The Soviet Union doesn't exist anymore; its Warsaw Pact allies have more pressing internal concerns. China and Cuba have dropped out of the action.
And, if the stalled negotiations with Syrian President Hafez al-Assad can get moving, Syria may be less inclined to host and direct terrorist activity. That could leave only a few nations - principally Iran - as potential sponsors.
An optimistic scenario? Certainly. In the meantime, the modus operandi must be, as an Israeli diplomat put it: "Advance the peace process as if there is no terrorism and fight terrorism as if there is no peace process."

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document