State lawmakers revisit anti-terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
May 23, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Pantagraph
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 334 words
Byline: Karen Blatter
Body


SPRINGFIELD - State lawmakers and Attorney General Jim Ryan are making a second run at getting an anti-terrorism law on the books in Illinois.
The bill's fate before Gov. George Ryan, however, is unsure because the proposal continues to include the death penalty for terrorists who murder.
On Wednesday, a House committee unanimously approved a revised version of the package proposed last year by the attorney general. It would change the requirements for a firearm identification card and would allow officials to eavesdrop on terrorist-related conversations.
The governor recommended a majority of the measure, but specifically said he did not favor the death penalty portion.
"I am hopeful the governor will sign it, I don't see any good reason not to sign this bill," the attorney general said. "We have addressed every concern he has had, except for making the crime death eligible. If someone carries out an act of domestic terrorism that results in the loss of life should at least be death eligible."
The Sept. 11-inspired legislation was approved last fall, but George Ryan in February made several changes to the package and returned it to lawmakers. He told the General Assembly it needed to approve his changes, which included removing a death penalty provision, before he would sign it.
The governor filed a 12-page explanation about his actions, saying lawmakers were reacting to the events of Sept. 11 and not fully thinking about the measures they passed.
Jim Ryan is the Republican candidate for governor in November. George Ryan will not seek a second term.
Critics say the bill repeats federal laws and is unnecessary.
The attorney general disagrees. "The fact that there are federal laws does not mean we don't pass state laws," he said. "We should give the police officers the tools to deal with terrorism. Illinois does need this bill."
The package goes before the full House for a vote. House Speaker Michael Madigan, D-Chicago, predicted the measure would be approved and sent to the governor.

Graphic

 
Jim Ryan

Load-Date: May 23, 2002


End of Document