State gets $3M in drug deal; 
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
October 6, 2010 Wednesday


Copyright 2010 Lincoln Journal Star All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B1
Length: 780 words
Byline: NANCY HICKS
Body


Nebraska Attorney General Jon Bruning recently announced a national settlement with the manufacturer of Seroquel, an anti-psychotic drug.
Nebraska's Medicaid program will get more than $3 million from the settlement, which resolves claims of kickbacks and other illegal marketing.
The city-county jail has had its own problems with the pricey drug.
Corrections Director Mike Thurber hopes to contract out all jail medical services to a private company, in part to cut down on prescribing Seroquel for inmates.
Thurber told county commissioners recently that the jail spent about $100,000 on Seroquel last year, because it is the current drug of choice of the psychiatrists.
Omahans fight tax
A group of restaurant owners upset about Omaha's new 2.5 percent restaurant tax filed a lawsuit last month to try to stop it.
Lincoln plans to impose a 2 percent bar and restaurant tax and a 4 percent hotel and car rental tax beginning Jan. 1 to help pay for its $168 million arena project.
So Lincoln city leaders are watching the Omaha case.
The suit contends the city is trying to do an end run around the 1.5 percent lid on the Omaha sales tax.
The plaintiffs lost the first round. A Douglas County District Court judge refused to grant a preliminary injunction last week, saying restaurant owners failed to show the new tax was a sales tax or that it would cause their businesses irreparable harm.
A very broad state law allows cities to have an occupation tax. (To read more about that tax, check out the state Department of Revenue website: www.revenue.state.ne.us.)
Omaha's 2.5 percent tax is expected to raise $14.8 million a year. Most of the money will be used to shore up the city's police and fire pension fund.
Lincoln's new occupation tax on bars, restaurants, hotels and car rentals is expected to raise about $10 million a year.
The Lincoln tax seems to be accepted by local businesses as a part of the plan for the arena, Councilman Jonathan Cook said this week.
Grand Island imposed a 1.5 percent tax on food and beverages two years ago to pay for improvements at the new Nebraska State Fair site.
Occupation tax No. 2
That new iPhone will cost you another $12.
The city began collecting a 6 percent occupation tax on telecommunications equipment Friday.
Retailers already have been collecting the 6 percent tax on the telecommunication service itself. The council and mayor expanded that to equipment purchased at retail.
The city is guessing broadening the tax will bring in about $666,666 for the 10 months it will be in effect this fiscal year.
National search duds
Mayor Chris Beutler decided to forgo a broad search when he named Judy Halstead as the next Health Department director, saying he had found a "jewel within."
The city and county used open searches for many previous directors.
Well-respected Director Bruce Dart came through an open, local search. He was visiting his parents in Bee and saw the ad.
But some previous national searches have turned up a few odd eggs.
Former Mayor Mike Johanns named Ted Mala, a former health commissioner of Alaska, after a national search. Mala withdrew after a reporter found he had been criticized by legislative auditors in Alaska for diverting funds in his departmental budget.
The next director, Leon Vinci, who came to Lincoln from Connecticut, didn't get a raise in his two years before being suspended by then-Mayor Don Wesely. Vinci resigned.
Views of terrorism
City and county government have different views on the need for terrorism insurance.
Lancaster County includes $5 million in terrorism insurance in its liability coverage. For about $5,700 a year, the county policy covers the fallout from an act of terrorism.
These are not your garden-variety acts of destruction, however. It doesn't apply when some angry yahoo shoots up the Hall of Justice.
An act of terrorism must be committed by a person or person acting on behalf of foreign interests, explained Sue Eckley, the county's risk manager.
The acts of terrorism must be certified by three federal officials: the secretary of the treasury, the secretary of state and the U.S. attorney general.
The city, however, traditionally has decided to forgo this coverage in its insurance package.
"We don't know that we are a prime terrorist target," said Mark Koller, director of the Personnel Department.
"It's a little expensive and maybe not appropriate."
Jail two years off
The new city-county jail likely will be finished in June 2012, according to the latest timetable.
The contractor is 134 days behind schedule because of rain and wind.
Corrections Director Thurber expects to be moving prisoners into the new cells that winter.
Reach Nancy Hicks at 402-473-7250 or nhicks@journalstar.com

Load-Date: October 8, 2010


End of Document