State faces threats other than just terrorism
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
January 29, 2004, Thursday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2004 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 337 words
Byline: CURT WOODWARD, Associated Press
Body


Events such as chemical spills and extreme weather are keeping North Dakota officials prepared for the worst, though they are unlikely to face a terrorist threat, an expert says.
 Steve Hightower, a U.S. Army Special Forces veteran and terrorism consultant, spoke at a workshop for emergency managers Wednesday in Bismarck.
 'North Dakota is probably not really high on the international terrorist target list,' but a long Canadian border means authorities have to be ready, Hightower said.
He pointed to the 1999 arrest of Ahmed Ressam, who was apprehended as he tried to enter Washington state from Canada with explosives in the trunk of his car. Ressam has since been convicted of planning to bomb the Los Angeles airport during millennium celebrations.
 Even after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, 'We still have fairly porous borders,' Hightower said.
 Doug Friez, the state's emergency director, said North Dakota's food supply and its hydroelectric dam on the Missouri River could be targets for sabotage.
 Violent natural forces, however, often are the focus for state emergency officials.
 'North Dakota has specific challenges, and the weather is among the most significant,' Friez said.
 The state had more than a dozen major disaster declarations in the past decade, including the Red River flood of 1997, Friez said.
 Lingering drought across the western United States also poses problems, including high fire danger and the threat of water shortages, he said.
 A depleted Lake Oahe was blamed last year when the water supply dried up on North Dakota's Standing Rock Indian Reservation, and the town of Parshall has modified its water intake as Lake Sakakawea approaches a record low level.
 'If the drought continues, there's a chance that there could be more of those types of situations,' Friez said.
 A hazardous material spill -- such as the January 2002 train derailment that sent a cloud of toxic anhydrous ammonia farm fertilizer over part of Minot -- also tests the state's emergency system, Hightower said.

Load-Date: January 30, 2004


End of Document