State anti-terrorism laws proposed
Chicago Daily Herald
October 17, 2001, Wednesday Cook,Lake,Fox


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 631 words
Byline: Shamus Toomey Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


One month after suggesting Illinois needs tougher laws to fight terrorism within its borders, Attorney General Jim Ryan Tuesday put forth a package of proposed legislation and urged the General Assembly to make it law this fall.  
The ideas developed by Ryan and a task force of law enforcement groups range from expediting the search warrant process by giving judges the power to approve warrants over the phone, to allowing investigators to tap all the phones linked to a terror suspect, not just a single line.  
Ryan's announcement came a day after Gov. George Ryan again urged restraint from state lawmakers who might want to write laws that would simply duplicate the federal government's authority.  
Jim Ryan insisted the package he presented is not a duplication, but an enhancement to get local and state law enforcement up to speed.  
"It's definitely not a duplication," he said. "The state has the duty to respond to acts of domestic terrorism, and we have to have the legal wherewithal to do that. The president himself has said that the states play a vital role and are partners in this effort."  
The attorney general said he consulted with U.S. Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald, the area's top federal prosecutor, and with other members of the U.S. Department of Justice on the proposal, which he said mirrors a recently-passed New York state law.  
The Elmhurst Republican, who is seeking his party's nomination for governor, bristled at any implication his announcement amounted to political opportunism. "This fits in the category of doing my job as attorney general," he said. "That's where you categorize this."  
A spokeswoman for primary opponent Lt. Gov. Corinne Wood, stopped just short of accusing Jim Ryan of playing politics, but did question the need for the new proposed legislation.  
"We question the possible duplication," Wood spokeswoman Tressa Pankovits said.  
The campaign manager for GOP governor candidate state Sen. Patrick O'Malley of Palos Park questioned why Jim Ryan supports the state's current death penalty moratorium but calls for the death penalty for terrorist attacks.  
"If we're going to make this tough, let's make this tough," said Don Peloquin, campaign manager for O'Malley, who wants to lift the death penalty ban.  
The legislation would create an anti-terrorism statute for the first time in Illinois. It also would allow, for the first time, for terrorism suspects to have their phones tapped after a judge determines probable cause, the attorney general said.  
And that wiretap warrant would apply to a person, and not to a phone line, in an attempt to thwart suspects from using multiple phones to evade eavesdropping.  
Cook County State's Attorney Dick Devine, a Democrat who endorsed the new proposals Tuesday, said that provision could be used in the fight against gangs as well.  
In addition, the new proposals would give the attorney general power to freeze the assets of suspected terrorists; would make it a criminal and civil violation to financially support terrorists, subject to prison terms and civil forfeitures; and would expand the death penalty statute to make terrorism convictions eligible for capital punishment.  
In addition to Devine, the proposals garnered support from the associations that represent Illinois sheriffs and police chiefs. Prosecutors representing McHenry, DuPage and Will also were on hand in Chicago Tuesday to endorse it.  
A spokesman for the Illinois branch of the American Civil Liberties Union said the group wants to review the package first before commenting. Jim Ryan stressed he thinks the laws are "within constitutional parameters" and would not lead to racial profiling or diminished civil liberties.  
"The only people that have to be worried about this legislation are terrorists," he said.

Graphic

 
Jim Ryan

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document