STATE TOURISM UP DESPITE TERRORISM FEARS, ECONOMY
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 30, 2003 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C-8
Length: 305 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: VIENNA
Body


Despite fears of terrorism and a lackluster national economy, Gov. Mark R. Warner said tourism in Virginia continues to increase.
Speaking yesterday at the Virginia Governor's Conference on Travel and Tourism, Warner said leisure travel to the state increased 11.6 percent in 2002.
Despite a drop of 4.7 percent in business travel, visits to the state were up 6.4 percent overall.
"This increase shows the strength and resilience of Virginia's travel industry and the commitment of the more than 211,000 Virginians employed in it," Warner said. The tourism industry serves as the state's third-largest employer.
Warner credited the rise in tourism to initiatives between Virginia tourism officials and private industry. He expects another boost when the Smithsonian Institution's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center - part of the National Air and Space Museum - opens this December at Washington Dulles International Airport. Officials are also planning a 2007 celebration marking the 400-year anniversary of the Jamestown settlement.
Warner said he believes people are vacationing closer to home, in part out of fears about terrorism and SARS. He said about half the nation's population lives within a day's drive of Virginia and that 48 percent of tourists to the state come to visit relatives. As part of the governor's emphasis on tourism, he has signed an order requiring state agencies to try to persuade trade organizations in their fields to bring their conventions to Virginia. In the 14 months since Warner signed the order, 41 new conventions have been booked.
Warner has declared the week of May 10 Virginia Tourism Week and plans radio and TV commercials that feature him encouraging visits to Virginia sites. He said yesterday that he will be taking his own advice this summer. "Look for me when you least expect it," Warner said.

Load-Date: May 1, 2003


End of Document