Statement by Arafat and Jews
The New York Times
December 8, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk; Text
Length: 351 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: STOCKHOLM, Dec. 7
Body


Following is the text of a joint declaration issued today by a delegation of American Jews and a delegation led by Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, as presented by Foreign Minister Sten Andersson of Sweden:
The Palestine National Council met in Algiers from Nov. 12 to Nov. 15, 1988, and announced the declaration of independence, which proclaimed the State of Palestine and issued a political statement.
The following explanation was given by the representatives of the P.L.O. of certain important points in the Palestinian declaration of independence and the political statement adopted by the P.N.C. in Algiers.
Affirming the principle incorporated in those United Nations resolutions that call for a two-state solution of Israel and Palestine, the P.N.C.:
1. Agreed to enter into peace negotiations at an international conference under the auspices of the U.N., with the participation of the permanent members of the Security Council and the P.L.O. as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, on equal footing with the other parties to the conflict. Such an international conference is to be held on the basis of U.N. Resolutions 242 and 338 and the right of the Palestinian people of self-determination, without the external interference, as provided in the U.N. Charter, including the right to an independent state, which conference should resolve the Palestinian prob-lem in all its aspects;
2. Established the independent State of Palestine and accepted the existence of Israel as a state in the region;
3.
Declared its rejection and condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, including state terrorism;
4. Called for a solution to the Palestinian refugee problem in accordance with international law and practices and relevant U.N. resolutions (including right of return or compensation).
The American personalities strongly supported and applauded the Palestinian declaration of independence and the political statement adopted in Algiers and felt there was no further impediment to a direct dialogue between the United States Government and the P.L.O.


End of Document