STATE NOT TAKING ANY CHANCES ON TERRORISM BUDGET INCLUDES MONEY FOR BOMB SUITS, ROBOT, OTHER EQUIPMENT
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 02, 1997, Wednesday


Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 494 words
Byline: STEPHEN SINGER
Body


Terrorism poses little threat in West Virginia, but state law
enforcement officials are not taking any chances.
State legislators, prompted by Delegate Barbara Warner, D-Harrison,
inserted in the Budget Digest, the catalog of spending instructions to
state agencies, $ 250,000 sought by the state Fire Commission to
purchase anti-terrorism equipment.
"With the way the world is, even the way West Virginia is right now
with the militia problem, I think it's much needed," Warner said.
Mountaineer Militia leader Floyd "Ray" Looker and six others with
militia ties are accused of plotting to blow up the FBI fingerprint
center in Clarksburg.
The matter is a federal case, but state law enforcement officials want
to increase protections in West Virginia.
State Fire Marshal Walter Smittle cited more distant acts of
terrorism: the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York in 1993,
which claimed six lives, and the bombing of the Alfred Murrah Federal
Building in Oklahoma City two years later that left 168 dead.
The Internet is a culprit, providing easy access to information about
how to build pipe bombs and incendiary equipment, he said.
Smittle said state police have for years collected and disposed of
explosives but need more sophisticated equipment.
The money, set aside for a program to be jointly operated by the state
Fire Commission and state police, would pay for bomb suits, X-ray
equipment, a vehicle to transport bombs or suspected bomb packages,
photographic equipment and a robot to enter potentially dangerous
areas, Smittle said.
With a price tag of between $ 55,000 and $ 70,000, the robot would be
the costliest item, he said.
In addition, fire officials and state police are adding three bomb
specialists to the three already at work, Smittle said.
The anti-terrorism program will be based in southern and northern
areas of the state, possibly in Charleston and Clarksburg or
Morgantown, though officials have not decided. It will be in operation
in about six months, Smittle said.
West Virginia will join Virginia, Ohio, Maryland and a least one
Pennsylvania county in toughening efforts to find and dispose of
bombs, he said.
But bombings and bomb threats in West Virginia are rare, a state
police officer said.
Other than occasional arrests on charges of making and setting off
low-charged bombs and telephoning bomb hoaxes - a fraudulent report
was made last weekend in Campbells Creek - bombs do not pose a threat
in West Virginia, said Maj. Chuck Starcher, who heads support services
for the state police.
"The majority of our calls are not bombs," he said. Most callers want
help getting rid of military shells dating to World War I or World War
II, he said.
Contractors last week unearthed World War II-era mortars in the Dolly
Sods Wilderness, a onetime Army training area.
Law enforcement officials need to be prepared for possible bomb
threats and attacks, though West Virginia is not especially at risk,
Starcher said.
"As far as a growing problem, I can't say that," he said.

Load-Date: July 3, 1997


End of Document