State hesitant to go public with oil info; Terrorism, 'trade secrets' cited on railroad shipment routes
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 13, 2014, Saturday


Copyright 2014 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P1A
Length: 1034 words
Byline: Ken Ward Jr., Staff writer
Body


Amid continued national controversy over increased rail shipments of crude oil, West Virginia emergency response officials are reconsidering whether they will make public more detailed information provided by CSX Corp. about the company's rail shipments of crude oil through the state.
The state Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management turned down a June public-records request from McClatchy Newspapers for information CSX gave the government under an emergency federal order that followed several fiery crashes of crude oil trains around the country.
In July, after a Gazette-Mail request under the state's Freedom of Information Act, Homeland Security officials indicated that they were taking a closer look at the issue.
On Friday, Melissa Cross, coordinator of the State Emergency Response Commission, said the request for the CSX crude oil shipping information "continues to be under legal review at this time.
Across the country, states have taken varying positions on whether they would make public material submitted by railroads under the emergency order issued in May by the U.S. Department of Transportation in response to concerns about increased shipments of crude oil from the Bakken region of North Dakota and Montana.
Between 2010 and 2013, crude oil production in the Bakken region tripled. The DOT noted a string of incidents involving rail shipments of crude oil, including the July 2013 explosion of an oil train in the Quebec town of Lac-Megantic, which killed 47 people. Closer to West Virginia, in late April, a CSX train carrying 3 million gallons of Bakken crude derailed in Lynchburg, Virginia, causing a fire and spilling oil into the James River. The DOT has expressed concern over such incidents and noted that oil from the Bakken region is more volatile than is typical for light, sweet crude oils.
In its May emergency order, the DOT told railroads operating trains carrying more than 1 million gallons of Bakken crude to notify state emergency officials "regarding the expected movement of such trains through the counties in each state.
The DOT order required railroads to provide states with estimated volumes of Bakken crude, frequencies of anticipated train traffic, and the routes through which Bakken crude would be transported. The idea was that states could use the information to prepare for, and help local emergency response officials prepare for, any crude oil railroad incidents.
CSX provided a package of information to West Virginia emergency response officials in June. T.D. Lively, a spokesman for the state Homeland Security agency, said CSX had marked the two pages containing requested routes and schedule information as "confidential security information - meaning it needed to be kept secret, for anti-terrorism reasons - and as "proprietary business information.
After railroads began citing anti-terrorism concerns as a reason their crude oil shipment information shouldn't be made public, a spokesman for the DOT's Federal Railroad Administration said the material was not exempt from disclosure as "security-sensitive information under federal anti-terrorism rules.
Later in June, state Homeland Security Director Jimmy Gianato turned down McClatchy's request for that information, noting that CSX had marked it "proprietary and citing a section of West Virginia's public records law that includes an exemption for certain "trade secret information. Then, in July, Lively indicated that the state was re-examining that determination.
"We are reviewing the records to determine whether this information is actually a protected trade secret and exempt from FOIA disclosure or is public information, Lively said in an email. "As you know, some states have released the information, some have denied release, and others have yet to make a decision. We are reviewing the document and applicable laws to sufficiently respond to the FOIA request.
Under West Virginia law, state agencies that receive FOIA requests have five days to provide the requested material, advise the requester of the time and place when they may inspect and copy the materials, or deny the request in writing, stating the reasons for such denial.
CSX communications director Carla Groleau has said that, on average, CSX traffic includes about two crude oil trains per day across the railroad's entire system. That's up from about one such train last year, CSX officials have said. A system map posted on CSX's website shows that crude oil trains travel across the railroad's Southern West Virginia system, but provides no other details. Groleau said that, while CSX "is committed to sharing what it hauls, and where it goes, with first responders, that customer shipment information is "sensitive and proprietary.
During an email exchange in July, Groleau said CSX had developed and deployed "special technology that allows first responders to track rail shipments "in virtually real time. She said this technology, called SecureNow, was providing emergency officials in 19 states, including West Virginia, access to data on the location of CSX trains and their contents. However, Lively said at the time that no one in the state's Homeland Security office was using SecureNow. On Friday, Cross said agency employees have now been trained to use SecureNow and have access to the system.
Lively said state officials had not used the CSX crude oil shipment information to make any changes in West Virginia's emergency response plan. The routes identified for crude oil shipments were already being used "for multiple hazardous materials and were "previously identified as a potential hazard for local emergency response officials, Lively said.
On Thursday, the Sierra Club and other groups filed a lawsuit against the DOT, alleging that the federal agency is not doing enough to ensure the safety of crude oil shipments.
The groups say federal officials did not respond to a legal petition filed in July that sought to prohibit Bakken crude from being carried in older tank cars, known as DOT-111s. The DOT proposed in late July to phase out those cars, but the process could take several years.
Reach Ken Ward Jr. at kward@wvgazette.com, 304-348-1702 or follow @kenwardjr on Twitter.

Load-Date: September 15, 2014


End of Document