State National Guard tapped for terrorism response teams
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
June 6, 1998, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 02D
Length: 360 words
Byline: Ron Martz
Series: Metro Final
Body


The task seems daunting in scope and complexity: help pick up the pieces in the aftermath of a terrorist incident involving a weapon of mass destruction.
Yet that is exactly what a select unit of the Georgia National Guard will soon start training to do. Named last week by Pentagon officials as one of 10 state National Guard units that will field such regional teams, the Georgia Guard will begin putting its team together before the end of the year and hopes to have it ready to respond on a limited basis by late 1999.
"That's a perfect role for us. It's a mission we've been involved in for some time in supporting civil authorities in times of natural disasters," said Lt. Col. Ken Baldowski, spokesman for the guard.
As envisioned by the Pentagon, these 22-person units, known as Rapid Assessment Teams, would assist first responders to a terrorist attack utilizing a weapon of mass destruction. The weapon could be nuclear, biological, chemical, or a combination. The teams would help local authorities determine the type of weapon used while providing medical and technical assistance and rounding up other federal aid.
Although Baldowski said the actual composition of the teams is still being worked out by National Guard Bureau officials in Washington, it is likely to include a reconnaissance element, a doctor, a nurse, an environmental specialist and security and logistics personnel. The team will also have immediate access to National Guard aircraft for transportation.
"There are still a number of issues to be worked out," said Baldowski, including how and where they will be trained and whether team members will be considered federal technicians or full-time Guard personnel.
Other states selected for this pilot program are California, Colorado, Illinois, Massachusetts, Missouri, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas and Washington.
Creation of these teams is part of a larger federal initiative to better prepare the nation to deal with possible attacks involving weapons of mass destruction. In addition to these teams, military reservists will provide 64 decontamination and 28 reconnaissance units that will be trained and equipped to offer support.

Load-Date: June 7, 1998


End of Document