Statement Denying Visa For Arafat
The New York Times
November 27, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk; TEXT
Length: 740 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26
Body


Following is the official text of the statement issued today by the State Department on Yasir Arafat's application for a visa:
 |||
|Nov. 26, 1988||
|Department of State||
|Statement on the Determination||
|by the Secretary of State||
|on Visa Application of Yasir Arafat||
 
The 1947 United Nations Headquarters Agreement obligates the United States to provide certain rights of entry, transit and residence to persons invited to the United Nations headquarters district in New York City.
The Congress of the United States conditioned the entry of the U.S. into the U.N. headquarters agreement on the retention by the U.S. Government of the authority to bar the entry of aliens associated with or invited by the United Nations ''in order to safeguard its own security.'' In this regard, U.S. law excludes members of the P.L.O. from entry into the United States by virtue of their affiliation in an organization which engages in terrorism. The Secretary of State is vested by law with the discretion to recommend to the Attorney General that the prohibition against a particular P.L.O. member be waived.
The United Nations General Assembly in 1974 invited the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate as an observer at the General Assembly. The United States acknowledged that this U.N. invitation obligates the U.S. to accord P.L.O. members entry, transit and residence; therefore, visa waivers have been issued to such individuals as a routine practice. As a result, a P.L.O. Observer Mission has been in operation at the U.N. since 1975. The P.L.O., therefore, has had, and continues to have, ample opportunity to make is positions known to the membership of the United Nations.
 
Receipt of Application
On Nov. 24, 1988, we received an application from Mr. Yasir Arafat, Chairman of the P.L.O., for a visa to attend the United Nations General Assembly session in New York City as an invitee. The Secretary of State has decided not to recommend a waiver of ineligibility in this case; the visa application therefore is not approved.
The U.S. Government has convincing evidence that P.L.O. elements have engaged in terrorism against Americans and others. This evidence includes a series of operations undertaken by the Force 17 and the Hawari organizations since the PLO claimed to foreswear the use of terrorism in the Cairo Declaration of November, 1985. As chairman of the P.L.O. Mr. Arafat is responsible for actions of these organizations which are units of Fatah, an element of the P.L.O. of which he also is chairman and which is under his control. The most recent sign of Mr. Arafat's associations with terrorism was the presence at the Algiers session of the Palestine National Council this month of Abu Abbass, a member of the Executive Commitee of the P.L.O. who has been convicted by the Italian judicial system of the murder of an American citizen, Mr. Leon Klinghoffer.
 
P.L.O. and Terrorism
The P.L.O.through certain of its elements has employed terrorism against Americans. Mr. Arafat, as Chairman of the P.L.O., knows of, condones and lends support to such acts; he therefore is an accessory to such terrorism.
Terrorism and those involved in it are a serious threat to our national security and to the lives of American citizens. The Headquarters Agreement, contained in Public Law 80-357, reserves to us the right to bar the entry of those who represent a threat to our security.
The United States firmly believes that Palestinian political rights must be recognized and addressed. A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict is achievable through the peace process that already has brought significant progress. Palestinian participation is required at every stage of the negotiations required to achieve peace, justice and security. Participation requires responsibilities, however. All parties must demonstrate their desire to make peace; they must adhere to internationally accepted principles and norms. No participant in a peace process can wave the flag of justice in one hand and brandish the weapons of terrorism in the other. All participants must renounce violence and terrorism.
The outcome of the P.N.C. session in Algeria produced signs that there are Palestinians who are trying to move the P.L.O. in a constructive way. That is encouraging and should continue. It is unfortunate that the blight of terrorism still afflicts the Palestinian cause and leaves no alternative to decisions such as the Secretary has taken today.


End of Document