STATUE OF LIBERTY BONB CAUSED ONLY MINOR DAMAGE TO 3 MUSEUM ITEMS Room in the base of the statue
The New York Times
June 5, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 697 words
Byline: By PETER KIHSS
Body


Three historic items suffered minor damage in a bomb explosion at the Statue of Liberty museum Tuesday night, the National Park Service said yesterday. The cost of the damage was estimated ''conservatively'' at $15,000.
Paul Kinney, acting curator of the American Museum of Immigration in the statue's base, displayed a medallion -one used to raise funds for the pedestal -that had been bent by the blast. The explosion also tore a corner off an invitation to the Oct. 28, 1886 dedication of the statue and tore in half a ticket to board a steamboat on that occasion.
AN-A
David L. Moffitt, superintendent of the monument, noted that the blast had destroyed a 15-by-15-foot section of the @second-floor Story Room ceiling. A Park Service employee, Charles Green, who was working on the next level up, escaped serious injury when he passed through the room where the bomb had been planted. He was outside the structure, about 50 yards away, when the bomb exploded. 
The New York City Joint Terrorism Task Force, set up recently by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Police Department, interviewed the Liberty Island staff of 35 to 40 persons. It reported nothing yet to substantiate suggestions by telephone callers that a political group was responsible for the blast. The calls were made in the names of five political groups.
A spokesman for Consolidated Edison said that after the explosion the state police received a call from a man identifying himself as a member of the Fuerzas Armidas de Liberacion Nacional, the Puerto Rican liberation army that is widely known as the F.A.L.N. The man threatened to bomb the Con Edison nuclear power plant at Indian Point in Westchester County.
''The caller said something to the effect, 'We got the Statue of Liberty, and Indian Point 2 is next,' '' the utility spokesman said.  He said that security forces at the plant had been alerted but that no move had been made against the plant.
The Statue of Liberty was closed yesterday but will reopen to visitors today.  The explosion, at 7:25 P.M. Tuesday, came on a day when storms had held down attendance to 3,800 visitors, as against a normal 6,000 at this time of year.
The last visitor ferryboat departed at 6:15 P. M. Remaining on the island were a dozen regular residents and five workers who were repairing a ceiling leak on the museum's third level. Four of the workers took a work break and walked outside. Mr. Green, who sometimes uses a second-floor closet next to the Story Room to study school books, then emerged and the bomb exploded.
The bomb appeared to have been placed behind a wooden exhibit case with a glass lid. The case was about 5 feet long by 2 1/2 feet wide by 2 feet deep. Besides the three damaged items, it held two other museum pieces.
One was an 1883 booklet to raise funds for the statue pedestal, including the first publication of the Emma Lazarus poem that begins ''Give me your tired, your poor/ Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.'' The other was a silk list of performers, including Lillian Russell, in an April 7, 1885, ''Entertainment'' to aid the project.
 
Motive Puzzles Superintendent
''I can't imagine what propaganda a group would gain from attacking Liberty,'' Superintendent Moffitt observed sadly.  The statue was damaged when two men climbed it last May 11 to display a banner protesting a California murder case. A plan to erect an inspection scaffold has been estimated to cost $50,000 and has been temporarily dropped, Mr. Moffitt said. The demonstrators face criminal charges of causing damage ''in excess of $100.''
Earlier Tuesday the task force against terrorism made its first two arrests since its formation. The arrests grew out of the alleged delivery Monday of a fake bomb and a note threatening violence against a corporation executive unless $250.000 was paid.
The task force said that the note had used the name of the F.A.L.N. but that there was no information at this time linking the Puerto Rican pro-independence group to the two men arrested for extortion.  The suspects were identified as Carmelo Hernandez, 37 years old, of 244 Lorimer Street, Brooklyn, and Elliot Duprey, 34, of 1105 Morrison Avenue, the Bronx.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photos of the Statue of Liberty and men examining damage in the Story


End of Document