State congressional delegation voices outrage, grief
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 13, 2000, Friday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 23A
Length: 556 words
Byline: Rob Hotakainen; Staff Writer
Body


For Democratic Sen. Paul Wellstone, the attack on the USS Cole appeared to be a "cowardly and despicable" act of terrorism.
     For Republican Sen. Rod Grams, it was a reminder of "the great service the men and women in uniform perform every day."
     For many members of Minnesota's congressional delegation, Thursday's attack on a U.S. Navy destroyer in Yemen provoked outrage, sympathy and calls for quick justice.
   "I'm deeply saddened for the families of these brave sailors," said Rep. Jim Ramstad, R-Minn. "Certainly, this act of terrorism cannot be allowed to stand."
     Rep. Bill Luther, D-Minn., called the attack "regrettable," saying "some sort of a comprehensive peace" in the Middle East appeared within reach just a few months ago.
     "I think restraint is the word," Luther said. "The leaders need to do everything they can to reach out to the extremist elements within their nations, because they are largely responsible for what's going on."
     Rep. David Minge, D-Minn., called the attack "a disgusting act of cowardice," adding that he supported President Clinton's decision to send investigators from the FBI, State Department and Pentagon.
     "My prayers are with the sailors bravely serving their country and their loved ones anxiously awaiting news at home," Minge said. "Hopefully, conclusive evidence will quickly be found and the perpetrators can be brought to justice."
     Rep. Gil Gutknecht, R-Minn., said the attack was "a tragic reminder that we live in a very dangerous world."
     In a speech on the Senate floor, Wellstone said: "As a United States senator from Minnesota, I just want to express my support and my concern. . . . It certainly looks like a well-planned terrorist attack."
     On another important foreign development, Wellstone, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, called the violence in the Middle East on Thursday "a grave setback" for the peace process. He called the Israeli-Palestinian conflict "one of the great tragedies of our time," and he urged the parties to end the violence.
     "While this is clearly a grave setback for the Middle East peace process, if the terrorists' intent was to kill that effort, they will fail," Wellstone said.
     Grams, another member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said that he did not view the attack on the Cole as a reason for the United States to increase its military presence in the Middle East.
     He said that his thoughts and prayers are with the families, saying: "The only effective deterrent against terrorist acts is a robust response to each and every attack. The state sponsors of terrorism must be identified and brought to justice."
     Gutknecht said that as families grieve, "I want them to know that we as Americans are grieving with them."
     In a statement, Gutknecht said: "Every time we send our young people out on the ocean or in our planes around the world to dangerous spots, we know that they're putting their lives on the line for us."
     In an interview, Ramstad said that he had his "eyes glued" to the situation, and he expressed hope that "the perpetrators of this heinous terrorism . . . be brought to justice as quickly as possible."
.
     _ Washington Bureau correspondent Andrew Donohue contributed to this report.
.
      Rob Hotakainen can be reached at rhotakainen@mcclatchydc.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 13, 2000


End of Document