States define roles to fight terrorism;
Pa., N.J. augment federal efforts - and spend millions doing it.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
June 11, 2002 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. A01; news
Length: 1038 words
Byline: Amy Worden Inquirer Harrisburg Bureau
Body


Fast computers in police cars. Updated training for rescue workers. Renovated hospitals to handle mass casualties.
Lacking the broad intelligence-gathering capabilities of federal officials - who announced the arrest yesterday of a suspected "dirty bomb" terrorist - Pennsylvania and New Jersey officials have kept a tight focus on their antiterrorism activities.
State officials say their goal is to gather intelligence within their borders, communicate it efficiently to other law-enforcement agencies, and respond quickly when something goes wrong.
"We have a long-term threat before us," Earl Freilino, Pennsylvania's homeland security director, said last month. "… The terrorists who bombed the World Trade Center in 1993 tested their bombs in Perry County. We have had [terrorist cells] in Pittsburgh, and we have our own brand of domestic terrorism… . That's what we're facing."
In the post-Sept. 11 world, states are finding room in their budgets for millions in antiterror programs. Pennsylvania Gov. Schweiker proposed spending $200 million on such initiatives - comparable to Gov. Pataki's proposal for New York - and named Freilino, a former FBI agent, to the $110,000-a-year post of homeland security director.
Freilino, 56, spent his 30-year-career with the FBI in Western Pennsylvania, but as head of a regional federal task force on terrorism, his reach was well beyond the Monongahela Valley.
In the five months since his appointment, Freilino has tried to build on programs already in place before Sept. 11, he said, including the state's nine regional counterterrorism task forces and bioterrorism research, and to expand the fight against terrorism to include all public agencies and even the private sector.
Freilino said the key to preventing disaster is to be able to detect attacks that may not start with a bang.
"If we have a disease surveillance system in place, we can zero in on diseases that may be terrorist-based or they may be communicable," he said. "Either way, we need better early warnings."
In order to deal effectively with threats, state agencies must have the technology to assess them, he said.
"Is it a credible threat or an unconfirmed report?" said Freilino, who coordinated the regional federal response when a hijacked plane crashed in Shanksville on Sept. 11. "We got 4,000 to 5,000 reports of threats after Sept. 11, and most were baseless."
Pennsylvania was not even a target in that terrorist plot, yet it wound up with a central role, and state government changed dramatically in the aftermath.
A quirk of fate brought down United Flight 93 in a field in Pennsylvania that day. Less than a month later, a new governor was sworn in after President Bush picked Gov. Ridge to head the new federal Office of Homeland Security.
Schweiker, the former lieutenant governor, rarely misses an opportunity to remind people he is the only governor to hold the position as a result of Sept. 11. He has made fighting terrorism the number-one priority of his abbreviated term, which ends in January.
In New Jersey, Gov. McGreevey created the Office of Counterterrorism shortly after taking office in January, naming Kathryn Flicker, the former director of the state's Division of Criminal Justice, to head the office. The office has 60 investigators, lawyers and intelligence experts, including state troopers who specialize in counterterrorism.
In addition, New Jersey in October created the Domestic Security Preparedness Task Force to work with the state's businesses and industries to formulate guidelines to protect against threats to private industry. The group has broad powers to dictate the security measures private industry must implement.
When McGreevey introduced his $23.7 billion budget for fiscal 2002-2003, he allocated $66 million to pay for security initiatives, including the Office of Counterterrorism. Specifically, he budgeted $6.9 million to expand the office to a staff of 90 in the forthcoming fiscal year, which begins July 1.
Pennsylvania legislative leaders say the antiterrorism spending plan is one of the few items, if not the only one, not on the negotiating table during the difficult budget talks now under way to deal with a projected $1.2 billion deficit.
The Legislature has responded to the new threats by approving a slew of antiterrorism bills, from increasing the penalties for terrorist activities and expanding wiretapping to cracking down on drivers'-license fraud.
But beyond fresh funding and new laws, state agencies must change the way they do business, Freilino said.
"You would never guess that Aging or Welfare would have to be concerned about terrorism, but we didn't think we could be attacked by terrorists who would use various means of employment to hide their activities," he said. "We have to strengthen the whole society and practice due diligence that we never had to before."
Among the major proposals included in the Schweiker plan, which would be funded by $125 million in federal money and $75 million from the state, are biohazard preparedness, cyber-security, upgrades in the emergency communications system, and improvements in emergency response training.
Schweiker wants $45 million to install computers in state police vehicles, set up a computer-aided dispatch center, and establish bar-code scanning technology for processing evidence; $27.6 million to create a computer system that provides criminal-record, drivers'-license and motor-vehicle data to all law-enforcement officers; and $25 million to improve security at state-owned buildings.
Schweiker also proposes spending $8.2 million to put 100 additional state troopers on the roads and $4.1 million to create a center to conduct threat assessments against the state's infrastructure such as bridges, water supplies and nuclear power plants.
Both Pennsylvania and New Jersey won federal grants last week to increase preparedness for bioterrorism attacks. Pennsylvania received $37 million and New Jersey $27.7 million for bioterrorism surveillance and detection, training for emergency workers and doctors and upgrading hospitals to handle mass casualties.
Contact Amy Worden at 717-783-2584 or aworden@phillynews.com. Inquirer staff writer Angela Couloumbis contributed to this article.  

Load-Date: June 11, 2002


End of Document