State Department Intensifies Warning on Terrorism
The New York Times
December 22, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk ; Column 4; 
Length: 278 words
Byline: By DAVID STOUT 

By DAVID STOUT 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21
Body


The State Department intensified its alert tonight for Americans traveling overseas, warning that terrorists may be planning attacks against large groups in Jordan.
The department said that official Americans and ordinary citizens alike should be cautious, and that groups gathered for religious services or to commemorate the new millennium might be at risk.
The department's alert was similar to one issued on Dec. 11 but considerably more specific, especially in its references to Jordan.
"We have learned that possible sites in Jordan may have included hotels, tour buses and tourist sites," the latest advisory said.
Although the advisory did not say where the department got its information, it seemed all but certain that much of it came from the questioning by Jordanian authorities of 13 suspected terrorists who were arrested in recent weeks in the Middle East.
Clinton administration officials have said the suspects had links to Osama bin Laden, the wealthy Saudi-born militant who is blamed for the bombing of two American embassies in Africa in August 1998.
Tonight's State Department advisory followed an acknowledgment by Pentagon officials that American military posts around the world had been warned to be extra careful.
The latest alert suggested that Americans abroad check the State Department Web site for advisories. And while it used low-key language and did not advise against travel, it warned Americans overseas to review their own security practices, to avoid large crowds and to vary their routes.
"We cannot rule out the possibility that attacks still may be planned for this and other parts of the world," the alert said, referring to Jordan.
      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 22, 1999


End of Document