States discuss ways to combat terrorism; Governors: Security measures could cost $4 billion
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 6, 2001 Thursday


Copyright 2001 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. a7
Length: 677 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Security and public health demands could cost states up to $$ @4 billion this year, governors estimated Wednesday as hundreds of state lawmakers gathered to develop new approaches for terrorism and its fallout. 
"Bioterrorism, public health, airport service - ultimately, it's going to cost us all," said Alaska state Rep. Pete Kopp, who came cross-country to get ideas to protect the state capitol in Juneau and the Alaska oil pipeline. "We're all going to pay."
The National Governors Association, in a preliminary estimate that could grow, figured states would have to spend $$ @1 billion to protect airports, bridges, power plants and other critical infrastructure. Another $$ @3 billion would go to public health and law enforcement needs. 
"State budgets are already burdened by the recession," said Kentucky Gov. Paul E. Patton. "We have responded to the requests of various federal agencies for assistance in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks, and to be blunt, these services aren't cheap."
Governors were seeking at least $$ @3 billion from Congress to help. 
State lawmakers at the annual meeting of the National Conference of State Legislatures weighed the potential for federal financial help versus their own tight budgets as they considered changes to laws and budgets.
A few states, such as New York and Florida, have already taken steps to increase penalties for terrorism, but most states won't begin legislative work until the new year.
The usual concerns of state government - education, welfare, rural development and tax issues - were not ignored at the scores of roundtable discussions and workgroups at the annual meeting
But this year, the task of finding responses to terrorism in all its forms swamp the agenda. Conference choices for more than 600 lawmakers, aides and lobbyists include "Preparing Legislators to Lead in Crisis," "Cyberterrorism," and "Is the Capitol Safe?"
"The threat is real," said Michael Lowder, a Federal Emergency Management Agency planning chief who spoke about potential environmental crises. "The key thing is preparedness."
Today, lawmakers are to hear from Tom Ridge, the former Pennsylvania governor now heading the federal Homeland Security office.
The crush of ideas ranged far beyond increased penalties: wiretapping authorities for prosecutors; revamped equipment for police, fire and emergency management officials; preventing and punishing terrorist hoaxes.
Public health drew much of the attention, with ideas to improve first response, communication among front-line care providers at clinics and hospitals, and expanding government powers for quarantine in the event of bioterror attacks.
Right now, the inability of clinics, hospitals and local health departments to quickly share information is a dangerous gap, said Dr. Richard Jackson of the Centers for Disease Control Prevention. He said there were probably 500 local health departments or hospitals burdened with rotary phones and ancient computers.
There's a great deal of assistance available to improve state and local preparedness, said Andy Mitchell, a Justice Department deputy director. But he acknowledged that the states will have to bear their share.
Money worries loom over all the anti-terrorism, as state finances worsened again last month, a new NCSL report found. In October alone, 12 more states had to cut budgets to adjust to weaker revenues, bringing the total to 36.
"Sept. 11's had a terrific impact on us," said Bill Pound, NCSL's executive director. "And you're also dealing with it in a time when money's short."
Some legislators worried that the focus on terrorism would overshadow other important issues. "Some of the other stuff is going to get lost," said Connecticut Rep. Mary Mishinsky, who wants to also talk about youth issues, education and welfare.
Even she couldn't leave the terrorism worries alone, since she oversees the Quinnipiac River watershed area, a potential target for a terrorist attack.
And as she tore through her mail this week, she heard that her local post office had tested positive for anthrax.

Load-Date: December 6, 2001


End of Document