State Department terrorism report criticizes PLO Document 'puts Arafat on notice' but leaves U.S.-Palestinian ties intact
USA TODAY
April 26, 2001, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 445 words
Byline: Barbara Slavin
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- The State Department will include criticism of two
key groups in Yasser Arafat's Palestine Liberation Organization
in its annual terrorism report due out next week, U.S. officials
said Wednesday. The report will mark the first time that mainstream
elements of the PLO are cited in the influential document.
The report will include Israeli accusations that the largest faction
in the organization, Fatah, and its Tanzim youth militia took
part in terrorist activities against Israel during the Palestinian
uprising that began in September. The violence in Israel and the
West Bank and Gaza has claimed the lives of nearly 500 people,
most of them Palestinians. The Bush administration also has criticized
Israel for "excessive" retaliation against the Palestinians,
but Israel has not been singled out for terrorism.
Officials said the report won't address the question of whether
Arafat or other top Palestinians ordered attacks against Israeli
targets. However, by merely mentioning the groups, the Bush administration
will be taking into account congressional criticism of the PLO
and warning Arafat to rein in his followers. "This lays the intellectual
groundwork for declaring these groups foreign terrorist organizations,"
said Kenneth Katzman, a Middle East expert at the Congressional
Research Service. "It puts Arafat on notice."
The PLO has had an office in Washington since its peace treaty
with Israel in 1993.
PLO groups were criticized earlier this month in a State Department
report on compliance with anti-terrorist laws. "While it is difficult
to determine who, if anyone, planned specific instances of anti-Israeli
violence, public statements by leaders of the Tanzim clearly encouraged
violence," the report said. "Elements of Fatah and members of
the Palestinian Authority's security forces instigated and participated
in anti-Israeli violence."
A letter to President Bush earlier this month, signed by 296 members
of Congress, called for a reassessment of the U.S.-PLO relationship,
including an examination of whether PLO-affiliated groups should
be designated as foreign terrorist organizations.
The officials said the report next week will not say the groups
are "foreign terrorist organizations," a classification created
by Congress in 1996 that could oblige the United States to sever
ties with the PLO and could complicate efforts to restart peace
negotiations.
Hassan Abdel Rahman, the PLO ambassador in Washington, called
the criticism "unfair, unbalanced and counterproductive."
Paul Pillar, former deputy counterterrorism chief at the CIA,
says "a mention of concern is probably the right thing to do.
It gets away from the legal requirements but calls a spade a spade."

Load-Date: April 26, 2001


End of Document