State has seen protests, but 'nothing as scary as this';
Environmental radicals appear to have brought to Maine the terror tactics they use in other regions.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
November 5, 2005 Saturday, Final Edition


Copyright 2005 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FRONT; Pg. A1
Length: 910 words
Byline: JOHN RICHARDSON Staff Writer
Body


The vandalism that struck Plum Creek Timber Co. and some of its employees this week sparked outrage and accusations of eco-terrorism.
It wouldn't be the first time radical environmentalists have targeted corporations and private property here. But it also may be a sign that bolder and more serious crimes are spreading into the state.
"You're a little bit late (in Maine)," said Ron Arnold, author of "Ecoterror: The Violent Agenda to save Nature."
Vandals started targeting Plum Creek's offices after the company unveiled plans last spring to develop thousands of acres around Moosehead Lake. But the attacks reached a new level Monday night.
Vandals damaged three private homes and three office buildings in five Maine communities. They splattered orange paint and spray-painted "scum creek" and other messages on some of the buildings. They also poured a foul-smelling chemical and left parts of a raccoon carcass and animal feces at some targets. And they threw rocks through the windows of the home where Plum Creek's top Maine official lives with his family.
Maine State Police and the FBI stepped in to coordinate the investigation, and state officials, environmentalists, business leaders and others loudly condemned the actions.
"All they are is terrorists," said Sen. Paul Davis, R-Sangerville. "We've had cases in the past, but nothing like this."
Davis was a state trooper in 1990 when extremists hammered long metal spikes into trees and logs in an effort to stop logging of an old-growth timber tract near the Big Reed preserve west of Ashland. The spikes made it difficult and dangerous to saw the wood, and forced loggers to scan with metal detectors.
In 1998, protesters spray-painted graffiti on buildings at the Lincoln Pulp and Paper Mill to draw attention to dioxin pollution.
About five years ago, vandals damaged Maine fish and game clubs, and tried to blow one up. There also are periodic reports of damaged logging equipment in northern Maine, said Patrick McGowan, commissioner of the state Department of Conservation.
But, McGowan said, those acts were "nothing as scary as this, where people's homes were targets."
No group has claimed responsibility, police said. That's not unusual, according to Arnold, who works with the Center for the Defense of Free Enterprise and tracks eco-terrorism around the country.
Groups such as the Earth Liberation Front and the Animal Liberation Front will sometimes take credit, but often do not. They are the leaders of the trend and may well be linked to what's happening in Maine, he said.
Earth First!, which took credit for spiking the trees 15 years ago and held a protest at Plum Creek offices this summer, is less likely to be involved in the vandalism, Arnold said. The group decided years ago to focus on civil disobedience and leave the criminal activity to ELF, he said.
ELF and ALF are loosely organized. Their actions are led by itinerant activists who travel the country and stop in different states to recruit young sympathizers and then attack a corporation, he said.
Targeting the homes of employees and company lawyers already is commonplace in other parts of the country, especially out West in places like California, Arnold said. And eco-terrorism also has become more dangerous and violent in parts of the country, with buildings burned to protest development and Hummers burned to object to the practices of automakers.
"Arson is pretty much the signature," he said.
Not all crimes that initially appear to be eco-terrorism actually are, however.
Last winter, arsonists destroyed new homes in a Maryland subdivision that had been the subject of fierce environmental opposition because of a valuable wetland nearby. Federal investigators joined the search for what appeared to be eco-terrorists, but they eventually arrested a disgruntled employee and members of a local youth gang.
Officials here say the targets and crimes clearly point to radical environmentalists as the prime suspects.
Plum Creek's plan to open the Moosehead region to 975 homes, two resorts, campgrounds and other development has been controversial, with local residents divided and organized opponents trying to scale back or defeat the plan. But the public debate also has been civil.
The Moosehead Region Futures Committee, a local group working on an alternative to Plum Creek's plan, said last week that the crimes could undermine positive efforts to influence the plan and protect some of the woods.
Plum Creek certainly won't back off, said Jim Lehner, the manager whose house was pelted with rocks and paint.
The vandals "don't have a seat at the table," he said. "And they're not getting one."
The vandalism could well have repercussions in the state Legislature, however. The Maine Forest Products Council is hoping to revive an eco-terrorism bill to create stiff penalties for anyone convicted of such crimes.
In 2001, lawmakers considered a law that would have increased punishments for environmental terrorism. But the bill failed after opponents argued that it was too broadly defined and would cover protesters but have no impact on criminals.
The council may ask lawmakers to reconsider after the vandalism that took place this week, said executive director Patrick Strauch.
"We're pretty concerned about it," he said. "It's going beyond spiking trees and damaging equipment. Now they're starting to terrorize families."
Staff Writer John Richardson can be contacted at 791 - 6324 or at:
jrichardson@pressherald.com  

Graphic

 
Blethen Maine News Service photo by Jeff Pouland
Deanne Lehner examines some of the damage that vandals did to her home in Oakland on Monday night. Her husband is Jim Lehner, Plum Creek Timber Co.'s regional manager for the Northeast. In all, six homes and buildings were damaged.

Load-Date: November 6, 2005


End of Document