STATE SENATOR SUGGESTS USING LOTTERY TO HELP FIGHT TERRORISM;
 ONE DAY'S PROFITS WOULD GO TOWARD SECURITY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 8, 2001 Thursday Illinois Five Star Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. C1
Length: 274 words
Byline: Kevin McDermott Post-Dispatch Springfield Bureau
Dateline: SPRINGFIELD, ILL.
Body


The president of the Illinois Senate is suggesting a new way to pay for the war against terrorism: Earmark one day of state lottery proceeds to help pay for anti-terrorist security costs.
"We ought to take one day for the lottery and have a special day for terrorism," Illinois Senate President James "Pate" Philip said Wednesday.
He recommended that the money "go to the state police and National Guard" for their anti-terrorism expenses.
Philip said his staff is researching the idea.
According to a state lottery spokesman, the lottery's gross sales average about $28 million a week, or $4 million a day.
Thirty-five cents of every dollar -- or about $1.4 million a day -- is profit for state government. Currently, all that profit is assigned by law to go to the state's fund for public schools.
Philip spokeswoman Patty Schuh said the lottery's single-day sales might go up on that special anti-terrorism day, perhaps by setting up a special lottery game.
"People would know they were helping Illinois' anti-terrorism efforts," she said. "It would give people an opportunity to participate and show some patriotism."
Not everyone likes the idea.
"We used to sell war bonds to fund wars. Now we've got politicians encouraging us to buy lottery tickets," said the Rev. Tom Grey, a Rockford, Ill.-based anti-gambling activist. Gambling proceeds shouldn't be used to help pay governmental costs for any program, he added.
Gov. George Ryan has said that diminished tourism and increased security costs might force cuts in the state budget. As for the lottery idea, a spokesman said, "It will be considered along with other anti-terrorism fund-raising ideas."

Notes

Note: a shorter version of this article ran in the FIVE STAR LIFT Edition, page C2.; Reporter Kevin McDermott:; E-mail: kmcdermott@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 217-782-4912  

Load-Date: November 8, 2001


End of Document