State-Sponsored Terrorism, American Style
The New York Times
February 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 296 words
Body


To the Editor:
"Worse Than a Blunder: a Crime" (editorial, Feb. 9), on the Iran-contra arms affair, points out that United States law forbids arms shipments to a state that sponsors terrorism -- such as Iran.
True, but why stop there?  My dictionary defines terrorism as "the use of terror, violence or intimidation to achieve an end."
Ample evidence from Nicaragua indicates that the contras do just that.
As a former contra leader, Edgar Chamorro, acknowledged (letter, Jan. 9, 1986), "during my four years as a contra director, it was premeditated policy to terrorize civilian noncombatants to prevent them from cooperating with the government." He continued: "Hundreds of civilian murders, mutilations, tortures and rapes were committed in pursuit of this policy, of which the contra leaders and their C.I.A. superiors were well aware." An Americas Watch report (news story, Feb. 10) confirms that contra brutality continues unabated.
The dictionary definition of terrorism doesn't ask whether the perpetrators are Islamic fundamentalists or anti-Communist "freedom fighters"; it doesn't ask whether the victims are American tourists or Nicaraguan peasants.  Premeditated violence against civilians, whatever its alleged justification, is called by its true name.
So you are absolutely right that the Iran-contra arms shipments are more than a blunder; they are a crime.  But the crime is not just that zealots in the White House carried out their Nicaragua policy behind the backs of Congress.  The crime is the policy itself.  As long as the U.S. continues to finance and direct the contra war, then simple honesty requires us to acknowledge that our own country is, like Iran, a state that sponsors terrorism.
ALAN SOKAL, Professor of Politics, N.Y.U., New York, Feb. 10, 1987


End of Document