State terrorism plan goes back to 2000
Chicago Daily Herald
November 8, 2001, Thursday All


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 580 words
Byline: Victoria Pierce Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


If terrorists were to strike a skyscraper, nuclear plant or municipal water supply, emergency workers are prepared to respond to any disaster, state officials said Wednesday at Wheaton College during the area's first workshop on homeland security.  
About 400 firefighters, police officers and local government officials from communities in Cook, DuPage, Will and Kane counties attended the workshop, which focused on the work of the state's task force on terrorism.  
The task force has been developing a terrorism response plan since May 2000, long before terrorists crashed jetliners into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon killing thousands on Sept. 11. The group includes representatives from the state's health, police, agriculture, environmental protection and nuclear safety departments, among others.  
"The state of Illinois was well ahead of the game," said Tod Rowe, manager of emergency operations for the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. "This has been thought out. We didn't start this on Sept. 11."  
In the event of an attack in Illinois, the state's Emergency Management Agency will coordinate the response of a variety of agencies including specially trained teams recently established by the Illinois State Police.  
The Illinois Department of Public Health is also a key player in the state's response to any biological attack.  
The recent deaths and illnesses from anthrax exposure on the east coast have already prompted the public health department into high gear as hundreds of suspicious packages, letters and other samples containing powders feared to be anthrax are tested. Crews are working double shifts to test all the materials but so far only baby powder, bird feces and other harmless substances have been found, said George Stevens of the Illinois Department of Public Health.  
"We have not had a positive anthrax test. I doubt if we will," Stevens said. But if something does test positive, the department is prepared to handle it, he said.  
The state also has plans to protect the emergency crews that respond first to an attack with special equipment and antibiotics, said Mike Chamness, director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.  
Tom Meloni, deputy chief of the Wheaton Police Department, said such dangers are inherent to law enforcement. "It's part of our jobs as police officers to respond. It's endless what we could face," Meloni said.  
Other workshops are scheduled throughout the state including one today at South Suburban College, 15800 S. State in South Holland; another Tuesday at the College of Lake County, 19351 W. Washington in Grayslake; and a third Nov. 15 at McCormick Place, 2301 S. Lake Shore Drive in Chicago. All the workshops begin at 9 a.m. and are open to the general public. To register call (800) 247-5010.  
GRAPHIC: Be prepared  
The American Red Cross recommends families and individuals have emergency plans in case of a natural disaster or act of terrorism. Some suggestions include:  
- Create an emergency communication plan so family members know where to call if separated.  
- Establish a family meeting place.  
- Assemble a disaster supply kit that would last 72 hours. In addition to food, water and a radio don't forget other necessities such as medicine and diapers.  
- Find out ahead of time how your local school district and municipality will handle an emergency. Ask where parents can pick up children and where emergency shelters will be located.  
- Always carry identification.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC: (text at bottom of article)

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document