State plan could limit terrorism coverage
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 11, 2002, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1E
Length: 535 words
Byline: JEFF HARRINGTON
Body


Thousands of Florida businesses face reduced insurance coverage against terrorist attacks under a plan being finalized by the state Insurance Department and an insurance industry group.
State regulators this week said they intend to let insurers exclude terrorism coverage on commercial property policies unless Congress creates an emergency fund to reimburse the insurers for losses in a major attack.
At least 115 of the state's 400 commercial insurers have filed for a terrorism exclusion since the terrorist attack on New York's World Trade Center. The Sept. 11 attack will result in an estimated $ 50-billion to $ 70-billion in losses for the industry.
INSURANCE11
The decision by Florida Insurance Commissioner Tom Gallagher largely mirrors a plan endorsed in December by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. It limits the industry's losses to terrorism after $ 25-million except in cases of nuclear, chemical or biological attack. Claims also could be excluded if an event led to injury or death of more than 50 people.
The national insurance commissioners group approved its policy, which is not binding on states, after Congress failed in December to create an emergency fund to help insurers with losses from some future large-scale attack.
The new twist added by Florida involves a sunset provision that would eliminate the terrorist exclusion if and when a federal emergency fund is created.
The Insurance Service Organization, an insurers group charged with developing a standard terrorism exclusion form, has to agree to the sunset provision or Florida will not approve any exclusions to terrorism coverage, Gallagher spokeswoman Tami Torres said Thursday.
"We're in conversations with them, but we have not yet reached an agreement," Torres said.
Sam Miller of the Florida Insurance Council, which represents the industry, applauded Gallagher's decision with a caveat.
The insurers, he said, want the language of the policy to give the companies an out if Congress passes a weak terrorism insurance package. For instance, he said, insurance companies would like other limits if the federal fund kicks in after $ 10-billion in losses instead of the industry-preferred $ 1-billion in losses.
"I believe that the industry and the department will be able to work out this provision," Miller said.
Businesses and public agencies with large properties - such as office towers, malls, arenas, stadiums, city halls and courthouses - will be most affected by the exclusions.
Policyholders will not have to deal with the issue of terrorism coverage until their insurance comes up for renewal. But nearly half of all commercial insurance policies have January renewal dates, according to some industry estimates.
Jim Henderson, executive vice president of Brown & Brown Inc., an insurance brokerage with dual headquarters in Tampa and Daytona Beach, said state regulators have little choice but to grant the exclusions. "If insurers withdraw from the market, then they (regulators) have a bigger problem than if the insurers stay here with these exclusions," Henderson said.
- Information from Times wires was used in this report. Jeff Harrington can be reached at harrington@sptimes.com or (813) 226-3407.  

Load-Date: January 11, 2002


End of Document