State denies Black Friday terrorism calls
The Lebanon Democrat (Tennessee)
November 19, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 The Lebanon Democrat
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 287 words
Byline: Xavier Smith, The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn.
Body


Nov. 19--"We have been made aware that there are some individuals posting information on Facebook, indicating that TBI is calling all police, fire and first responder services in Tennessee to alert them to a credible threat planned for Black Friday in Tennessee," the agency said in a Facebook post.
"Please be aware that this information did not originate from TBI, nor are agents from TBI making such calls."
The agency said reports on social media indicating calls are being made to law enforcement to inform them of a credible terrorist threat are unfounded and are not coming from the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.
People around the world have a heightened sense of awareness and concern since Friday's terrorist attacks in Paris that left at least 129 people dead and wounded about 350 more people.
Gov. Bill Haslam has asked that Tennessee be allowed to refuse Syrian refugees as a result of the attacks.
In a statement released Monday, Gov. Haslam said "As we mourn the loss of innocent life from Friday's horrific and cowardly attacks in Paris, these terrible events have once again shown us that the threat of Islamic terrorism knows no boundaries and recognizes no borders. We as a state must do everything we can to provide Tennesseans the safe environment to live, work and raise a family that so many across the world seek."
"This that happened in Paris has had an awakening for a lot of people of how serious this is. They have named the United States as a target. They are looking for soft targets which makes it more dangerous for everybody," Rep. Mark Pody said.
___ (c)2015 The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. Visit The Lebanon Democrat, Tenn. at www.lebanondemocrat.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: November 20, 2015


End of Document