State set to spend bio-terrorism money; wants more
Crain's Detroit Business
September 9, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 7
Length: 556 words
Byline: Amy Lane LANSING
Body


One year after Sept. 11, Michigan is preparing to divvy up the $31.2 million it has received to help prepare for future biological attacks.
But as health agencies, hospitals and others assess what they need to develop plans and the capacity to handle public-health threats, whether from biological attacks or infectious diseases like the West Nile virus, there's one piece of the federal funding that state and hospital officials know isn't enough.
That amount, $4.1 million received Aug. 30 from the federal Health Resources and Services Administration, targets bio-terrorism response by hospitals, clinics and emergency medical services.
''The whole state has to be prepared,'' said Jacqueline Scott, director of the Michigan Office of Public Health Preparedness. But the funds ''will barely touch on the needs'' of Michigan hospitals, she said.
Scott hopes to receive an additional $38 million from the Health Resources and Services Administration next year, and she and others say this year's funding is just a start.
The state will use part of the initial money from the agency to assess the ability of hospitals, emergency-medical-service responders and other health care providers to respond to the threat of bio-terrorism and to determine needs.
''This is bare bones, to start (a) foundation,'' said Laura Schmidt, senior manager of health care surveys for the Michigan Health & Hospital Association in Lansing.
Michigan's $31.2 million in federal preparedness funds are among $1.1 billion doled out to states as part of President Bush's response to last year's terrorist attacks.
The state plans to spend $27.1 million toward upgrading state and local public-health networks in areas that span communication and emergency-response plans.
The money also will be used to hire regional epidemiologists, expand laboratories, train health care providers and plan sites and procedures for a stockpile of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals.
The Michigan Department of Community Health will spend some of the money as local health departments submit proposals to improve operations, such as buying computers or improving communications.
The department also is developing formal bid requests to issue in the next two months for activities such as university or business-provided education and training.
An additional $4.1 million from the federal Health Resources and Services Administration includes money for needs assessment and collection of hospital data by Public Sector Consultants Inc. in Lansing.
Public Sector has a $49,500 contract to survey Michigan's 214 licensed hospitals and affiliated clinics and report the results, probably in November.
Eight regional medical-control authorities will each receive $325,000 to be dispersed to hospitals based on the needs and recommendations of regional advisory panels.
The hospital association's Schmidt said allocating the money by region spreads the initial assistance to small rural hospitals and to those in large metropolitan areas.
''I think it's very equally distributed, and until we identify strengths and weaknesses, that's the best way to do it right now,'' she said. ''We have to work as a unit; we have to work as regional hospitals.
''Emergency management and disaster preparedness is not about competition. It's about keeping people alive.''
Amy Lane: (517) 371-5355, alane@crain.com  

Load-Date: September 10, 2002


End of Document