State Department may have terrorism update
USA TODAY
December 21, 1999, Tuesday,
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 566 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson; Bill Nichols
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Clinton's top foreign policy advisers
are considering how the government should respond to increasing
concerns about the prospect of terrorism related to celebrations
for the new millennium.
During a two-hour discussion Monday at the White House, advisers
including Attorney General Janet Reno, Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright and CIA Director George Tenet discussed whether the government
should issue further guidance to the public beyond a warning on
Dec. 11 to Americans traveling overseas during the holidays.
Administration officials said that an additional statement could
come as soon as today, but the form and content of the new statement
was still unclear late Monday.
Concern about millennium-related violence has heightened in the
USA after last week's arrest of alleged Algerian terrorist Ahmed
Ressam.
The 32-year-old Montreal resident was charged Friday with transporting
a carload of powerful explosives, including two jars of nitroglycerine,
into Washington state from Canada.
Authorities were also seeking more information on a possible accomplice.
The discovery of bomb-making materials prompted a renewed focus
on porous U.S. border crossings in the Northwest as law enforcement
officials prepared to deal with the potential for violence related
to upcoming observances of the next millennium across the country.
Despite Ressam's arrest and seizure of bomb-making materials,
federal law enforcement officials reasserted Monday that they
were not aware of any specific targets for violence.
White House spokesman Joe Lockhart said President Clinton was
receiving updates on the terrorist situation. Clinton, however,
was not present during the meeting of his advisers.
"Because it's an issue of concern, it probably is occupying more
of his time than, say, two months ago," the White House spokesman
said.
"We have ongoing efforts that look at both international terrorism
(and) protecting against domestic terrorism. That work is something
that the president has closely involved himself in and has done
a lot of work on," Lockhart said.
U.S. officials denied some published reports indicating that the
Clinton administration feels Canada's counterterrorism efforts
have been lacking.
"We have a lot of confidence in the ability of our Canadian friends
to undertake effective counterterrorist work and effective law
enforcement work," State Department spokesman James Foley said.
Concerns about the safety of U.S. facilities and Americans abroad
continue at the State Department after its worldwide travel alert
was issued more than a week ago.
Foley said visa operations at the U.S. Embassy in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia, have been suspended temporarily because of security
concerns. He said the U.S. Embassy in Quito, Ecuador, also has
been closed pending the arrival of a U.S. diplomatic security
team to assess safety issues.
The State Department is shutting down processing of immigrant
visas worldwide for two weeks starting Jan. 1. Authorities said
the action was necessary to allow consular officials to work on
potential Y2K problems.
The Federal Aviation Administration said the circumstances of
Ressam's arrest also have caused the agency to tightened security
measures at U.S. airports. Travelers are expected to encounter
more explosive-detection teams and uniformed police patrolling
inside and outside airports, officials said.
Contributing: Barbara Slavin, Laurence McQuillan and Blake Morrison

Load-Date: December 21, 1999


End of Document