Staying tough on terrorists
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 29, 1997, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 306 words
Body


Your editorial on Nov. 12 suggests that Congress should readdress the secrecy issue in the new law, as it is not tolerable to confine a person on the strength of classified information ("Anti-terrorism law goes too far").
Terrorism is not only global; political agendas and terrorist activity in other parts of the world affect Americans. During war it is necessary to classify information, as the terrorists are so well-advanced that most of them get away.
After the conviction of Ramsi Yousef and Eyad Ismoil, it was U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White who warned not to let down the nation's guard as other suspects of the World Trade Center bombing are still at large. President Clinton declared that "Terrorism is the enemy of our generation."
To someone like me who has come from an island plagued with terrorism, it was comforting to note that the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Ealam has been declared a terrorist organization. The LTTE built its massive arsenal of arms and ammunition from so-called humanitarian fundraising activities. The most recent attack by the LTTE targeted a hotel alleged to have been occupied by a few Green Berets. Over the years it has cost more than 50,000 lives and many billions of dollars.
Whether the secrecy issue should be readdressed in the light of abuse by law enforcement agencies is certainly a matter for concern. But I doubt much whether a high price is being paid for a small increase in security because anti-terrorism law should provide sufficient secrecy in order to investigate, confine and convict terrorists. It could be done based only on classified information.
Israeli anti-terrorist laws may have influenced the president when the law was introduced, but I must confess that the anti-terrorism law is held in high esteem by the peace-loving international community.  - TILAK RATNASEKERA Tampa

Notes

LETTERS

Load-Date: November 30, 1997


End of Document