Steelman owned stocks she spurned She campaigned for terrorism-free investments, but held funds with firms active in sanctioned nations.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 19, 2010 Sunday
FOURTH EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1657 words
Byline: BY JAKE WAGMAN , jwagman@post-dispatch.com,  314-340-8268
Dateline: 0 
Body


ST. LOUIS - When Sarah Steelman was Missouri state treasurer, her signature issue was "terror free" investing.
The Rolla Republican, who announced this month that she is running for the U.S. Senate in 2012, traveled the country stressing the importance of not investing in companies that do business in countries identified as sponsors of terrorism.
In television appearances and testimony on Capitol Hill, Steelman trumpeted her investment of public money in a fund that eschewed stock in companies that do business in nations such as Iran and Sudan.
"The war on terror should be fought on this new battlefield," Steelman told Congress in 2007. "And every American can play a major part."
After leaving office last year, Steelman worked as a consultant for a brokerage firm in Arizona, Empowerment Financial, that has built a national reputation selling its "terror free" investments. She was paid about $17,000 for eight months of work, a Steelman spokesman said.
Terror-free investing is generally defined as divesting from any company that has nonhumanitarian business in any nation on the State Department's sanction list. That includes owning equity in the company directly, or through a mutual fund. Mutual funds typically spread risk by investing their holdings in many stocks.
Even experienced investors can have difficulty navigating such a "terror free" strategy in their investments.
Look no further than Steelman.
Financial disclosure statements show that during her tenure in Jefferson City, Steelman personally owned mutual funds that bought stock in companies engaging in the same type of activities she was denouncing.
One of Steelman's mutual funds bought interest in an oil services firm that works in sanctioned nations. Another fund bought a stake in a Russian energy conglomerate that has an agreement with the Iranian government to study the development of oil fields.
While the political appeal of terrorism-free investing is obvious, critics caution that the strategy casts money managers as social activists when they should be focusing on getting top returns. Others have questioned if terrorism-free investing is really an effective means to undercut rogue regimes - or just an investment gimmick.
"It's a little cottage industry. They get people fired up, like Sarah," said Todd Smith, a former chairman of the Missouri public employee pension fund. "What they were doing was using her to drum up more business for them."
A weapon for our times
Steelman, 52, was a state senator before her election as treasurer in 2004. By 2006, Steelman claimed that hers was the first public agency in America to invest money in a fund that specifically excluded companies that do business in Iran, Syria, Cuba or Sudan. (North Korea also was on the list, though the country is no longer classified as a sponsor of terrorism.)
"It seems strange to me that we send young men and women to defend freedom, some of who pay the ultimate sacrifice," Steelman said on National Public Radio in 2007. "However, we have not yet used our most powerful weapon, America's financial markets."
The amount of pubic money Steelman invested in the terrorism-free fund was relatively small. Steelman put 25 percent of the Missouri Investment Trust - a now-defunct account set up to benefit state arts and humanities organizations - in a fund that excluded companies with ties to sanctioned nations. The stake in the terrorism-free fund was worth as much as $8.3 million in 2007, before the market tanked.
The terrorism-free fund performed slightly below the international index fund it replaced, earning about 1.45 percent less between 2006 and 2009, when the trust was dissolved.
But the net return from the terrorism-free stock portfolio was hurt by the amount of investment fees.
Boston-based State Street Global Advisors charged investment fees of $25,000 a quarter for the terrorism-free fund, which required custom research. By comparison, the same company charged just a few hundred dollars a quarter to manage the more conventional international index fund the Missouri Investment Trust held until Steelman pushed for a terrorism-free investment.
Steelman, by virtue of her office, had a seat on the Missouri public employee pension board, MOSERS. During her tenure as treasurer she criticized the system for not going far enough to shed ties to companies in terrorism-sponsoring states.
From 2005 to 2008, MOSERS spent about $23,000 a year on two firms that screened its investments for links to terrorism. However, a MOSERS spokeswoman says the firms did not guarantee the accuracy of the underlying information they were providing. The pension fund now relies on government reports to comply with its anti-terrorism policy.
Smith, the former chairman of MOSERS, harbors doubts about the legitimacy of the terrorism-free movement.
Some of the companies that have links to sanctioned nations are household names. For instance, Samsung electronics and the aspirin maker Bayer - both included in Steelman's holdings - do business in Iran.
"If you dig in there far enough, just about any international fund has some connection at some point with these bad actors," Smith said, referring to sanctioned countries.
Pension fund managers and other money managers sometimes have to sift through ambiguous information to determine whether a company is truly aiding a pernicious government. The question, Smith said, is whether that trumps the fiduciary obligation to get the best return.
"Nobody, including any private traded company, obviously, wants to invest in terrorism, or assist them in any way," Smith said. "The devil is in the details."
Three years ago, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission put together a listing of companies that appeared to be operating in sanctioned nations, but it was yanked from the agency's website amid complaints the directory was out of date and misleading.
A report by the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College on terrorism-free investing found that allowing politics to interfere with investing pension funds was "asking for trouble."
"Boycotting companies doing business with particular countries is a slippery slope - today Sudan and Iran, tomorrow Saudi Arabia," the report said.
In California, the public employee pension fund is required to screen for investment ties with Iraq or Sudan. But a spokesman said it was rare that the system sold its shares in a company for terrorism-related reasons.
"Generally, we steer clear of divestment because we think it's less effective than holding our shares with companies and using them as leverage to accomplish change from within," said Clark McKinley, a spokesman for Cal-PERS, one of the nation's largest pension funds. "If we sell off our shares, others will buy them. We will lose investment income and have no voice to influence company decisions."
But others insist the terrorism-free strategy makes sense.
Chris Holton, vice president of the Center for Security Policy think tank in Washington, said he believed that "everyone should invest terror free." Holton, whose organization has worked closely with Steelman in the past, praised her as a "hero in the terror-free investment movement." He suggested that if Steelman wanted a terrorism-free portfolio for herself, there were ways to accomplish it.
"There are terror-free investment mutual funds," Holton said. "Not many of them, but there are some."
Holton declined to name any, citing a reluctance to endorse a particular fund.
Doing business in Iran
Steelman's 2008 financial disclosure statement, a form all state officers are required to submit each year, indicates she owned at least $10,000 worth of a mutual fund that bought shares in companies such as Gazprom, a Russian gas provider that has drilling and pipeline operations in Iran.
That same fund also had shares in Petrobras, a Brazilian oil giant that in 2008 signed an agreement with Cuba to look for oil off the island nation's shores; and UBS, the Swiss bank fined $100 million by the Federal Reserve in 2004 for attempting to hide currency transfers to Iran and Cuba.
Another fund Steelman owned bought shares in Schlumberger, an international oil field services company that, according to regulatory filings, has operations in Cuba, Iran, Sudan and Syria.
A spokesman for Steelman said she sold interest in both mutual funds this year.
Steelman is vying for the GOP nomination to run against Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Mo., in 2012. Steelman, who ran unsuccessfully for governor in 2008, announced her bid for the Senate on Dec. 1. She is expected to face some opposition from within her own party, potentially former U.S. Sen. Jim Talent.
McCaskill's own financial disclosures show a voluminous investment portfolio, though most of those holdings are in her husband's name.
McCaskill's office said she did not screen her investments for ties to certain countries, but she hasn't touted terrorism-free investment as an issue, either. Most lists of terrorism-free investments are incomplete or inaccurate, making it difficult to track individual funds, a McCaskill spokesperson said.
In an interview, Steelman acknowledged that her personal holdings included companies that would not have passed the terrorism-free test she employed as treasurer.
"There are not products available to individual investors, so it can't be a cleaner portfolio, unfortunately," Steelman said. "I wish it was."
Part of her aim in office, she said, was to pressure Wall Street to make instruments such as terrorism-free mutual funds more widely available to individuals.
"I've always said that's a problem," Steelman said. "Right now, it's next to impossible to screen any of these funds for companies that are doing business in terrorist sponsor states."
Mark J. Langerman, chief executive of Empowerment Financial, the firm for whom Steelman worked as a consultant, has his own answer to the problem.
"If you want to invest terror free, what can you do?" he asks. "Right now, call us."

Graphic

 
 Post-Dispatch Photo  Sarah Steelman answers questions at a coffee shop in St. Charles while campaigning for the Republican nomination for Missouri governor in 2008. Steelman has announced she will run for U.S. Senate in 2012.  Photo - Sarah Steelman 

Load-Date: December 19, 2010


End of Document