Stepped-up security unveiled for latest NYC terrorism trial Attacks in Paris heighten concern as lone defendant faces judge in 1998 embassy bombings
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 25, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 599 words
Byline:  By LARRY NEUMEISTER Associated Press Tom Hays of the Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Body


NEW YORK • Bigger names in global terrorism have been tried in New York's federal courts before, but there has never been this kind of security all at once: federal guards with assault rifles at every entrance, Homeland Security vans surrounding the courthouses, searches, metal detectors and sign-ins required for all trial visitors.
As a terrorism trial gets underway for a lone defendant in twin bombings of U.S. embassies nearly two decades ago, fears over the terrorist attacks in Paris and unrest a world away have raised security at the city's federal courthouses to levels not seen since the days after the Sept. 11 attacks.
But even with the stepped-up security, which includes the recording of passing license plates, courthouse administrators said it was important that the doors be kept open and that anyone who enters be able to do so without fear of intimidation.
"No event here or overseas is going to shake that foundation," said Edward Friedland, judicial district executive for the Southern District of New York.
Friedland and Chief Judge Loretta A. Preska both said they could not discuss specific security measures, though they noted that assessments of security were frequently done and improvements often made, including construction of a new $10 million security pavilion alongside a federal courthouse that will prevent visitors from entering the 26-story courthouse without being screened first.
"It will make the place a lot safer because we will be screening people outside," Preska said.
The ability to fully protect lower Manhattan during major terrorism trials conducted a short walk from the World Trade Center complex was called into question in 2009 when Attorney General Eric Holder announced that professed Sept. 11 attacks mastermind Khalid Sheik Mohammed would be tried with four others in Manhattan. The decision was reversed after city officials protested loudly that security would be too costly and potentially disruptive, even to the city's economy. The five men remain incarcerated at Guantanamo Bay.
Outside the courtroom door of Judge Lewis A. Kaplan, who is presiding over the trial of an alleged al-Qaida top operative from the 1990s, every spectator must sign in and walk through an airport-style metal detector. Spectators must also sign in with court officers before entering court. The judge disallows cellphones and other electronic devices.
Although security has been in place for earlier terrorism trials, a temporary wall has been placed between the courtroom and the screening device, presumably so jurors cannot see the tight security.
There is no similar effort to hide security outside the courthouse, where a show of force seems to be the point. A police car outside the courthouse captures the license plates of passing cars. Numerous Homeland Security vans are also parked around the courthouse.
Security outside two federal courthouses in lower Manhattan has been steadily increased since soon after the February 1993 World Trade Center bombing, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000 others. After that attack, it was learned that terrorism suspects had discussed attacks against judges. For several years, judges assigned to terrorism trials were guarded by deputy marshals in the courthouse and in their personal lives.
In recent years, the level of security for trials has varied according to the preferences of each judge.
Eric B. Timberman, acting U.S. marshal in the district, said security is taken seriously every day to protect the integrity of the judicial process.
"There's no specific threat that we're aware of," he said.

Graphic

 
 FILE - In this Jan. 22, 2015 file photo, security police watch over the entrance to a federal courthouse in New York where the trial of a man charged with conspiring in the 1998 bombings that killed 224 people at two U.S. embassies in Africa is taking place. Fears over the terror attacks in Paris have raised security at the city's federal courthouses to levels not seen since the days following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig, File)  FILE - In this Jan. 22, 2015 file photo, security police watch over the entrance to a federal courthouse in New York where the trial of a man charged with conspiring in the 1998 bombings that killed 224 people at two U.S. embassies in Africa is taking place. Fears over the terror attacks in Paris have raised security at the city's federal courthouses to levels not seen since the days following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig, File) 

Load-Date: January 25, 2015


End of Document