Stephen DeWerff, 63, Hillsboro, passes away June 15
Chicago Daily Herald
June 24, 2020 Wednesday
Free Press-Progress Edition


Copyright 2020 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: PNP; Pg. 2
Length: 660 words
Body


Stephen James DeWerff, born in Hillsboro, on September 11, 1956, took his final earthly flight on June 15, 2020. He is survived by his loving partner Romie Black of Newnan, GA; his parents James L. and Betty Durbin DeWerff of Nokomis; son William Anthony DeWerff and his husband, Edward Norris of Atlanta, GA; son Robert James DeWerff of Los Angeles, CA; daughter Elizabeth DeWerff Fahnders and her husband, Benjamin Fahnders; and grandson James Paul Fahnders of Houston, TX. He is also survived by his brothers and sisters, Kevin (Kathy) DeWerff, Dennis (Vickie) DeWerff, Nancy (Rick) Roberts, Kathryn Finley, Tim (Shell) DeWerff and Chrissy DeWerff (Brad Whalen). He was a loving son, brother, father and grandfather. The eldest grandchild on both sides of his family, a job he took very seriously; Steve was the rock that everyone leaned on. He was a family man, incredibly proud of each of his offspring, and did not hesitate to tell everyone how great they were. 
Steve was raised on a dairy farm in Nokomis, with six younger brothers and sisters. From the time he was 8 years old, Steve aspired to fly jets. He graduated from Nokomis High School in 1974 and attended the University of Illinois on a four-year Air Force ROTC scholarship. While at U of I, he pledged Sigma Pi, was a member of Air Force ROTC and obtained a bachelor's degree in Animal Science. After graduation in 1978, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the US Air Force. During a nine month delay until reporting to Reese Air Force Base in Lubbock, Texas, he taught agriculture and the FFA program at Pana High School and was the sophomore boys' basketball coach. He served as a pilot in the United States Air Force for 30 years on active and active reserve duty achieving the rank of Colonel. For most of his military career, Col. DeWerff flew KC-10 aerial refueling planes. He served in Operation Urgent Fury, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. In 2008, Col. DeWerff finished his career as the vice commander of 934th Airlift Wing in Minneapolis, Minnesota flying C-130 Hercules aircraft. Among Steve's numerous awards and decorations throughout his Air Force career, are: Legion of Merit; Meritorious Service Medal; Aerial Achievement Medal; Air Force Commendation Medal; Air Force Achievement Medal; Air Force Outstanding Unit Award; Air Force Organizational Excellence Award; Combat Readiness Medal; National Defense Service Medal with Bronze Service Star; Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal; Southwest Asia Service Medal with two Bronze Service Stars; Global War On Terrorism Expeditionary Medal; Global War On Terrorism Service Medal; Humanitarian Service Medal; and, many more. In 1988, Steve was hired by Delta Air Lines and began a 32-year career with the company. During his time with Delta, Steve flew Boeing 727; MD-88; L-1011; Boeing 757; Boeing 767; Boeing 777. His last 14 years with Delta, Steve was a Captain on the 767-ER flying to South America, Central America, Europe, Africa and Asia. In 42 years of flying, Steve clocked more than 25,000 hours of flying to more than a hundred countries and 6 continents. Flying was more than a career, it was his passion, but nothing was more important to Steve than his family and friends. Steve made friends wherever he went and always made them feel they had been friends for decades. Steve was one-of-a-kind and will be dearly missed by all. The viewing and visitation was held on Friday, June 19 from 5-7 pm at the Stiehl-Dawson Funeral Home located at 200 East State Street, Nokomis. A funeral service was held on Saturday, June 20 at 10 a.m. at St. Louis Catholic Church, Nokomis followed by interment at Calvary Cemetery, Nokomis with full military rites by Waples-Bauer Post 94, Nokomis American Legion and the Air Force. In lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made to the Glioblastoma Foundation at Glioblastomafoundation.org in memory of Steve DeWerff.

Graphic

 
Stephen DeWerff

Load-Date: June 24, 2020


End of Document