Stepped-up air-safety rules arrive to fight terrorism
USA TODAY
September 6, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 455 words
Body


In a double dose of news about terrorism Thursday, three men in
New York were convicted of conspiring to blow up U.S. airliners
just as Vice President Gore unveiled new initiatives in Washington
to bolster aviation security.
The double billing may have been accidental. But the two events
share a common goal: to make U.S. skies safer.
The conviction of Ramzi Yousef, a Muslim extremist also accused
of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing, and two others
removes a serious threat. They had concocted a plot to blow up
a dozen U.S. airliners, killing more than 4,000 passengers. The
verdict won't end terrorism, but the accompanying mandatory life
sentences might deter some.
Terrorism safeguards proposed by the Commission on Aviation Safety
and Security, which Gore chairs, hold even more promise. Among
the improvements:
-- Deployment of state-of-the-art bomb-detection devices and
missile defenses.
-- Increased use of bomb-sniffing dogs and hiring of more FBI
agents.
-- Vulnerability studies for every U.S. airport to identify and
close security gaps.
The commission also recommends precautions that many frequent
fliers assume are already in place. Criminal background checks
and uniform performance standards for airport personnel, including
X-ray screeners. Matching passengers with their bags. Using computer
profiles to identify suspicious passengers.
Few would argue with the wisdom of these upgrades. Yet that is
precisely what has been going on for years in Washington.
The urgent need to improve security at U.S. airports was known
years before Yousef's arrest and before the mysterious explosion
of TWA Flight 800. The National Transportation Safety Board made
repeated, specific proposals to fix the flaws.
Those were lost in a vacuum of leadership in government and U.S.
aviation. The result: too much bickering over cost and too few
results. In the interim, airports in Europe, the Middle East and
Asia put U.S. aviation security to shame.
Just 45 days old, the Gore commission may have repackaged old
solutions to meet a report deadline set by President Clinton after
the TWA explosion. That does not diminish the importance or the
need to move forward on these changes.
The threat of terrorism has been proved. U.S. airports should
be armed to combat it.
Aiding victims' families
In addition to recommending a variety of safety measures, the
aviation commission is remembering the often-overlooked other
victims of crashes: the families of those who died. It recommends
requiring airlines to keep comprehensive passenger lists for both
international and domestic flights. And the National Transportation
Safety Board would coordinate services to families in conjunction
with other federal agencies and with private organizations, such
as the Red Cross.

Load-Date: September 6, 1996


End of Document