STERK AIMS TO IMPROVE TERRORISM RESPONSE;
 SHERIFF SAYS HANDLING OF RECENT ANTHRAX SCARE WAS VERY GOOD
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
March 6, 1999, Saturday,
SPOKANE EDITION


Copyright 1999 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE REGION,
Length: 312 words
Byline: Adam Lynn Staff writer
Body


Spokane County emergency officials said Friday they are working on a plan to smooth glitches in their response to domestic terrorism, especially where potential chemical weapons are involved.
Authorities want to streamline dispatching methods and increase training for personnel who respond to such incidents, said Sheriff Mark Sterk, the elected official charged with directing emergency services for the county.
Leaders from the sheriff's office and local fire departments met Thursday morning to critique their recent response to an anthrax scare in the Valley and discuss ways to improve response to such situations.
Some officials, including Sterk, said the response to the incident at the Planned Parenthood building on South Pines Road wasn't as fast as it should have been.
On Feb. 22, a letter with a brown smudge on it turned up at a dental office in the Planned Parenthood building. The letter had been post-marked in Kentucky.
Other abortion providers across the nation have received letters from Kentucky that contained threats about anthrax.
''We had a very good response to this incident,'' Sterk said. ''It was methodical and adequate. There are some things we can improve on.''
The letter sent to the Valley clinic did not contain anthrax or any other bio-medical agent.
One thing authorities hope to do in the future is dispatch law enforcement officers and firefighters to similar threats at the same time. Now, a deputy is sent to the scene to assess the situation first.
They also want to have more joint-training sessions so they get used to working with one another in such situations.
The federal government is expected to give the county money soon so it can have training exercises on domestic terrorism, said Dave Byrnes, the county's deputy emergency management director.
''(Domestic terrorism) is going to be the challenge we face in the future,'' Sterk said.

Notes


Adam Lynn can be reached at (509) 459-5583 or by e-mail at adaml@spokesman.com.  

Load-Date: March 10, 1999


End of Document