Stillwater man to stand trial on terrorism charge
The Perkins Journal (Oklahoma)
July 8, 2010


Copyright 2010 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2010 The Perkins Journal


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 659 words
Byline: Patti Weaver
Body


A Stillwater man who was ordered to stand trial on a charge of calling the Sheriff's Office with a terrorism hoax was released from jail last week - - after a judge reduced his bail from $100,000 to $10,000 at his July 1 preliminary hearing.
Layne Lester Kent, 52, who has a history of alcohol-related arrests, was ordered by Special District Judge Phillip Corley to refrain from using alcohol as a condition of his lowered bail.
"You are not to consume alcohol. You are not to call the Payne County Sheriff's Office for any business unless there is a reason for them to be out there," the judge admonished Kent Thursday.
"It appears to the court that when you start drinking, problems occur. You need to refrain from alcohol," the judge told Kent after ordering him to stand trial on a terrorism hoax charge.
Kent had been jailed since his April 24 arrest at his residence by Payne County Sheriff's Deputy Paul Fox, court records show.
Sheriff's Dispatcher Joe Henniger, who previously worked as a detention officer, testified at the preliminary hearing last week that he recognized Kent's voice when the dispatcher answered the phone at 2:45 am. on April 24.
"I heard Mr. Kent say, 'There's a low-flying plane inbound for the Sheriff's Office.' I said 'excuse me.' He hung up the phone. I notified Deputy Fox. He went to Mr. Kent's house," the dispatcher testified.
On cross-examination from Kent's court-appointed attorney Debra Vincent, the dispatcher admitted that he did not notify the FBI, Homeland Security, or the OSBI. He said that no effort was made to evacuate the building.
The dispatcher testified that he thought that Kent was under the influence of alcohol when he made the call, but the dispatcher said that he was afraid that there could be a low-flying plane bound for the Sheriff's Office.
The defense lawyer sought the dismissal of the felony charge by pointing out to the judge, "I understand Mr. Kent presents a problem, but terrorism is not one." She noted, "He didn't say he had the plane under his control," as the charge alleged.
After prosecutor Tom Lee argued to the court, "The issue is not whether he could carry it out," the judge said, "The witness did say he had some fear he could carry it out," and ordered Kent to stand trial.
Deputy Fox wrote in an affidavit that after the phone call to the Sheriff's Office, "I responded to Mr. Kent's residence and observed Mr. Kent to be very agitated and intoxicated, and we talked through the door for several minutes.
"I could hear him banging items in his residence and due to his agitation, I left his front porch and returned to my patrol car.
"Mr. Kent then came outside with a camera and began taking pictures and invited me inside his residence.
"Mr. Kent was still very agitated and had a strong odor associated with alcoholic beverages about his breath and person.
"Mr. Kent began looking for items in his residence, and at one time, he said he lost his balance and grabbed hold of me.
"I forceably removed Mr. Kent from me and placed him onto his couch where I then placed him under arrest for terrorist threats," the deputy wrote in his affidavit.
If convicted of a terrorism hoax, Kent could be given as much as a life prison term, court records show.
His latest alleged crime came two weeks after he was freed from jail on $20,000 bail on a misdemeanor charge of using a telephone to make a threat of physical injury to Stillwater police on March 29.
Last fall, he was charged with misuse of the 911 emergency telephone service by calling the Stillwater police dispatcher on the emergency line several times for nonemergency use on Oct. 19 and Oct. 20, 2009, court records allege.
A year ago, he was charged with petty larceny for allegedly taking several items that belonged to the Stillwater Medical Center on March 24, 2009, court records show.
Two years ago, he was charged with falsely reporting a crime to Payne County Sheriff's Deputy Fox on April 20, 2008, court records allege.

Load-Date: April 9, 2011


End of Document