Stoic British have felt the horrible sting of terrorism before
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 8, 2005, Friday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 585 words
Byline: Susanna Rodell
Body


There are several big differences between July 7, 2005 and Sept. 11, 2001. As I write this, we don't yet know the extent of British deaths and injuries, but it's clear that, horrific as it is, yesterday's attack on London doesn't come close to the scale of the attacks on our soil nearly four years ago.
Aside from scale, though, there's another big difference: experience. The Brits have been here before. Lots of times.
Unlike Americans, the British have lived a long time with their own vulnerability. Before al-Qaida, there was the Irish Republican Army, and before that the German Blitz, and before that … well, you can go all the way back to 1066.
Perhaps that helps explain why various reporters have already characterized Londoners' attitude in the hours after the bombings as stoical.
It's early now, and it's always a dicey exercise to try to make sense of huge events before the dust settles, but it brings up something I've been struggling with since our own tragedy. I keep thinking of the words in that Sting song: How fragile we are.
Americans aren't good at this. We like to think we're tough. With two wide oceans between us and much of the world's chaos, and with all the big conflagrations of the last century fought somewhere else, we started to believe we were safe.
Then those towers came crashing down, and we learned that the bodies Americans live in are as soft and as vulnerable as those belonging to Israelis or Spaniards or Japanese. We learned that Americans walking to work or reading the morning paper are no better prepared for terror than innocent citizens anywhere else in the world.
We quickly became a nation obsessed with safety. People started hoarding duct tape and buying gas masks. Fashion trends gave way to scare trends: smallpox, anthrax, dirty bombs. It seemed that something more was at stake than just the lives we lost: It was that sense of American exceptionalism, the sense of ourselves as a people uniquely blessed, even chosen, to live in a land free from the perils that beset the rest of the world.
My own childhood was marked with this view. I grew up and went to school with kids whose parents had escaped Nazi-dominated Europe or emigrated after the war. "Never forget how lucky you are," we were told. "You live in a country that is safe." The very superficiality of '50s pop culture, with its sitcoms set in sunny suburbs and its small inconsequential dramas, all that said: We're safe.
True, it was offset with vague nuclear threats, but even that seemed somewhat improbable and far away. It was way different from the reality our European neighbors described: People being taken away at night, houses bombed, childhood bypassed, betrayal.
Americans have still not fully digested the 9/11 trauma. Much of our national drama in coming years will play out against this backdrop: How many of our civil liberties will we be willing to give up to feel secure? How selective will we be with the principles our society is based on, like the presumption of innocence? How aggressive will we be abroad, and how regimented at home?
The British, meanwhile, will grit their teeth and get on with their lives. They have been here before, as have their parents and grandparents. Their island is small and accessible. Their leaders cannot always protect them.
They already know what it might yet take decades for us to learn: Life is dangerous. No amount of prosperity or intelligence or political righteousness can change that fact.
Rodell is the Gazette's editorial page editor.

Load-Date: July 9, 2005


End of Document