Stopping violence begins at point of entry
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
January 23, 2013 Wednesday


Copyright 2013 Capital Gazette Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg.12
Length: 392 words
Byline: PETER FRIEDMAN, For The Capital
Body


As an airline pilot for 37 years, we learn to handle and deal with many situations because we are subject to hijackings and terrorism.
Instead of throwing our hands up and saying the National Rifle Association killed those kids in Connecticut, as the politicians and the "politically correct" want us to believe, we should learn and act from experience of what really works in those situations.
First, we learned from Sept. 11, 2011, that retaliation is not the answer. Prevention is.
That is why the Transportation Security Administration and the Department of Homeland Security were set up. That is why many local banks and buildings have security guards at the point of entry. We have to stop the terrorist from getting on the airplane, or getting in the building or school. Once inside, you have little chance of stopping devastation. We have to prevent entry. Arming school teachers is not the answer, nor should it be.
Start with locking all the doors and windows and placing security guards at the point of entry, just like the TSA does at every airport. You may dislike the inconvenience, but it is worth its weight in gold. Prevent entry and you deny entry to the terrorist.
Secondly, the airlines have a "no-fly list." Anyone who has a questionable background with a terrorist history or a history of violence is not allowed to board the aircraft. This is prevention, not retaliation. Apply that to the purchase of weapons, and you have a "no-buy list.'' Everyone should have a background check, which covers not only criminal activity, but a check of mental stability.
In reality, there are too many guns out on the streets in the wrong hands. Banning assault rifles and gun purchases is not the solution. It is a Band-Aid. It may deter future purchases, but it will in no way keep a criminal from possessing or getting a weapon. Terrorism is not just al-Qaida and the Taliban. It is many situations all rolled up into heinous, brutal acts.
We have to be intelligent in our approach. Profiling people wearing "trench coats" and bullet-proof vest when entering a movie theater or school is not wrong. We cannot prevent every situation or stop every crazy person from attempting a terrorist act, but we must start with the point of entry. We must not let them past the threshold. Proper and aggressive security procedures are the main part of the answer.

Load-Date: January 23, 2013


End of Document