STOP THE MASSACRE, SCORES PLEAD AT TIMES SQ. RALLY
Daily News (New York)
January 4, 2009 Sunday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 278 words
Byline: BY MIKE JACCARINO and RICH SCHAPIRO DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS
Body


CHANTING "FREE Palestine," thousands of Palestinian supporters demonstrated in Times Square yesterday to protest Israel's punishing military offensive in Gaza.
The wave of protesters stretched across three blocks, dwarfing the dozens of boisterous supporters of Israel assembled across Seventh Ave.
"What's happening in Gaza is something that shouldn't be tolerated anywhere in the world," said Bassal Omar, 29, an American-born Palestinian from the Bronx.
"It's a humanitarian crisis, and it's just going to get worse."
Cathie Bell held a sign reading "Palestinians are freedom fighters" as she rallied on 42nd St.
"I'm here in solidarity with the people who are being murdered in Palestine," Bell, 59, of Chelsea, said. "I think it's a horrendous, horrific assault over there, and something should be done."
The demonstration came eight days after Israel launched an assault against Gaza's Hamas rulers that has killed nearly 450 Palestinians and wounded 2,050 others. A ground offensive began yesterday.
"We need to stop this massacre against humanity," said Fatima Elkettani, 42, a Moroccan-born sales manager from Queens.
Across Seventh Ave., John Walland, 33, joined about 50 supporters of Israel, waving flags and chanting "U.S.A.!"
"I thought it was important to stand up to Hamas and terrorism, whether it's Islamic terrorism in Mumbai, London or Gaza," Walland said as he hoisted an Israeli flag in the air. "Terrorism is terrorism."
Bruce Ticker, 58, agreed.
"This is a chapter in the war for survival," said Ticker, who drove to the city from Philadelphia yesterday. "Hamas is building a war machine, and Israel has the right to counter that."
rschapiro@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Anti-Israel demonstrators fill Seventh Ave. Photos by Ron Antonelli/Daily News Protester waves on marchers along 42nd St. headed for Israeli Consulate on Second Ave. at yesterday’s rally against attacks on Gaza.

Load-Date: January 4, 2009


End of Document