Store offers anti-terrorism gadgetry
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 26, 2003 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 603 words
Byline: SHELLEY EMLING
Body


New York --- Now here's something you don't see every day in a Manhattan window display: duct tape, smoke hoods and emergency parachutes for that quick escape from a burning skyscraper.
They all grace the windows of Safer America, a store that's a far cry from Barneys New York with its trendy fashions.
Safer America is for the edgy consumer in search of protection in an uncertain world. It has been called the Home Depot of home security products, a place where shoppers buy items they hope they will never have to use.
Cox New York Correspondent
The 1,500-square-foot store is a short hop from Blimpie, Payless and Nine West, but a world apart from everyday consumer America.
Sure, there are mannequins at Safer America. But they're sporting silvery-gray biohazard suits, not Chanel. There are potassium iodide pills to help prevent radiation poisoning for $11.95. There are bulletproof vests for $500 and up. And for real worrywarts, there are home air filtering units to protect against biological attacks for as much as $7,700.
And what about the pint-sized member of the family? For him or her, there's a baby-sized chemical protection suit for $495.
For one-stop anti-terrorism shopping, a family of four can get everything it might need to survive a terrorist attack for $1,425. The kit includes gas masks, protective wraps, chemical-resistant Nitrile gloves and booties, and two hazard suits designed to protect against even nuclear contamination.
"Terrorism is with us, and we have everything you might need for protection, not only in the event of a terrorist attack but in the event of a natural disaster," said terrorism expert Harvey Kushner, a store founder.
Safer America opened last October on the busy corner of Nassau and Ann Streets just a few blocks from where the majestic World Trade Center once stood. Its motto is "Be Safe. Be Strong."
A new store is planned for midtown Manhattan this spring, followed by stores in big cities across the country.
"It's certainly an interesting bunch of products," said Jonathan Blackwell, perusing the windows one day last week. "Hope I never have a need for any of the stuff."
Safer America's founders are Frederic Samama, a former bond trader, and Kushner, a popular talk show guest and Long Island University professor. Kushner also is author of numerous books on terrorism, including the just-published "Encyclopedia of Terrorism."
Samama grew keen on the idea of a store after shopping for a gas mask last spring and finding no one who could teach him how to properly use it.
As a result, customer service is emphasized at Safer America. Employees are trained to know why, for example, one gas mask is more expensive than another. (It's related to comfort.)
"We believe that you have to make the public aware of what they are purchasing and what it can and cannot do," Kushner said.
But since the World Trade Center attack, safety experts have warned that many highly touted anti-terrorism products give a false sense of security. For example, they've cautioned that by the time poisons are detected in the air and reported to the public, it would be too late to benefit from a gas mask.
Kushner said his aim is not to give false hope.
"I don't want our company to be known as a survivalist company that can make you impervious to every attack," he said.
For now, he insisted that the absolute must-have item is the Evac-U8 smoke escape hood for $85. He said the hood, which gives a person time to escape from air contaminated by smoke or another airborne hazard, should be provided by every hotel along with a Gideon Bible.
 
* ON THE WEB Safer America: www.saferamerica.com 

Graphic

 
Photo: An emergency evacuation mask for use in chemical or biological attacks is one of many masks and hoods sold at Safer America in New York City, a few blocks from the World Trade Center site. / STEPHEN CHERNIN / Associated Press

Load-Date: January 26, 2003


End of Document