Store workers taught how to spot bogus IDs
The Brunswick News (Georgia)
February 26, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 409 words
Byline: Cody Trawick, The Brunswick News, Ga.
Body


Feb. 26--The battle against underage drinking in Glynn County continued as a group of convenience store employees were educated on how to spot bogus IDs used by teenagers, The News reported on Feb. 27, 2001.
Friendly Express, one of the largest convenience store chains in the Golden Isles, teamed with Glynn County police to learn compliance laws and ways to recognize false or altered drivers licenses.
"If in doubt whether it's real or not, don't sell," warned Glynn County police Cpl. Glen Hester.
The convenience store employees were able to correctly determine if an ID was falsified 72 percent of the time in a practice scenario. Undercover operations and seminars had been performed in the past to encourage alcoholic beverage licensees to ask for an ID each time a purchase was made.
"The main thing we have stressed is that identification is shown," Hester said. "The main reason so many were violated last year is that they didn't ask."
February 27, 2003: Officials assess bridge's terrorism vulnerability
Standing on the new Sidney Lanier Bridge on a foggy afternoon, a group of about 10 law enforcement, public safety and public health officials assessed the vulnerability of the bridge as a target for terrorism.
The lack of security on the bridge entrance and on the supports rising up from the water were among the potential liabilities discussed by the group, as well as the possible economic ramifications on Brunswick should an attack on the bridge occur.
Fortunately, all the talk of the potential bridge disasters was just an exercise to help public officials determine terrorist risk levels for specific sites.
The site risk assessment was part of a three-day training course for officials in southeast Georgia on threat and risk assessments for weapons of mass destruction.
"The bridge could be targeted by an environmental group, or a disgruntled construction worker," said Evelyn Sears, an affiliate of the Emergency Prepared Division of the Coastal Health District. "We aren't necessarily talking about Al-Qaida here."
To see more of The Brunswick News or to subscribe to the newspaper, go to http://www.thebrunswicknews.com/. Copyright (c) 2008, The Brunswick News, Ga. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: February 27, 2008


End of Document