STRANGE BEDFELLOWS SEEK PATRIOT ACT FIX;
CONSERVATIVE LIBERTARIANS, ACLU JOIN TO OPPOSE CERTAIN PROVISIONS' RENEWAL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 23, 2005 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 356 words
Byline: TOM BRUNE, NEWSDAY
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Conservative libertarians yesterday launched a campaign to persuade President Bush and Congress to fix sections of the anti-terrorism Patriot Act that they say intrude on privacy and harm civil liberties.
 Long wary of the act's enhanced police powers, the conservatives announced that they had formed Patriots for Checks and Balances with the liberal American Civil Liberties Union in time for hearings in the Republican-controlled Congress next month over whether it should renew 16 Patriot Act provisions that expire at year's end.
 At a news conference yesterday, ACLU Washington director Laura Murphy underscored the importance of raising the profile in the debate of such prominent conservatives as Grover Norquist of Taxpayers United, David Keene of the American Conservative Union and Paul Weyrich of the Free Congress Foundation. "Given the number of folks in this room wearing [Republican] elephant lapel pins, I don't think the administration can easily discount our message," Murphy said.
Bush and new Attorney General Alberto Gonzales have said in recent speeches that one of their priorities this year is to win congressional renewal of all expiring sections of the controversial anti-terrorism law, enacted just weeks after the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks.
 Bob Barr, the group's chair and a former Georgia Republican congressman who voted for the act in 2001, said the sunsetting of the provisions and the House and Senate hearings provide a "unique opportunity" to add checks and balances to the act. In a letter yesterday, he asked Bush "to reconsider your unqualified support" for three specific provisions, only one of which is set to expire without reauthorization.
 Those are the so-called "sneak-and-peek" Section 213, which allows agents to enter a place without first notifying the owner; Section 215, which permits agents to get business and library records more easily; and Section 802, which broadly defines terrorists and terrorism.
 The ACLU has worked with conservative libertarians for the past decade with to insist on the inclusion of judicial review and other safeguards for privacy in anti-terrorism laws.

Load-Date: March 23, 2005


End of Document