Strategy complicated by jumble of agencies
USA TODAY
June 30, 2000, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 641 words
Byline: Peter Eisler
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON
Homeland defense has taken on a whole new meaning -- and spurred
a whole new debate.
The growing threat of terrorist attacks on U.S. soil has spurred
fundamental changes in national security strategy. But the resulting
plans for responding to that threat are no simple matter, and
there's broad disagreement on everything from who should be in
charge of planning and response for terrorist incidents to how
much money should be spent on those activities.
Just this month, Congress' National Commission on Terrorism urged
a "more aggressive U.S. strategy against terrorism." Among other
things, the panel called for substantial policy changes, including
some that could prove quite costly.
Conversely, other reviews have concluded that the government spends
too much time and money preparing for unlikely scenarios.
Federal officials "have used and are still using improbable 'worst-case
scenarios' to plan and develop programs," Norman Rabkin of Congress'
General Accounting Office told lawmakers at a hearing in April.
"Some agency initiatives appear at odds with the (threat assessments)
of the intelligence community."
Behind the debate: a burgeoning counterterrorism bureaucracy.
A special FBI office assesses terrorist threats for virtually
every significant U.S. event, from World Cup ski races and the
Daytona 500 auto race to New Year's celebrations and national
political conventions. The Energy Department has a Nuclear Emergency
Search Team that can hunt out hidden nuclear devices. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention has scientists studying ways
to counter chemical and biological pathogens.
"More often than not, we overcommit resources," says one federal
official involved in counterterrorism operations. He notes, for
example, that chemical/biological response teams are in place
for some U.S. events, even though there has never been such an
attack. "Why is it there? Because if something does happen, we're
going to face questions about why it wasn't."
Therein lies much of the problem: How does the government prepare
for something that has never happened? Preparations for attacks
on U.S. soil must be based on a heavy dose of speculation and
conjecture.
By comparison, the government's approach to managing offshore
threats is old hat, validated in everything from the Cuban missile
standoff of 1962 to the Iranian hostage episode of 1979-80.
Unlike foreign crises, in which authority for steering a U.S.
response lies mainly with the State Department, responsibilities
in a domestic attack can be blurry, depending on its scope and
location. Local and state officials typically are first in charge,
but an array of federal agencies can get involved when events
overwhelm state and local capabilities.
In an effort to test responses to a domestic crisis, the government
has spent millions of dollars on joint response plans and exercises,
including a $ 3.5 million drill last month that simulated biological
and chemical attacks in Denver and Portsmouth, N.H. As in real
life, the exercises put local and state officials in the role
of first responders. The FBI and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) coordinated federal action.
"At this point, there's not so much a unity of command in this
environment as there is a unity of effort," says Army Lt. Col.
Bill Benner, Pentagon liaison to the FBI's Domestic Terrorism
and Counterterrorism Planning Section.
Several of the reports criticizing the government's counterterrorism
plans have focused on streamlining lines of authority. The National
Commission on Terrorism proposed that the Pentagon be the lead
agency for responding to attacks, replacing the FBI and FEMA.
The commission conceded, however, that even that idea is no panacea:
"The (Defense Department) is not optimally organized to respond
to the wide range of missions that would likely arise from the
threat of a catastrophic terrorist attack."

Load-Date: July 1, 2000


End of Document