Strain of Isolation Compels Qaddafi To Approach US
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
November 9, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE WORLD; Pg. 1
Length: 1072 words
Byline: George Moffett, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Highlight: Hit by sanctions, Libya offers to let bombers of Pan Am 103 be
tried in a 'neutral' nation
Body


AT a Middle East economic conference in Casablanca earlier this
month, Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller received an unexpected
call. Libyan leader Col. Muammar Qaddafi requested that she visit
Libya on her way home to Ankara.
Two days later, in a late-night meeting in Libya, Colonel
Qaddafi made an offer he asked Ms. Ciller to convey to Washington.
Qaddafi would ''accept'' the Middle East peace process and turn
over two Libyans accused of planting the bomb that destroyed Pan
American flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. In return,
he wanted the United States to lift its economic sanctions on Libya
and allow the two suspects - both Libyan intelligence agents - to
be tried in a neutral country.
The meeting was not the first time Qaddafi made such an offer,
which US officials regard as a complete nonstarter. But it provides
new evidence that years of economic and political isolation have
taken a significant toll on Libya and on its enigmatic leader, who
has ruled his desert nation since 1969.
''He's in desperate shape,'' says Henry Schuler, director of the
energy and natural security program at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS) in Washington. ''He's trying anything
and everything to find a way out of the UN sanctions.''
US sanctions were imposed on Libya in 1973 and later
strengthened in response to Qaddafi's support of terrorism. The
sanctions were reinforced by the United Nations after Qaddafi
refused to extradite the two bombing suspects for trial in
Scotland, where 259 people, including 188 Americans, were killed
four days before Christmas.
 
Libya's isolation
Even though the UN sanctions do not bar the export of oil and
Qaddafi's far-flung international business interests are
prospering, the sanctions, economic mismanagement, and corruption
are taking a heavy toll on the Libyan people, according to Libya
experts and media reports. Government, civilian, and military
workers haven't been paid in months. Medical care has deteriorated.
Water supplies are contaminated.
Libya's isolation has been deepened by the Middle East peace
process and was underscored when Qaddafi was not invited to
participate in the Morocco conference at which most other Arab
nations were represented.
Six years after the Lockerbie incident, the families of the
victims remain deeply angered that the Libyan leader has been
spared justice for an event that claimed more American lives than
the Gulf war.
Diplomatic analysts say the main reason is that each of several
possible courses of action against him has an unacceptable
downside:
* Unilateral military action against Libya would be enormously
costly for the US and would be greeted with a storm of
international protest.
* Stepped-up US pressure on the UN Security Council to add oil
to the Libyan trade sanctions would jeopardize consensus among the
five permanent members on other issues - notably Bosnia and Iraq -
that the US considers more important.
* Appeals to European nations on a bilateral basis to embargo
Libyan oil are of doubtful utility because of the substantial
profits the Libyan connection provides to European businessmen.
The US is also reluctant to pressure Egypt, which has been a
conduit of embargoed goods, including spare aircraft parts, to
Libya.
 
Reluctance to press Egypt
Convinced that Egypt is his only bridge to the West, Qaddafi has
come to rely on President Hosni Mubarak to make his case with the
US for dropping sanctions and getting him off the hook for past
acts of terrorism.
Mr. Mubarak also helped Qaddafi by ensuring that Libyan
opposition figures are not allowed to operate on Egyptian
territory. For example, Mubarak declined to conduct a serious
investigation into the disappearance of Mansur Kikhiya, a leading
Libyan dissident, who was abducted in Cairo last December.
In return, Qaddafi has provided generous rewards. He accepted
hundreds of thousands of Egyptian guest workers into Libya, easing
Egypt's severe unemployment problem. He also steered handsome
profits to men close to Mubarak, who have been enlisted as agents
of Libyan investment abroad, according to well-informed Libyan
sources.
In an effort to win influence in the Mubarak government, these
sources say, Qaddafi allowed state-controlled companies to give one
of Mubarak's sons a lucrative monopoly over the import of
construction steel.
''The relationship provides stability for both countries,'' says
Mamoun Fandy, an expert on Egypt and Libya who teaches at Mount
Mercy College in Iowa. ''If Mubarak can't have Egyptian workers in
Libya, the Islamic threat to Egypt will increase considerably. If
Qaddafi doesn't have an outlet through Mubarak, that will be the
end of his regime.''
Mindful of the key role Mubarak has played in the Middle East
peace process and of the pressure he is under from radical
Islamists, the US is reluctant to lean harder on Mubarak to cut
ties with the Qaddafi government.
''Egypt's message is, if you hurt Qaddafi you're hurting us, and
if you hurt us, you're hurting US policy in the region,'' Dr. Fandy
says.
The collapse of Qaddafi's regime could pinch in another way,
Fandy says. What little opposition to Qaddafi inside Libya exists
comes from Muslim extremists. An Islamic successor regime would not
only support and provide sanctuary for Egyptian Islamists. It could
also serve as a bridge for well-organized Islamic extremists in
Algeria to provide money, training, and weapons to their Egyptian
counterparts.
 
Clouds behind Qaddafi
''If Qaddafi falls, Libya's tremendous oil revenues could help
fund Islamic revolutions,'' Fandy says. As much as Qaddafi would
like to break out of the sanctions, he is unable to pay the asking
price by extraditing the bombing suspects for trial in Scotland,
where they would be accessible to questioning by US and British
intelligence.
If Qaddafi turned over the two agents, he would almost certainly
weaken the morale of the Libyan internal security forces at a time
when he needs them most. Under threat of the death penalty if they
did not cooperate, moreover, they would almost certainly point the
finger at Qaddafi himself, who many experts believe directly
ordered the terrorist attack.
''This is not state-supported terrorism,'' the CSIS's Henry
Schuler says. ''It's state-perpetrated terrorism.''
''There can be no compromise on the need for trying the suspects
in a Scottish court under Scottish law,'' says a senior State
Department official, commenting on Qaddafi's latest offer.
''We are absolutely opposed to any alternative trial venue,'' he
adds.

Load-Date: November 10, 1994


End of Document