Strasburg police chief discusses terrorism;
Borough town hall meeting also includes crime prevention tips for residents
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
November 5, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 480 words
Byline: Cindy Hummel, Correspondent
Body


Strasburg Borough police Chief Steve Echternach gave about 35 residents a lesson in terrorism and crime prevention during an Oct. 29 town hall meeting.
"We get the crowd because it (the presentation) is about terrorism," Echternach told the citizens who came out on a cold, rainy evening, "but it is really about crime prevention." Terrorists, Echternach said, can be defined as "the unlawful use of force," or "force for some kind of change."
#TOWNHALL.N55s#
Motivations for terrorism include obsessions, life-changing events or a belief that the ends justify the means, Echternach said. Terrorists hope fear and panic will lead to disruption, as evidenced by the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. he said, adding that terrorists seek long-term goals, such as policy changes and overthrowing governments.
Echternach said citizens can help prevent future attacks by "being a participant, not a spectator." He asked residents to be aware of their surroundings and note when things are unusual.
He said things to look for include unusual: requests for information, thefts or purchases and traffic in and out of a house.  If someone asks to purchase a large quantity of a bomb-making ingredient, Echternach said, the police should be alerted.
Echternach asked that residents make detailed reports. A description of a person's gender and shirt is not as helpful as including a suspect's height, age, hair color and style, scars and tattoos. Note details of a suspect's car, including: the make, year, model, color, dents, bumper stickers and license plate number, if possible. Echternach encouraged residents to write details down and report them right away. He stressed that residents should never endanger themselves in obtaining information.
In an emergency, he said, call 911. For a nonemergency incident, call 1-800-957-2677 or 1-800-957-COPS. Echternach said he would rather check out reports, even if they do not proof credible, rather than have a terrorist attack.
"I think we have had a valuable enlightenment as a result of 9/11," Echternach said.
In other business, Michael Reeder of South Jackson Street, told council through a sign language interpreter, that he has concerns about speeding traffic on his street. He said the excessive speed makes it difficult for him to cross the street to get his mail.
Echternacht said he has put a speed control on South Jackson and other streets in the borough. Municipal police departments in the state are not allowed to use radar, however, which makes it more difficult to enforce speed limits. He encouraged citizens concerned about speeding to lobby their representatives to permit radar for local departments.
Councilman Don Bachman announced that the borough will honor Pearl Harbor Day at 12:30 p.m. Dec. 8 with a ceremony in the square. A new flag will be raised, honoring eight brothers in the Rineer family who served in three different wars.

Load-Date: November 6, 2002


End of Document