Stress over terrorism goes straight to the heart
USA TODAY
January 8, 2008 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. 7D
Length: 462 words
Byline: Marilyn Elias
Body


Those who felt severely stressed after the Sept. 11 attacks and continue to worry about terrorism are developing cardiac problems at much higher rates than other Americans, a groundbreaking study suggested Monday.
It's the first large report to track the health of adults from before 9/11 to see how their responses to the terrorist attack may be contributing to illness years later.
"You don't have to be directly exposed to attacks or have pre-existing health problems to see some bad effects. It's how you react to the terrorism that counts," says Roxane Cohen Silver, a psychologist at the University of California-Irvine.
The study by Silver and E. Alison Holman followed about 1,800 adults who had filled out health surveys that were part of an ongoing database up to 15 months before 9/11. They were contacted again nine to 14 days after the attacks and asked if they had stress symptoms, such as flashbacks, were constantly thinking about the terrorism or were startling easily.
Over the next three years, participants were asked if doctors had diagnosed them with cardiac problems, such as heart disease, high blood pressure or strokes. And they were asked about worries over terrorism.  Those who felt deeply stressed right after 9/11 were about three times more likely than others to have heart-related illnesses one and two years later,  Holman says. The worst effect fell on adults who were very stressed after the attacks and continued to worry about terrorism. Compared with others, they were about three to five times more likely to have a cardiac diagnosis two to three years after 9/11, Silver says.
The report is published in the Archives of General Psychiatry. The researchers took into account illnesses before 9/11, heart disease risk factors, age and life stress.
It's not surprising that terror-related stress socks it to the heart, says health psychologist Gregory Miller of the University of British Columbia. Stress promotes blood clots, inflammation that can damage the heart and cardiac arrhythmias, he says.
Chronic worriers also often don't sleep well, so their hearts don't benefit from the drop in blood pressure and heart rate that comes with deep sleep, says Timothy Smith, a psychologist at the University of Utah who studies how stress affects health. And chronic worriers "may exhaust their social networks" by seeking constant reassurance, so they wind up isolated, and that can drive up blood pressure, Smith says.
Chronic stress also increases a person's output of cortisol, a hormone that promotes clogging of the arteries, he says.
People who have strong fears about terrorism can be helped by short-term therapies that relieve anxiety, such as cognitive behavior therapy, Smith says. "Regular exercise and meditation also can be effective." 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Carmen Taylor, AP

Load-Date: February 13, 2008


End of Document