STRIKING BACK: U.S. FIGHTS TERRORISM - NO LINK MADE BETWEEN ANTHRAX, HIJACKERS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
October 10, 2001, Wednesday


Copyright 2001 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: World/Nation; Pg. a4
Length: 407 words
Byline: KAREN GULLO, Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- The FBI believes the strain of anthrax that killed a tabloid newspaper editor in Florida was manmade, and tests of the 19 hijackers' possessions have found no trace of the deadly bacteria, law enforcement officials said Tuesday.
Investigators so far have found no evidence linking the Florida incident to terrorism, although the manufactured nature of the bacteria suggests criminal activity may be involved, the officials said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
U.S. officials, meanwhile, said there was evidence that Osama bin Laden sympathizers have been performing surveillance of U.S. buildings overseas. That information and other evidence have prompted continued warnings for Americans overseas to use caution, the officials said.
President Bush was preparing to visit the FBI on Wednesday to announce the creation of a list of most wanted terrorist worldwide. Officials said the initial list would include 19 names, some whom are believed to be connected to Osama bin Laden's network.
Overseas, anti-terrorist detectives in Ireland arrested three Libyans and an Algerian at their Dublin homes on suspicion of fund raising and providing logistical support to groups linked to al-Qaida.
More than $ 13,000 in cash, documents and financial records were seized, detectives said. They were also investigating the four men's various bank accounts.
Police refused to identify the detainees, but authorities said they included:
* A 39-year-old Libyan who has directed two Islamic charities in Ireland that detectives suspect have been used to pass funds to al-Qaida members.
* A 26-year-old Algerian who arrived in Ireland illegally two years ago and was previously been suspected of involvement in abortive plans to attack U.S. cities during millennium celebrations.
In Florida, there were growing signs that the appearance of anthrax at a tabloid newspaper office may not have involved terrorism but would be treated as a criminal act.
Tests so far had not found any other workers at the location who were infected, or additional spores of the bacteria except those found on the computer keyboard of the victim who died last week, officials said.
Robert Stevens, 63, a photo editor at The Sun newspaper, died from anthrax.
Dr. Jean Malecki, director of the Palm Beach County Health Department, said officials could not say whether someone genetically manufactured the bacteria or they occurred naturally because tests weren't completed.

Load-Date: October 10, 2001


End of Document