Students undeterred by latest terror plot
University Wire
August 30, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 The Crimson White via U-Wire
Length: 487 words
Byline: By Jared Culver, The Crimson White; SOURCE: U. Alabama
Dateline: TUSCALOOSA, Ala. 
Body


With only a few weeks until the 5-year anniversary of 9/11, a plot to blow up 10 planes bound from London to the United States was foiled by investigators, creating more terrorism hype.
Despite all the risks and warnings, students are embracing life rather than fear.
Jerry Rosenberg, a professor of psychology, said people are conscious of the newfound realities of terrorism post-9/11 without being consumed by them.
"I don't see a dramatic change in behavior," he said. "Just a dramatic change in awareness."
Where the struggle is one of ideology, the psyche of people is paramount, Rosenberg said. Terrorists lack the military strength or numbers to invade literally, so their nature is to invade the mind of their enemy, he said. The side that can control the minds of the people is the side that emerges victorious, he said.
"We are not prepared to give in to those that want to take away our way of life," Rosenberg said. "There is always going to be a touch of fatalism, the sense that no matter what the risk, we'll still fly."
Students face these problems every year, such as when they study abroad or travel to assorted UA sporting events around the country. Many pack into large stadiums despite proclamations from terrorist leaders that all Americans, military and civilian, are legitimate targets, Rosenberg said.
"It has become part of our normative world," he said.
Some students say the danger seems far away. While New York City and Washington, D.C., seem obvious targets, there isn't significant worry that terrorists are thinking of attacking Alabama.
"I believe the students here aren't as worried because the threat is minimal compared to the major cities," said Will Smith, a sophomore majoring in political science.
While acknowledging the risk of boarding a plane or gathering in large groups, students are determined to carry on with their lives.
"I do think twice before I get on an airplane," said Erica Sanders, a junior majoring in chemical engineering.
Tyler Pair, a freshman majoring in biology, said he doesn't let the terrorism scares bother him.
"No one wants to live in fear," Pair said. "You just have to go out and do stuff."
Colin Chapell, a graduate student in history, said that after five years of on-again/ off-again terror warnings, the latest one is just another news story.
"People are beginning to be fatigued," Chapell said. "I don't know if it is the government, media or both, but they seem to hype up every threat."
Adam Holbein, a freshman majoring in telecommunication and film, said the main goal of terrorists is to make people afraid.
"If you are going to be afraid, they have more motivation," Holbein said. "They are not going to stop if we keep giving in."
Rosenberg said people likely think another terror attack could happen.
"There is a sense amongst people that we will have another 9/11, " Rosenberg said. "You can't let it consume your life."
(C) 2006 The Crimson White via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 30, 2006


End of Document