Students from Berkeley to U. Nebraska protest war against terrorism
University Wire
November 12, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Nebraskan via U-Wire
Length: 527 words
Byline: By Melissa Lee, Daily Nebraskan
Dateline: Lincoln, Neb.
Body


Just hours after the U.S.-led attacks on Afghanistan began, more than 10,000 people swarmed the Bay Area around San Francisco, Calif., to protest the bombings.
Many of those 10,000 were students.
The student anti-war movement in California and along the West Coast has grown so large over the past month that some have compared it to the peace movements during the time of the Vietnam conflict.
U. Nebraska
"We've had many sizable demonstrations against the war," said Snehal Shingavi, a leading member of the Students Against the War Coalition at the University of California-Berkeley.
The biggest one to date was held this weekend, Shingavi said.
Representatives from more than 60 schools as far away as Mexico came to Berkeley on Saturday and Sunday for the Students Against the War Conference.
Six hundred people were registered for the event, Shingavi said.
The conference provided students a chance to plan joint events and discuss anti-war activism.
"We want to get students to collaborate and devise tactics to get an anti-war message out there," Shingavi said.
"And, eventually, we want to strategize on how to end this war."
A similar conference for East Coast institutions was held this weekend at Boston University.
But the magnitude of the student anti-war movements along the coasts has not been felt yet in Nebraska.
Carol McShane, director of Nebraskans for Peace, said the peace movement in Nebraska was not large compared to other parts of the nation, but it was expanding.
"Ours is growing. As each day goes by, we see more and more people joining the anti-war movement," she said.
Nebraskans for Peace has been holding peace vigils on Tuesdays at noon and 4:30 p.m. on the north steps of the Capitol.
Anywhere from seven to 20 people attend the vigils, McShane said.
The University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Nebraska Wesleyan University and Union College have been well-represented at the vigils, she said.
"Every time we go, we see a new face -- and usually it's a student," she said.
Several smaller peace rallies have been held in Nebraska, and Nebraskans for Peace sent a van of students to a Sept. 29 rally in Washington, D.C., McShane said.
Although Shingavi said she didn't know how to account for the difference between the coasts and Nebraska in numbers of students opposed to war, McShane named California's notoriously left-wing stance on most political issues as one reason.
"I think Nebraskans are more conservative," she said. "They're not so demonstrative."
But regardless of the numbers, one thing all the protesters of the war have in common is the belief that America's attacks on Afghanistan are useless.
"The things that are happening in the war against Afghanistan -- the loss of life, starvation -- don't actually help us solve terrorism," Shingavi said.
"These things actually compound terrorism."
McShane said she was against the war for practical reasons.
"It's not going to work," she said. "They're not going to get bin Laden. We're going to destabilize any relationship we might have had with Muslims around the world.
"You can't hit terrorism with bombs."
(C) 2001 Daily Nebraskan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 12, 2001


End of Document