STUDENTS' TERRORISM TAKE TAKES
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 8, 2001 Saturday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2001 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL; Leigh Allan Column; Pg. 1B
Length: 579 words
Byline: Leigh Allan Dayton Daily News
Body


THEY WERE IN THE midst of solving the terrorism crisis. Giving it a good shot.
Then, through the fault of no one and nothing but inevitability, the situation collapsed into chaos.
Which may have made it a little too close to reality.
"They" were 250 students from 16 high schools in southwestern Ohio, brought together Thursday at Wright State University by a joint effort of the Dayton and Cincinnati Councils on World Affairs. The annual forum discusses a topic chosen by the students, with terrorism the obvious choice this year.
They were a broad demographic mix, from both suburban and urban schools. And they had a broad opening agenda, with four anti-terrorism options: the United States acting alone, a U.S.-led coalition, getting the United Nations to take the lead and concentrating on the root causes.
The students were randomly divided into 15 groups to choose a policy or mixture thereof. Each room had a student "facilitator" (an edu-babble word that ought to be terrorized out of the language). I wandered into most of the rooms and heard everything from a belief that we can wipe out hatred to a call to terrorize the world into giving up terrorism.
A teacher who was doing the same thing came to the same conclusions I did - the students mostly were doing a good job of thinking through their positions, but made a lot of misstatements of fact that could have been avoided with better preparation. The errors - Syria has oil, we give massive aid to Saudi Arabia, etc. - were about equal regardless of the speakers' politics. We also agreed that the students' ignorance wasn't nearly as vast as that of the average American adult.
Every group I saw had spirited participation except one, which seemed brain dead. (That's the room where the TV folks headed, showing that "birds of a feather flock together" outweighs "opposites attract" in cliche accuracy. But I digress.)
After the groups formed their own policies, all came together to present their decisions. New position groups were created, and students picked one or more groups in which to discuss ways to support the decision.
Deciding what a policy should be before deciding why it should be that way may seem backward, but it's the way real foreign policies are often developed, so it's pretty realistic. After coming up with arguments for their positions, it was back to mass presentations.
Although everyone agreed on eliminating al-Qaida, the final positions stressed everything from virtual isolationism to virtual one-worldism. There were touchy-feely calls for foreign-policy changes to help the downtrodden, and there was a strutting martinet of the nuke-'em-all-first-and-ask-questions-later-just-'cause-we-can school.
The nuker got the most audience response, pro and con, and was so overdone I thought at first he was being satiric. But then came a group that really was spoofing, from the members' College of Mortuary Science shirts to their positions in favor of Joe McCarthy and the Alien and Sedition Acts and statement that God is only on our side. The satirists did a great job that was lost because as the presentations proceeded bus announcements kept being made, and students kept rushing out. By the end, 90 percent of the crowd was gone.
There was supposed to be a vote, but that became meaningless because of the panic to get home. Which could be all too good a harbinger of what the real world will eventually face.
Contact Leigh Allan at 225-7317 or e-mail him at leigh_allan@coxohio.com  

Load-Date: December 11, 2001


End of Document