Student liberties at risk because of anti-terrorism law
University Wire
February 6, 2002


Copyright 2002 Daily Northwestern via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 585 words
Byline: By Tina Valkanoff, Daily Northwestern
Dateline: Evanston, Ill.
Body


At Durham Technical College, having an anti-Bush poster brought the FBI to freshman A.J. Brown's door on a tip that she had "un-American material." At Northwestern University, the Evanston Police Department is questioning international students at the request of the Justice Department. The NU policy statement on student rights and responsibilities declares "students will be secure against invasion of privacy and unreasonable search and seizure." The rights of individual students include "freedom to … exercise the civil rights to which any citizen of the United States is entitled."
Northwestern U.
The U.S.A. Patriot Act conflicts with the rights NU guarantees its students.
NU's policy states that "students' records may be released to persons outside the university only on request of the student or through compliance with applicable laws."
Under the Patriot Act, law enforcement officials must present to the court "a certification that there are specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the education records are likely to contain information relevant to an authorized investigation or prosecution."
If a judge agrees that a student's records might contain "pertinent" information to an investigation, they can issue a subpoena. According to the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers, about 200 colleges and universities, including NU, have turned over student information to the FBI, INS and other law enforcement officials. These requests focused primarily on foreign students.
Further analysis of the Patriot Act reveals potential for more privacy violations. Section 508 provides law enforcement access to the student information gathered for the purpose of statistical research under the National Education Statistics Act. The student information covered by NESA was previously held to strict confidentiality requirements. The new law requires a court order and certification that the records are relevant to an investigation. It fails to provide significant judicial review and does not protect student privacy or investigations based on racial profiling.
This legislation allows the government to investigate any students it says fits a "suspicious" profile, which potentially could include those affiliated with political groups critical of the government or with majors such as microbiology, Islamic studies or aviation.
Nadine Strossen, president of the American Civil Liberties Union, draws a parallel between anti-terrorism legislation and McCarthyism: "The term 'terrorism' is taking on the same kind of characteristics as the term 'communism' did in the 1950s. It stops people in their tracks, and they're willing to give up their freedoms. People are too quickly panicked. They are too willing to give up their rights and to scapegoat people, especially immigrants and people who criticize the war."
So far, investigations of NU students do not seem to have yielded any useful information. The number of applications to NU from international students are growing.
But as the anthrax investigation begins to point to a domestic terrorist, it seems likely that law enforcement officials will widen their dragnet from racial profiling to academic and political profiling. They will probably return to campus.
The question is when and if NU will act to stop student rights violations. And if NU does not act, we as students must act to reclaim the civil rights NU guarantees to us.
(C) 2002 Daily Northwestern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 6, 2002


End of Document