Students, staff weigh in on ISIL threats to America
Daily Collegian: Pennsylvania State University
October 2, 2014 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 853 words
Byline: Chelsea Friedman
Body


Thirteen years after America found itself under terrorist attack, the country may face another threat.
On Sept. 23, America and its allies began airstrikes against the Islamic States of Iraq and Syria, and Penn State students and professors have many thoughts and concerns about another war against terrorism.
The organization, better known as ISIL, started off as an organization from al-Qaeda, according to a written statement by the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson on Sept. 17.
When America invaded Iraq and took down Saddam Hussein, it supported the Shia population, which is the original target of ISIL, a Sunni sect, Penn State Professor of International Affairs and former United States Ambassador to Mozambique and Peru, Dennis Jett said.
It was during this time that a civil war was started and many from the war joined ISIL, he said.
L. Paul Bremer was hired by President George W. Bush and was put in charge to disband the Iraqi military where he then hired people to be militias, to get to those creating the civil war, Jett said.
"But when America left, they stopped getting paid," he said. "That's when Prime Minister al-Maliki recreated the civil war, which led to groups like ISIL forming and spreading into Syria."
The difference between al-Qaeda and ISIL is that al-Qaeda targets non-Muslims from the western world and ISIL was only meant to target Muslims, he said.
These groups threaten America and its allies, President Barack Obama said during his weekly address Sept. 20 at the White House. In that same speech, he said over 40 nations have joined in the fight against ISIL, whose membership continues to grow.
After multiple beheadings released to the media, along with mass murders and the takeover of nearby regions, it has caused some to question if American troops are needed on the ground, Jett said.
ISIL is not a normal army, it's a guerilla movement, Penn State Professor of Political Science James Piazza said.
"And there's a big question as to whether the U.S. air strikes will be effective and if ISIL will use the civilian casualties as propaganda," he said.
The outcome will be critical for President Obama, after he campaigned on America getting out of Iraq, and statistics continue to show that Americans do not want another war in Iraq, Piazza said.
"We won't be able to defeat them," Jett said. "The Iraqi forces are not willing to fight. And until they are, America dropping bombs, as much as it should, won't make much of a difference."
Some also debate if it was a mistake to pull troops out to begin with, and question that if American troops go back, if they would ever be able to leave, he said.
For Americans, social media has played a big role in spreading awareness about the threat of ISIL and assisting American leaders on what should be done next, Jett said.
The videos of the two American journalists that were beheaded was the highest known understanding of a national story in five years, reaching about 90 percent of Americans, he said.
But some students are still unaware as to what is going on and what another war against terrorism means for America and its future.
"I haven't really been able to keep up with the news," Bria Truxon (junior- elementary education) said. "But it's kind of scary to think about war in general."
Knowing there are people that hate Americans and are willing to retaliate is frightening, she said. The thought of terrorism is scary, she added.
History shows before 9/11, there were several high-profile terror attacks, but no one has seen ISIL do anything like that, Piazza said.
"But I don't know if that can make you feel safe, so America needs to be on high alert," he said.
Some Middle Eastern students praying at Penn States Pasquerilla Spiritual Center Sept. 23 shared their thoughts on the vilification of the Muslim religion after radical jihadist groups like ISIL are discovered and grow.
"What they believe in, is total war against anyone who isn't Muslim," Mohammad Munasef (junior-electrical engineering) said. "And that's completely against the Islamic belief. Muslims are raised to be accepting of other religions and cultures."
Another student, who identifies as Muslim, also shared his thoughts.
"It's like a car. Islam or any religion in general is like a car, which should help people to have a better life," Hyder Alkhalifah (junior-petroleum engineering and Japanese) said. "But if people misuse it, it's like a car accident. That's what's happening in the Middle East."
Considering the positive intentions of the U.S., he shared his perspective on whether America should be involved or not.
"We love the Americans," Alkhalifah said. "There's too much terrorism in the Middle East. America helping is a good thing, so let the U.S. help."
America will lead the world in the war against ISIL, along with many other recent epidemics, President Obama stated in his weekly address, on Sept. 27.
There's a risk involved and it's a risk we all have to share because America does provide leadership to the world, Jett said.
"This could be a long-term struggle," he said. "But America will ensure that ISIL does not advance."

Load-Date: October 2, 2014


End of Document