Students pack COD for terrorism talks by university experts
Chicago Daily Herald
October 31, 2001, Wednesday DuPage


Copyright 2001 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 305 words
Byline: Catherine Edman Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


Orella Warner knows she'll field questions about Islam, Muslims and Afghanistan in her upcoming class on cross-cultural communications.  
The part-time teacher needed some answers, and she joined 1,000 others Tuesday looking for the same sort of information at a daylong teach-in at the College of DuPage that focused on terrorism.  
It's the first in a series of monthly events planned by the Glen Ellyn-based college looking at global terrorism.  
Of the five sessions Tuesday, two the greatest draws were those on Islam. There were few, if any, available vacancies for those classes in the 793-seat McAninch Arts Center.  
Student Lara Suleiman was glad to see Islam presented in a factual, detailed way because she sees it skewed toward one viewpoint or another in so many other venues.  
"He was very accurate," the Naperville woman, who's Muslim, said.  
John Woods, the University of Chicago's director of Middle East Studies compared Islam, Judaism and Christianity and explained the development of Islamic extremism.  
That's the sort of depth people need to better understand the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and the world's subsequent response, Harry Lepinske, Purdue University-Calumet director for International Business Development Programs.  
Too many people think the attacks represent "all Islam … all the Middle East," said Lepinske, who was attracted to the event, in part, because of the help he offers to businesses in Azerbaijan. It's an area of the world with which he's particularly familiar.  
The teach-in was important because it helped students, teachers and community members better understand Muslim students who attend COD, Dania Hajjar, a student from Westmont, said.  
"We're the same as any other students at COD," she said.  
The next session "Understanding Afghanistan" is planned for noon to 1:30 p.m. Nov. 20.

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document