Study: War on terrorism veils tyranny
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 16, 2002 Wednesday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 622 words
Byline: BOB DEANS
Body


Washington --- In Zimbabwe, President Robert Mugabe has begun calling dissenters and some journalists "terrorists," accusing his political opponents of trying to poison him with anthrax.
In Beijing, the Chinese government claims its longstanding oppression of Islamic minorities is helping the U.S. war on terror.
And in Russia, President Vladimir Putin has stepped up the military campaign in Chechnya, asserting that Muslim separatists are part of the global terror network targeted by the United States.
Cox Washington Bureau
In the months since the United States launched its war on terrorism, governments around the world have used the campaign to justify human rights abuses, according to a new study by Human Rights Watch, a New York-based investigative and advocacy group.
"A lot of countries saw 9/11 as a wonderful opportunity to legitimize repressive practices in the name of America's cause," said Tom Malinowski, advocacy director for the Washington office of Human Rights Watch.
The group's 700-page annual report on human rights practices in 67 countries will be released today. The use of the anti-terror campaign as a veil for repression is the dominant theme.
"It's not just that these things are bad," Malinowski said. "Promoting human rights and democracy is actually a very important element of defeating terrorism over the long term. You can't separate these two issues."
Combating human rights abuses and promoting democratic development are essential to the success of any anti-terror campaign, analysts say.
"When it gets beyond the military components, we should recast this as a struggle for open societies that respect human rights," said Sarah Mendelson, senior fellow for Russia and Eurasia programs at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. "That is our best anti-terrorism strategy."
Bush will meet today with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit of Turkey, a predominantly Islamic nation and important member of the anti-terror coalition. Turkey also hosts U.S. warplanes used to patrol the northern no-fly zone over Iraq and would be central to any future U.S. attacks on that country.
But Turkey also has a poor human rights record, with arbitrary detentions and torture, according to the London-based human rights group Amnesty International.
"It will send the wrong signal if it appears that the U.S. has set aside the promotion of democracy and human rights as a result of Turkish cooperation post-September 11," Amnesty's U.S. director, William F. Schulz, wrote in a letter Tuesday to President Bush. "We urge you to utilize this historic moment to use U.S. leverage to help build a stable, democratic, prosperous, and human rights-respecting culture in Turkey."
No country, though, has posed a thornier human rights dilemma for Bush than Russia, where four wars in seven years have killed more than 250,000 people, most of them civilians, in the largely Islamic region of Chechnya.
Bush has repeatedly urged restraint in Chechnya, for instance, as he did in October when he met with Putin in Shanghai.
"I emphasized to Vladimir Putin that the war on terror is not, and cannot be, a war on minorities," Bush told reporters, Putin at his side. "It's important to distinguish between those who pursue legitimate political aspirations and terrorists."
Just last week, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher reiterated the theme, in the face of mounting military abuses in Chechnya.
"The lack of a political solution and the number of credible reports of massive human rights violations we believe contribute to an environment that's favorable towards terrorism," Boucher said.
Putin, who severed the slim hope of political talks with Chechans on Monday, hasn't embraced the message.

Load-Date: January 16, 2002


End of Document