Student convicted of supporting terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
June 11, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 429 words
Byline: GREG BLUESTEIN The Associated Press
Body


ATLANTA - Syed Haris Ahmed's videos of Washington, D.C., landmarks didn't represent an imminent threat to the U.S., but prosecutors said his conviction Wednesday for supporting terrorism exemplifies a strategy of snuffing out potential plots in their earliest stages. U.S. District Judge Bill Duffey found the 24-year-old former Georgia Tech student guilty of a conspiracy to provide support to terrorism. Prosecutors said Ahmed and a co-defendant made the videos to gain prestige with overseas terror leaders. 
Ahmed's attorney countered that the videos were silly and amateurish. Shortly after the verdict, U.S. Attorney David Nahmias, who led the prosecution, said authorities can't afford to wait until would-be terrorists are closer to acting. "The fuse that leads to an explosion of violence may be long, but once it is lit - once individuals unlawfully agree to support terrorist acts at home or abroad - we will prosecute them to snuff that fuse out," he said. Ahmed defense attorney Jack Martin argued throughout the four-day trial that the government's evidence wasn't strong enough to merit a conviction. He said the case was based on "passing talk" from an immature college student whose idea of paramilitary training was shooting paintball guns in the north Georgia woods. Martin also sought to downplay the importance of the videos, saying one herky-jerky video of the World Bank could prove useful - "if a terrorist was attacking on a pogo stick." The videos were made in April 2005 when Ahmed drove his pickup truck to Washington with a suspected cohort. They took footage of U.S. landmarks as well as a fuel depot and a Masonic Temple in northern Virginia. A few months later, prosecutors said, Ahmed traveled to Pakistan on a one-way ticket to seek out Lashkar-e-Taiba, a Pakistan-based group linked with attacks in the disputed state of Kashmir. He returned to Atlanta about a month later after unsuccessfully attempting to join. They're accused of brainstorming strikes against targets ranging from military bases to oil refineries and talking of disrupting the Global Positioning System satellite network. Ahmed, a U.S. citizen, waived a jury trial so he could deliver closing statements last week. He could face up to 15 years in prison, but Duffey delayed the sentencing until the conclusion of an August trial set for Sadequee. Ahmed said in closing arguments that he was "misguided" but never directly addressed the charges, instead reading nine verses of the Quran in Arabic and delving into some of the shared beliefs of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

Load-Date: June 11, 2009


End of Document