Study: Few terror-related probes produce long prison time
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 8, 2003 Monday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A16
Length: 404 words
Byline: Curt Anderson ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Justice Department has sharply increased prosecution of terrorism-related cases since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, but many fizzled and few produced significant prison time, a study released yesterday found.
About 6,400 people were referred by investigators for terrorism-related criminal charges in the two years after the attacks, but fewer than one-third actually were charged and only 879 were convicted, according to government records reviewed by Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse.
The median sentence was just 14 days, according to a study by David Burnham and Susan P. Long, the clearinghouse directors. Only five people were sentenced to 20 years or more.
Critics seized on the numbers to question whether Attorney General John Ashcroft and other top law enforcement officials had been overstating the success of their antiterrorism efforts. Nearly every time Ashcroft talks about the subject, he reads a long list of statistics on arrests and convictions to buttress his contention that great progress is being made.
Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R., Iowa), a member of the Judiciary Committee, said the report "raises questions about the accuracy of the department's claims about terrorism enforcement."
"This report shows that despite the focus on terrorism-related crimes, most of the people accused of terrorism involvement are getting little jail time, if at all," Grassley said.
Justice Department and FBI officials said the study was rooted in past conceptions of crime and punishment and did not reflect the reality that would-be terrorists seek to blend into society until they are ready to strike.
Lack of lengthy prison terms in many cases can be explained by the effort by prosecutors to stop would-be terrorists long before they are ready to attack, often charging them with lesser offenses, such as identity theft, document fraud and immigration violations.
Prosecutors say they think it is better to get suspects off the streets and press them for information than wait for events that could produce harsher penalties. They also said the study made no mention of the value of intelligence collection and the need to reward cooperation with lesser sentences.
"The whole point is to disrupt terrorism at an early stage instead of letting the conspiracy fully hatch," said Viet Dinh, a former top Justice Department official under Ashcroft who teaches law at Georgetown University.

Load-Date: August 19, 2005


End of Document