Study calls for broadening U.S. terror coverage; RAND report cites TRIA gaps
Business Insurance
June 27, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1168 words
Byline: ROBERTO CENICEROS
Body


While policyholders and insurers await a key U.S. Treasury Department report on long-term proposals for terrorism insurance, a study released last week maintains that merely extending the availability of the current coverage is inadequate.
Coverage now available under the federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act falls short because terrorism threats are evolving, with international and domestic terrorists increasingly placing private-sector companies in their crosshairs, according to a RAND Corp. study financed by policyholders and insurers and released last week.
Still, the study concludes that allowing TRIA to expire without additional congressional action would only magnify the economic consequences of an attack. The study suggests that Congress consider policyholder subsidies or other measures that would encourage companies to purchase terrorism coverage.
The RAND Center for Terrorist Risk Management Policy released its study, ``Trends in Terrorism: Threats to the United States and the Future of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act,'' to coincide with the National Symposium on the Future of Terrorism Risk Insurance, held June 20 at the University of Southern California. The symposium was sponsored by RAND, the Department of Homeland Security, USC's Center for Risk & Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events, the Wharton Risk Management & Decision Process Center at the University of Pennsylvania and The Communications Institute.
The RAND report's authors say that the success of anti-terrorism measures have forced Al Qaeda to shift its focus to softer, easier-to-attack targets owned by private-sector companies. Additionally, increased security at prominent sites and government facilities has moved the attack threat to privately owned civilian venues, especially those with unimpeded public access, they say.
Terrorists' shifting focus to corporate assets underscores the need to extend TRIA to allow policymakers time to formulate a viable long-term solution for terrorism coverage, policyholders and insurers advocated last week at the symposium.
TRIA, which provides a government backstop for insurers in the event of a future catastrophic terrorist attack, is set to expire on Dec. 31. Some free-market advocates argue that the government should not provide insurance for private industry and should let the measure expire, while other critics complain that TRIA is a bailout for insurers.
But the RAND report states that because Al Qaeda, the Islamic terrorist group held responsible for the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, and its leader, Osama bin Laden, remain determined to cause losses that would reverberate throughout the U.S. economy, insurance should be considered an anti-terrorism tool, not just an economic development boost following an attack.
``If the RAND study and others suggest that radical Islamic terrorism is aimed at disrupting U.S. economic stability, then it is incumbent on the federal government, as part of its national security responsibility, to create a framework to stabilize those risks,'' said Peter Lowy, chief executive officer of Westfield America Inc.
Mr. Lowy represented policyholders and spoke last week before the symposium on the future of terrorism insurance. He also serves on the advisory board of the RAND CTRMP.
Westfield America is a publicly traded real estate company that owns and operates 127 shopping malls in four countries, with property values exceeding $41.6 billion. It purchased lease rights to the World Trade Center retail mall just six weeks before the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and is still grappling with ``a large number'' of related lawsuits, Mr. Lowy said.
Mr. Lowy said that the extension of TRIA is vital in the short term for the U.S. economy and national security. He acknowledged, though, that TRIA also has its shortcomings and that renewing it every couple of years is inefficient.
A long-term solution to business' need for terrorism coverage, therefore, is also necessary, Mr. Lowy said. He called for Congress or President Bush to form a ``blue-ribbon'' commission of stakeholders to tackle the issue.
Mr. Lowy told the symposium that his company is currently renewing its insurance coverage and faces difficulty obtaining the necessary terrorism coverage limits. Efforts to mitigate the risk of terrorist attack are also difficult because of a lack of guidance from the federal government.
Without adequate insurance coverage, companies such as his could be forced to forgo development projects that would otherwise create thousands of jobs and help fill local tax coffers, Mr. Lowy said.
The RAND report details the alleged shortcomings and gaps in TRIA spoken of by Mr. Lowy and others at the symposium.
One of the greatest weaknesses of the current terrorism insurance market stems from TRIA's treatment of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear attacks, according to the report.
Under the act, insurers can exclude coverage for damages from CBRN attacks, except in the case of workers compensation losses.
There is good reason for insurers to avoid the ``open-ended'' losses that could stem from a dirty-bomb attack, the RAND report states. Such attacks could contaminate a 10-square-mile area and lead to ``enormous'' losses. But predicting the consequences of a CBRN attack is likely to be an insurmountable problem for some time, the report says.
Yet there is a growing risk that terrorists could execute a radiological attack. Materials to make dirty bombs are available from many sources in the United States, the RAND study authors say.
``CBRN attack insurance may thus be an area where a direct government program, like war risk insurance, is appropriate,'' the RAND report concludes.
There are other shortcomings with current TRIA coverage. For example, it excludes coverage for attacks from domestic terrorists. Yet there is also a growing groundswell of domestic radicalism motivated by anti-globalism and bent on causing economic damage to corporations, the study found.
Additionally, TRIA does not provide adequate financial protection for the U.S. economy, because the ``take-up rate'' for terrorism coverage remains low. Speakers at the symposium said only about 50% of large policyholders purchase the coverage.
The study states that Congress might, therefore, consider subsidizing coverage or lowering the deductible that insurers are responsible for before federal reinsurance is available. The latter measure could reduce the price of coverage, the study says.
Meanwhile, a public policy consensus on a long-term solution for terrorism insurance needs has yet to emerge, Debra Ballen, executive vp for the American Insurance Assn. in Washington, said.
The wait for the Treasury report on terrorism insurance-expected by month's end-is adding to delays for crafting a long-term solution, Ms. Ballen said.
``There has been a sense on Capitol Hill, and the administration as well, that we ought not publicly talk about where to go from here until Treasury has come out with its study,'' Ms. Ballen said.

Load-Date: July 1, 2005


End of Document