Study Finds Sharp Drop in the Number of Terrorism Cases Prosecuted 
The New York Times
September 4, 2006 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9; THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE COURTS
Length: 1022 words
Byline: By ERIC LICHTBLAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 3 
Body


The number of terrorism cases brought by the Justice Department, which surged in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, has dropped sharply since 2002, and prosecutors are turning down hundreds of cases because of weak evidence and other legal problems, according to a study released Sunday. 
  The study, conducted by a private research group at Syracuse University, found that federal prosecutors have declined to prosecute two of every three international terrorism cases brought to them by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other agencies since 2001.
The rejection rate was even higher for the first eight months of the current fiscal year, with 91 percent of the referred cases turned down for prosecution, the research group said. Among the most frequent explanations cited by prosecutors, the study found, were a lack of evidence of criminal intent by the suspect and ''weak or insufficient'' evidence. 
  The numbers brought differing interpretations from legal analysts, prosecutors and government officials, many of whom said they were surprised by the findings, and are likely to add to the debate over the administration's legal tactics in prosecuting the fight against terrorism. The Justice Department immediately took issue with the study's methodology and its conclusions. 
  The study ''ignores the reality of how the war on terrorism is prosecuted in federal courts across the country and the value of early disruption of potential terrorist acts by proactive prosecution,'' said Bryan Sierra, a Justice Department spokesman.
  ''The report presents misleading analysis of Department of Justice statistics to suggest the threat of terrorism may be inaccurate or exaggerated,'' Mr. Sierra added. ''The Department of Justice disagrees with this suggestion completely.'' 
  Department officials declined to discuss any details of what they considered the flawed methodology.
  Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the Bush administration has pursued a strategy of investigating and prosecuting terrorism suspects within the United States to ''pre-empt'' attacks, rather than waiting for them to unfold. 
  The strategy, which administration officials say helps explain the absence of any further attacks on American soil, has been seen in cases like the arrests of seven men in Miami in June in a plot that the F.B.I. said was ''more aspirational than operational.''
  The approach has led critics of the Bush administration to say that prosecutors are routinely bringing terrorism charges in cases that do not warrant them. But the data from the Syracuse group suggests that for every prosecution like the one in Miami, there are many other investigations that never become public because prosecutors conclude there is not enough evidence to take them to court. 
  The F.B.I. and other federal agencies bring what are known as referrals in cases in which the investigating agency recommends that federal charges be considered, often after investigations lasting months or years. 
  In 2001 and 2002, the Syracuse study found, federal prosecutors turned down only about 35 percent of the referrals brought to them in international terrorism cases. But that rate has climbed sharply over the last four years, with rejection rates of 77 percent in 2003, 65 percent in 2004, 82 percent last year and the 91 percent this year.
  Last year, the Justice Department prosecuted 46 international terrorism cases -- down from 355 in 2002 in the spike that followed the Sept. 11 attacks -- but it declined to bring charges in 209 cases the F.B.I. or other agencies had referred, the study found.
  The statistics ''raise profound questions about how well the government is doing in dealing with this very difficult problem of terrorism,'' said David Burnham, co-director of the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse University, which conducted the study by obtaining hundreds of thousands of records through a lawsuit brought under the Freedom of Information Act. 
  ''It is clear that the prosecutors are deciding that a lot of the investigations being recommended do not cut the mustard and do not meet their standards,'' Mr. Burnham said.
  In all, the study found that in nearly 6,500 cases treated by the Justice Department as ''terrorism'' investigations since the Sept. 11 attacks, about one in five defendants have now been convicted. The median sentence for those convicted in what were categorized as ''international terrorism'' cases -- often involving lesser charges like immigration violations or fraud -- was 20 to 28 days, and many received no jail time at all, the study found.
  The Justice Department, which has tightened the way it defines terrorism cases over the last five years, cites a much higher rate of success. Examining only those cases in which someone was actually charged, it said in a report in June that it had secured convictions or guilty pleas against 261 of the 441 defendants accused in connection with terrorism since the Sept. 11 attacks.
  Brian Levin, an associate professor at California State University, San Bernardino, who studies terrorism prosecutions, said the numbers clearly reflected the government's efforts to swiftly halt any possible plot, including many that might prove unfounded. 
  ''The data suggests that if there's a whiff of suspicion, they will come down in any way possible against a suspect and sort the evidence out later,'' Mr. Levin said. ''They're obviously casting a broad net but throwing a lot back into the sea.''
  A federal terrorism prosecutor agreed with that assessment. ''You have to chase dead ends a lot of times -- it's inherent in this business,'' said the prosecutor, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the issue. 
  Moreover, in smaller-scale cases like identity theft or immigration fraud that may have some nexus to terrorism, the government may not have the time or resources to fully pursue a case, leading prosecutors to reject the filing of charges. 
  ''The F.B.I.'s looking for bomb throwers,'' the prosecutor said, ''and we have a lot of small cases that there are no resources devoted to.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: ''Tally of Terror Cases''In the years since the Sept. 11 attacks, the F.B.I. and other investigative agencies have taken some 1,391 international terrorism cases to the Justice Department, according to a new study. A look at the status of the cases as of May 31.PROSECUTIONS: 335CONVICTED: 213REFERRALS PENDING: 239REFERRALS DECLINED: 817Includes cases reclassified by the government as not international terrorism.DISMISSED OR NOT GUILTY: 66PENDING: 56NO PRISON TIME OR TIME SERVED: 90LESS THAN ONE YEAR: 9120 YEARS TO LIFE: 6FIVE TO 20 YEARS: 8ONE TO FIVE YEARS: 18Top reasons federal prosecutors gave for declining to pursue international terrorism referrals.Request by agency investigating the case: 117Reclassified as not international terrorism: 69Lack of evidence of criminal intent: 108Weak or insufficient admissible evidence: 97No federal offense evident: 86Suspect to be prosecuted by other authorities: 67Other: 273(Source by Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at the University of Syracuse)

Load-Date: September 4, 2006


End of Document