Study faults nuclear plant's plan; New York: Indian Point does not include terrorism in its emergency policy
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
January 11, 2003 Saturday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. c3
Length: 565 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.
Body


Emergency plans for the Indian Point nuclear power plant fail to address the threat of a terrorist attack, and do not adequately protect the densely populated New York metropolitan area from a release of radiation, an independent study concludes.
Evacuation plans for the plant, situated 35 miles from midtown Manhattan, are inadequate to "protect the people from an unacceptable dose of radiation," according to the report delivered Friday to Gov. George Pataki.
Among other problems, "the plans do not consider the possible additional ramifications of a terrorist-caused release," the report said. "Simply stated, the world has recently changed. What was once considered sufficient may now be in need of further revision."
The study was done by James Lee Witt Associates, a consulting firm headed by a former head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Pataki hired Witt last summer to review emergency planning for New York state's nuclear plants, starting with Indian Point.
Since the attack on New York City in 2001, fear of terrorism at Indian Point has turned emergency planning, especially the adequacy of the evacuation plan, into a major issue in the lower Hudson Valley. Dozens of politicians, from members of Congress to school board members, have called for a shutdown of the two reactors there, but Pataki has not.
The report does not call for a shutdown. But it says that because of Indian Point's location in a major metropolitan area, the approach toward safety there should not be the same as for other plants.
An estimated 11.8 million people live within 50 miles of Indian Point, far more than around any of the nation's other nuclear plants. There are 256,000 suburbanites within 10 miles of the nuclear station, which is in the Westchester County village of Buchanan.
Sen. Hillary Clinton, among others, has suggested that the 50-mile radius, rather than the traditional 10-mile zone, be used for emergency planning at Indian Point. The Witt report says planning should take into account that people well beyond the 10-mile zone would leave the area in the event of a radiation release.
Upon the release of the report, Pataki called on FEMA and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to "take a hard look at the standards used to certify these emergency plans and determine if they are strong enough to meet the post-Sept. 11 reality."
Alex Matthiessen, who leads the environmental organization Riverkeeper, said that Pataki instead ought to demand that the Bush administration and the NRC shut down the plant.
The 500-page study is critical of emergency regulations from FEMA and the NRC and says existing plans "are built on compliance with regulations, rather than a strategy that leads to structures and systems to protect from radiation exposure."
FEMA spokesman Mike Beeman said the agency was reviewing the report and had no immediate comment.
Neil Sheehan, a spokesman for the NRC, pointed out that most of the recommendations apply to FEMA, but said the commission would "continue to work with the state, county and local governments to try to improve the plan."
Jim Steets, a spokesman for Indian Point owner Entergy Corp., said the company is focusing on "enhancing safety and security at Indian Point, to prevent ever having to implement the plan in the first place."
"But we recognize the post-Sept. 11 world may necessitate making additional changes to the plan," he said.

Load-Date: January 12, 2003


End of Document