STUDENTS SEE FBI TERRORISM RESPONSE AT WORK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 13, 2004 Friday
REGION EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NULL,
Length: 466 words
Byline: KEITH STONE URBAN AGENDA STAFF WRITER
Body


A bomb went off outside of PNC Park on July 27 during a concert, injuring 10 people.
 This was not an actual explosion, just a simulation performed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation designed to show aspiring journalists what a terrorist attack could be like.
 Special Agent Ken McCabe, head of the South Side FBI office, held a press conference on Aug. 9 for students with the Frank Bolden Urban Journalism Workshop.
During the drill, McCabe provided details of the investigation.
 He said an improvised explosive device or IED exploded outside of the park, and three similar bombs were found inside the stadium.
 The 10 injured people were taken to local hospitals. The most serious injuries involved shrapnel and concussions.
 Using evidence and intelligence gathered, the FBI was able to link the bomb to a radical fundamentalist group.  The Jihadists Jihad is a group of terrorists that are loosely connected with Al Qaeda.
 The police have made one arrest and are asking the public for any information that could lead to the capture of the three remaining suspects, McCabe said.
 The three were described as:
 * Mohammad Mohammad A 25-year-old white male with a swarthy complexion. He is a slight 5-foot-7-inch and has a full beard.
 * Akhbar Mohammad, a 28-year-old North African.  He is light-skinned with a full beard and a thin, 6-foot-6-inch build.  He speaks English with a thick foreign accent.
 * The final suspect is a 5-foot-three-inch, heavy-set white female with a New York accent.  She is a sympathizer who has a known connection with the Jihadists Jihad.
 The four terrorists arrived in America within the last two weeks and are suspected of building and transporting the bombs while in Pittsburgh.
 Civilians with information regarding these suspects or the terrorist attacks can contact the FBI at (412) 432-4000.
 McCabe said the FBI is working to provide Chief Robert McNeilly and the Pittsburgh police with intelligence information.  It is the responsibility of the police force to provide security for public events.
 "Rest assured the government is working 24 hours a day and seven hours a week to keep America safe," McCabe said.
 After the mock news conference, FBI Chief Division Counsel Jeff Killeen and members of the journalism workshop toured agency headquarters.  Killeen, who handles legal issues involving the department, showed the students a wide variety of rooms, ranging from the polygraph room and firearms locker to McCabe's office.
 The FBI has taken special measures to ensure that their building is secure. Security is a necessity because at times fugitives are held at the headquarters.  "We have cameras for our cameras," Killeen said.
 Students also learned that FBI agents are "trained to neutralize the threat, protect [themselves] and not hurt the third party."

Load-Date: August 13, 2004


End of Document