Students decry idea of monitoring
USA TODAY
June 8, 2000, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1025 words
Byline: John Ritter
Dateline: BERKELEY, Calif.
Body


BERKELEY, Calif. -- Foreign college students reacted with dismay
and disappointment this week to a government commission's recommendation
that they be more closely monitored for ties to terrorism.
The commission's report did not specify how the monitoring should
be done, but students interviewed on several campuses across the
nation found repugnant the idea that the government might keep
track of them, much less tap their phones or intercept their e-mail.
The students said they recognized the government's right to protect
its citizens from terrorists, but insisted they're here to study.
They said the government had no evidence that foreign students
were affiliated with terrorists.
"It's unfair. It infringes on the privacy of individuals who
are here for academic reasons or job opportunities," says Kevin
Lo, 22, a Hong Kong-born Canadian citizen majoring in Asian studies
at the University of California-Berkeley. "It's an extreme step."
Saurabh Rateria, a 19-year-old from Calcutta, is taking summer
business classes at Berkeley and will return to Loyola Marymount
University in Los Angeles this fall.
"We come here so we can do better in our developing countries,"
he says. "I'm here to do my studies, get a pretty good education
and go back to my country and set up a business there. That's
my whole goal."
Thousands come to learn
The State Department says more than 500,000 foreign students study
in the United States and pump $ 9 billion into the economy each
year.
L. Paul Bremer, chairman of the National Commission on Terrorism
and a former U.S. ambassador-at-large, downplayed the monitoring
recommendation as "rather insignificant."
Foreign students already are being tracked at 21 southeastern
universities as part of a pilot program required by 1996 immigration
reform laws, and Bremer says commission members believe the program
should be expanded nationally.
The program has had mixed results because some of the universities
haven't collected the fees needed to centralize information in
a computer database.
So far, 25,000 records have been added to the database, but the
Immigration and Naturalization Service could not say whether any
students had been expelled from the country based on information
provided by participating universities.
Those universities, including Auburn, Duke, Clemson and Alabama,
were required under the law to supply names, addresses and academic
status of their foreign students.
The commission's report, released Monday, was silent on whether
monitoring would be limited to that type of data collection.
Many students figured the real goal was to keep abreast of students
from nations that the United States considers terrorism sponsors
-- Iran, Iraq, Cuba, Libya and North Korea.
A 30-year-old Berkeley engineering student from Iran says Americans
harbor a lot of ignorance about people from "these so-called
terrorist countries."
"The terrorism designation is not based on the country, it's
based on some short-term government that may have done some illegitimate
behavior," says the student, who declined to be identified because
he fears consequences at home.
He says many foreign students become agents for change. "We're
educated here, and when we go back, we have a new movement, and
later on when these countries become more free, their relationship
(with the United States) is going to change."
'A scary situation'
The monitoring recommendation clearly frightened some students.
"If someone followed me, I'd be afraid," says Ricardo Gomez,
18, an Ecuadorian student at American University in Washington,
D.C. "It hasn't seemed to have happened yet."
Rateria says, "It would make me feel like I was doing something
wrong by coming to this country. That would make my four years
here a scary situation. I couldn't live properly or happily."
Still, most students appear to take terrorism seriously.
"I've heard many bad news in the U.S., and I worry about terrorists
a lot of time," says Ayumu Kyroda, 18, a Japanese student at
American. "In Japan, I worried because I don't know where terrorism
happens."
Ron Sexena, 23, an Indian student who just graduated with a business
degree from Berkeley, says the government should be able to investigate
the origin and past history of U.S. visa applicants.
However, he worries that monitoring them afterward "would make
it harder for legitimate candidates to get their papers processed."
With so many foreign students on American campuses, moving from
one school to another, there also were doubts about the effectiveness
of any monitoring effort.
"It seems to me to be a way to search for a needle in a haystack,"
says Vineeth Ravinder, 26, an Indian student at the University
of Texas.
Jesus Reynoso, 23, a Colombian studying computer programming at
UT, says, "Sure, there are security lapses facing this country,
but the reaction appears out of measure with the concern."
Texas is not part of the pilot monitoring program, but officials
say they cooperate with regional INS officials who asked them
to report on the academic status of the university's nearly 4,000
foreign students.
Privately, these officials say they oppose the new monitoring
recommendation because of the burden on the campus bureaucracy
and a reluctance to appear as an agent for the government.
"Our concern is that this might be a bit of overkill," says
Jerry Wilcox, director of UT's international office.
University officials point out that the only student terrorist
connection uncovered so far was one of the World Trade Center
bombers, who had attended college in Kansas before dropping out.
To use that as a rationale for "monitoring 500,000-plus foreign
students because they might be wanting to do something similar
seems to be stretching the point," Wilcox says.
Several students says a nationwide monitoring program would tarnish
the United States' reputation abroad.
"Ever since I was a child, I always had this impression that
America is a liberal country and people enjoy freedom of speech
and assembly," says Shis-Hua Chien, a 23-year-old Taiwanese studying
Japanese at Berkeley.
"Never in my wildest ideas would America ever do this."
 Contributing: Guillermo X. Garcia in Austin, Texas, Kevin Davis
in Chicago and Kevin Johnson and Hilary Wasson in Washington,
D.C.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Quin Tian, USA TODAY, Source: State Department (Line graph); PHOTO, B/W, Clay McLachlan, Reuters; At Berkeley: Students walk through Sather Gate on campus in 1998. Foreign students were shocked and upset by a commission's recommendation that they be monitored.

Load-Date: June 8, 2000


End of Document