STUDENT ARTIST GETS BRUSH WITH TERRORISM IN KENYA
Wyoming Tribune-Eagle (Cheyenne, WY)
August 16, 1998, Sunday


Copyright 1998 Cheyenne Newspapers, Inc.
Section: local; Pg. A6
Length: 633 words
Byline: Kim Steele Northern Wyoming Daily News
Body


WORLAND -- Hunter Nielson's drawings and woodcuts reveal much about his unforgettable six-month visit to Kenya.They depict slices of the African country he has come to love -- a solemn man dressed in tribal clothes, a mother guiding her hesitant child as they walk, and leafy branches swaying in the breeze. Nielson created the pictures as he observed daily life in Nairobi.But the artwork doesn't tell the whole story of Nielson's experience there.It leaves out last week's embassy bombing, which Nielson discovered after returning to the broken city that day from a safari at a nearby game preserve. And it fails to convey his concern for a 10-year-old African boy.Nielson, 21, traveled to Kenya in February as part of an overseas program at the University of Colorado in Boulder, where he is a junior majoring in anthropology and fine arts. While there, Nielson observed OXFAM, a nongovernmental organization from England, teaching Kenyans about crop development and animal health care."It was fascinating," Nielson said. "The world is diverse, and it's interesting to find out about its variations. But it's also getting smaller all the time, and people are more alike these days than they are different. You have to know a lot more today than just about rural Wyoming."Nielson said he learned about the ravages of war from his housemother, Lucy Kayiwa, an elementary teacher from Uganda. Besides housing Nielson, Kayiwa had taken in Bali, 10, and his guardian, both refugees from Zaire.
Nielson said that during two years with Kayiwa, Bali could not afford school.Bali and his guardian have found a new home, and Nielson said he would like to raise enough money so Bali can get his education. Nielson is sponsoring an art show of his Kenya drawings and woodcuts from 5 to 7 p.m. Tuesday at High Plains Gallery. All sale proceeds will go to Bali."Even $200 would go a long way towards his education," said Nielson, adding donations are accepted. "I know there are thousands of refugees, and Bali is just one of them. It's hard to decide who t
o help. But Bali was put in my life and I in his, so he seems the logical choice."Nielson also discovered the horror of terrorism when his parents, Lloyd and Donna Nielson, traveled to Kenya to see their son's temporary home. After a safari at a nearby game preserve on Aug. 7, the three returned to Nairobi that afternoon to find chaos and death awaiting them.Nielson said everyone they met when they entered the city was talking about the bombings that morning in the U.S. embassies in Nairobi and in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The blasts killed 257 people and injured more than 5,500. Among those killed were 12 Americans, all in Nairobi.The Nielson family went to a hotel room, where they watched the drama as it unfolded on the news. Nielson said the Americans he talked to were worried, but not panicky, while the Kenyans were dismayed. Nielson said his housemother was riding a bus into the city when the bomb exploded, and was told to return home before she got there."Personally, I wasn't scared," Nielson said. "But I was frustrated, especially when I found out the bomb had been planted on a busy street corner where people had been standing and walking. This was definitely a tragedy, and not just because Americans died. Kenyans were killed, too."Nielson said that during his stay, he saw the country begin to resolve its major problems. Nielson said elections took place in January, and the accompanying tribal conflicts on the coast were exaggerated by the media, which frightened away tourists for a while.Nielson said he would like to return to Kenya someday if the situation remains stable and it is safe."I think you can't help but find a spot in your heart for a place where you spent time and the people were good to you," Nielson said.

Load-Date: August 17, 1998


End of Document