Students examine terrorism abroad
University Wire
October 7, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The Heights via U-Wire
Length: 1476 words
Byline: By Brigitte Hamadey, The Heights
Dateline: Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Body


Jonathan Riches, A&S '04, remembered an Israeli who told him, "Arabs and Jews used to live together in peace before terrorism was even a word in the dictionary."
Since Sept. 11, Riches observed that Osama bin Laden has become a household name. The definition of terrorism provided by the State Department is "premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetuated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience."
But to gain a better understanding of terrorism and how to counteract terrorist actions, two Boston College students, Riches and Ensieh Sarrami, A&S '04, spent two weeks in August in Israel learning about the threat of terrorism to democratic nations.
The undergraduate fellowship program was sponsored by the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies, a non-profit, non-partisan Washington, DC-based think tank dedicated to the research and education on the war on terrorism. Riches and Sarrami were two of 49 students around the nation selected from an application process and invited to stay at Tel Aviv University in Israel.
Boston College
The two political science majors traveled to Israel to have their voices heard. "The problem at BC is that students may understand terrorism, but that doesn't mean they have to accept it," said Sarrami.
"It is important for college students and everyday citizens to be vigilant and aware about the threat of terrorism," said Riches, adding that some of the true heroes of Sept. 11 were "a handful of normal Americans in the air over Pennsylvania who had the courage and determination to act decisively," and take down one of the two hijacked planes.
"I have always wanted to do intelligence work," said Riches, facetiously blaming too many James Bond movies, and has been interested in the Middle Eastern conflict since his senior year of high school.
After the escalated awareness of global terrorism, following Sept. 11, Riches' own involvement has also escalated.
"No matter the situation, killing innocent children to get a point across is not right," said Riches. "As the U.S. democracy is under attack, we have a right to defend ourselves." He said that "unless we drain the swamp, they [terrorists] are going to keep coming back."
ON A JOURNEY
In preparation for their trip to Israel, Riches and Sarrami were advised to read books on terrorism by authors like Bernard Lewis and Robert Baer. During the first three days of their stay, Riches and Sarrami participated in a series of lectures about global terrorism given by the Israeli Defensive Forces, intellectual military, government officials, and the Ambassadors of India and Turkey.
"Though the lecturers were not all Israeli, they all maintained that serious measures need to be taken about terrorism," said Sarrami.
During the remainder of their stay in Israel, Riches and Sarrami visited various military bases and border posts.
Sarrami recalled lectures at the naval base in Haifa as her favorite because it featured discussions of Israel as a maritime state and why it needs to control all ships going in and out of the country. On Jan. 3, 2002, the Israeli Naval forces uncovered one of the largest arms shipments aboard the Karine A. The batch included missiles, rifles, and ammunition loaded by Iranians and the Hezbollah, which was being sent to Palestinian Naval Police.
At the naval base, Riches and Sarrami also had the opportunity to view one of many CDs found on a ship with instructions on how to make a suicide bomb. They noted that Israeli security is very thorough and different from the United States because this country has yet to start investigating CDs as possible threats.
SECURING THE BORDERS
Sarrami said she believes that, compared to Israel's 100 percent security check rate, the United States and its estimated three percent inspection rate "could do a lot more … especially with immigration and borders."
"The U.S. is not in the same situation as Israel," said Riches. "Whereas the U.S. is surrounded by two oceans and friendly neighboring countries, Israel is bordered by four hostile countries." In Israel, security checks are conducted at malls and restaurants with metal detectors. Riches said that these unfamiliar precautions made him feel more vigilant, comfortable, and safe.
Riches and Sarrami witnessed live-fire exercises demonstrated by an undercover Israeli police unit. Such exercises implemented hypothetical terrorist situations that could occur in a public place, such as a cafe, where the unit would have to respond. After an accused terrorist is arrested, he is brought to Israel and tried. The head of the Israeli undercover unit explained to Riches that every morning he wished he didn't have a job that day; he wished terrorism didn't exist. Sarrami said that during the eight-year life span of this particular unit, they have never killed civilians. Not all undercover units have preserved a similar record. According to a BBC report, there have been reports of undercover police killing armed civilians and Palestinians in prohibited territories.
Despite current conflicts, Israel and Palestine still engage in trade. Riches and Sarrami visited Customs, where the regulation of trade between Israel and Palestine takes place. Due to Israel's stringent inspection policy, every truck carrying cargo that enters and leaves Israel has to be examined. Riches and Sarrami said that due to complete inspection, a truck might have to wait about three hours to be checked. They noted that for the amount of security efforts Israel implements, three hours is fast.
They went to the military base at Erez Crossing, a neutral zone between Gaza and Israel. At the Erez Crossing, Palestinians who come into Israel have to wait in lines to be checked by Israeli military in a process that resembles standard airport security: Metal detectors, ID checks, random shoe inspections, and questioning if deemed necessary. Riches and Sarrami said they heard a grenade had been launched at the crossing a few days before their arrival.
While in Israel, Riches and Sarrami traveled to the northern border of Israel where they stood within two miles of the Hezbollah outpost in Lebanon. Hezbollah is an Iranian and Syrian-backed guerilla movement originally established in 1982 to counter Israeli forces in southern Lebanon. Riches noted that while Hezbollah does serve social causes, the organization is a top suspect of terrorism that is believed to be in contact with the Palestinian Authority. Riches recalled seeing the Hezbollah flag, which features a yellow fist gripping a rifle, at the border. He remarked to his companions that it ironically paralleled the United Nations flag at a nearby U.N. building. The day after their visit, Hezbollah shelled northern Israel, killing an Israeli teenager. In response to this act, Israel warplanes raided a village in southern Lebanon and bombed an anti-aircraft battery, he said.
Riches and Sarrami traveled to the Old City, which is part of East Jerusalem and predominantly inhabited by Muslims. Upon entering the gates of the Palestinian community, Sarrami, relying on her knowledge of Farsi, distinguished a list of suicide bombers posted on a wall in Arabic, naming them as martyrs. In the Old City, Riches and Sarrami walked around marketplaces where they observed differences between Israel and the Palestinian section.
VIEWS OF ISRAEL
Sarrami said she views Israel as an open-minded nation where a person can walk around, despite what he or she may be wearing, and still have the same basic rights as the next person. She compared these beliefs to those present in Iran, her country of heritage, where it may be looked down upon for a woman to walk around without a scarf on her head. Sarrami said she experienced that same feeling of being viewed differently in the Palestinian part of Jerusalem. She did not have the same sense of basic human rights while within the gates of the Palestinian section.
Riches and Sarrami encountered mixed reactions to their purpose in Israel with an anti-terrorism program. The professors at Tel Aviv University commended their efforts and presence in Israel. Riches and Sarrami said some Israelis questioned American knowledge of terrorism.
For safety reasons, security guards constantly surrounded Riches and Sarrami while in Israel, and they were not able to go out at night except on select occasions. On one nightly excursion, Riches and Sarrami found themselves sitting around a hookah smoking tobacco with an Iraqi, two Arabs from Lebanon, an Israeli girl, and a Colombian from the program. After looking around at the members of the group, Riches said one of the Lebanese Arabs said, "We're all here having a good time. Why can't it be like this everywhere?"
(C) 2002 The Heights via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 7, 2003


End of Document