Students travel to biotechnology security conference on terrorism
University Wire
September 9, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 Daily Forty-Niner via U-Wire
Length: 369 words
Byline: By Michelle Spalter, Daily Forty-Niner
Dateline: Long Beach, Calif.
Body


A group of eighteen hand-chosen criminal justice students attended the 10th annual Biotechnical Security Conference June 21 through 25 in Washington, D.C., to learn how to provide security for the nations top political figures.
Second year criminal justice major, Rachel Wiedemann, said the highlight of the trip was getting to see President George Bush. Thomas Rich, director of Homeland Security, and Bush were among the officials who attended the conference.
California State U.-Long Beach
Just knowing that we were there to learn how to help protect the president, "was an amazing feeling," Wiedemann said.
Harv Morley, the group's adviser and a professor of criminal justice, takes select students to a political event. For the past three years, that event has been the Biotechnical Security Conference.
"The criminal justice department fully supports activities that take theory and show them in a practical setting," Morley said. "As their professor and adviser, I try to provide students with the greatest range of activities to enhance their academic careers. The university is aggressively pursuing service learning and this trip is the optimum of service learning."
The annual conference gives scientists and politicians a chance to discuss and introduce the latest technology and research regarding biotechnology. This year parts of the conference were held at the Smithsonian Institution and the Union Station.
"This trip is a lot of work," senior Sean Kelly said. "When you have only five days to spend in the nation's capital and you are working 14 hours a day, you come to realize that this trip is not for fun."
This seemed to be the general feeling coming from the students about their experience. Heidi Chavez, a fifth year student who had attended the conference in Toronto last year said that this trip was easier because she already knew what to do.
The trip included daily seminars and classes providing a forum for the students to discuss relevant issues and what they might have learned at the conference throughout the week. In addition to on site learning and daily reports, students were required to complete a project due at the end of the conference.
(C) 2002 Daily Forty-Niner via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 10, 2003


End of Document