Studies Probe Weather, Terrorism ; Focus is on inversions, chemical- and bio-attacks
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
October 21, 2000, Saturday


Copyright 2000 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. B2
Length: 478 words
Byline: BRENT ISRAELSEN, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


Federal government scientists are conducting two different atmospheric studies in Salt Lake City this month.
Both will look at how air and particles flow in the atmosphere, but their data is being used to study two different Utah phenomena: weather inversions and the Olympics.
One study is part of the Department of Energy's Chemical and Biological National Security program, whose goal is to develop and improve systems the United States can use to respond to chemical and biological attacks.
In this study, a non-toxic, inert tracer chemical called sulphur hexafluoride is being released into the skies above Salt Lake City.
Monitoring and sensoring equipment are tracking the chemical to determine wind patterns, temperature and moisture patterns and how air is mixed in lower- and mid-levels of the atmosphere.
The Department of Defense's Defense Threat Reducation Agency (DTRA) is supporting this study and may use information from it for the 2002 Winter Olympics
DTRA, which is responsible for protecting the United States and its allies from weapons of mass destruction, will use the information to assist police, fire and military personnel in the event of an attack involving nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or a large chemical accident, said Capt. Bob Bennett, spokesman for the agency. The study will be conducted through much of this month.
The knowledge may be useful for security during the 2002 Winter Games, though Bennett insisted the upcoming Olympics was not the motivation behind his agency's "piggybacking" on the DOE's atmospheric study.
Utah Olympics security officials this week said they were unaware of the military's involvement in the atmospheric study, but welcomed any data that might help avert or minimize the risk of terrorist attacks.
And Utah safety and health officials, who have been active in preparing for terrorism, likely will welcome it.
Scott Williams, deputy director of the Utah Health Department, visited the Sydney Games. He said he learned that every Olympics event is a potential target of bioterrorism and public-health officials can be involved in prevention.
The second study is part of DOE's Vertical Transport and Mixing Program, which will look at how air mixes and moves vertically.
Scientists hope a key outcome of this experiment will be an increased understanding of temperature inversions, in which cold air settles for long periods of time in the Salt Lake Valley, trapping pollutants that are harmful to human health.
Salt Lake is the perfect location for such a study.
"Its complex topography and geographic makeup provide an ideal setting to study how cold night air collects in mountain basins," said Dawn White, with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, which is one of DOE's labs. It is those cold air pools sitting below the warmer air that create a temperature inversion, she explained, and trap pollutants.

Load-Date: October 21, 2000


End of Document