Subpoena for Trump records upheld white house roundup
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
August 21, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 420 words
Body


aw_200821_whitehouseroundup
^$^NEW YORK - President Donald Trump lost another key legal round Thursday in his battle to keep his tax returns away from Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr.U.S. District Judge Victor Marrero emphatically upheld a subpoena ordering Trump's accountants to hand over the financial records, siding with Vance in the prosecutor's probe of Trump's alleged financial misdeeds.
"Justice requires an end to this controversy," Marrero wrote in a 103-page opinion. He declared it would amount to an "undue expansion" of presidential immunity to grant Trump's request to quash the subpoena.
Don't expect to see Trump's 1040s anytime soon, despite the ruling. Even if Vance obtains the documents, he would be bound by grand jury secrecy to keep them under wraps.
Trump criticized the ruling as a continuation of "the greatest witch hunt in history," his go-to description of the various investigations of his alleged wrongdoing.
Jay Sekulow, the president's lawyer, said they will appeal the ruling. It came after the Supreme Court turned away the president's claim of "absolute immunity" from an investigation, but ordered a new hearing on other issues.
The president said he interprets the Supreme Court ruling as backing his claim that the subpoena is invalid.
The subpoena is related to Vance's probe of "alleged insurance and bank fraud by the Trump Organization and its officers," along with hush-money payments to women to cover up Trump's alleged affairs.
Trump's lawyers said that the request for tax records dating back to 2011 was retaliatory after the president's company, the Trump Organization, disputed the scope of a subpoena seeking records from 2015 to 2018.
U.S. formally demands
full Iran sanctions restored
UNITED NATIONS - The Trump administration on Thursday formally notified the United Nations of its demand for all U.N. sanctions on Iran to be restored, setting off an immediate confrontation with Russia and other Security Council members, including America's European allies, who called the U.S. move illegal.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo delivered the notification to the president of the U.N. Security Council, citing significant Iranian violations of the 2015 nuclear deal, a requirement to "snap back" U.N. sanctions.
"The United States will never allow the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism to freely buy and sell planes, tanks, missiles and other kinds of conventional weapons ... (or) to have a nuclear weapon," Pompeo told a U.N. press conference.
From wire reports

Load-Date: August 21, 2020


End of Document