Subsidizing Terrorism 
 The New York Times
December 4, 2002 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30
Length: 402 words
Body


Saudi Arabia belatedly seems to recognize that the diversion of large sums of money from the kingdom to terrorist groups has become a threat to continued good relations with the United States. After a week of damaging publicity in the wake of the disclosure that thousands of dollars donated by the wife of the Saudi ambassador to Washington may have ended up in the hands of two of the Sept. 11 hijackers, the Saudi government announced a series of measures yesterday aimed at halting illegitimate transfers.
     The heart of the problem is Saudi Arabia's large informal network of private charitable foundations. Devout Muslims are expected to donate some 2.5 percent of their wealth each year to charity. Until very recently, these foundations operated with minimal regulation or oversight. Terrorists have also laundered money through Saudi banks and companies and have parked large sums in accounts under their control. 
 Some of the rules outlined yesterday have been in place for months and have yielded only limited results. Others are still in the planning stage. Nevertheless, they can help bring the money transfers under more effective control, provided they are vigorously and consistently enforced. The policies include a call for systematic auditing and supervision of charities and government monitoring of charitable funds as they move abroad. Some modest steps have also been taken, under American pressure, to curb money laundering and freeze terrorist accounts. Much more needs to be done in both areas. 
Even the best controls won't amount to much unless they are backed by a new level of energy and commitment by the highest levels of the Saudi government. This cannot be just a public relations exercise to damp down criticism in the American press and Congress. Yesterday's announcement would have sounded more convincing if it had not been accompanied by an acerbic lecture from Saudi Arabia's spokesman in Washington, Adel al-Jubeir, accusing Americans of mindlessly bashing Saudi Arabia without duly weighing the evidence.
Charity is a pillar of Islamic belief and a valued source of welfare for the needy and ailing. Around this time every year, billions of dollars are collected from the faithful around the world and distributed by private charitable organizations. Sustained and aggressive monitoring by Saudi Arabia will be essential to keep these funds out of the hands of terrorists. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 4, 2002


End of Document