Substance lacking at conventions But two major parties still see value as chance to rally troops, launch candidate.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 21, 2012 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 283 words
Byline: By JENNIFER C. KERR • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


WASHINGTON - Long gone are the passionate debates. Long gone is the suspense about who will emerge as the party's presidential nominee. Political conventions now are carefully scripted pep rallies aimed at a national TV audience.
Not since the 1970s, in fact, has the nation had a major-party national convention begin with the nominee in doubt. Americans already know how the story will end at this year's Republican and Democratic national gatherings. So have modern-day conventions become irrelevant?
Not completely.
For the parties, conventions are colossally significant events - opportunities to claim precious hours of free prime-time television and showcase their nominees to millions. They preview the fall campaigns that are commencing and give the parties a chance to promote unity and excitement.
"Conventions have become more of a launch pad for the presidential campaign," says Stephen Wayne, a presidential scholar at Georgetown University and author of the book "The Road to the White House." "They excite the people. They excite the party base."
For everyday Americans, maybe not. Plenty of people aren't focused in the waning days of summer on politics, government and the direction of the country. "People tune in for the final speech," Wayne said.
And for many, that's about it.
Modern-day conventions, spanning three to four days, feature speeches, votes on rules and debates over the issues in the party's platform - where the party stands on taxes, terrorism, abortion, immigration and other issues. They also can help to launch up-and-comers - such as a little-known Senate candidate named Barack Obama, who was chosen to give the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic convention.

Load-Date: August 21, 2012


End of Document