SUBWAY FACES TEST 'DISASTER' SEPT. 9
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 19, 2000, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 402 words
Byline: MARYLYNNE PITZ, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER
Body


Hundreds of local emergency management officials, police, paramedics and hospital workers will find out Sept. 9 just how prepared they are for disaster.
Disaster, in the form of a five-hour training exercise, will strike the Steel Plaza subway station, Downtown, on that date.
The exercise will be a learning experience for law enforcement and emergency personnel from Pittsburgh, Allegheny and 12 surrounding counties who have spent the last 18 months preparing to respond to acts of terrorism. The Federal Emergency Management Agency has awarded a $ 28,000 grant for the exercise.
During the past year, law enforcement officers and emergency personnel have attended training sessions that featured discussions about biological terrorism, such as release of anthrax, chemical terrorism, such as the use of mustard gas, and the type of explosion that five years ago today ripped apart the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
Coordinating the disaster preparation among 170 emergency medical services agencies, 13 hazardous materials teams, 79 ambulance services and 65 hospitals is a full-time job for Robert Coll, chief of Allegheny County's bureau of emergency services.
Part of that preparation entailed training 800 police officers, firefighters, paramedics and hospital workers from Western Pennsylvania to respond to various types of disasters.
Raymond DeMichiei, the city's operations supervisor for the Department of Public Safety, is planning the September exercise.
The Port Authority of Allegheny County, DeMichiei said, has been supportive of the training exercise.
"The fact is not lost on them that someone decided to do this in a subway in Tokyo," he said, referring to the March 1995 incident in which the nerve gas sarin was released in the Tokyo subway system, killing eight people and sickening thousands.
DeMichiei said he hoped students from local acting classes and college nursing programs would volunteer to act as victims. Depending on the number of volunteers, there will be 150 to 500 victims.
Knox T. Walk, director of the public safety institute at Community College of Allegheny County, also serves as an emergency management services coordinator for Allegheny County, working with 79 ambulance companies.
"Part of this plan involves teaching hospitals how to decontaminate patients before admitting them," Walk said. He added that sometimes soap and water or bleach will suffice.

Load-Date: April 19, 2000


End of Document