Success Battling Terrorists, but Scant Glory for It
The New York Times
October 3, 2011 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16; NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 1151 words
Byline: By JACKIE CALMES; Megan Thee-Brenan contributed research.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The killing of an American-born Al Qaeda leader in Yemen on Friday will probably bolster the high marks Americans give President Obama for dealing with terrorism and foreign policy. Yet his overall approval ratings are likely to remain depressed, underscoring the economy's drag on his prospects for re-election.
Ten years after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, economic insecurity has replaced national security as Americans' chief concern, leaving Mr. Obama with little credit for his record of hunting and killing terrorists -- a topic that stirred public passions not long ago.
Instead, the successes notched since Mr. Obama escalated antiterrorism operations upon taking office -- crowned by the killing of Osama bin Laden in May and then punctuated by Friday's drone strike against the American-born leader, Anwar al-Awlaki -- are overshadowed almost completely by his failure to reduce unemployment.
The contrast with his predecessor could hardly be starker. Long after the attacks of 2001, President George W. Bush rode a wave of popularity for his image as the take-charge commander of what he called a global war on terror. But the bump Mr. Obama got in the polls after he ordered the risky operation that killed Bin Laden, whom Mr. Bush had promised to get ''dead or alive,'' lasted barely a month.
That suggests that Mr. Obama, whose approval ratings as president hit a new low in September, cannot expect much improvement after the missile strike that killed Mr. Awlaki, the Qaeda propagandist believed to have radicalized numerous Muslims, including Nidal Malik Hasan, the Army major accused of the 2009 Fort Hood mass shooting, and Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the Nigerian who tried to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner on Dec. 25, 2009. Also killed in the strike, according to American officials, was Samir Khan, the editor of Al Qaeda's magazine.
''While people view what's occurred as positive, it's not enough to offset the concern about how he's handling the No. 1 issue -- jobs and the economy. And that's what he's being judged on,'' said David Winston, a Republican pollster.
A New York Times/CBS News poll in mid-September showed just 43 percent of Americans approved of Mr. Obama's job performance, while 50 percent disapproved. Just after Bin Laden's death, Americans by a 20-point spread, 57 percent to 37 percent, approved of his handling of his job. A month later the margin had closed again: 48 percent approved and 43 percent disapproved.
Even many Democrats complain that Mr. Obama seems weak in his budget fights with Congressional Republicans and too willing to compromise. A CNN poll in September had 52 percent of Americans saying the president was not ''a strong and decisive leader.''
Yet Mr. Obama's ratings for fighting terrorism rose after he took office -- after a campaign in which Democratic and Republican rivals depicted him as a liberal naif on national security -- and have remained high. More than six of 10 Americans approved of his handling of terrorism threats in a Times/CBS poll in June.
On his handling of the economy, however, the numbers flip. And that, say people in both parties, explains his political plight.
''This president is in trouble because the economy is in terrible shape,'' said Peter D. Hart, a Democratic pollster. But he predicted that the antiterrorism effort would ultimately play to Mr. Obama's benefit in next year's election: ''Usually Democrats are on the defensive when it comes to national defense and terrorism. Nobody will be able to label him as soft on national defense.''
For now, though, the disconnect between Mr. Obama's national security record and his overall approval rating, though understandable given Americans' preoccupation with the economy, is a matter of continuing frustration within the administration.
''It's hard for these things to break through in a world where the conversation is about the economy at every kitchen table all the time,'' said Dan Pfeiffer, the White House communications director. But, he added, ''When we get to next year, the president is going to have a very powerful case to make about his foreign policy successes.''
To the extent that such sentiment has not broken through, factors other than the economy could be at work. Even before the recession and financial crisis that Mr. Obama inherited, Americans had become complacent about terrorism. The operations are covert, and except for Bin Laden, are against shadowy, little-known figures.
Some of the explanation might also be traced to the White House. Mr. Obama seems reluctant to draw attention to the record as he emphasizes his job-creation agenda, and perhaps wants to avoid being seen as taking credit for the acts of military and intelligence operatives. In his statement about the Yemen strike, Mr. Obama was spare in his remarks.
''His view is that he's not one to boast or to do end-zone dances on these issues,'' said Benjamin Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser.
In speeches that lately have become more campaignlike, Mr. Obama typically seeks to rally supporters discouraged by the partisan gridlock by boasting of achievements to date, like the health care act passed in 2010, and repeal of the ''don't ask, don't tell'' law against openly gay service members. Only occasionally does he mention the killing of Bin Laden. Over the past 10 days, at events in Washington, California, Colorado and Ohio, Mr. Obama cited him once, at a fund-raiser in San Diego.
''We have decimated Al Qaeda and killed Bin Laden,'' he told donors midway through his usual rundown of accomplishments, drawing applause. Yet two hours later, at another fund-raiser, he was silent on the matter.
And if Mr. Obama does not take credit, nor does he get much from either party.
Since the Vietnam era, Democrats generally have been uncomfortable talking tough about national security. Some liberals criticize Mr. Obama for expanding the war in Afghanistan and for extrajudicial killings of suspected terrorists like Mr. Awlaki. Among the few statements of reaction from Congressional Democrats on Friday was a critical one from Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, a liberal from Ohio, who objected that the killing was ''wrong legally, constitutionally and morally.''
One Republican, Representative Peter T. King, the chairman of the House Committee on Homeland Security, called the killing ''a tremendous tribute to President Obama and the men and women of our intelligence community.'' But a memo from a House Republican leadership office on Friday morning was headlined ''Tough Day for the White House''; it referred only to domestic issues, saying nothing about Mr. Awlaki.
The contenders for the Republican presidential nomination say almost nothing about national security, reflecting their emphasis on the economy, their differences with one another and also, perhaps, the difficulty of finding fault with Mr. Obama's antiterrorism record.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: President Obama has low approval ratings over all, as a focus on the economy distracts from foreign policy successes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTOFFER TRIPPLAAR/SIPA PRESS, VIA BLOOMBERG NEWS)                                                                  

Load-Date: October 3, 2011


End of Document