SUDAN SNARES JACKAL,' MOST WANTED TERRORIST
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 16, 1994, TUESDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A; PROFILE Carlos "The Jackal" Ilich Ramirez Sanchez
Length: 975 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body


During the Cold War, terrorist Carlos the Jackal moved between East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Syria "with extraordinary protections at his disposal," said Pierre Marion, France's former intelligence chief.
"To catch him then wasn't possible."
But communism fell, the Cold War ended, and Carlos - the free-lance terrorist whose bombings and hijackings made him one of the world's most wanted men - lost his protection, Marion added.
French counterintelligence agents found Carlos early this year in Sudan. On Monday, French Interior Minister Charles Pasqua announced in Paris: "Yesterday morning, Sudanese authorities let us know they had positively identified Carlos and were ready to respond to French arrest warrants."
Sudanese agents seized the Venezuelan-born Carlos on Sunday and turned him over to France, ending a 20-year search.
As a terrorist-for-hire, Carlos is said to have teamed up with some of the world's most notorious groups, including Germany's Red Army Faction, the Japanese Red Army, the Basque separatist movement in Spain and various Palestinian groups.
He was most often linked to the murky world of Middle East terrorism. Intelligence reports connect him with the massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics in Germany in 1972, an attack in 1975 on OPEC headquarters in Vienna, Austria, in which 11 oil ministers were kidnapped - Carlos and his accomplices were flown to Algeria, where they freed the hostages and escaped - and the hijacking in 1976 of an Air France jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda, which prompted an Israeli rescue raid.
But now, Carlos, 44, is behind bars in La Sante prison in southern Paris. He is scheduled to go before a special terrorism judge today.
In June 1992, a French court convicted Carlos in absentia, sentencing him to life in prison for fatally shooting two agents investigating attacks on Israel's El Al airplanes at Paris' Orly Airport. Under French law, he will have to be retried for the slayings.
In announcing the arrest Monday, Pasqua said Carlos was directly or indirectly responsible for killing at least 15 people on French soil and injuring 200. Carlos claims to have killed 83 people around the world.
Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, got his nom de guerre after British tabloids learned that a copy of Frederick Forsyth's 1971 thriller, "Day of the Jackal," had been found in one of Carlos' London safe houses. The novel tells the story of the Jackal, a professional killer hired to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle.
The flamboyant terrorist long worked in the foreign operations section of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Besides the Munich Olympics and Entebbe hijacking, Carlos also is suspected in the takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague, Netherlands, in 1974.
Pasqua called Carlos a "mercenary at the disposition of the liberation movements of the world. He was without doubt animated by a sort of ferocious passion that turned delirious."
Pasqua said Sudan had not asked for compensation for handing over Carlos. But he suggested that Sudan might be trying to prove its good will to the West to try to end its ostracism.
In fact, Sudanese Justice Minister Abdel-Azziz Shado called Monday for the United States to remove it from its blacklist for supporting international terrorism, a listing that has cost Sudan most of its aid, Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported.
Born Oct. 12, 1949, Carlos is the son of a wealthy communist Venezuelan lawyer, Jose Altagracia Ramirez Navas, who gave each of his three sons one name of the Soviet Union's revolutionary leader Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
Carlos joined the communist students' movement in the streets of Caracas and later got guerrilla training in Cuba. The Venezuelan Communist Party sponsored him at Lumumba University in Moscow, where many Third World nationals were selected by the KGB for training as Soviet agents.
While there, Carlos came in contact with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine,
Following his notorious exploits in the 1970s, Carlos reportedly organized covert operations for Syria aimed at overthrowing the Iraqi government. Some reports said he was the leader of a Libyan hit squad sent to kill President Ronald Reagan in 1981.
In March 1982, Carlos threatened attacks against the French government unless it freed two of his suspected agents, Bruno Breguet, a Swiss, and Magdalena Kopp, a West German, both arrested the previous month in Paris. Later that month, a bomb exploded aboard the Paris-Toulouse express, killing six and wounding 15. The French blamed Carlos.
Kopp and Breguet were freed in May 1985. Reports say Kopp flew to Damascus, Syria, to join Carlos, married him and had a child, Rosa.
Carlos has been reported captured or killed many times. In 1981, Mexico City police claimed that they had captured Carlos, but their "Carlos" turned out to be a frightened armed robber with only a passing resemblance to the terrorist. Sudanese Motives
Sudanese officials said that Carlos came to Khartoum to plan assaults on foreign targets in Sudan and that agents had him under surveillance even before France requested his arrest.
"It is part of our moral conviction to fight against this kind of activity," said Abubaker al Shingieti, a government spokesman. "The government of Sudan in doing this is fulfilling its obligations to the international community in fighting terrorism and fighting against terrorists."
Carlos entered Sudan with a fake diplomatic passport from an Arab nation, said Interior Minister al-Tayeb Ibrahim Mohamed Khier.
Shingieti said Carlos and others were arrested "in the past few days" in Khartoum. Other sources said he had been seized in a rented house on Sunday. Shingieti refused to say how many other people were arrested, when they arrived in Sudan, where they were from, or whether they were still in Sudan.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) Photo by AP - French police say this photo of terrorist Carlos "The Jackal" was taken last week in Khartoum, Sudan. The terrorist sought for 20 years was arrested there Sunday and flown to France. (2) Three Photo Headshots - Undated file photos of Carlos. (3) Photo by AP - Arab commando on balcony of building where members of the Israeli Olympic team were being held hostage in Munich. (4) Graphic/Chart - CARLOS THE JACKAL CATCHING CARLOS * Since he joined the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine in 1970, Carlos has been the world's most wanted, most elusive terrorist. He's set off many false alarms; in 1981, Mexico City police claimed they had him, but had only misidentified a small-scale robber. * Carlos entered Sudan on a false passport - officials won't say when - and officials had him under surveillance. France recently asked Sudan to arrest him. NAME: Ilich Ramirez Sanchez CODE NAME: Carlos the Jackal WANTED FOR: Killing two French counterintelligence agents AGE: 44; born Oct. 12, 1949 in Venezuela FAMILY: Wife Magdalena Kopp, a West German terrorist; daughter Rosa. (5) Graphic/Chart - CHRONOLOGY OF TERROR 1972: The massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics. 1974: Takeover of the French Embassy in The Hague. 1975: Killing of two French intelligence agents. An attack on OPEC headquarters in Vienna, Austria; three are killed, 11 taken hostage. 1976: Hijacking of an Air France jetliner and diversion to Uganda. 1982: Bombing of the Paris-Toulouse express; six are killed. Bombing near the Champs Elysees in Paris; a pregnant woman is killed; 63 are wounded. 1983: Bombings in and around Marseilles kill five. (6) Graphic/Chart - THE MAKINGS OF A TERRORIST MASSACRE AT THE OLYMPICS During the 1972 Summer Games in Munich, eight Arab terrorists attacked the Israeli team headquarters. Two Israelis were killed; nine were taken hostage. Several hours later, all the hostages, five terrorists and a West German policeman were killed in a gun battle with West German police. Carlos is linked to the killings. HIJACKING OVER THE MEDITERRANEAN In 1976, Palestinian terrorists hijacked an Air France airplane filled with Israeli passengers and forced the pilot to land at the Entebbe Uganda airport. They held more than 100 hostages for a week, until Israeli commandos launched a raid. Three hostages and one of the rescuers were killed in crossfire; all others were freed. Carlos is linked to the killings. THE COMPANY HE KEPT Carlos had contact with Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang, Japan's Red Army, the Turkish Popular Liberation Front, the Basque separatist movement in Spain, and several Palestinian organizatons.

Load-Date: August 18, 1994


End of Document