SUDANESE SCHOLAR DENIES THAT HE SPREADS TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 5, 1994, Monday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 5B; PROFILE HASAN TURABI
Length: 697 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: KHARTOUM, SUDAN
Body


HASAN TURABI has no official post. Yet dignitaries and ambassadors trek to his modest offices to hear his thoughts on what is happening in Sudan and how an Islamic revival will sweep the world.
To the West, he is the architect of a campaign by Sudan to spread terrorism by Muslim radicals. To many Arabs, he is a visionary thinker on the future of Islam. From either side, he is the most influential man in Sudan.
In an interview, the 62-year-old Turabi brushed aside questions about his own power in Sudan, a vast and arid African expanse that is one of the world's poorest countries. He focused instead on his view that "Islamic terrorism" has more to do with Western fears than with reality.
"The spreading of the Islamic revival has created a terror in the world," he said. "I care that the Islamic revival spreads, especially in the Arab world, because they are historically closer to the origins of Islam and can lead the international revival."
Turabi's power stems from his leadership of the National Islamic Front, which is in theory banned like other political parties but actually controls the government in this nation of 25 million people. Western diplomats say Turabi sets the tone for Sudan's rule but does not make all daily decisions.
The country is a pariah because of its backing for Iraq in the Gulf War and charges that it supports Islamic radicals who have caused havoc in Egypt and Algeria.
Sudan was put on the U.S. list of terrorist-sponsoring states last year after five Sudanese were charged among defendants in a plot to blow up New York landmarks. The United States and some Arab nations accuse Sudan of plotting with Iran and harboring radical groups like the Palestinians' Hamas and Abu Nidal.
Although a champion of Islam, Turabi is a contrast to the religiously educated leaders of Iran's Islamic republic. He studied in Britain and got a doctorate in law from the Sorbonne in Paris in 1964. He is a charismatic speaker who charms visitors in eloquent Arabic or fluent French and English.
He has been a political player in Sudan since 1965, holding posts under five regimes. His ability to survive is renowned. Former President Gaafar Nimeiri imprisoned Turabi for seven years, then made him a close aide.
Turabi was behind Sudan's 1983 implementation of Islamic law, which was a major factor in reviving the Arab-led government's civil war with Christian and animist blacks in southern Sudan.
He narrowly escaped death in 1992 when a Sudanese opposition member beat him during a visit to Canada. He was in a coma for days.
Since Lt. Gen. Omar Hassan el-Bashir seized power in 1989, Turabi has been known as the power behind the throne. But he refuses to be pinned down on his links to the government.
"I have to have relations with the regime . . . . I support the regime . . . but I am not an Islamic guide," he said with a grin.
He dismissed rumors that he would run in a presidential election expected next year.
His only formal job is head of the Popular Arab and Islamic Congress, a group he founded to promote religion.
He says that Islam is a peaceful religion but that he supports the tactics of radicals in Algeria, Egypt and the Palestinians' self-rule territories.
"A Muslim is not allowed to start violence, but he is allowed to answer back with violence if someone else starts," Turabi said.
"In these Arab countries like Egypt and Algeria and others, where the government starts using force to suppress the new Islamic movement . . . then a person can answer violence with violence until there is a revolution."
U.S. Ambassador Donald Petterson would not discuss Turabi but said nothing has changed Washington's view of Sudan.
"There are training activities, terrorist organizations are allowed to function here, and there is interaction between the government and organizations here like Hamas, Hezbollah, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Abu Nidal and others," he said.
Turabi said Sudan accepts refugees from all over the world but he denied that radicals get military training. He asked for evidence that Sudan exports terrorism.
"The West never gives details, no names or places - only rumors and suspicions, which they turn into facts with no proof," he said.

Graphic

 
Photo By AP - Hasan Turabi, 62, possibly the most influential man in Sudan, gestures Wednesday as he speaks in Khartoum. The West says he is behind Sudan's campaign to spread Islamic terrorism.

Load-Date: December 6, 1994


End of Document