Sudanese strains surface as US pressure triggers debate on Israel
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 21, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 616 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


US President Donald Trump said Sudan will be removed from the United States' list of state sponsors of terrorism if the capital Khartoum follows through on a pledge to pay US$335 million ($475 million) to American victims of terrorism and their families.
Trump tweeted: "GREAT news!"
The Trump administration has brokered similar peace deals between the Israeli government and Arab nations in recent months.
Sudan is on a fragile path to democracy after a popular uprising a year ago led the military to overthrow autocratic leader Omar al-Bashir in April 2019.
While Trump has authority to remove Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism, both the administration and lawmakers have been seeking a package that would compensate victims and families over attacks - namely Al-Qaeda's 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Khartoum's removal from Washington's State Sponsor of Terrorism list is a major step in Sudan's efforts to reintegrate into the worldwide community after last year's uprising toppled longtime leader Bashir.
"At long last, JUSTICE for the American people and BIG step for Sudan", Trump posted on Twitter.
A key sticking point in the negotiations was Sudan's insistence that any announcement of Khartoum's delisting not be explicitly linked to normalization with Israel.
Wales golf clubs SHUT DOWN due to 17-day coronavirus lockdown
Mark Drakeford confirmed yesterday that every business covered by the small business rates relief will receive a £1,000 payment. Wales will begin a two-week "fire break" lockdown on Friday to try and curb a second wave of rising COVID-19 infections.
The announcement was swiftly welcomed by Sudanese Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, whose government has been pushing for the delisting to help it revive Sudan's struggling economy ever since taking office a year ago following the military overthrow of longtime President Omar al-Bashir in the face of months-long protests.
The announcement, just two weeks ahead of the U.S. presidential election, also comes as the Trump administration works to get other Muslim-majority countries, such as Sudan, to join the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain's recent recognition of Israel.
Sudan was put on the list in 1993, when the U.S. government charged the country's leader at the time, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, of giving shelter to Hezbollah and Palestinian militant groups that the United States considers terrorists.
Sudan can not receive foreign aid until it is removed from the us list of state sponsors of terrorism, which it has been on since 1993 for allegedly granting refuge and assistance to the USA -designated terrorist group Hezbollah and Palestinian terrorists.
U.S. -Sudanese negotiations have focused on funds that Washington wants Khartoum to deposit in escrow to be paid for victims of al Qaeda attacks on U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, U.S. government sources said. Differences remain between Sudanese political and military officials on how far to go in the warming of relations with Israel. The Sovereign Council is supposed to transition to civilian control next year, then cede power to an elected government in 2022.
Sudanese officials have been negotiating the terms of removing the country from the list for more than a year but the USA effort to fix relations with Sudan dates to the end of President Barack Obama's administration, which initiated the process in January 2017.
One possibility, a US official said, would be for Washington to leave it to Sudan and Israel to go public later, possibly in coming days, with an agreement on opening relations.
More than 200 people died in twin Al-Qaeda bombings in 1998 of the United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.

Load-Date: October 21, 2020


End of Document