Sudan's Critics Relieved That Obama Chose a Middle Course
The New York Times
October 18, 2009 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 770 words
Byline: By GINGER THOMPSON
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


A day after the first details began to emerge of the Obama administration's long-awaited policy for Sudan -- one that proposes working with the government rather than isolating it -- advocates of a tougher approach toward Khartoum said they wished the administration had been stronger.
  But they also expressed relief at what has been released so far, saying they had  feared the White House would take an even more conciliatory line toward the government, whose leader has been charged with crimes against humanity.
  During his presidential campaign, Barack Obama had pledged a harder stance, but on Friday, Maj. Gen. J. Scott Gration, retired, said the policy to be announced Monday would make use of a mix of ''incentives and pressure'' to seek an end to the human rights abuses that have left millions of people dead or displaced in Darfur.
  Two members of Congress who are deeply involved with Africa issues said that they had been alarmed by recent statements made by General Gration, suggesting that the administration was considering easing sanctions and taking Sudan off the list of nations that sponsor terrorism.
  ''I think the only thing the government of Sudan understands is bluntness and power,'' said Representative Donald M. Payne, Democrat  of New Jersey, a co-chairman of the Sudan caucus. 
  And Representative Frank R. Wolf, a Republican from Virginia and another co-chairman of the caucus, said:  ''Considering the rumors we've been hearing, this policy seems very positive. Seems they are going to take a more balanced approach.''
  Mr. Payne said President George W. Bush's mix of incentives and pressures on Sudan had  failed to achieve a lasting peace in the country, and he worried that President Obama's policy  would produce the same result.
  Most of the details of the policy are expected to be announced Monday by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton. Administration officials said the policy aims to compel Sudan to end to its attacks against civilians, to abide by the terms of a 2005 peace agreement with rebels in southern Sudan, and to stop its support for terrorist organizations. 
  White House officials refused to give details about the types of incentives and pressures they would use, saying that parts of the policy would remain classified. And they acknowledged the policy marks an evolution in Mr. Obama's position on Sudan, one that is likely to reignite criticism that the White House has often softened positions he espoused as a candidate. 
  ''Things have changed in Sudan from a year ago, or two years ago, and this policy is an effort to take that reality into account,'' said Susan E. Rice, the United States ambassador to the United Nations and a leading architect of the Sudan policy.
  In recent months, analysts  both inside and outside the United States government have reported that ''low-intensity'' skirmishes have replaced systematic slaughter by government-supported militants on one side and rebel groups on the other. However, systematic abuses continue to occur. Millions of people are still displaced, and the administration continues to characterize the actions of the Sudanese government as genocide.
  Ms. Rice said the administration would insist that Sudan show real evidence that  conditions for civilians had begun to improve before offering incentives. The administration said that the policy calls for quarterly reviews of conditions in Darfur.
  The administration said that pressures on Sudan would increase if the United States saw signs either that it was backsliding or simply maintaining the status quo.
  When asked why the administration was willing to engage at all with a government it believes is responsible for genocide, Ms. Rice said: ''Engagement is not a reward. To definitively end the killing and dying ultimately requires a solution the government is willing to implement. There's no way around it.''
  The administration is expected to say that its  policy  is consistent with its philosophy of engaging with even the most notorious actors on the world stage.
  John Norris, executive director of the Enough Project, one of the leading groups advocating peace in Sudan, said he saw some hypocrisy in a policy that calls for engagement with a government that the administration accuses of genocide.  
  ''It raises some real philosophical problems,'' he said, referring to administration assertions that Sudan has provided important support for the United States' fight against terrorism. ''In exchange for some cooperation on terrorism issues, are we not going to hold Khartoum accountable for the displacement of millions of people?''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 18, 2009


End of Document