SUDANESE LEADER MAY REJECT U.S. AID
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 19, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 356 words
Dateline: KHARTOUM, SUDAN
Body


Sudan's military ruler dismissed on Thursday accusations by the United States that his country supported international terrorism and said it only advocated Islam.  By adding Sudan to its list of nations supporting terrorism, the United States on Wednesday severed Sudan from its assistance programs, except for humanitarian aid.  But Lt. Gen. Omar Hassan el-Bashir, Sudan's leader, indicated that he would reject even the $50 million in humanitarian aid that the United States was sending this year.  "Talking about the continuing humanitarian assistance means talking about an American intelligence presence in Sudan," el-Bashir said. That "would make our country a theater for spies and agents." His statement was a retort to the U.S. State Department's contention that Sudan was a haven for terrorists.  The administration of President Bill Clinton based its decision on "its deep-rooted animosity against Islam" and was "politically biased and lacking in evidence and logic," el-Bashir said in comments read on national radio.  The U.S. action coincided with reports of evidence linking Sudanese diplomats in the United States with the terrorist plot to bomb targets in New York. But the United States did not take the allegations into account in making its decision to brand Sudan a terrorist-sponsoring nation, Mike McCurry, a State Department spokesman, said in Washington.  Gutbi Mehdi, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the American notification of its decision presented no evidence and no specific acts.  The State Department said the United States imposed economic sanctions on Sudan after that country's pro-Iranian government refused to respond positively to U.S. complaints about Sudanese links to international terrorism.
"The evidence currently available indicates that Sudan allows the use of its territory as sanctuary for terrorists, including the Abu Nidal organization and members of Hezbollah and Palestine Islamic Jihad," McCurry said. "We also believe safe houses and other facilities used to support radical groups are allowed to exist in Sudan with the apparent approval of the Sudanese government's leadership."

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document