Sudan, Denying Terrorism Role, Vows to Resist World Pressure
The New York Times
February 15, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section A;  ; Section A;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 572 words
Byline: By DOUGLAS JEHL  

By DOUGLAS JEHL  
Dateline: KHARTOUM, the Sudan, Feb. 14
Body


Top Sudanese officials, facing increasing international pressure for allowing terrorist groups to operate in the country, are making an attempt to cooperate with Security Council demands on one hand while threatening retaliation on the other.
The Security Council wants the Sudan to surrender three Egyptians suspected of involvement in the attempt to assassinate Egypt's President, Hosni Mubarak, last June in Ethiopia.
Sudanese officials have said repeatedly that they do not believe the suspects are in the Sudan. Nevertheless, the Interior Ministry has ordered all Egyptians to register with the police, and arrest warrants issued by the country's Prosecutor General are being read repeatedly on state radio and television.
Officials here warn that the country's Islamic military Government might lash back in the event of sanctions, although the United Nations is far from imposing any sanctions.
In this country, where the lead-in to the television evening news often includes images of lightning striking the Statue of Liberty, anti-American sentiments are common among officials.
"If people push us into a corner, we're going to fight back," Dr. Ghazi Atabari, the Secretary General of the National Congress, said in an interview. "Any means that is available to us, we'll use it."
Mahdi Ibrahim, the country's representative-designate to the United States, said in a separate conversation: "If action is taken against Sudan, it is baseless, it is a gross departure from the norms of justice, and it will only affect the people."
The United States has withdrawn its diplomats from Khartoum because, it says, the Government provides sanctuary for the Islamic Group, which claimed responsibility for the attack on Mr. Mubarak, as well as for other violent Muslim militant organizations.
Hassan al-Turabi, the leader of the National Islamic Front and perhaps the country's most influential political force, dismissed as "foolish" the American contention that the Sudan supports violent terrorist groups, and he said those beliefs fuel anti-American propaganda.
"You know human beings," he said. "Evil has to be adapted into somebody or something. "Now in Sudan, America has come to play that role."
Representatives of the Organization for African Unity and the United Nations are now in the Sudan for talks on the issue, and the Security Council has given Secretary General Boutros-Boutros Ghali until March 31 to report on whether the Sudan has cooperated in surrendering the suspects to Ethiopia.
In what it has portrayed as a sign of its earnestness, the Sudan in recent days has asked Ethiopia to provide further information to help in tracking down the suspects. Ethiopia, already at odds with the Sudan, has challenged its sincerity.
"Since Sudan knows full well where the three gunmen are being sheltered and protected by its own security personnel, the notice issued by its prosecutor is the latest confirmation Sudan is not about to comply with the request of the Security Council," Ethiopia's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said.
Saddiq al-Mahdi, the Prime Minister who was overthrown in a 1989 coup here by Lieut. Gen. Omar Hassan Bashir, said the steps taken by the United States and the United Nations indicate the deterioration in relations between the Sudan and the rest of the world.
"The regime has come to the end of its tether," Mr. Mahdi said in an hourlong conversation in his home. "How long it can remain there, I don't know."

Load-Date: February 15, 1996


End of Document