Suicide plane crash was act of tragedy, not terrorism
University Wire
January 18, 2002


Copyright 2002 The Battalion via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 495 words
Byline: By Kelln Zimmer, The Battalion
Dateline: College Station, Texas
Body


On Jan. 5, 15-year-old Charles Bishop flew a plane into a skyscraper and drove a knife into the heart of an already splintered American psyche. This incident was treated like every other news story in the last several months, immediately swinging to the possibilities of terrorism. Beyond the news, the chilling realization with Bishop's actions is the American youth's slide beyond school shootings to a much more visible, unthinkable way of ending their lives.
Texas A&M U.
As Bishop stole and proceeded to crash a small plane into a 42-story skyscraper in downtown Tampa, Fla., news outlets immediately churned out stories reporting the possibility that Bishop was linked to terrorism, and then quickly they reassured the American public that he had acted alone. This was merely a suicidal flight. Bishop's flight opened the floodgates for scrutiny on the security of the aviation system. He effortlessly stole the plane from the private airport and citizens and legislators called for a closer look at the world of private air travel and its security.
Aside from the startling fact that a 15-year-old breached a heightened state of national security, the real devastation of this suicide flight is its illustration of the bleak state of America's youth and the measures they will take to display grief. After the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the logical thought process of Americans was undeniably altered. Unspeakable horrors like this are immediately charged as attempts at terror with grand motives and a larger intent to harm. Bishop and any ties he had to terrorism can be refuted thanks to the fact that Bishop's fatal flight occurred on a Saturday evening, when few people would be in the building. He only hurt himself.
Bishop is thought to have taken controversial acne medication, Accutane, which was investigated under charges that patients can become depressed or suicidal while on the medication. There are conflicting reports as to the personality and mental state of the teen, but in any case it is unfortunate that a 15-year-old has the insight and the will to end his life in such a terrible way.
Rather than focusing on terrorism, the media and the public should reach into the issue and realize what kind of a world has been created when a teen-age boy has the insight and the means to crash a plane to end his life. In the last decade, continuing into this week, school shootings have plagued America and its youth and children live in a society their parents never dreamed they would see. The focus of America must be to save its children, for they are doomed under a black cloud of fear. Unforeseeable events caused the nation to spin out of control and forget what living in America means.
Tragedy does not equal terror. Bishop was a product of America and unfortunately his death was glazed over to ensure the safety and sanity of a country rather than awaken a nation to the dwindling state of its youth.
(C) 2002 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 18, 2002


End of Document