Suicide Bomber Attacks Tourists at Yemen Temple, Killing 9
The New York Times
July 3, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 373 words
Dateline: SANA, Yemen, July 2 
Body


A suicide bomber drove into a convoy of Spanish tourists visiting an ancient Yemeni temple, officials said, killing seven Spaniards and two Yemenis less than two weeks after the United States issued a terrorism warning about the area.
  No one claimed responsibility for the attack in central Marib Province, about 85 miles east of the capital, Sana, but the police said they received information last month about a possible attack by Al Qaeda.
  Al Qaeda has an active presence in Yemen, the ancestral home of Osama bin Laden, despite government efforts to fight the terrorist network.
  Witnesses said the bomber drove a car through the gate of the temple compound, and the vehicle exploded near the structure, which was built about 3,000 years ago and dedicated to the Queen of Sheba.
  Spain's foreign minister, Miguel Angel Moratinos, said seven of the dead and five of the wounded were Spaniards.
  Less than two weeks ago, the United States Embassy warned Americans to avoid the area. On June 23 in neighboring Shabwa Province, a Yemeni guard opened fire on a group of foreign oil workers shortly after they landed at a company airstrip, killing one and wounding five, including an American.
  The provincial governor said at the time that the guard was mentally ill, but the United States Embassy in Sana canceled travel to the two provinces ''for the near future'' and recommended that Americans avoid the region.
  Spain has also issued warnings about the area.
  Al Qaeda was blamed for the 2000 bombing of the destroyer Cole in Aden that killed 17 American sailors,  and also for  an attack on a French oil tanker that killed one person two years later.
  Yemen was a haven for Islamists from across the Arab world in the 1990s, but after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, it declared support for the campaign against international terrorism. Its crackdown on militants has suffered a number of setbacks, however, such as the February 2006 prison breakout of 23 convicts, some of whom had been jailed for crimes linked to Al Qaeda.
  Tourists are frequently kidnapped by tribes in Yemen that are seeking to win better services from the government or the release of jailed relatives. Most of the hostages have been released unharmed.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Security forces and others at the scene of a suicide bombing yesterday at the Queen of Sheba temple, about 85 miles east of Yemen's capital, Sana. The United States had recently issued a terrorism warning about the area after a man opened fire on oil workers in a nearby province in late June. (Photograph by Marib Press, via Associated Press)                       

Load-Date: July 3, 2007


End of Document