SUITS TARGET PRODUCTS USED TO HARM;TERRORISM ON TRIAL
Business Insurance
July 22, 1996


Copyright 1996 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: News; Pg. 2
Length: 881 words
Byline: JOANNE WOJCIK
Body


OKLAHOMA CITY-If you can't legislate terrorism out of existence, why not use the courts to try to prevent it?
That seems to be the tactic employed by plaintiffs lawyers who brought a civil suit against the suppliers of ammonium nitrate fertilizer used in last year's bombing of the Oklahoma City federal building, seeking unspecified damages for the harm caused by their product.
While the first named defendant-Dallas-based ICI Explosives USA Inc.-was dismissed from the suit July 2, the team of plaintiffs lawyers led by Johnnie Cochran, the Los Angeles attorney who won notoriety for his role in successfully defending O.J. Simpson against murder charges, is preparing to appeal.
Still named in the suit, however, are ICI's parent company, Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. of London, and related companies ICI Canada Inc.  of Toronto and ICI America Inc. of Wilmington, Del.
If plaintiffs lawyers are successful in bringing the fertilizer case to trial, it could trigger even  more litigation against manufacturers and suppliers of all kinds of products with potential lethal uses, defense lawyers fear.
In fact, the Oklahoma City product liability suit already closely resembles legal actions filed against the makers and distributors of guns used in violent crimes-a legal strategy that is increasing in popularity.
For example, a federal district judge in New York ruled in May that victims of handgun violence may proceed with a lawsuit against the firearms industry alleging that it failed to take adequate steps to prevent weapon sales to illegal buyers such as teen-agers.
And a California judge permitted a suit filed against the manufacturer of a gun used in a 1993 shooting rampage at a San Francisco law firm (BI, April 17, 1995; June 20, 1994).
Litigation that moves through the manufacturing chain searching for a deep pocket is endemic to the U.S. legal system, defense lawyers say.
These types of suits illustrate how ''our tort system has become a business,'' observed Rod Eshelman, a partner in the San Francisco office of Carol, Burdick & McDonough.
''Plaintiffs counsel try to expand liability as much as possible, because that's how they get paid,'' he said.
That's why he wasn't surprised by the fertilizer suit being filed in connection with the bombing, Mr. Eshelman said. ''I was looking for the fertilizer suit the day'' the bombing occurred, he said.
But, in general, ''injury resulting from obvious misuse of a product doesn't create liability on the part of the manufacturer,'' said Robert B.  Flaig, chairman of the litigation department at Sheppard, Mullin, Hamilton & Richter in Los Angeles.
The usual test applied under most product liability statutes is whether a manufacturer knew or should have known its product had potentially lethal uses, he explained.
Tom Denver, managing partner at Hoge, Fenton, Jones & Appel in San Jose, Calif., agreed.
''If manufacturers of legitimate products or providers of raw materials that can be perverted to unlawful use can be held responsible, that would create unlimited liability,'' he said. ''Then why not sue the chemical manufacturers that provided the constituent chemicals that went into the fertilizer?''
Attorneys representing ICI Explosives and the other companies named in the suit declined to comment for this article.
But plaintiffs lawyers involved in the case allege that the fertilizer maker knew the product could be made safer.
''They conducted tests in 1968 to support a patent to make ammonium nitrate non-detonable by adding diammonium phosphate,'' said John Merritt, co-counsel with Mr. Cochran on the case. Mr. Merritt is with Merritt & Rooney Inc. in Oklahoma City.
''They also knew since the mid-1970s that ammonium nitrate might be used for destructive purposes by criminals and terrorists,'' he said, pointing out that Imperial Chemical conducted a seminar on that subject at the time.
ICI lawyers declined to comment.
The ruling ''confirms that the only people responsible for the tragedy in Oklahoma City are the terrorists,'' an ICI spokesman said. He also said the company is insured for the product liability exposure, but would not provide coverage details.
In his July 2 decision dismissing ICI, which has not yet been published, U.S. District Judge David L. Russell did not address either of these issues, which were brought up in the third amended complaint filed by plaintiffs in November 1995.
Instead, the judge found that ''defendant's production, marketing or sale of ammonium nitrate in whatever form did not logically compel or induce the bombing, and certainly conception of a plan to bomb a building or the bombing itself is not an ordinary response to and does not logically flow from the availability of ammonium nitrate in whatever form in the fertilizer market.''
''It defies all logic and common sense to suggest that the very existence or availability of a substance which can be used as or employed in a weapon invites persons to use it as or in a weapon,'' the judge added. ''The bombing did not occur because Nichols and McVeigh acquired (ammonium nitrate) fertilizer. The bombing occurred only because of the terrorists' intent to cause harm.''
Lena E. Gaines-Tabb et al. vs. ICI Explosives USA Inc. et al., U.S.  District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma; No. CIV-95-719-R.

Load-Date: July 25, 1996


End of Document