Suit Seeks to Force F.B.I. to Seal Data In Terrorism Inquiry
The New York Times
November 30, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 283 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29
Body


Five groups demanded in a lawsuit today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation forever seal records of a 1983 inquiry on terrorism, one the bureau has since acknowledged was unnecessarily broad.
Only that action can assure that the bureau does not reopen the issue or use false data in its files to discredit people who were wrongly investigated, Margaret L. Ratner, a New York City lawyer for the groups, said at a news conference.
Ms. Ratner, an attorney for the Center for Constitutional Rights, filed the lawsuit in Federal District Court on behalf of the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador, or Cispes, and four other groups in New York, Washington, Pittsburgh and Tucson, Ariz.
Seven individuals joined in the suit, which Ms. Ratner said seeks to expunge the names of thousands of peoples identified by the bureau. The suit asks the court to order the F.B.I. to ''recover, collect and seal'' information obtained in the inquiry.
The lawsuit stems from a 27-month investigation of Cispes and other domestic activist groups. The investigation, begun in March 1983, was based on a tip that Cispes was aiding terrorists in El Salvador. The tip later was determined to be unfounded.
The Center for Constitutional Rights, which documented the investigation after suing to force the release of F.B.I. files on Cispes, has charged that the inquiry rights of those investigated.
Many people identified in the inquiry, Ms. Ratner said, have been permanently cross-referenced in F.B.I. files.
The bureau has admitted no illegalities, but its Director, William S. Sessions, admitted in September that the bureau committed serious errors and allowed the inquiry to become ''unnecessarily broad.''


End of Document