SUMMIT IN EGYPT: THE OVERVIEW;
World Leaders Join in a Condemnation of Terrorism
The New York Times
March 14, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section A;  ; Section A;   Page 1;   Column 6;   Foreign Desk  ; Column 6;  
Length: 1220 words
Byline: By TODD S. PURDUM  

By TODD S. PURDUM  
Dateline: SHARM EL SHEIK, Egypt, March 13
Body


Invoking the solemn shared history of three religions, leaders of 27 nations, including a broad swath of the Arab world, joined today in a sweeping condemnation of the recent suicide bombings in Israel and vowed to cooperate in fighting terrorism and promoting peace throughout the Middle East.
In a hastily organized one-day meeting sponsored by the United States and Egypt at this Red Sea resort, President Clinton and leaders from countries as diverse as Russia, Saudi Arabia, Japan and the Western European powers pledged to work together to prevent terrorist organizations from recruiting members, raising funds or supplying arms on their soil, and to share training and equipment "to cooperate in cutting them off."
"We are at a watershed," Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel said at the meeting, which amounted to a giant show of support for his peacemaking efforts. "Our region is going through a period of transition. The dark days are at an end. The shadows of its past are lengthening. The twilight of wars is still red with blood, yet its sunset is inevitable and imminent."
By almost any measure, it was a landmark event, if largely symbolic, drawing presidents and prime ministers together with sheiks, princes and kings from 14 Arab nations from North Africa to the Persian Gulf, whose mere presence in the same room with an Israeli Prime Minister would been unthinkable not so long ago. Today they raised their linked hands aloft with his.
Indeed, this scuba-diving port at the tip of Sinai was the staging area for Egypt's blockade of the Strait of Tiran before the 1967 war with Israel, yet today bikini-clad sunbathers shared the sand and sidewalks with the parade of dignitiaries.
But there were cracks in the facade of solidarity. Two of the most important countries in the region, Syria and Lebanon, declined invitations altogether. And the Saudi delegate, whose presence and handshake with Mr. Peres was praised by American officials as the most significant appearance of the day, mixed his condemnation of the attacks on Israeli civilians with a sharp warning against over-broad retaliation against Palestinians.
"Collective punishment, closure and every type of violence against innocent people will in turn generate more violence," said the Saudi Foreign Minister, Saud al-Faisal, referring to Israel's sealing of border settlements in the wake of the bombings, which have killed 62 people, including the bombers, since Feb. 25.
Later, Mr. Clinton and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt took pains to say they believed the closings would not be long-lasting, and Mr. Clinton justified the measures as reasonable "at a time when it's hard to tell who may be wrapped in plastique" explosives. The communique the two men issued at day's end said the participants had agreed to continue both economic and political support for the peace effort, "with special attention to the current and pressing economic needs of the Palestinians."
Mr. Clinton expressed disappointment at Syria's absence, but dismissed it as "part of a general pattern of going their own way." He acknowledged that today's meeting was only a first step and insisted, "You can focus on what didn't happen today, but if you do, it will blind you to what has happened, which no one would have conceived of happening even a few months ago."
For his part, Yasir Arafat, the president of the Palestinian Authority, vowed "that we are confronting and will continue to confront terrorism and to uproot it from our land, because our dream of freedom, independence and self-determination cannot bear fruit and be realized amid a sea of blood and tears."
After the meeting, Mr. Arafat told reporters that "the Israelis informed us that there has been a partial lift of the security cordon and we hope that during the next few days there will be a total lift of the blockade."
Senior Clinton Administration officials said the mere fact of the meeting and the diversity of its cast were its principal achievements.
"Israel and many of these Arab countries haven't worked on anything openly and above the table," one American official said.
The gathering also had the effect of bolstering Mr. Peres's sagging political standing as he heads into elections back home at the end of May, and of burnishing Mr. Clinton's foreign policy in the face of his own re-election challenge. Again and again today, Mr. Clinton heard the other leaders praise him as a statesman and peacemaker in the most glowing terms.
Just what practical results the meeting will produce is another question. This afternoon, the White House announced that the State Department's special Middle East envoy, Dennis Ross, would convene the first working session of the group's anti-terrorism efforts in about two weeks in the United States, to discuss the details of cooperation and report back to the participants in 30 days.
Mr. Clinton is to hold more talks with Israeli officials in Jerusalem on Thursday on how the United States can more effectively share intelligence about terrorism with countries throughout the region, and Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, John M. Deutch, are to hold further talks on Friday.
Today's meeting, under a crystalline sky on a seaside plain where the mountains of Sinai plunge down to the sea, mixed high pageantry and symbolism with a carnival air.
Sinai is rich with the region's shared cultural and religious history and most of the leaders made reference to those traditions -- Jewish, Christian and Islamic. Mr. Clinton recalled Moses' receipt of the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai, Mr. Peres cited biblical injunctions against violence and Mr. Arafat declared that Muslim teachings rejected both suicide and murder.
"I'm not going to say it was one big love-in," an American official said of the meeting. "But these kinds of symbols can't be overestimated at this point."
On the way to Egypt, Mr. Clinton shared one potent American symbol of his own with King Hussein of Jordan, giving him an 11-hour ride on Air Force 1. The King, who by coincidence had been visiting the United States and who is a certified jet pilot, compared the Boeing 747 with his own L-1011, allowing that Mr. Clinton's plane had "more power and thrust," said the White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry.
"He was in the cockpit for takeoff, but did not attempt to wrest control from the United States Air Force, which was probably wise on the King's part," Mr. McCurry said.
 |||
|--------------------||

Hamas Defends Bombings
 JERUSALEM, March 13 (By The New York Times) -- Thrown on the defensive by the show of international resolve to fight terrorism at the summit meeting in Egypt, the militant Islamic group Hamas sought to justify its bombingstoday, calling it legitimate resistance to Israeli occupation.
In a memorandum addressed to world leaders gathered at Sharm el Sheik, Hamas asserted that its recent suicide bombings were aimed at soldiers and that civilian casualties were "unintentional," adding that it was prepared to cooperate with efforts to broker a cease-fire.
Hamas argued that United Nations resolutions recognize the right of armed resistance to military occupation.
"The Palestinian people has had no choice but to take up arms to defend itself, combat Israeli terrorism and fight the occupation," it said.

Graphic

 
Photos: During the final speeches of a meeting in Sharm el Sheik, Egypt, yesterday, on fighting terrorism, President Clinton watched as a gust of wind carried off the papers of the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak. (Photographs by Associated Press)(pg. A10); Leaders from 27 nations pledged to work together against terrorism. Joining hands for a group photo were, from left, Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, President Clinton, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, and the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat. (Associated Press)(pg. A1)
 
Map showing location of Sharm el Sheik.

Load-Date: March 14, 1996


End of Document