SUMMIT IN TURKEY;
In Words of Yeltsin and Clinton: Examining Terrorism and Human Rights
The New York Times
November 19, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; ; Text
Length: 1985 words
Byline: AP 
Dateline: ISTANBUL, Nov. 18
Body


Following are excerpts from statements today by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and President Clinton at the conference here of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as recorded by the Federal Document Clearing House, a private company:
 
Remarks by Yeltsin
We have an opportunity together to take stock of the work that we've done together, but even more importantly, to elaborate common approaches to the future of Europe in the 21st century.
Russia is determined to continue businesslike cooperation at this summit. I'm convinced that Russia, as well as the other members of the O.S.C.E., today particularly needs a respectful dialogue, not mutual reproaches or sermonizing. We all have an equal interest in stability and security in the whole of the European area.
The years of the existence of the O.S.C.E., and particularly this last year, have given rise to great hopes, great expectations, but at the same time also considerable disappointments.
Europe has found itself facing new challenges. These challenges are global in nature, and their nature is directly bound up with changes in the international climate and the arduous quest for new models of cooperation, for all European states today face threats such as the disruption of strategic stability, transnational crime and the spread of nuclear weapons. And at last we have all felt for ourselves the harm that can be done by international terrorism.
These challenges can only be successfully met if we act together. We in Russia are prepared for such common endeavors. We are convinced that the stability and security of Europe cannot be considered in isolation from Russia.
You have no right to criticize Russia for Chechnya. As a result of the bloody wave of terrorist acts that have swept over Moscow and other cities and towns of our country, 1,580 peaceful inhabitants of our country have suffered.
The pain of the tragedy has been felt by thousands of families in every corner of Russia. In the last three years, terrorists have kidnapped 935 hostages, and these were not only Russians. They included also Britons, United States nationals, French nationals. About 200 prisoners are still being held by the bandits, and they are suffering atrocious torment at the hands of the bandits, upon which we cannot look with indifference.
For terrorists, considerations of proportionality or humanitarian concerns simply do not arise, because their purpose is to sow death and destruction. We are grateful to those who in these difficult days have shown and continue to show solidarity with us and with what we Russians are suffering. At the same time, we cannot accept recipes such as the so-called objective critics of Russia, those who fail to understand that we are simply obliged to put an end to the spread of cancer of terrorism, to prevent it from metastasizing far beyond north Caucasus, and even spreading beyond the border of the Russian Federation.
Thousands of mercenaries are being trained in camps in the territory of Chechnya, as well as being brought in from abroad, and they are preparing to spread extremist ideas all over the world. We know well from what countries they come and through what countries the terrorists receive their support.
In the very near future, I shall be appealing to the leaders of these states, calling on them to put an end to this activity. International terrorism is a challenge not only to Russia, and it was not born in Russia, and the final destination of the terrorists is certainly not the Caucasus. . . .
Russia is entitled to go on expecting understanding and support from the countries of Europe and from the O.S.C.E. . . .
Not all the ideas that have arisen in the course of the discussion about the future of Europe seem to us to be justified. I'm thinking in particular of the appeals for humanitarian interference -- this is a new idea -- in the internal affairs of another state, even when this is done on the pretext of protecting human rights and freedoms.
We all know already what disproportionate consequences such interference can cause. Suffice it to recall the aggression of NATO, headed by the United States, that was mounted against Yugoslavia. Now on the threshold of a new era, it is more urgently necessary than ever before that our principle commandment for our joint efforts in Europe should be, "Do not harm."
This is why we today propose a different technique, the technique of the patient quest for mutually acceptable affiliations, particularly solutions that would be suitable for the joint resolution of so-called nonstandard situations. That is why we intend strictly to comply with the Charter of the United Nations and international law and, in the first instance, with the 10 principles of the Helsinki Final Act.
It can hardly be denied that, in conditions of a changing world, the significance of those 10 principles is only increasing. . . .
In signing today -- and the Russian delegation will be flying away today -- in today signing the Charter of European Security, we will regard that charter as a kind of code for honest and fair mutual relations throughout the O.S.C.E. area.
It is a code not only of right, but also of mutual responsibility. And it is this that we see as the best guarantee of a safe and happy future for our continent.
We regard that as our common contribution to shaping a multipolar world in the 21st century. And that is a responsibility that Russia is prepared to share with all the nations of Europe.
 
Remarks by Clinton
In country after country, the O.S.C.E.'s ideals of human rights and the rule of law are now ascendant. A quarter-century after Helsinki, the question is not whether democracy will survive, but when it will be embraced in every European country and how it will work in every country.
Clearly, we must adapt the O.S.C.E. to meet new realities. The charter we've negotiated recognizes that the greatest threats to our security today are as likely to come from conflicts that begin within states as between them. The O.S.C.E. has responded to this challenge with courage and distinction, from the Balkans to the Baltics, organizing elections, monitoring human rights, reducing ethnic and religious tensions. We must give the O.S.C.E. the tools to respond even more effectively.
I am pleased the O.S.C.E. is endorsing the react concept, which will enable it to deploy experts in elections, law, media and administration rapidly to nations seeking to prevent or recover from conflict. That way, time and lives won't be lost while we organize from scratch to meet every crisis. . . . Now in addition to making the O.S.C.E. more operational, we have to uphold its principles in hard cases. In that spirit I would like to say a few words about the situation in Chechnya. . . .
I think I speak for everyone here when we say we want Russia to overcome the scourge of terrorism and lawlessness. We believe Russia has not only the right, but also the obligation to defend its territorial integrity. We want to see Russia a stable, prosperous, strong democracy, with secure borders, strong defenses and a leading voice in world affairs.
I have often asked myself, as I hope all of you have, what I would do if I were in President Yeltsin's place. I think before any of us sit in judgment, we should be able to answer that question. Russia has faced rebellion within and related violence beyond the borders of Chechnya. It has responded with a military strategy designed to break the resistance and end the terror. The strategy has led to substantial civilian casualties and very large flows of refugees.
The first thing I would like to say is that most of the critics of Russian policy deplore Chechen violence and terrorism and extremism and support the objectives of Russia to preserve its territorial integrity and to put down the violence and the terrorism. What they fear is that the means Russia has chosen will undermine its ends, that if attacks on civilians continue, the extremism Russia is trying to combat will only intensify, and the sovereignty Russia rightly is defending will be more and more rejected by ordinary Chechens who are not part of the terror or the resistance.
The strength Russia rightly is striving to build, therefore, could be eroded by an endless cycle of violence. The global integration Russia has rightly sought to advance, with our strong support, will be hindered. Russia's friends are united, I believe, in what we think should happen -- appropriate measures to end terrorism, protection of innocent civilians, a commitment to allow refugees to return in safety, access for relief groups and a common effort to rebuild.
In other words, in order to isolate and undermine the terrorists, there must be a political dialogue and a political settlement, not with terrorists, but with those who are willing to seek a peaceful resolution. The O.S.C.E. and others can play a role in facilitating that dialogue. . . .
Finally, let me say I have to respectfully disagree with my friend President Yeltsin in his characterization of U.S.-led NATO aggression in Yugoslavia. Consider Bosnia, where the world community waited four years and we saw 2.5 million refugees and 250,000 deaths placed on the altar of ethnic cleansing.
I honor and praise the courage of the secretary general and the United Nations for acknowledging just a few days ago the grievous error of the U.N. in waiting so long to act and that wait being responsible, in part, for the travesty of Srebrenica.
Consider Kosovo, where the world community did not wait, but there were still thousands of deaths and hundreds of thousands of refugees. But unlike Bosnia, because we acted more quickly, they are almost all home today, coming to grips with the challenge of the coming winter.
So I believe we did the right thing. And I do not believe there will ever be a time in human affairs when we will ever be able to say we simply cannot criticize this or that or the other action because it happened within the territorial borders of a single nation.
President Yeltsin, one of the most thrilling experiences of my life as a citizen of the world, before I became president, was when you stood up on that tank in Moscow when they tried to take the freedom of the Russian people away. And your standing there on that tank said to those people, "You can do this, but you'll have to kill me first."
If they had put you in jail instead of electing you president, I would hope that every leader of every country around this table would have stood up for you and for freedom in Russia and not said, "Well, that is an internal Russian affair that we cannot be a part of."
I don't think we have any choice but to try to work for common objectives across lines. And I certainly associate myself with any efforts that we can make together to fight terrorism within any nation's borders.
Let me just say this in closing. We are here in Turkey, and it is an appropriate place to say this, thinking of Chechnya, thinking of all these issues, thinking of the trouble in the Caucasus and the trouble in the Balkans.
So much of the future of the 21st century will turn on developments in the vast region that lies between traditional notions of Asia and Europe, between the Muslim world and the West, between the parts of our community that are stable and prosperous and democratic and those still struggling to build basic human security and freedom.
The people who live in these crossroads face truly momentous challenges. And we are dealing with some of them today. They are trying to preserve their unique heritage and participate fully in the modern world.
And there is no single simple answer to all their problems. But there is a guidepost -- this O.S.C.E. and its principle that human differences should be resolved democratically, with respect for diversity and the basic rights and freedom of every individual. That was true in 1975. It is even more true today.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 19, 1999


End of Document