Summit's focus shifts to terrorism Economics also on agenda at 7-nation meeting in France
USA TODAY
June 26, 1996, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 860 words
Byline: Susan Page
Body


A presidential trip the White House envisioned as a welcome relief
from controversies over FBI files, Paula Jones' lawsuit and Eleanor
Roosevelt's ghost takes on a more serious tone for President Clinton
in light of Tuesday's truck bombing in Saudi Arabia.
Clinton is set to depart this morning on a five-day trip to France
for the 22nd annual economic summit of the world's major industrialized
democracies in Lyon, meetings with Russian Prime Minister Viktor
Chernomyrdin and an overnight visit to Paris.
The White House had been braced for the trip's intended message
-- that the U.S. has been an economic leader in creating jobs,
controlling inflation and reducing the budget deficit -- to be
overshadowed by continued controversy in Washington. For instance,
Clinton before leaving today is expected to embrace legislation
that would penalize foreign companies that do business with Iran,
Libya and Cuba, a measure that has drawn strong opposition from
U.S. allies.
But anti-terrorism measures, which already were scheduled to be
a summit topic, will now likely become an overarching focus for
the summit, as will Clinton's response to the tragedy in Saudi
Arabia.
The administration had hoped the Sommet de Lyon would highlight
strong U.S. economic performance during Clinton's presidency,
particularly in contrast with summit partners struggling with
slow growth, high unemployment and rising budget deficits.
In Germany, for instance, joblessness has reached post-World War
II highs. In France, an estimated 25,000 workers and retirees
marched on Lyon Tuesday to protest cost-cutting measures that
they say threaten their economic security.
"There are lessons from the U.S. economy," says Laura D'Andrea
Tyson, head of the National Economic Council. One purpose of the
summit "will be to give our explanation about what we think has
worked."
Clinton used the three previous economic summits to take bold
strokes, including pressing contentious auto trade issues with
Japan last year. But now in an election year, the White House
has tried to avoid provoking disputes that could prove troublesome.
The issues to be discussed include:
-- The adoption of a 40-point program to combat international
crime and drug trafficking. The recommendations include a "nowhere
to hide" extradition accord and new procedures to deal with fraudulent
documents and the smuggling of illegal aliens.
-- The debate over U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's
bid for a second term. The United States said last week it would
use its veto if necessary to block him, but French President Jacques
Chirac has emerged as his champion. Boutros-Ghali will attend
some summit sessions at Chirac's invitation.
-- French proposals to have rich countries do more to help poor
countries. One plan, opposed by Germany and Japan, would sell
$ 2 billion in international gold reserves to finance debt relief
for 20 poor countries.
-- A plan to help ensure that elections take place on schedule
this fall in Bosnia.
-- Ways to encourage Russia to continue economic and political
reforms.
Participating at the economic summit are the leaders of the so-called
Group of Seven: Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan
and the United States.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin had been expected to participate
in the summit, which some Western officials saw as an opportunity
to boost him in his runoff election July 3 against Communist Gennady
Zyuganov. But Yeltsin decided last week to stay home and campaign,
dispatching Chernomyrdin instead.
THE SUMMIT'S PLAYERS
President Clinton
The United States
Able to boast of a generally strong U.S. economy, including the
creation of 9.7 million jobs since he took office in 1993.
Ryutaro Hashimoto
Prime minister, Japan
His first G-7 summit. A former trade minister, he must deal with
contentious trade disputes on computer chips, insurance and airline
landing rights.
Romano Prodi
Premier, Italy
An economics professor who took office only last month, the 55th
Italian government in 51 years. Expected to protest U.S. legislation
threatening boycotts on foreign companies that do business with
Iran and Libya and Cuba.
Viktor Chernomyrdin
Prime minister, Russia
While Moscow isn't formally a part of the G-7, Russian leaders
recently have joined in the summit's political discussions. Chernomyrdin
is standing in for President Boris Yeltsin, who decided to stay
home and campaign for the July 3 runoff election.
Helmut Kohl
Chancellor, Germany
The senior summiteer, now attending his 14th. Wants the leaders
to reaffirm their commitment to scheduled elections in Bosnia
this fall.
Jean Chretien
Prime minister, Canada
In relatively strong political shape at home, with elections likely
next year. Opposes U.S. secondary boycotts on foreign companies
that do business with Cuba; supports efforts to liberalize trade.
Jacques Chirac
President, France
The summit host. Urging rich countries to do more to help poor
ones, he invited the heads of the United Nations, the World Bank
and the World Trade Organization to participate.
John Major
Prime minister, Britain
Politically imperiled with a one-vote parliamentary majority and
elections required by May. May propose debt relief for poor nations
and measures to reform financial institutions.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AFP; PHOTOS, B/W, AP (3); PHOTOS, B/W, Reuters (2); PHOTOS, B/W, Pool photo (2); President Clinton Ryutaro Hashimoto Romano Prodi Viktor Chernomyrdin Helmut Kohl Jean Chretien Jacques Chirac John Major

Load-Date: June 26, 1996


End of Document