SUMMIT IN NEW YORK: TERRITORIAL DISPUTES;
India and Pakistan Continue War of Words, Minus Names, Over Kashmir
The New York Times
September 9, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Column 1;
Length: 359 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 8
Body


Two days after Pakistan used the United Nations summit meeting to deliver a blistering attack on India over its occupation of Kashmir, India's prime minister counterattacked today without mentioning the name of his country's bitter enemy.
"Many statesmanlike words have been delivered from this high tribune," Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India said when his turn came to speak today. "Unfortunately, some of them are a mockery of the truth."
"The world must see the reality as it is," he said. "The acid test of sincerity of purpose is not words but deeds. Terrorism and dialogue do not go together."
On Wednesday, Pakistan's military ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, told leaders at the summit meeting (without mentioning India): "The people of Kashmir remain deprived of justice. The consequence of this injustice has been four wars. The region stands heavily militarized, even nuclearized."
"This situation is certainly not of Pakistan's making," General Musharraf continued. "We have been obliged to respond to the compulsions of our society and have merely acted in self-defense."
General Musharraf, who seized power in a coup in October, has been accused by India of supporting Kashmir separatists seeking independence or autonomy for the disputed Himalayan territory. India dismisses them as nothing more than terrorists, a perception that Mr. Vajpayee built upon today.
"Of all threats to democracy, development and peace in our times," the Indian leader said, "the most diabolic is international terrorism, with its links to religious extremism, drug trafficking and commerce in illicit arms. Terrorism feeds on violence against innocent people and seeks to undermine plural, open societies."
Mr. Vajpayee, who was re-elected last year, made his own appeal to world leaders for cooperation. "I call upon the international community to act against terrorism before it is too late," he said.
General Musharraf proposed for the United Nations the kind of role in Kashmir that it played in championing the independence of East Timor from Indonesia. "If the people of East Timor could be given their freedom," he said on Wednesday, "why not Kashmir?"

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 9, 2000


End of Document