SuperTarget vandalism in 2002 has the FBI's attention;
One agent has called it a case of domestic terrorism, but police in Lakeville aren't so quick to agree.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 5, 2005, Tuesday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 930 words
Byline: Mike Kaszuba; Staff Writer
Body


For most, the spray-painting and vandalism that took place at a SuperTarget store construction site in Lakeville three years ago has largely been forgotten.
But the FBI believes that the incident probably represents much more: domestic terrorism aimed at urban sprawl that is not unlike the work of environmental extremists who burned Hummers at a car dealership in California.
In a presentation on homeland security in January, FBI agent Millicent Kirby talked of the incident before a gathering of civil engineers in the Twin Cities area and displayed pictures of a damaged piece of construction equipment with the words "No sprawl" spray-painted across it. She said she looked forward to the day when the evidence would go before a jury.
But what really happened in Lakeville remains a mystery, with no arrests.
"Is it domestic terrorism? I don't know," said Dave Watson, a Lakeville police detective who worked on the case. "My gut feeling [is] it's a high school kid."
In the past 12 years, FBI officials said there have been a dozen violent acts committed in the Twin Cities area by suspected animal-rights and Earth Liberation Front (ELF) activists.
ELF, which according to its website has no official membership, said it does not endorse, encourage or approve of illegal acts committed by individuals claiming to act on the group's behalf.
But in remarks to a U.S. Senate committee in May, deputy assistant FBI director John Lewis said that domestic terrorism acts were "growing in frequency and size."
"ELF's target list has expanded to include sport-utility-vehicle dealerships and new-home developers. We believe these trends will persist, particularly within the environmental movement, as extremists continue to combat what they perceive as 'urban sprawl,'-" he said.
Concluding that vandalism is aimed at urban sprawl, however, can lead to false assumptions.
In Maryland, environmental extremists were among the initial suspects when 35 homes in the upscale Hunters Brooke subdivision near Washington, D.C., were destroyed or damaged in fires in early December. The case instantly made national headlines. However, a security guard angry at his employer for denying him bereavement leave - and envious of wealthy residents moving into Hunters Brooke - pleaded guilty last month to conspiring to set the blazes that caused $10 million in damage.
The Lakeville incident seemed to have a clear anti-sprawl message.
On the morning of Jan. 27, 2002, workers arrived at the partly completed SuperTarget store site to find two forklifts with their fuel lines cut, sand and rocks poured into at least one gas tank and the windows smashed on several pieces of machinery, including the cab of a crane. The words "No more sprawl" were painted on the side of a wall, and the phrase "Go develop in hell" was written across the side of a construction trailer.
Police reports listed the damage at roughly $125,000.
Plaster casts were taken of two sets of footprints found at the scene, which indicated that the vandals had parked their car on a nearby dead-end street. A spokesman for Target said the company had not received any threats regarding the project.
There was some initial suspicion that the vandalism may have been tied to nearby residents who had protested the decision to place a SuperTarget so close to their neighborhood.
One resident, Jean Marie Baudhuin, was even interviewed by police.
"It was kind of after 9/11. All of a sudden, you're hearing 'domestic terrorism' - those are heavy words," she said. "No one I knew was interested in doing anything physical," she said of the neighborhood opponents.
Police said they also tried to determine whether the SuperTarget vandalism was tied to a fire set earlier the same month at the University of Minnesota's Microbial and Plant Genomic Research Center in St. Paul. And nine months earlier, ELF claimed responsibility for trying to set fire to a Nike store at an outlet mall in Albertville, Minn.
Steve Bakke, the owner of Northland Concrete, visited the SuperTarget site to inspect the damage to his company's equipment. "It was just a mess," he said, remembering the incident. "I think it was a bunch of tree-huggers that didn't want anything going in there."
Bakke said he doubted that the vandalism, which was the worst his company had seen, was the work of juveniles. "They typically steal stuff," he said. "They wouldn't go through and put dirt in gas tanks."
Kirby, the FBI agent who outlined the case to civil engineers in Brooklyn Center, declined to comment.
FBI spokesman Paul McCabe said similar cases have occurred across the country. "There's been a number of them," he said. "Some of the sabotage and terrorism - and that's what it is - that has been conducted has been quite extensive."
Wendy Danks of the Builders Association of the Twin Cities said there has been little evidence of vandalism aimed at urban sprawl locally, even though "we've got a fairly liberal mind-set around here, you might say."
'Pretty skeptical'
After the Maryland arson in December, she said, association officials talked about the potential of anti-sprawl vandalism occurring in the Twin Cities area.
However, "I'm pretty skeptical that we've seen any true ecoterrorists in this" area, she added.
Watson, the Lakeville police investigator, said police tracked one suspected animal-rights activist who had lived in Lakeville, but never made an arrest. Police were also stymied, he said, because no environmental extremist group ever took responsibility for the vandalism. "The case," he said, "is cold."
Mike Kaszuba is at mkaszuba@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: July 6, 2005


End of Document