Support holds firm for Great Britain
USA TODAY
July 22, 2005, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; Letters
Length: 406 words
Body

United we stand with our British allies ("Blasts hit London trains, bus," USA TODAY.com, Thursday).
The resolve of the British and American people is once again united in one spirit: the defeat of cowardly terrorism.  Rick Schreiner
San Marino, Calif.
Wake up, America
Thursday's acts of violence in London should wake up every person in this country to the fact that terrorism is alive and well.
Even in London's high state of alert, bad guys got through -- again.
During this time of war, why is it that liberals will publicly support our troops who are in harm's way, but will also put civil liberties above enforcing immigration laws? As thousands of illegal immigrants continue to cross our borders daily, the next act of terrorism is already in the planning stages.
What is it going to take for America to wake up and realize that we, the freedom keepers of this world, are the real target?
It is because of civil liberties that terrorism goes unchecked.
D. Barton
Daytona Beach, Fla.
Religion's toll
It is wrong to believe that Muslims attack countries with a democratic system because they are jealous of our freedoms.
When people are fundamentally religious, there is only one way to perceive how life should be lived. That is their way, according to how they interpret their holy books.
What many of us perceive as freedom, certain Muslims and Christians perceive as evil.
When radical Christians kill doctors who perform abortions, they believe they are working on behalf of the higher power to rid the earth of evil. When radical Muslims fight countries with a democratic system, they believe they are doing likewise.
If some Christians of today had the power to run the government, there would be the same chaos and mindset that the religious leaders of these Muslim countries impose on the people they govern. When people of any religion believe their way to the glorious kingdom is the only way, those of us who do not fit this imagined moral code will, as history proves, find ourselves in great peril.
June VanDerMark
McBride, British Columbia
Canada
Get to root of problems
The four London bombers on July 7 were all suicide bombers. Our knee-jerk reaction is to increase security on our public transit ("Cities look for ways to secure rails," News, Wednesday).
I doubt there is one American police officer who would try to stop a suicide bomber.
The best response is to fix the problem that causes suicide bombers.
Bob Munson
Newbury Park, Calif.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Sang Tan, AP

Load-Date: July 22, 2005


End of Document