Support on terror risk welcome
Business Insurance
July 31, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8
Length: 311 words
Body


GETTING MEMBERS of the House Homeland Security Committee to join their counterparts on the House Financial Services Committee in a rare joint hearing on terrorism insurance is a welcome development indeed.
As we report on page 3, the members of two subcommittees of the two committees heard witnesses describe the problems associated with underwriting the terrorism peril, and how those problems might multiply if the federal terrorism insurance backstop is allowed to expire as scheduled on Dec. 31, 2007.
Now, there is nothing new about the topics the witnesses discussed. Risk managers, insurers and others have repeatedly presented the case for a federal backstop to prevent massive market dislocations in the event of another catastrophic terrorist attack. What was new was the fact that last week they had an opportunity to present that case not only to lawmakers who deal with insurance but to those who deal with national security well.
And that's how it should be. Despite the repeated cries of some critics that the federal backstop is somehow nothing more than a ``bailout'' of insurers, the issue isn't one of insurer solvency but rather one of economic security. Economic security cannot be divorced from national security. Terrorists don't attack to bankrupt the insurance industry; they attack to do as much damage to the economy as whole that they can.
Adding lawmakers who deal with homeland security to the debate over how best to meet the challenges associated with terrorism insurance recognizes the national security aspect of the issue. We realize that nothing is likely to happen in the current Congress regarding extension of the federal backstop. But the more lawmakers who understand the issue the better, as we prepare for the next debate over the federal government's role in guaranteeing insurance coverage for an event we hope will never occur.

Load-Date: August 2, 2006


End of Document