Supporting a habit of terrorism
University Wire
May 2, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Washington Square News via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 787 words
Byline: By Marissa Moss, Washington Square News
Dateline: New York
Body


I killed mothers, I killed fathers, I killed sisters, I killed brothers. According to the Office of National Drug Control, if any you have ever done a drug, you're a murderer too. Actually, you just "kinda helped." Monday night on ABC, an ad aired featuring a young boy, staring straight ahead and mouthing off this obscene list of "I killed so and so"s, or at least, as he says at the end, he just "kinda helped." The message that flashes at the end of the commercial reads: Drug money supports terrorism, if you buy drugs, you might too. Hurry kids, flush your marijuana down the john, you're funding al Qaeda!
I thought it was over with the Superbowl ads: these terrible masturbatory manipulations of the public on behalf of Sir Government, to try to kill two birds with one stone (or more appropriately, one stoner). How can we forget the commercial that at first appeared to be for MasterCard, starting with the "Fake ID, 3,000 dollars" that you think is going to end with a kid sitting on his parents lap saying, "Love, priceless," but actually finishes with a bombing and the same sweeping generalization linking drugs with terrorism. And due to the timing of the ad, intentionally linking the Sept. 11 attacks to drugs. Superbowl ad: 3.5 million taxpayer dollars. Government manipulation of the facts: priceless.
New York U.
There couldn't be more things wrong with these ads. Not only are they incorrect, pulling the wool over the eyes of the American youth, they are also using a tender situation, such as the recent terrorist attacks, to add fuel to their own age-old agendas. Politics, not purpose, once again. The Office of National Drug Control, on its Web site, claims that using drugs (they refer to "drugs" all-inclusively, no reference to a specific drug is made) supports terrorist groups like al Qaeda. If not, they are at least involved in a "mutually beneficial relationship by money, tactics, geography and politics. Most importantly, they share a common disregard for human life."
OK, I get it. So even if there is no concrete evidence, doing drugs supports terrorism because terrorists and drug smugglers are alike. Fine, if we're linking people by a common disregard for human life, then our military is full of "terrorists" too. If we're linking groups by money tactics, then we must make the link between al Qaeda and al Enron, no?
The fact is that yes, Osama bin Laden seems to get some money from opium distribution. But not nearly as much money as he garnered from his huge inheritance. And the commercials say "drugs," not "opium." Osama bin Laden is not growing marijuana in Tora Bora, so the chances that your pot-smoking habit funded the hijackings is slim to none -- no, just none. Ditto for cocaine, ecstasy, PCP, LSD, mushrooms, any other sort of hallucinogenic and many others. If these commercials wanted to maintain any integrity, they should have focused solely on heroin, which is derived from opium, instead of all "drugs." Even then, what is the point of trying to guilt people out of a heroin addiction?
If this issue of terrorism and drugs were such a pressing problem and these ads aren't just manipulation, then why weren't we seeing these commercials pre-Sept. 11? The government is feeding us these ads, tapping into rage and sorrow, in the same way street venders do selling $ 20 post cards of the World Trade Centers surrounded by a pink heart. Some genius down in D.C. conceived this grand scheme to trick the American public into thinking drugs equal terrorism, and thus are bad, not through education or after-school programs, but though sad manipulation and dishonesty.
I've got an idea for an ad. How about one that shows some guy filling up his SUV at a gas station in a flannel shirt, saying that he's killed people by funding terrorists, yada, yada, yada; and if you use gas made from petroleum, you're funding terrorists too. There's more evidence that our obscene connection with oil has a closer link to terrorism than John Doe smoking a joint after work. But we do not see these ads. How about an ad asserting the link between McDonald's hamburgers and terrorism? Petroleum does run the beef factories. I could go on and on. The point is to illustrate how ridiculous this all is, let alone false.
I miss the "this is your brain on drugs" commercials. What I would do for a frying egg.
"Kinda helping" terrorists: the cost of a dime bag, according the Office of National Drug Control. Proving that we know better: the time it takes to turn off your television during these ludicrous ads. The Government actually putting money towards education and not propagandist commercials: absolutely priceless.
(C) 2002 Washington Square News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: May 2, 2002


End of Document