Supreme court nixes suit against Ashcroft
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
June 1, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 365 words
Byline: The Washington Post
Body


WASHINGTON -- Former Attorney General John Ashcroft cannot be sued for his role in detaining an American Muslim, even though the government did not charge the man with a crime or bring him as a witness in a terrorism investigation, the Supreme Court ruled Tuesday. 
Justice Antonin Scalia said using the federal "material witness" statute to detain Abdullah al-Kidd as a "material witness" in a terrorism investigation does not give al-Kidd a right to sue, because no court precedent had said such a use of the law was unlawful. 
"Qualified immunity gives government officials breathing room to make reasonable but mistaken judgments about open legal questions," Scalia wrote. "When properly applied, it protects all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law. 
"Ashcroft deserves neither label." 
All eight justices hearing the case agreed that al-Kidd's suit against Ashcroft could not go forward; Justice Elena Kagan sat out the case because she had worked on Ashcroft's behalf as President Obama's solicitor general. But there was disagreement about the government's action in the case and the treatment Kidd suffered in 16 days of detainment. 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, in a separate opinion joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor, said al-Kidd's ordeal "is a grim reminder of the need to install safeguards against disrespect for human dignity, constraints that will control officialdom even in perilous times." 
Al-Kidd is a onetime University of Idaho football star, born Lavoni T. Kidd. He converted to Islam in college. He was arrested at Dulles International Airport in 2003 as he was boarding a plane for Saudi Arabia, where he planned to study. 
The government persuaded a federal judge to issue a warrant for al-Kidd's arrest by saying he was necessary to the investigation of Sami Omar al-Hussayen, who eventually was indicted on charges of supporting terrorism. Al-Kidd was never called to testify against Hussayen, who was acquitted of the most serious charges against him. 
Al-Kidd maintains that in his more than two weeks of detention, he was strip-searched, shackled, interrogated without an attorney present and treated as a terrorist. 

Load-Date: June 1, 2011


End of Document