Supreme Court upholds anti-terror law
The Salt Lake Tribune
June 21, 2010 Monday


Copyright 2010 The Salt Lake Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; National; World; Local
Length: 565 words
Byline: By Joan Biskupic Usa Today
Body


Washington » The Supreme Court upheld a federal law Monday that makes it a crime to provide "material support" to designated foreign terrorist groups, even when that support involves training and advice on humanitarian activities.
"Everyone agrees that the government's interest in combating terrorism is an urgent objective of the highest order," Chief Justice John Roberts wrote for the majority in the closely watched case.
Roberts stressed that even aid from charitable groups that promotes peaceful conduct can further terrorism.
"Such support frees up other resources within the organization that may be put to violent ends," Roberts wrote.
The majority's rejection of a First Amendment challenge to the disputed 1996 law drew a vigorous objection from dissenters led by Justice Stephen Breyer, who took the rare and dramatic step of reading some of his statement from the bench Monday.
He noted that the Los Angeles-based Humanitarian Law Project, which challenged the law, had wanted to assist the Kurdistan Workers' Party, a militant separatist group in Turkey, in petitioning the United Nations for relief and peacefully resolving disputes.
Breyer said the activities at issue involved political advocacy generally covered by the First Amendment's protection for free speech and association.
"The government has not made the strong showing necessary to justify under the First Amendment the criminal prosecution of those who engage in these activities," Breyer wrote in the dissent signed by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor.
The disputed law subjects anyone who provides "service," "training" or "expert assistance" to designated groups to 15 years in prison.
Joining Roberts in the majority were Justices John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas, and Samuel Alito.
Stevens, a liberal who is also the only remaining World War II veteran on the bench, did not write separately.
Chief Justice Roberts emphasized in his own remarks from the bench that the court was deferring to findings of Congress and the executive branch about the dangers of any help to a designated foreign terrorism group.
"The State Department informs us that the experience and analysis of the U.S. government agencies charged with combating terrorism strongly support Congress's finding that all contributions to foreign terrorist organizations further their terrorism," Roberts wrote.
From the bench and in his opinion, Roberts took lengths to respond to the dissenting justices' views. "The dissent fails to address the real dangers at stake," Roberts wrote. "It instead considers only the possible benefits of (challengers') proposed activities in the abstract. The dissent seems unwilling to entertain the prospect that training and advising a designated foreign terrorists organization on how to take advantage of international entities might benefit that organization in a way that facilitates its terrorists activities."
The U.S. secretary of state has long designated the Kurdistan Workers' Party, known as the PKK, a "foreign terrorist organization," and that label was not in dispute in the case.
Monday's high court decision reversed a ruling by the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, which had ruled that most of the disputed terms of the material-support law were unconstitutionally vague and violated free-speech rights. Alt Heads:
Supreme Court upholds anti-terror law

Load-Date: June 21, 2010


End of Document