Surprising ally in Afghanistan - France
 Philadelphia Daily News
August 29, 2005 Monday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 22
Length: 370 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates
Body


As the going gets tougher for the U.S. military in Afghanistan and elsewhere in the region, one ally has stepped up despite a recent straining of ties: France.
Paris has significantly boosted its military presence in Central Asia and Afghanistan, plus in nearby seas, as both it and Washington nurture their budding rapprochement after a bitter falling out over the Iraq war.
French fighters have been flying sorties under U.S. command in Afghanistan since Aug. 16, and France also took command this month of an international naval task force on terrorism-related patrols in the seas between the Horn of Africa and Pakistan.
France has kept about 900 troops in Afghanistan since 2003, including 200 Special Forces soldiers fighting alongside the Americans. Its air force periodically has joined the U.S.-led coalition since taking its biggest role in the war's opening weeks in 2002, when France had 5,500 troops in the region.
"It's France's wish to show that we are cooperating in the fight against terror and in support of you in Afghanistan," said French Air Force Col. Gilles Michel, who oversees his country's air-force role in the theater. "We told the Americans, 'If you need some assets, we will provide them.' "
A French Defense Ministry official, speaking on condition of anonymity in line with French custom, said Paris was determined to keep battling terrorism in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks and was increasing its military cooperation in Afghanistan to support next month's landmark legislative elections.
"We had a very clear position when it comes to Iraq," the Paris-based official said. "That has nothing to do with our fight against terrorism, with France working with our American colleagues" on the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force.
Since earlier this month, French Mirage-2000 fighters have been flying alongside U.S. Air Force A-10 Warthogs to assist American and Afghan ground troops near Kabul, Ghazni, Delaram and Qalat, said Capt. David Small, spokesman for U.S. Central Command Air Forces in Qatar.
Mirage F1-CR fighters also are handling reconnaissance missions, shooting intelligence video and imagery for targeting purposes, while French cargo planes supply bases in the theater.

Load-Date: August 29, 2005


End of Document