Surveillance, in a Search for Safety
The New York Times
June 20, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26; LETTERS
Length: 741 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Living With the Surveillance State,'' by Bill Keller (column, June 17), and ''Blowing the Whistle,'' by Thomas L. Friedman (column, June 12):
There is no such thing as perfect safety. Attempting to achieve it by the wholesale surrender of liberty is as discreditable to the American people as it will be ineffectual -- freezing creativity and strengthening our enemies by demonstrating a hypocritical distrust of our own ideals.
For your columnists to urge giving the majority what it wants lest it want even worse is to forget the whole purpose of the Bill of Rights: to protect enduring values from transient majoritarian passions.
Mr. Keller and Mr. Friedman should be rallying the public against fear. They should not be encouraging the belief that panicky overkill is a sound strategy.
Nor should they be promoting the delusion that any dangers may be averted by safeguards administered by public officials whose every incentive is to subvert them.
ERIC M. FREEDMAN Hempstead, N.Y., June 17, 2013
The writer is a professor of constitutional law at Hofstra University.
To the Editor:
In his June 17 column, ''Living with the Surveillance State,'' Bill Keller agrees with Thomas L. Friedman's point that the gravest threat to our civil liberties is another attack on the scale of 9/11 that could leave a panicked public willing to ratchet up the security state.
What is so different about America's willingness and ability to deal with the modern realities of terrorism from, say, that of Britain or Israel? Far more Americans are killed in gun violence each year or in highway accidents, not to mention smoking-related deaths or the deaths of our troops in Afghanistan. American deaths caused by terrorism are but a small fraction of those from these more common tragedies. Yet the media coverage furthers our fear of terrorism.
There is a scene in an episode of ''The Sopranos'' in which Svetlana, a Russian, tells Tony that everywhere else in the world people believe that bad things will happen -- except in America, where we all believe that only good things will happen.
I would add that when disappointed, we overreact, whether it's the swelling up of our security apparatus, forming the bloated Homeland Security bureaucracy or going to war in two countries. Our politicians don't help, either; usually they are more than willing to exploit these fears.
Safety and security are not our birthright. They were never guaranteed in the Constitution, unlike our liberties, which too many of us are willing to barter away.
EUGENE COSLOY Kittery Point, Me., June 17, 2013
To the Editor:
Bill Keller has summarized the prevailing view of the inevitable rise of government surveillance in our lives. The question of monitoring those who monitor us is a difficult one, largely because it involves more government. I have nothing against government in principle, but with the rising complexity, dysfunction and rabid partisanship in all three branches, I find it hard to trust the government to protect us from itself.
I am increasingly thinking that we need a fourth branch of government, a citizens' assembly of some sort, to oversee our government between elections and to keep our officials honest. Monitoring surveillance programs would be a proper task for such an assembly -- as would setting Congressional rules of procedure and Congressional compensation.
RON L. MEYERS New York, June 17, 2013
To the Editor:
Bill Keller's column repeats the deeply depressing and defeatist argument made recently by Thomas L. Friedman: another significant terrorist attack would inevitably produce a further slide into repressive ''war-on-terror excesses,'' and thus the policies of the moment are, unfortunately, justified.
But the war on terror is not a winnable war (how can we win a war waged against a noun?). It is eternal, and the policies pursued in its name have been a disaster. Can we not hope to learn from our mistakes?
The jihadists who are intent on doing us harm cannot defeat us militarily, economically or culturally -- but they can eradicate the idea of America as a freedom-loving, peaceable nation, a bastion of liberty unlike any other. We become a different, authoritarian, security-obsessed state, and we hand them a victory they cannot otherwise achieve.
I am 79 and trust I won't live to witness the ''surveillance state'' that Mr. Keller and Mr. Friedman seem to believe is very nearly inevitable.
PETER MATSON New York, June 17, 2013

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/20/opinion/surveillance-in-a-search-for-safety.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY PETER BURR)       

Load-Date: June 20, 2013


End of Document