Suspect charged in Hanukkah stabbing Stabbing: Suspect pleaded not guilty to 5 counts of attempted murder
Chicago Daily Herald
December 30, 2019 Monday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 829 words
Byline: By Ryan Tarinelli, Michael R. Sisak and Michael Balsamo Associated Press
Body


MONSEY, N.Y. — A knife-wielding man stormed into a rabbi's home and stabbed five people as they celebrated Hanukkah in an Orthodox Jewish community north of New York City, an ambush the governor said Sunday was an act of domestic terrorism fueled by intolerance and a "cancer" of growing hatred in America. Police tracked a fleeing suspect to Manhattan and made an arrest within two hours of the attack Saturday night in Monsey. Grafton E. Thomas had blood all over his clothing and smelled of bleach but said "almost nothing" when officers stopped him, officials said. An automated license plate reader alerted officers that the suspect's car had crossed over the George Washington Bridge into New York City about an hour after the attack. 
The suspect was stopped and taken into custody about 20-30 minutes later, NYPD Commissioner Dermot Shea said. Security camera footage the NYPD made public Sunday night showed two officers approaching the suspect's sedan with guns drawn before he placed his hands on the roof of the car and he was put in handcuffs. President Donald Trump condemned the "horrific" attack, saying in a tweet Sunday: "We must all come together to fight, confront, and eradicate the evil scourge of anti-Semitism." One witness described the attack as a chaotic scene punctuated with panic and screams. The 37-year-old suspect was arraigned Sunday and pleaded not guilty to five counts of attempted murder and one count of burglary. Bail was set at $5 million and he remains jailed. He didn't answer questions as authorities escorted him to a waiting vehicle. A lawyer representing the suspect at the arraignment said he had no convictions. The Greenwood Lake street where the suspect lived with his mother, about 20 miles from Monsey, was blocked with police tape Sunday as FBI agents and police officers carried items from their home. The FBI is seeking a warrant to obtain his online accounts and were scouring digital evidence, the official said. They are also looking into his mental health history. The family's pastor, the Rev. Wendy Paige, said the suspect has been suffering from mental illness and that his family believes that condition was the cause of the alleged stabbings — not hatred toward Jewish people. She said his family is sorry for the pain he has caused. The stabbings on the seventh night of Hanukkah left one person critically wounded, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said. The rabbi's son was also injured, he said. Authorities have not provided a motive and Shea said investigators do not believe, at this point, that any other people were involved. The attack was the latest in a string of violence targeting Jews in the region, including a Dec. 10 massacre at a kosher grocery store in New Jersey. Last month in Monsey, a man was stabbed while walking to a synagogue. Cuomo said Saturday's savagery was the 13th anti-Semitic attack in New York since Dec. 8 and endemic of "an American cancer on the body politic." "This is violence spurred by hate, it is mass violence and I consider this an act of domestic terrorism," Cuomo said. "Let's call it what it is." Ramapo Police Chief Brad Weidel said it was unclear why the rabbi's house was targeted or if a specific ideology motivated the suspect. According to the official briefed on the investigation, authorities do not believe the suspect is connected to recent anti-Semitic incidents in New York City. Sen. Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, called on the FBI to investigate possible links between the Monsey stabbing spree and other recent attacks. The Simon Wiesenthal Center said it wants the FBI to create a special task force. "Enough talk, it is time for action to deter those who propagate this hatred," Israeli U.N. Ambassador Danny Danon said. The stabbings happened around 10 p.m. Saturday at the home of Rabbi Chaim Rottenberg, located next door to his Congregation Netzach Yisroel synagogue. The large house on Forshay Road remained cordoned off with yellow crime-scene tape early Sunday. By evening, the tape was gone and a fully lit menorah shone from a window. "The guy came in wielding a big knife, sword, machete — I don't know what it was," said Josef Gluck, who hit the assailant with a coffee table during the attack. "He took it out of his holder, started swinging," Gluck said. The dining room, he said, emptied in split seconds. While inside the home, the assailant didn't say a word as he carried out the attack, he said. Rabbi Motti Seligson, the media director of the Chabad Lubavitch movement, said witnesses told him that people fled the house and went to the synagogue where they locked themselves in. Rottenberg led the service at the synagogue later, Seligson said. Weidel said a witness saw the suspect fleeing in a car and alerted police to the license plate number. Police entered that information into a database and used plate reader technology to track the vehicle to Manhattan, where Thomas was arrested. "It was critical to the case," Weidel said.

Notes

Eds: UPDATES: With AP Photos.; AP Video.; Updates with police commissioner saying suspect was tracked with license plate reader, NYC mayor announcing new initiatives to combat hate crimes. Updates byline. Eds: UPDATES: With menorah lit in window of home. With AP Photo. AP Video.

Load-Date: December 30, 2019


End of Document