Suspicion cast at Mideast
USA TODAY
August 10, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 836 words
Byline: Lee Michael Katz
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- Though Friday's bombings at two U.S. embassies left
their trail of death and destruction in Africa, Middle Eastern
terrorists are the most likely suspects, U.S. and Israeli analysts
said.
U.S. officials cautioned that no suspects are being ruled in or
out in their investigation, but they also said Africa may have
offered two "soft targets" for Mideastern terrorists who wanted
to strike at the United States.
The most recent threats to U.S. targets overseas, along with a
shadowy claim of responsibility for the bombings, come from Middle
Eastern sources with a grudge against the United States. And the
blasts' characteristics, from the vehicle bombs used to the size
and sophistication of the attacks, suggest a Mideastern flavor.
Robert Oakley , a former State Department counterterrorism official,
cautions that though early signs point to a Middle Eastern connection,
Mideast terrorists also were first thought to be behind the bombing
of an Oklahoma City federal building in 1995. "It turned out
be one home-grown, demented individual."
Israel, which has much experience with the bloody aftermath of
terrorist bombings, was the first to suggest the bombings were
linked to Middle Eastern terrorists.
"Based on its intelligence estimates, the government of Israel
believes it is a fanatic Islamist group," David Bar-Illan, spokesman
for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, said Sunday. Of course,
Israel can gain politically by blaming Mideast terrorists.
But U.S. officials who would not speak publicly, and experts who
would, also said that Mideast terrorists were the most likely
involved.
"I'd bet my dog on it," said Frank Johns, managing director
of Pinkerton Global Intelligence Services.
Osama bin Laden, a Saudi Arabian exile who has issued recent threats
against the United States, is a prime suspect. He has threatened
a "holy war" against the United States. Egypt's Islamic Jihad
group, which has ties to bin Laden, warned of an attack against
the United States a day before the bombing. And an unknown group
called the Islamic Army For the Liberation of Muslim Holy Sites
claimed responsibility for the blasts in calls to Mideastern news
organizations.
Other suspects include Middle Eastern terrorist groups such as
Hezbollah and such nations as Iraq, Iran, Libya and Sudan.
Sudan, a northern neighbor of Kenya, has served a training ground
for Middle Eastern terrorists and other terrorist organizations
around the world. But Sudan generally has been considered more
of a host for terrorists than an active sponsor. Sub-Saharan Africa
has not seen the types of bombings that rock the Middle East.
Last year, 105 people died in international terrorist incidents
in the Middle East, compared with only 12 in Africa. Oakley said
Sudan "may have had a hand" in the bombing, but a pure African
connection is less likely.
"So far as the State Department and others know, there isn't
an indigenous group in Africa that is this well-organized and
has the motivation," Oakley said.
The leading Mideast suspects and the reasons they might have targeted
U.S. embassies include:
-- Bin Laden, who has threatened the United States from exile.
He is a multimillionaire living in Afghanistan. He is said to
have a $ 300 million-$ 500 million fortune from his family's construction
business. Bin Laden "is one of the most significant sponsors
of Sunni Islamic terrorism groups," a State Department report
said this year.
Bin Laden wants U.S. forces out of the Mideast. He is suspected
to have been involved in the bombing of U.S. Air Force barracks
in Saudi Arabia in 1996. In June, he told ABC News he wanted to
"send the bodies of U.S. troops and civilians home in wooden
boxes and coffins."
This caused the State Department to issue a warning about bin
Laden's threats. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said Sunday
on NBC's Meet the Press that bin Laden has "been involved
in sponsoring terrorism" but wouldn't reveal details of the investigation.
-- Egypt's Islamic Jihad, which issued a threat a day before
the bombing. The group said that it would retaliate for U.S. help
in extraditing Islamic militants from Albania to Egypt.
Martin Kramer, an Israeli terrorism expert, said the Jihad group
could be seeking revenge.
"This may be a manifestation of their desire to say to the United
States, 'Look, you want to pursue us around the globe, we can
pursue you, too,' " Kramer said.
The Egyptian group has ties to bin Laden.
-- The unknown "Islamic Army," which has made claims of responsibility
for the bombings to news outlets in Egypt and Dubai. That could
be any one of a number of Middle Eastern terrorist groups who
have created a new name, Kramer said.
Bin Laden reportedly called a number of terrorist groups together
in June to organize an umbrella effort to strike U.S. interests.
-- Any one of a group of nations that the State Department has
cited as sponsors of terrorism. Rep. Jim Saxton, R-N.J., said
that he believes "state-sponsored terrorism" is behind the bombing.
Terrorism sponsors include Iraq's Saddam Hussein, hard-liners
in Iran and Libya's Moammar Gadhafi.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, AP

Load-Date: August 10, 1998


End of Document