Suspects seem unlikely terrorists; Neighbors shocked that 4 face charges in plotting attack.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 18, 2016 Sunday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A7
Length: 752 words
Byline: Adam Nossiter ?2016 The New York Times
Body


Passengers wait at a bus stop Tuesday in the Meinau neighborhood of Strasbourg, France. The recent arrests of four men on terror charges from the area and their seemingly normal appearance has had a thoroughly unsettling effect on authorities and residents alike.
STRASBOURG, FRANCE -
One was a well-liked elementary school assistant. Another was a hardworking cargo handler. The third was a friendly grocer. They were longtime friends in their quiet suburban neighborhood, and they joked with teenagers and greeted children with a smile.
Yet in the early hours of Nov. 20 agents from France's internal security agency swooped down, plucking the three and one other from their apartments, charging them with plotting a terrorist attack, and locking them up in a prison outside Paris.
Here was a new type of terrorism arrest: decently paid men in their 30s giving no warning signs of radicalization - no beards, no robes, no proselytizing.
And unlike many troubled youths in Paris and Brussels who have latched onto the Islamic State, they did not live on the margins. They had stable jobs and no previous brushes with drugs or crime.
It is their sheer normalcy that has had a thoroughly unsettling effect on authorities and residents alike.
"Nobody saw anything," said Olivier Bitz, Strasbourg's deputy mayor in charge of counter-radicalization. "And that is profoundly disconcerting. It is profoundly destabilizing for society. Now, the threat can come from anywhere."
"It calls for heightened vigilance," Bitz added. "These are not people who are outside French society."
In the days that followed the arrests, French authorities congratulated themselves on pre-empting what they called a "deadly" plot. The men were set to "go into action imminently," Fran&c- cedil;ois Molins, France's chief terrorism prosecutor, said in Paris soon after the arrests.
"The Strasbourg cell had instructions to get weapons, given by a commander in the Iraq-Syria zone," Molins said, adding that weapons and pledges of allegiance to the Islamic State were found in searches.
Authorities would not release the men's full names. But Molins said that at least two, the cargo handler and the school employee, apparently tried to get to Syria, making it as far as Turkey.
Molins, counterterrorism's public face in France, blasted the French media for revealing that undercover agents had been used in the eight-month investigation. Otherwise, he insisted that the arrests had forestalled "an action envisaged by the Strasbourg group for the first of December."
Another man connected to the Strasbourg cell has been arrested, authorities said, bringing the total to seven, including one in Marseille and one in Morocco. Potential targets, according to authorities: police headquarters in the heart of Paris, the Christmas market on the Champs-Élysées, and cafes in the city's 20th Arrondissement.
The arrests may offer only a temporary respite. French authorities say they have uncovered 17 plots since the beginning of the year, and made 43 terrorism arrests in November alone.
It was the second time in two years that the immigrant neighborhoods of Neuhof and Meinau, adjoining each other and cut off by busy highways from the jewel-like half-timbered old city of Strasbourg, have yielded major terrorism arrests.
These districts of subsidized pastel-colored, low-rise housing are tidy and well maintained, not places of obvious deprivation. But they feel a world away from the prosperous shops of bustling downtownStrasbourg,which is also the seat of the European Parliament. Among the second- and third-generation immigrant population, youth unemployment reaches 50 percent.
In June, seven of Strasbourg's young men from the Meinau neighborhood, who had been arrested in 2014, were tried and convicted on terrorism charges in a Paris court.
But this time the terrorism suspects were different.
They were not 20-something young Muslims adrift in marginal jobs or unemployed. They did not turn up in the French government's notorious "S Files," where thousands are listed as potential threats, including some who are subsequently arrested.
But it is precisely the inconspicuous profiles of the latest group that have made the men seem all the more menacing. They did not stand out in quiet neighborhoods where the full beards and veils are unusual.
Thegrocersoldliquorfrom his store. If officials have correctly identified them as terrorists-in-the-making, these men would perfectly fit the Islamic State's injunctions of concealment and dissimulation.

Load-Date: December 18, 2016


End of Document