Suspect Denies Role in Kennedy Airport Plot
The New York Times
July 21, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 613 words
Byline: By COLIN MOYNIHAN
Body


A former government official of Guyana testified on Tuesday that he was not involved in a chilling terrorism scheme aimed at New York City, saying that he had feigned interest in the plan because he hoped its architects would help him raise money to build a mosque.
The former official, Abdul Kadir, is one of four men indicted in a plot to try to blow up fuel tanks at John F. Kennedy International Airport. Prosecutors have said that the men, who were exposed with the help of a convicted drug trafficker turned informant, were out to cause a catastrophe that would dwarf the destruction of the World Trade Center. Some law enforcement officials, however, have questioned if the men had the ability to do substantial damage.
By nearly any reckoning, the four accused men were an unusual group. They included Russell Defreitas, a former baggage handler at the airport, and Mr. Kadir, an engineer who had been mayor of Guyana's second largest city, Linden, and later held a seat in the Guyanese Parliament. Both men are on trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, each facing five counts of conspiring to commit an act of terrorism.
Another defendant, known as Abdel Nur, pleaded guilty in June to a count of providing material support for terrorism. The fourth accused man, Kareem Ibrahim, was granted a separate trial.
Mr. Defreitas has not testified. But Mr. Kadir took the stand on Tuesday and wasted little time in declaring his innocence.
Just after being sworn in before Judge Dora L. Irizzary, Mr. Kadir listened as his lawyer, Kafahni Nkrumah, asked if he had agreed to ''commit a crime in the United States, specifically attacking gas tanks at J.F.K. International Airport?''
''No, sir,'' Mr. Kadir responded tersely.
He was more expansive in detailing his personal history, describing his schooling and his years as a Guyanese technocrat. He testified that he had seven children, two stepchildren and 24 grandchildren. He described himself as a devout Shia Muslim who had converted from Catholicism and who yearned to build a mosque near his home in Linden, Guyana, where he served a term as mayor.
The prosaic description was challenged by prosecutors, who entered into evidence photographs taken in Guyana showing Mr. Kadir and some of his children brandishing dangerous-looking firearms. The authorities said Mr. Kadir planned to show photographs of himself -- shirtless, and with pistols shoved into his waistband -- to extremists in Iran to bolster his image and gain support for the plan to blow up the fuel tanks.
But Mr. Kadir testified that most of the weapons in the photographs were toys. And he said he never intended to show the pictures in Iran, where he said viewers would most likely be offended by images of a shirtless man without traditional Muslim garb.
While prosecutors portrayed Mr. Kadir as an eager participant in the plot, he testified that he had feigned enthusiasm.
A complaint filed by the United States attorney's office said that on Feb. 19, 2007, Mr. Defreitas and the informant, Steven Francis, showed Mr. Kadir a videotape of the airport fuel tanks.
''Kadir expressed interest, saying that he needed a few weeks to contact some associates who would probably help them,'' the complaint stated.
In court, Mr. Kadir said that he demurred that day when invited to join the plot, but that after being asked if he knew others who might assist, he replied, ''Give me a few weeks.''
He did not want to respond negatively, he said, because he was hoping that Mr. Defreitas and Mr. Francis would help introduce him to rich American Muslims who might help finance a mosque in Guyana.
''I did not want to sever or cut off the relationship with them,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 21, 2010


End of Document