Suspects tied to radical group;
The 13 Muslims were charged with terrorism in the slaying of Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
NOVEMBER 14, 2004 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A10
Length: 589 words
Byline: Toby Sterling ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: AMSTERDAM
Body


Netherlands authorities have confirmed that 13 young Muslims arrested on terrorism charges after the killing of filmmaker Theo van Gogh are members of a radical Islamic group with international links and a Syrian-born spiritual leader.
Dutch intelligence calls the group the Hofstad Network, and a Justice Ministry official says Syrian Redouan al-Issar, 43, the alleged spiritual leader, has disappeared.
Van Gogh was ritually slaughtered on an Amsterdam street Nov. 2, apparently for making a film that criticized the treatment of women in Islamic society. His killing set off a wave of reprisals - attacks on more than 20 Islamic sites in the Netherlands, including a mosque gutted by fire early yesterday.
Van Gogh's alleged killer, 26-year-old Mohammed Bouyeri, of Amsterdam, was arrested in a shootout with police minutes after the filmmaker died of gunshot wounds and a slit throat. Bouyeri had a will in his pocket saying he was prepared to die for Islamic jihad, or holy war.
In the days that have followed, the government has come under pressure to release details about Islamic radical activities in the Netherlands.
In a letter and notes sent to parliament Thursday, Interior Minister Johan Remkes, who oversees the secret service, gave the clearest picture yet of the Dutch cell allegedly behind Van Gogh's murder.
Remkes said the Hofstad Network, composed mostly of young Dutch Muslims of North African ancestry, had links to networks in Spain and Belgium; that several members of the group had traveled to Pakistan for training; and that its members had been under the influence of Issar for many years.
"The number of persons and networks in the Netherlands that thinks and acts in terms of actual violence is, in our opinion, limited," he wrote. "But the feeding ground from which they spring, is broader. . . . It's better to think in terms of thousands than hundreds," he said.
Issar went by several names, including "Abu Kaled," the Justice Ministry official said. He sought asylum in Germany beginning in 1995, but has not been seen there since May, the Wall Street Journal reported yesterday.
Remkes said the Dutch secret service realized in spring 2003 that Issar was "a leading figure" who preached at fundamentalist gatherings at Bouyeri's Amsterdam home.
Issar "radiates charisma and exercises great influence on youth from this network," Remkes wrote. Dick Leurdijk, an expert on Islamic fundamentalism at the Netherlands Institute of Foreign Relations Clingendael, said he had worried there would be an attack like the one that killed Van Gogh.
"We cannot exclude these things happening in the Netherlands," he said. "We are certainly part of [the target of] this jihad."
Leurdijk said the Dutch cell had special links to Islamic groups in Spain, as well as a "common ideology" with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda network.
Three Dutch members of the Hofstad group traveled to Portugal in June during the European soccer championship and were arrested and deported because authorities there feared they would carry out an attack, Remkes said in the letter.
The Dutch secret service has been shadowing as many as 200 potential terrorists since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in the United States, but Bouyeri was not among them.
The Dutch cell began showing "conspiratorial behavior" last year, and a number of members traveled to Pakistan, probably for training, Remkes said.
Remkes said members also received orders from "Abdeladim Akoudad, who was suspected by the Moroccan government of involvement in the attacks on Casablanca."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
BAS CZERWINSKI, Associated Press
The Tarieq Ibnu Ziyad Islamic elementary school in Eindhoven, Netherlands, was bombed after the Nov. 2 slaying of a filmmaker.

Load-Date: September 2, 2005


End of Document