Suspect in Terror Plot Admits Training in Pakistan and Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy
The New York Times
April 3, 2007 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 538 words
Byline: By ALAN FEUER
Body


A man accused in an elaborate federal sting operation of plotting to provide training and money to terrorists pleaded guilty yesterday to attending a training camp run by the Pakistani terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba in 2002.
  The man, Mahmud Faruq Brent, a paramedic from Washington, was one of four men accused in the plot and the first to make a deal with federal prosecutors. His lawyer, Hassen ibn Abdellah, said that Mr. Brent would not testify against his co-defendants and that he pleaded guilty only to have his potential sentence cut almost in half, to a maximum of 15 years.
The plea by Mr. Brent, 32, is the latest episode in a case that began in May 2005, with the arrest of Tarik Shah, a New York jazz musician and martial arts expert, who stands charged with swearing an oath of allegiance to Al Qaeda. Mr. Shah, who grew up in the Bronx and spent his allowance on Cannonball Adderley records, is accused of offering hand-to-hand combat training to jihadists. He is also accused of offering training to Mr. Brent when they lived in Beacon, N.Y., in 2001.
  An associate of Mr. Shah's, Rafiq Sabir, a doctor from Boca Raton, Fla., was charged with offering medical assistance to potential Al Qaeda operatives. A fourth man, Abdulrahman Farhane, a Brooklyn bookseller, is accused of plotting with an F.B.I. informant to send money overseas to buy weapons and communications equipment for Muslims fighting United States forces in Afghanistan.
  All three men pleaded not guilty to charges resulting from the sting operation, in which the F.B.I. informant posed as a recruiter for Al Qaeda. 
  Federal agents initially linked Mr. Brent to Mr. Shah through a telephone number for Mr. Brent in an address book belonging to Mr. Shah that New York police detectives found during a search of Mr. Shah's apartment in December 2003. According to the complaint against Mr. Brent, he met with Mr. Shah in Columbia, Md., in 2005, and described how difficult it had been to reach the camp in Pakistan.
  Mr. Brent nonetheless told Mr. Shah, the complaint said, that the experience had been ''one of the better decisions of my life'' and that he hoped that ''Allah would bless him'' for his efforts. Prosecutors say that passport records show that Mr. Brent was in Pakistan from February to June 2002.
  The camp was operated by Lashkar-e-Taiba, a group loosely affiliated with Al Qaeda, whose primary goal was to fight Indian forces in the disputed province of Kashmir. The group was declared a foreign terrorist organization by the United States in December 2001.
  The plea hearing yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan was attended by nearly 30 of Mr. Brent's relatives, who called out ''God is great!'' in Arabic and ''We love you, Mahmud!'' when he was brought into the room. 
  He pleaded guilty to a formal charge of conspiracy to provide material support for terrorism, admitting his role in the plot under questioning by his lawyer with a series of uninflected yeses.
  After the hearing, Mr. Brent's sister Attah Attulah questioned the validity of the charges that her brother faced.
  ''What does it mean, terrorism?'' Ms. Attulah asked rhetorically. ''Who defines it? You step on an ant today and that is terrorism.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 3, 2007


End of Document