Suspect Pleads Not Guilty In Bomb-Conspiracy Case - Correction Appended
The New York Times
September 30, 2009 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 935 words
Byline: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM; Majeed Babar contributed reporting.
Body


An Afghan immigrant from Denver who federal officials say was at the center of a Qaeda plot to set off bombs in the United States appeared in court in Brooklyn for the first time on Tuesday and pleaded not guilty to terrorism-conspiracy charges.
  The man, Najibullah Zazi, 24, who was born in Afghanistan, raised in Pakistan and lived in New York for 10 years before moving to Denver in January, was arrested there on Sept. 19 on charges that he had lied to the authorities during a terrorism investigation. Four days later, Mr. Zazi, who drove an airport shuttle bus in Denver, was indicted in Brooklyn on the bombing-conspiracy charges.
  The authorities have said that he received weapons and explosives training at a Qaeda camp in Pakistan last year, bought beauty products that contained the raw materials to build a bomb and traveled to Queens with bomb-making instructions in his laptop on the eve of the anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks. 
  Federal marshals brought Mr. Zazi to New York on Friday after a federal judge in Denver dismissed the false-statement charge against him and ordered him held without bail and transferred to Brooklyn to face the more serious terrorism indictment.
  A slim man with a beard rimming his long face, Mr. Zazi walked into United States District Court in Brooklyn wearing a blue prison smock over an orange T-shirt, blue pants and orange slip-on prison sneakers. He sat quietly next to his lawyer in front of Judge Raymond J. Dearie during the seven-minute proceeding, in which the lawyer, J. Michael Dowling, entered a plea of not guilty on his behalf. 
  Judge Dearie, citing a 12-page detention memo that the government filed last week, concluded that ''there are no reasonable conditions that will ensure this gentleman's presence or the safety of the community,'' and entered a permanent order of detention, which Mr. Dowling did not oppose.
  Mr. Zazi did not speak during the hearing, and when it ended, Mr. Dowling squeezed his shoulder before he was returned to detention by marshals.
  After the hearing, Mr. Dowling, who joined Mr. Zazi's defense team after the young man was arrested, said,  ''To use a hackneyed phrase, I'd like to stop this rush to judgment, because what I've seen so far does not amount to a conspiracy,'' he said.
  When the single-count bombing-conspiracy indictment was unsealed in Brooklyn on Thursday, prosecutors from the office of the United States attorney, Benton J. Campbell, described in the detention memo what they said were Mr. Zazi's efforts to make homemade explosives.
  At the hearing, the lead prosecutor in the case, Jeffrey H. Knox, said evidence obtained under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act,  which in some instances allows electronic surveillance and covert searches in counterterrorism cases,  would be used in the case. The prosecutors, he said, will file a memo in the coming weeks about how they will proceed under the Classified Information Procedures Act, which governs the use of classified evidence in federal criminal cases.
  Mr. Knox also asked the judge to designate the matter as a complex case, saying that in addition to issues involving the translation of some materials, ''the conspiracy is international in scope and we expect to have to deal with evidentiary issues and other types of issues with foreign governments.''
  Outside the courthouse, Mr. Dowling acknowledged that his client had traveled to Pakistan and had bought beauty products that contained chemicals that could be used to make explosives. But he said his client had not broken any laws by doing so. 
  And while he conceded that he had not yet seen all of the government's evidence in the case, he contended that the material detailed in the detention memo was insufficient to support a conspiracy charge, which requires that prosecutors prove Mr. Zazi entered into an agreement with someone else to commit a crime.
  ''The government will have to produce someone else -- they don't necessarily have to indict them -- or the conspiracy charge fails,'' he said. ''You can't convict him of conspiracy without an agreement.''
  The memo, which sets out some of the evidence that the government says it will present against Mr. Zazi at trial, said that three people helped him buy beauty supplies in Denver that contained chemicals that could be used to make home-brewed explosives. Prosecutors have said that Mr. Zazi told F.B.I. agents that he received weapons and explosives training in a Qaeda camp when he traveled to Pakistan in August 2008 and that he was accompanied on the trip by an unspecified number of people.
  No one else has yet been arrested. But on Tuesday morning, F.B.I. agents returned to a Flushing apartment they had searched on Sept. 14, according to a tenant, after Mr. Zazi had spent the night there on Sept. 10. The agents, several of whom had been present for the initial search, took two calculators and photographed a spiral-bound notebook belonging to another tenant. One page of the notebook, in an entry dated Sept. 20, 2007, indicated that the writer had borrowed $2,000 from Mr. Zazi and was traveling to Pakistan for four months. 
  The detention memo traced Mr. Zazi's steps from his four-month trip to Pakistan in 2008 to his purchases in Denver. It also described what the government called his efforts on Sept. 6 and 7 to make the explosives in a Denver hotel suite's kitchen and his subsequent trip on the eve of the anniversary of the 9/11 attacks to New York, where prosecutors said they found that his laptop computer contained a file with an image of his handwritten notes on bomb-making.

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


An article on Wednesday about the arraignment of Najibullah Zazi, an Afghan immigrant, on terrorism conspiracy charges misstated the date of an entry in a notebook that was photographed by F.B.I. agents searching a Queens apartment where Mr. Zazi spent the night of Sept. 10. The entry, which recorded a $2,000 debt owed to Mr. Zazi by a tenant of the apartment, was dated Sept. 30, 2007 -- not Sept. 20, 2007. 
Correction-Date: October 5, 2009

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Najibullah Zazi's lawyer, J. Michael Dowling, discussing Mr. Zazi's case outside federal court in Brooklyn on Tuesday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY RAMIN TALAIE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                         

Load-Date: September 30, 2009


End of Document