Suspects in Terror Case Wanted to Kill Jews, Officials Say
The New York Times
May 13, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 995 words
Byline: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM and AL BAKER; John Eligon, Colin Moynihan and Noah Rosenberg contributed reporting.
Body


The 26-year-old man from Queens had discussed growing a beard and the side curls of a Hasidic Jew, the police commissioner said, a disguise that he apparently hoped would enable him to attack a synagogue in Manhattan ''and take out the whole entire building.''
His ambitions did not end there. The man, a native of Algeria, also expressed an interest in blowing up the Empire State Building, the commissioner said.
He was not a member of a terrorist group like Al Qaeda, the commissioner said. Indeed, his father said, he once sold cosmetics at Saks Fifth Avenue and was now trying to be a fashion model.
Yet driven by a hatred of Jews and a belief that Muslims are mistreated the world over, the man, Ahmed Ferhani, began piecing together a plan to commit terrorism, the authorities said on Thursday, leading to his arrest after he and an accomplice bought weapons in a police undercover operation.
Mr. Ferhani, along with a 20-year-old naturalized United States citizen from Morocco, were charged on Thursday in a terrorism case that is remarkable not only for the would-be model-actor the authorities have identified as its central player, but also for the unusual way the case was brought.
The charges were announced at a City Hall news conference with arrest photos on display, featuring comments from Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg; the police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly; and the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr. The case was presented in State Supreme Court, with no involvement from the F.B.I. or the United States attorney's office, typically crucial in such investigations and prosecutions.
The accusations as detailed by the three officials sounded chilling. Just before Mr. Ferhani and his co-defendant, Mohamed Mamdouh, were arrested on Manhattan's West Side on Wednesday evening, they had bought a hand grenade, three semiautomatic pistols and 150 rounds of ammunition.
They wanted to kill Jews; they mulled blowing up churches; and shortly before Mr. Ferhani was arrested at 58th Street along the West Side Highway, he asked an undercover detective, who was posing as a gun dealer, if the man could get him a bullet-resistant vest, a silencer and a police radio.
Mr. Mamdouh was arrested nearby.
''They conspired and took concrete steps to blow up synagogues and churches to advance those ideological goals and to possess and use illegal firearms and explosives,'' Mr. Vance said at the news conference. ''They did it for jihad, something they referred simply to as the cause, which meant the violence and armed fight against Israel, Jews and other non-Muslims and the West.''
Mr. Kelly said Mr. Ferhani, using an expletive, explained he was fed up that Muslims around the world were being treated ''like dogs.''
The two men, who both live in Queens, were charged in a criminal complaint under a state terrorism statute passed after the Sept. 11 attacks that Mr. Vance said had not been used before in New York City in a terrorism case. Among the charges were second-degree conspiracy as a crime of terrorism, second-degree conspiracy as a hate crime and second-degree criminal possession of a weapon as a crime of terrorism. If convicted of the top count, the men face life in prison without parole.
The charges concluded what Mr. Kelly said was a seven-month investigation.
Major terrorism cases are generally investigated by the F.B.I.-N.Y.P.D. Joint Terrorism Task Force, staffed with police detectives and federal agents, and prosecuted by the United States attorney's office in federal court. One law enforcement official said the Police Department's Intelligence Division, which handled the case, had notified the task force about it and the group had opted not to get involved.
Little clarification was offered at the news conference, where officials offered explanations for why a case presented as a serious terrorism matter had not been brought in federal court.
''They don't take all the cases,'' Mr. Bloomberg said simply, referring to the federal authorities.
The commissioner said federal authorities have the right of first refusal on any tip, adding that the case began as a local criminal matter with the district attorney's office, and ''it was logical to keep it going when it morphed into a terrorism investigation.''
Mr. Vance said in this case, prosecutors worked with the local police, but suggested that in some matters, it was important to share information with federal authorities. A spokesman for the F.B.I., Timothy Flannelly, declined to comment.
The reasoning notwithstanding, Mr. Vance described Mr. Ferhani as a volatile threat.
''He was committed to violent jihad, and his plans became bigger and more violent with each passing week,'' Mr. Vance said.
At Mr. Ferhani's home in Whitestone, Queens, his father said his son had befriended people who were bad influences.
''He's a very good kid,'' the father, J. Ferhani, 51, said. ''He got involved with a bad kid. He's a naive person. He has a very good heart, but if somebody tries to tell him something, he always believes it.''
Told of the accusations against his son, Mr. Ferhani, a cabdriver, laughed in disbelief. ''Oh my God, that's unbelievable,'' he said. ''Bomb a synagogue? That's not my son.''
He said his son was raised as a Muslim, in Algeria, before the family fled in 1994 at the height of its civil war. ''But he's not a religious fanatic,'' Mr. Ferhani said. ''He doesn't pray; he drinks.''
Late in the afternoon, the two suspects appeared before Judge Melissa C. Jackson in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
A prosecutor, Margaret E. Gandy, asked the judge to hold both men without bail. ''The seriousness of this crime is considerable,'' she said, adding that investigators had an overwhelming amount of evidence. As she spoke, Mr. Ferhani lifted his head and mouthed words that could not be heard from the gallery.
Neither defendant entered a formal plea, but lawyers for both said their clients denied wrongdoing. Judge Jackson ordered the men held without bail.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Officers arresting Ahmed Ferhani, 26, at 58th Street along the West Side Highway. He had met with a detective posing as a gun dealer, officials said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NEW YORK POLICE DEPARTMENT)(A21)
 The charges against Ahmed Ferhani, left, and Mohamed Mamdouh conclude what was said to be a seven-month inquiry. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN MARSHALL MANTEL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A23)                                          

Load-Date: May 13, 2011


End of Document