Susquehanna County Marine dies after being hit by car at base in Virginia
The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)
October 13, 2011 Thursday


Copyright 2011 The Times-Tribune
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 328 words
Byline: Steve McConnell, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.
Body


Oct. 13--A 23-year-old Marine from Susquehanna County was killed Tuesday morning while running with other service members at a Virginia military base, the Marine Corps confirmed Wednesday.
Cpl. Chad M. Smith of New Milford died when a vehicle hit the group while they were running in formation at the Naval Weapons Station Yorktown base near Newport News and Virginia Beach, according to a release.
Two other servicemen, Sgt. Brandon J. Hamilton, 27, of Merced, Calif., and Pfc. Tyler R. Cannon, 19, of Jacksonville, Fla., were injured in the crash.
Cpl. Smith died at the Bon Secours Mary Immaculate Medical Center in Newport News as a result of his injuries.
The accident is under investigation, Lt. Col. Matt Morgan said Wednesday.
Cpl. Smith resided with his wife in Virginia, Lt. Col. Morgan said.
A relative reached by phone Wednesday night declined to comment on Cpl. Smith's death, saying he was overcome with emotion over the loss.
Mountain View Superintendent Andrew Chichura confirmed that Cpl. Smith was a graduate of Mountain View High School but wasn't immediately sure what year he graduated. A Times-Tribune archives story listed Chad Smith as a 2007 graduate.
Cpl. Smith was a rifleman with the 2nd Fleet Anti-Terrorism Security Team (2nd FAST) Company, Marine Security Force Regiment, II Marine Expeditionary Force, according to the release. He joined the U.S. Marine Corps in January 2009. In February, he was promoted to corporal.
He has been awarded with the National Defense Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, according to the release.
Naval Weapons Station Yorktown is a 10,624-acre military base that provides ordnance, technical support, and other logistics to the U.S. Armed Forces, according to a Navy website.
Contact the writer: smcconnell@timesshamrock.com
___ (c)2011 The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) Visit The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) at thetimes-tribune.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: October 13, 2011


End of Document