SUVs hit by domestic terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 23, 2003 Saturday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A; DIGEST
Length: 366 words
Series: NATION IN BRIEF
Dateline: WEST COVINA, Calif.; WASHINGTON
Body


Fires destroyed or damaged dozens of sport utility vehicles and burned a warehouse at an auto dealership Friday, and vehicles there and at three other dealerships were spray-painted with slogans such as "Fat, Lazy Americans."
The radical group Earth Liberation Front issued an unsigned e-mail Friday calling the incidents "ELF actions," and the FBI was investigating the dealership fire as domestic terrorism, police Chief Frank Wills said.
There were no reports of injuries, but damage was estimated at $1-million.
Compiled from Times WiresNo. 2 at Homeland Security to return to Navy
WASHINGTON - The White House announced on Friday that the No. 2 official at the Department of Homeland Security, Deputy Secretary Gordon England, would return to his previous job as Navy secretary, only seven months after he was confirmed to the domestic security post.
The move surprised many at the Homeland Security Department, where England, a former defense industry executive, was responsible for the logistics of the consolidation of 22 agencies.
BUSH BYPASSES SENATE TO APPROVE SCHOLAR: President Bush appointed an outspoken Middle East scholar known for his controversial critiques of militant Islam to a federally funded peace think tank Friday, bypassing the Senate approval process where his confirmation was in jeopardy. Bush's announcement naming Daniel Pipes, head of the Philadelphia-based Middle East Forum, to the U.S. Institute of Peace was one of nine recess appointments made Friday.
 
Also . . .
MOTORIST WHO STARTED FIRE SAYS HE'S OKAY: The stranded motorist who started a two-acre brush fire in California has been identified as Jong Choi, 45. He was stranded in a canyon when his vehicle plunged 500 feet over the side of a mountain highway Monday. He lit the blaze Thursday to get attention, authorities said. "He wants us to tell everybody that he's okay," hospital spokeswoman Connie Matthews said.
AT LEAST ONE DEAD IN KY. FLOODS: Flooding in central Kentucky swept a home into a creek Friday, killing at least one person, as a heavy storm felled trees and downed power lines. Storms packed large hail and lightning, and were moving south Friday evening, the National Weather Service reported.

Load-Date: August 23, 2003


End of Document