Swiss police probe possible terror motive after 2 hurt in supermarket attack
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 25, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 319 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


A 28-year-old woman, reported to be a Swiss citizen living locally, attacked two women at the Lugano department store on Tuesday.
Swiss police said a stabbing in a shopping area on Tuesday afternoon in the Italian-speaking city of Lugano is being investigated as a potential terrorist attack, and that the prime suspect arrested at the scene had a background of jihadist extremism.
One victim had serious but non-life-threatening injuries, and another had light injuries.
Fedpol, as the police agency is known, said investigations in 2017 revealed that the woman had been blocked that year by Turkish authorities while trying to cross Turkey's border to enter Syria.
"The woman was suffering from mental health problems at this time", fedpol tweeted.
She attempted to choke one and stabbed another in the neck with a knife before being stopped by shoppers, police say.
OANN suspended and demonetized by YouTube
This is easy for OAN to do, because it is unencumbered by any journalistic responsibility to report provable facts. YouTube says OAN suffered a "first strike " penalty for violating the company's COVID-19 misinformation policy.
The regional police later mentioned a possible terror motive behind the attack.
Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz condemned the "Islamist terrorist attack", tweeting "We stand with #Switzerland in these hard hours".
"We'll give a joint response to Islamist terrorism in Europe and defend our values".
But Switzerland has identified hundreds of residents deemed a threat and militants who have travelled to war zones.
Later on Tuesday, the Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland said an investigation would be opened into the attack and that terrorist motives were suspected.
In September, a man Swiss media dubbed the "Emir of Winterthur" and described as a leading Islamist militant in Switzerland was sentenced to 50 months in prison for ties to the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

Load-Date: November 27, 2020


End of Document