SYNAGOGUE PLOT HOLDS 2 IN STING
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 13, 2011 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5
Length: 535 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


NEW YORK -- Two men who officials say had complained that Muslims "were being treated like dogs" were being held on terrorism and hate-crime charges, accused of conspiring to blow up a synagogue, city officials said Thursday.
The men were arrested Wednesday night while buying guns and an inert hand grenade from undercover officers, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said.
Authorities identified the suspects as Ahmed Ferhani, 26, and Mohammed Mamdouh, 20, both of New York City. They are Americans of Algerian and Moroccan descent, respectively.
Bill targets scanners
WASHINGTON -- House Republicans controlling the Transportation Security Administration's purse strings are moving to cut off new funding for those advanced airport scanners that have sparked outrage over their revealing images of travelers' bodies.
Draft legislation released Thursday by the Appropriations' homeland security subcommittee denies the Obama administration's $76 million request for an additional 275 of the scanners.
Ensign ethics probe
WASHINGTON -- Former Sen. John Ensign of Nevada made false statements to the Federal Election Commission and obstructed a Senate Ethics Committee's investigation into his conduct, the panel said Thursday in a scathing report that sent the matter to the Justice Department for a criminal investigation.
Mr. Ensign, a Nevada Republican, resigned his seat May 3 rather than face continued scrutiny and possible public hearings about his affair with the wife of one of his top Senate aides, a payment to the aide's family, and the aide's lobbying after leaving Senate employment.
The committee also asked the FEC to investigate possible campaign finance law violations.
McCain assails torture
WASHINGTON -- Waterboarding and other harsh interrogation techniques were not a factor in tracking down Osama bin Laden, a leading Republican senator insisted Thursday in an impassioned speech on the Senate floor.
Sen. John McCain of Arizona, who spent 5 1/2 years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam, also rejected the argument that any form of torture is critical to U.S. success in the fight against terrorism.
Romney on health care
ANN ARBOR, Mich.--Mitt Romney, confronting an issue that seriously threatens his Republican presidential ambitions, acknowledged Thursday that the health care law he promoted and signed as Massachusetts governor has become a liability for him.
Under the plan, everyone in Massachusetts is required to obtain medical insurance or pay a penalty. Mr. Romney's government mandate and the rest of the plan provided a model for President Barack Obama's health care plan, which is the focus of Republican efforts in Congress and the courts to repeal or overturn it.
Cybersecurity planning
WASHINGTON -- Companies that run critical U.S. industries such as power plants would get government incentives to make sure their systems are secure from computer-based attacks, the White House said Thursday, detailing its broad proposal to beef up the country's cybersecurity.
Under its proposed legislation, the White House would give the Department of Homeland Security the authority to work with industry to come up with ways to secure their computer systems and protect against cyber threats.

Load-Date: May 13, 2011


End of Document