Syracuse panel debates way to reduce terrorist acts
University Wire
October 24, 1997


Copyright 1997 Daily Orange via U-Wire
Length: 920 words
Byline: By Brian Angell, Daily Orange
Dateline: Syracuse, N.Y.
Body


Syracuse University students and faculty gathered for a panel discussion on terrorist acts, including the 1988 bombing of PanAm Flight 103 that killed all 270 passengers on board.
In the discussion, they sought a means of preventing future tragedies through raising awareness.
The program was part of the university's annual Remembrance Week, which honors the lives of 35 Syracuse University students who died in the terrorist bombing of PanAm 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. About 40 people gathered to hear an SU victim's mother, an FBI agent and airport safety officials on Thursday in room A2 of Newhouse I.
 "The reason for programs like this is so we don't forget," said Daan Braveman, dean of the College of Law, who acted as the discussion's moderator. "It keeps this on the front burner."
Syracuse U.
Remembrance Week was organized by 35 SU Remembrance Scholars, seniors who were recently awarded a one-time $ 5,000 scholarship in honor of the SU PanAm victims.
Aphrodite Tsairis, whose daughter died in the bombing, was a featured panelist at the program.
Tsairis said she supported a proactive approach both for the government and the individual in the prevention of terrorism.
"You can go to Washington … like we did … but that doesn't necessarily mean that this moves the process forward.
 "It's a very complex political problem that two administrations could not deal with."
Gaining awareness
Other panelists included Sgt. Frank Pieklick, head of police for Syracuse's Hancock International Airport and John Carni, airport security coordinator at Hancock.
Tsairis commented on the ineffectiveness of U.S. government policies of combating terrorism after destructive acts are committed.
"You build a 10-foot wall and the terrorists will build an 11-foot ladder."
Panelist Scott Augenbaum, an FBI special agent and investigator of terrorist actions, agreed, but added his thoughts on how to combat terrorist activity.
"You build a 12-foot wall," he said. "We're not going to stop our efforts."
He added that anti-terrorism strategies often come after terrorist attacks.
"Unfortunately, I feel that we're reacting a lot more," Augenbaum said.
But, he said he knew of no possible alternative, noting that proactive prevention of terrorism may hinder civil liberties.
"Do you want to live in a police state?" Augenbaum asked rhetorically.
Panelists searched for an answer.
"I think awareness is a big part," he continued. Augenbaum added that the public may need more patience in dealing with airport security measures.
Airport security officials on the panel agreed.
 "Awareness is the biggest deterrent," Carni said.
Pieklick further urged people to be more aware when inside an airport and to pay attention to anything "suspicious."
"Quite often people believe that it's not going to happen here," he said.
"Sometimes the simplest of things are the most important." "It's the people that are around you that are going to have the impact on your flight," Pieklick added. "There is no definite definition of a terrorist."
A student in the audience said she was concerned that in a society with increasingly less civic pride, domestic terrorism would pose more of a threat than international terrorism.
"I think we're on the last leg here," she told the panelists. "What do we do?"
Augenbaum offered an unsure answer.
"I really wish I knew," he said. "I think we have to start with the youth of America and family values." Seeking justice
Tsairis' opening statement for the discussion focused on the role of two Libyan terrorists implicated in the bombing, and the nine-year struggle to bring them to trial in the Hague court, the U.N. International Court of Justice.
She used the word "damning" to describe evidence brought against the two Libyan men through FBI investigation.
"The Libyans must be delivered to the Hague," she said. "To have had a fair hearing is all that is required for me."
But, she said her role as an activist has been frustrating. Tsairis added that her numerous attempts to bring the Libyan terrorists implicated in the PanAm bombing to a United Nations hearing have been deferred.
"Too much time has passed," she said. "The immediacy is gone."
A proactive approach
Kate Cieslowski, a senior nursing student, said she learned a lot but presented a confused sentiment.
"I don't really know," she said after observing the discussion. "I think (preventing terrorism is) way out of a general person's hands." Marguerite DeMejo, a scholar and a psychology major, tried to define a role for students in terrorism prevention.
"It's hard to give a clear-cut answer," she said. "I think the entire Remembrance Week is a proactive approach."
Laura Gallagher, a scholar and an inclusive education and psychology major, said the solution to terrorism prevention is to "take a proactive approach."
Scholars Steve Mieczkowski and Kim Madore organized the panel discussion.
Madore, television radio and film management major, said that the panel was a success. "I think a lot of people learned a lot," she said.
 Mieczowski, a policy studies and economics major, agreed.
"I thought it was a really big success," he said. "The turnout just really impressed me."
He said the panel successfully conveyed the message that "we as students could do something," which was what organizers intended the program to do.
"I learned a lot from this panel," Mieczowski said. "There is a real sense that people can do things."
(C) 1999 Daily Orange via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 1, 1999


End of Document