Syrian peace talks yield hard stances, slight hope
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 24, 2014 Friday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2014 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A17
Length: 422 words
Byline:  By LORI HINNANT and ZEINA KARAM Associated Press   
Body


GENEVA • Syria's government said stopping terrorism - not talking peace - was its priority, while the Western-backed opposition said "the road to negotiations" had begun, offering a glimmer of hope Thursday for a way to halt the violence that has killed more than 130,000 people.
The two sides did not meet face-to-face, buffered by a famously patient U.N. mediator who shuttled between representatives of Syrian President Bashar Assad and members of the opposition trying to overthrow him. And they did not seem ready to meet today as originally scheduled.
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem questioned both the point of the talks and the legitimacy of the Syrian National Coalition, which is made up largely of exiles and lacks influence with an increasingly radicalized rebellion.
Infighting among rebels in the civil war has grown so deadly - nearly 1,400 killed in the past 20 days - that the head of al-Qaida called on Islamic militants to stand down, playing directly into Assad's argument that only his government is preventing Syria's further descent into chaos.
Al-Moallem, speaking before his meeting with mediator Lakhdar Brahimi, said his government's priority was "to fight terrorism."
Both U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and the head of the Syrian National Coalition derided the notion that Assad should stay in power to fight terrorists.
"Assad is responsible for the potential disintegration of Syria," Kerry told the broadcaster Al-Arabiya. "He is a one-man super-magnet for terrorism."
Both sides affirmed positions hardened after nearly three years of fighting. They blamed each other for turning a once-thriving country into ruins, calling each other terrorists.
But their willingness to meet separately with Brahimi gave the first sense that the negotiations might bear fruit. Brahimi himself said Wednesday they had shown willingness to bend on humanitarian corridors, prisoner exchanges and local cease-fires - even if the terms were still murky.
"The road to negotiations has begun," opposition chief Ahmad al-Jarba told reporters, even as he described Assad as "part of the past." He said he had empowered negotiators to determine the time and scope for any talks.
The fighting that began in March 2011 with a peaceful uprising against Assad has become a proxy war between regional powers Iran and Saudi Arabia, with hints of a throwback to the Cold War as Russia and the United States back opposite sides.
Syrian refugees at a camp in Turkey said nothing that happened in Switzerland would change their plight.

Graphic

 
 Ahmad al-Jarba, leader of the Syrian National Coalition (SNC), Syria's main political opposition group, rubs his chin during a press conference in Geneva, Switzerland, Thursday, Jan. 23, 2014. Al-Jarba announced that the Syrian peace talk negotiations will be difficult and that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is now part of the past. (AP Photo/Anja Niedringhaus)  Ahmad al-Jarba, leader of the Syrian National Coalition (SNC), Syria's main political opposition group, points his finger during a press conference in Geneva, Switzerland, Thursday, Jan. 23, 2014. Al-Jarba announced that the Syrian peace talk negotiations will be difficult and that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is now part of the past. (AP Photo/Anja Niedringhaus)  Ahmad al-Jarba, leader of the Syrian National Coalition (SNC), Syria's main political opposition group, answers questions during a press conference in Geneva, Switzerland, Thursday, Jan. 23, 2014. Al-Jarba announced that the Syrian peace talks negotiations will be difficult and that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is now part of the past. (AP Photo/Anja Niedringhaus)  U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry, left, meets with Lady Catherine Ashton, European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in Davos, Switzerland on Thursday Jan. 23, 2014. Kerry is attending the World Economic Forum annual meeting in the Swiss Alps. The UN-backed international conference on the Syrian crisis will continue with separate talks between the rival delegations in Geneva, Switzerland, on upcoming Friday. (AP Photo/Gary Cameron)  U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry, left, is greeted on his arrival in Davos, Switzerland by Swiss Ambassador Philippe Guex, right, Thursday Jan. 23, 2014, where Kerry will attend the World Economic Forum annual meeting. The UN-backed international conference on the Syrian crisis will continue with separate talks between the rival delegations in Geneva, Switzerland, on upcoming Friday. (AP Photo / Gary Cameron, pool) 

Load-Date: January 24, 2014


End of Document