Syrian pullout could alter dynamics in region
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 1, 2005 Tuesday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A08
Length: 294 words
Byline: BY PHILIP DINE Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


An end to Syria's domination of Lebanon, as demanded by thousands of Lebanese protesters Monday, would have a major impact in the Middle East.
White House spokesman Scott McClellan said Monday that the resignation of Lebanon's prime minister and his government allows for the prospect of Lebanese elections that are "free of all foreign interference."
He reiterated the U.S. demand that Syria pull its 15,000 troops from Lebanon.
A Syrian withdrawal would be likely to boost the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians. Syria is widely believed to use its military and intelligence presence in Lebanon to allow radical groups to operate there, sponsor terrorism against Israel and undermine peace efforts by moderate Palestinians.
Jim Phillips, an expert in terrorism and the Middle East at the Heritage Foundation, said, "As long as Syria dominates Lebanon, it'll have a leg up to project terrorism against Israel and that could make progress in the negotiations impossible."
Syria captured Saddam Hussein's half brother Sunday and handed him over to Iraqi forces. A withdrawal from Lebanon could lead to more cooperation with U.S. aims, such as stopping border crossings of Iraqi insurgents.
McClellan declined to comment on the handing over of Saddam's half brother, indicating the administration wants to see more cooperation vis-à-vis Iraq.
Also, ending Syria's control of Lebanon would remove a symbol that has grated on and intimidated many inhabitants of the region, said Patrick Clawson, deputy director of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
"Syrian domination of Lebanon has been seen in the Middle East as a particularly egregious example of how authoritarians can impose their will on people who want a much more open system," Clawson said.

Load-Date: March 1, 2005


End of Document