SYRIA'S ASSAD OFFERS ISRAEL 'FULL PEACE' FOR RETURN OF LAND
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
October 27, 1994, Thursday


Copyright 1994 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. A1
Length: 613 words
Byline: AP
Body


DAMASCUS, Syria (AP) President Hafez Assad, after talks with President Clinton, today offered "full peace" to Israel but insisted anew that it give up Syrian land seized in war. Clinton cited "some progress" but conceded a new peace agreement was not at hand.
Speaking after the two met at Assad's marbled presidential palace, Clinton suggested that Assad had "gone beyond" Syria's previous hardline position. He did not elaborate, but said he would convey the information in talks later today in Jerusalem with Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
The first U.S. president to visit Syria since Richard Nixon in 1974, Clinton was here as part of a six-nation, four-day tour of the Middle East to promote peace. Wednesday's signing of a historic peace agreement between Israel and Jordan has highlighted the trip.
Meanwhile, reports out of Israel said that Clinton would not tour of holy sites in east Jerusalem, as had been anticipated, amid a burgeoning controversy there. Israeli officials said that Clinton would cite fatigue as the cause for cancellation and would instead invite Jerusalem's mayor, Ehud Olmert, to call on him at his hotel.
Assad said that Syria truly wanted peace and asked "why the others are not convinced?"
Assad's statements touched only peripherally on the delicate and difficult issues separating Syria and Israel concerns about what kind of security arrangements would be guaranteed in any such peace treaty.
Clinton said, "This agreement will never occur unless Israel and Syria sign with the absolute conviction that they will be more secure for signing it, not less secure. I wish we were signing a peace treaty on this trip. We won't do it."
"Our job will not be done and we will not rest until peace agreements between Israel and Syria and Israel and Lebanon are reached," Clinton added.
Syria and Lebanon remain the last two Arab states on Israel's border still officially at war with Israel.
When asked about his country remaining on the official U.S. list of terrorist nations, Assad said that terrorism, per se, was not on their agenda. He denied that Syria sponsors terrorism, said no proof of such a link exists and suggested the allegations were based solely on Syria's stance toward Israel.
When responding to the same question, Clinton said, "President Assad … said he thought that (the killing of innocent civilians) was wrong wherever it occurred. So we did discuss it in that context."
"I'm here because I believe the best way to bring about an end to terrorism in this part of the world is to bring about a comprehensive peace," Clinton said.
He made no public assertions against the Assad government. In fact, he said the terrorism now rampant was aimed at the kind of peace that the said the Syrian leader was bent on pursuing the peace that the United States government was trying to nail down.
The president said that in their private talks, "There was some progress made, the details of which I will not and should not discuss at this time."
"But we are moving forward. I will … see Prime Minister Rabin and we will have a frank and open discussion as we always do."
Assad said Syria wanted "full withdrawal for full peace," saying Israel must return to Syria the Golan Heights it seized in the 1967 war as well as returning land it has occupied in southern Lebanon since 1983.
Clinton said a peace agreement between the two antagonists should be based on U.N. Security Council resolutions calling upon Israel to return the seized land. "Peace must also be real, more than mere words on paper, more than just the absence of war," he said.
The news conference was held in the sprawling presidential palace in the barren hills overlooking Damascus.

Load-Date: October 27, 1994


End of Document