Syria calls on US, French, Turkish forces to withdraw immediately
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 30, 2018 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 559 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Taking the stage to muted applause at the annual United Nations General Assembly meeting on Saturday, Deputy Prime Minister and foreign minister Walid al-Moallem slammed worldwide interference in Syria, denied Damascus' use of chemical weapons and accused the US-led coalition of war crimes.
"We hope that when the agreement is implemented, the Nusra Front and other terrorists will be eradicated, thus eliminating the last remnants of terrorism in Syria", al-Moallem said.
"They must withdraw immediately and without any conditions", he told the assembly.
Last week, USA national security adviser John Bolton said American troops would stay in Syria until Iran leaves, in a bid to counter Tehran's regional influence.
A picture taken on July 19, 2018 from the Golan Heights shows smoke rising in an area where Russian-backed government forces in Syria have been carrying air strikes near the village of al-Rafid in the southern Syrian province of Quneitra.
United Nations diplomats say a recent agreement between Russian Federation and Turkey to set up a buffer zone in the last major rebel stronghold of Idlib has created an opportunity to press ahead with political talks. "As for the countries that offer only conditional assistance or continue to support terrorism, they are neither invited nor welcome to help". "They are politicizing what should be a purely humanitarian issue".
More than 360,000 people have died and millions displaced from their homes since the regime responded to anti-Assad protests in 2011 with brutal repression.
"He was telling the Syrian opposition: "You've lost the war, you've got to come back home, you should forget [talking about] the future of Syria without Bashar al-Assad", said Ahelbarra.
IOS 12 causes charging problems for some iPhone, iPad models
In today's sale, both the iPhone XS and the iPhone XS Max will be available in three colours - black, grey or off-white, and gold. According to the Tim Cook, the new devices are "by far the most advanced iPhone Apple has ever created".
He said Damascus would continue "fighting this sacred battle until we purge all Syrian territories" of both terror groups and "any illegal foreign presence".
Towards the end of his address, al-Moallem briefly touched on global politics, chastising Israel for its "oppressive and aggressive policies" in Golan Heights and branding the country's recently-passed nation state law as "racist".
A US-backed militant group however on Saturday rejected the deal in Idlib, the last major terrorist bastion in the Arab country.
In a dramatic speech, Syria's top diplomat has told the world that his country's "battle against terrorism is nearly over" and that, after more than seven years of brutal civil war, Syria is now ready to welcome back the more than 5 million people who fled the country.
The UN-led efforts to bring Syria's warring factions together to draft a new constitution under which elections would be held has been stalled for years.
He added that Syria "will not accept any proposal that constitutes an interference in internal affairs of Syria, or leads to such interference".
While Turkey confronts the hard task of trying to separate the forces in Idlib, the United Nations envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, is trying to bring the warring parties together to move forward on long-stalled political talks aimed at ending the war.

Load-Date: September 30, 2018


End of Document