SYRIA WARNS JORDAN OF AN INVASION IF ANOTHER CONFRONTATION DEVELOPS
The New York Times
January 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 359 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Jan. 9
Body


A Syrian leader, accusing Jordan of continued conspiracies against the Government of President Hafez alAssad, has declared that Syrian forces will not stop at the Jordanian border if a new military confrontation is ordered.
The statement, which recalled the Syrian actions of last month in massing troops and tanks at the Syrian-Jordanian frontier, was in a speech by Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Abdel Halim Khaddam last night at a rally staged in Damascus by Al Fatah, the principal Palestinian guerrilla organization, to mark its 16th anniversary.
Mr. Khaddam, whose remarks were quoted by the Damascus radio today, said Syria would help the Jordanian people rise against their Government and would make it possible for Palestinian guerrillas to re-establish bases in Jordan for operations against Israel. The Jordanian Army drove the guerrillas out 11 years ago.
Syrian Deputy Prime Minister Abdel Halim Khaddam warns Jordan of possible invasion if new confrontation is ordered
The speech followed the publication of an article in the semiofficial Syrian newspaper Al Thawra that said the armed forces might stop what it said were anti-Syrian conspiracies by King Hussein.
 
Terrorism in Syria Rises
These statements appeared to be related to increased terrorism against the Syrian Government in the last three weeks by the Moslem Brotherhood, a right-wing organization that is outlawed in Syria. Mr. Khaddam reiterated his Government's charges that King Hussein had been harboring and helping members of the group.
In the next confrontation, Mr. Khaddam said, ''no mediation will be able to save the regime in Amman.'' The last confrontation, in which about 30,000 Syrian troops and 24,000 Jordanian troops were stationed near the border, ended last month after Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia made several trips to Damascus and Amman.
Syria began massing its troops shortly before an Arab League meeting in Amman that was boycotted by Syria, among others. The Syrians had wanted the meeting postponed, saying the Arab world was too divided over various issues, including the war between Iraq and Iran, to agree on a new strategy against Israel.


End of Document