Syria called hotbed of terror threat to U.S.
USA TODAY
January 30, 2014 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2014 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 404 words
Byline: Oren Dorell, @OrenDorell, USA TODAY
Body


U.S. intelligence chiefs told a Senate committee Wednesday that cyberattacks and terrorism pose the greatest threat to the U.S. homeland, especially from Syria where a three-year civil war has turned the country into a  hub for terrorist training and recruitment.
The civil war in Syria "is becoming a center of radical extremism and a potential threat to the homeland," James Clapper, director of National Intelligence,  told the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Other threats include  proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; a dangerous, unpredictable North Korea; emerging demands for energy, water and food; and an insidious blot of synthetic and addictive drugs, he said.
Among the most damaging events to the U.S. intelligence community, he said, have been the disclosures of classified information by former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden.
Although there have been no terrorist acts on the homeland since the last threat assessment, "terrorism is at an all-time high" with 15,400 deaths worldwide since 2012, said committee Chairwoman Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif.
Terrorists have been active in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia, Mali, Libya and especially in Syria, where even al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahri has criticized the actions of one al-Qaeda faction "as too extreme to countenance," Feinstein said.
Because large swaths of Syria are not under the control of the Syrian regime or the moderate opposition, U.S. officials worry about "the establishment of a safe haven and the real prospect that Syria could become a launching point or way station for terrorists seeking to attack the United States or other nations," she said. "Not only are fighters being drawn to Syria, but so are technologies and techniques that pose particular problems to our defenses."
The probability of an al-Qaeda attack in the U.S. is difficult to predict, Clapper said, "because of the diffusion of the threat." However, he noted, "there's no doubt they have an aspiration of an attack on the homeland."
Al-Qaeda's dispersion and decentralization from its "core" in Afghanistan and Pakistan to multiple locations across the Muslim world create "a different threat and a harder one to watch and predict," he said.
Of the 75,000 to 110,000 fighters taking part in the Syrian conflict, about 26,000 are considered extremists, and 7,000 are foreigners from 50 countries in Europe and the Middle East, Clapper said. 

Graphic

 
photo Zein Al-Rifai, AFP/Getty Images

Load-Date: January 30, 2014


End of Document