Syria's Kurds leave Geneva after not being invited to talks
The Bell Ringer: Augusta State University
February 1, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: GLOBAL-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 727 words
Byline: Gerald Bowen
Body


Washington and Moscow are the key players in the bid to end the bloody war in Syria, leading talks through the 17-nation ISSG. Overview of the Syria peace talks in Geneva, Switzerland, Friday, Jan. 29, 2016.
In a controversial move, the alliance has named Mohammed Alloush, member of the Army of Islam rebel group, as its chief negotiator, but sources hinted he was not among those travelling to Geneva.
The High Negotiations Committee begrudgingly bowed only late Friday to USA and Saudi pressure to at least show up in Geneva to test the waters for joining the biggest push yet to end a five-year-old civil war.
"We have been strongly suggesting to them that the best way to actually discuss the implementation of such a type of discussion, and therefore offer improvement is to be done here", said Staffan De Mistura, UN special envoy on Syria.
"This morning in light of what is at stake in these talks, I appeal to both sides to make the most of this moment, to seize the opportunity for serious negotiations, to negotiate in good faith with the goal of making concrete measurable progress in the days immediately ahead", Kerry said in a State Department webcast on Sunday. But we should ask the other side.
Danura said the way the West looks at Syria has largely changed from the view of a hopeless opposition working to defend the Syrian people to the cannot-be-hide atrocities of the IS.
Highlighting the alarming humanitarian situation, Doctors Without Borders said Saturday 16 more people had starved to death in Madaya, one of more than a dozen towns blockaded either by regime or rebel forces.
Another senior delegation member, Riad Naasan Agha, said their team includes several rebel groups including the Army of Islam that controls large areas near the capital Damascus.
"Preserving principles after entering the political process whose rules are against us will turn into an impossible mission with the absence of assurances and few honest mediators", said Labib al Nahhas, a prominent figure in Islamist Ahrar al Sham, which is represented on the HNC, on his Twitter account.
"When there is an order for a cease fire against civilians, an order to lift the siege and an order to release detainees then we will enter the negotiations and talk about a transitional governing body with full executive powers", he said. We have come here as the worldwide will requires.
The 18-month transition plan says nothing about President Bashar Assad's future. Instead "proximity talks" are envisioned whereby de Mistura will shuttle between participants.
Ja'afari added that the Damascus-area bombings "confirms what the Syrian government has stated before - that there is a link between terrorism and the sponsors of terrorism from one side, and some political groups, who claim that they are against terrorism". "In fact they don't fight terrorism because they bring terrorism there and ISIS is spreading in many areas in Syria more than before because of these Russian strikes", al-Mislet said, using an alternative acronym for the Islamic State group.
"The PYD is a historic part of the Syrian democratic opposition and PYD today is fighting terrorism on the ground and it is a main force", Jamil told a group of journalists in Geneva on Saturday.
W&M student contracts Zika virus in Central America
Prevent exposure to mosquito bites particularly during daytime as Aedes aegyptii mosquitoes are up and about mostly then. Luckily, the disease is not yet spreading locally in the country, according to a representative from the CDC.
Like this:
Bulls spoil Lue's coaching debut, beat Cavaliers 96-83Turnout is name of the game in Monday's Iowa caucusesNew Mass Effect, Battlefield, Titanfall by April 2017It's (almost) down to the voting in IowaMore than 2100 pregnant Colombian women infected with Zika virusFacebook, Instagram banning private gun sales on their sitesTexas officials confirm 6 travel-related cases of Zika virusWatch Evening FA Cup Clash from AnfieldState Department declares 22 Clinton emails 'top secret'Andy Murray blames unforced errors for crushing defeat to Novak DjokovicChina manufacturing index falls to three-year low in JanIOC sends medical advice to Olympic committees on Zika virusApple Sees First Sales Crisis In More Than A DecadeHere's a New Look at Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find ThemMicrosoft reports 10.1 pct fall in quarterly revenue

Load-Date: December 15, 2016


End of Document