SYRIA IS TERMED UNSETTLED ON TERRORISM AND IRAN
The New York Times
November 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 813 words
Byline: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Nov. 27
Body


Revelations of Syrian involvement in international terrorism have left President Hafez al-Assad deeply embarrassed, according to Arab and Western diplomats.
Moreover, the disclosures in Washington of secret American and Israeli arms deals with Iran, Syria's closest ally, have stunned the Assad Government, the sources say.
The latest blow came today when West Germany ordered the expulsion of three Syrian diplomats and downgraded its relations with the Assad Government, a day after a West Berlin court implicated Syrian officials in a bombing in the city last March.
The day before, the West Germans issued an international arrest warrant for the second-ranking officer in Syrian Air Force intelligence, Lieut. Col. Haithem Said, after a trial in which a Jordanian and a Palestinian were convicted of bombing the German-Arab Friendship Society in Berlin last March.
The West German warrant for the colonel's arrest came after other revelations of Syrian involvement in terrorism that have brought international sanctions.
Colonel Said is a deputy to one of President Assad's closest friends and advisers, General Mohammed al-Kholi, the head of Air Force intelligence. The colonel was also implicated in the London case of Nezar Hindawi, who was convicted last month of trying to blow up an Israeli airliner. According to testimony in the Berlin trial of Ahmed Hazi and Farouk Salameh, the Syrian Embassy in East Berlin provided the explosives for the bombing last March.
 
'Very Vulnerable, Very Angry'
A Western diplomat described the reaction of Syrian officials to the Iranian arms dealings and the exposure of what Western officials say are Syrian links to terrorism. ''They are very aggrieved,'' the diplomat said, ''very vulnerable and very angry.''
Trials are also pending in Ankara, Genoa, Karachi, Vienna and Madrid that are expected to expose Syrian involvement in international terrorism.
''There will be a link in each of these trials,'' a Western diplomat said. ''It's a mess.''
Diplomats and Arab sources here say President Assad apparently had no idea Iran had been getting arms from the professed most-hated enemies of both countries, Israel and the United States.
''They are the most astounded of anybody,'' a source with frequent contacts with Government officials said, gesturing in the direction of the Presidential palace. ''They just can't believe what's going on.''
President Assad's Government, secular by Baathist doctrine, has maintained its alliance with the Islamic Iran of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini - an alliance fueled by a common personal hatred of the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein - despite considerable criticism from fellow Arabs.
 
'Can't Imagine How This Hurts'
''Think of it from Syria's point of view,'' a Western diplomat said. ''These are arms from Israel. This is a knife that has just been twisted. You can't imagine how this hurts.''
''They have got to be embarrassed by it,'' another Western diplomat said. ''Here's their great friend the Iranians, who they've been trying to support against all kinds of criticism, getting arms from the Israelis.''
Asked over dinner the other night what the Syrian reaction had been to the news of the Iranian arms deal, three well-informed diplomats shook their heads bemusedly and said almost in unison ''not a word.''
The silence, including the avoidance of the subject of Iran and the Persian Gulf war in a speech by the President on Nov. 17, celebrating the 16th anniversary of his coming to power, has been widely noted.
Mr. Assad's Government rests largely on the support of a network of his minority Alawite sect in this predominantly Sunni Moslem nation, along with the unquestioned ruthless power of his military and security network. But the Iranian revelations were one more problem, in addition to growing economic difficulties in the morass of Lebanon, which could only increase the skepticism of much of the population.
 
'We Hate Israel and the U.S.'
''Right, we're the allies of Iran against Iraq, but mostly we hate Israel and the United States,'' said a shopkeeper in the Damascus suk, the bazaar that is the hub of much of the commerical life here, breaking into cynical laughter. ''So Israel is arming Iran: What kind of a story is this?''
Similarly, the Government's rebuttal to charges of sponsoring terrorism, delivered to the diplomatic community in a 17-page document appears to have met scant acceptance.
''They adopted a policy of denial and denunciation that is now in shambles,'' a Western diplomat said. ''The Syrians were totally unprepared, for example, for the trial that is starting now in Turkey. Their denial policy is in shreds.''
Mr. Assad is also faced with growing economic difficulties at home and the impasse in Lebanon in which his efforts to impose a Syrian order are being challenged in warfare in Palestinian refugee districts by a growing Palestinian guerrilla presence.


End of Document