Syrian foreign minister defends Assad regime He accuses U.S. and neighboring Arab nations of promoting 'terrorism.'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 2, 2012 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 558 words
Byline: By EDITH M. LEDERER and DIAA HADID • Associated Press McClatchy Newspapers contributed to this report.
Dateline: 0 
Body


UNITED NATIONS - Syria's foreign minister brought his regime's case before the world Monday, accusing the U.S. and its allies of promoting "terrorism" and blaming everyone from neighbors and extremists to the news media for escalating the war - except the Syrian government.
Addressing ministers and diplomats from the United Nations' 193 member states as fighting spread in the city of Aleppo, Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem lashed out at calls in Washington and in Arab and European capitals for President Bashar Assad to step down as interference in Syria's affairs.
Al-Moallem accused extremists of prolonging the crisis and denounced countries such as the U.S., Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey for supporting the opposition's "terrorism."
"This terrorism which is externally supported is accompanied by unprecedented media provocation based on igniting religious extremism sponsored by well-known states in the region," he told the U.N. General Assembly.
Members of the opposition said it was common knowledge that these neighboring Arab countries were supporting and financing the rebels but said the Assad government had brought it upon itself after cracking down on protests that began peacefully 18 months ago.
"It is the regime's mindless, brutal and criminal military crackdown that pushed the Syrian people to ask for help from the international community, from NATO and from the devil himself if necessary to protect them," Haitham Manna, a Paris-based veteran Syrian dissident who heads the external branch of the National Coordination Body opposition group, told The Associated Press.
Al-Moallem's speech followed his meeting with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in which the U.N. chief "raised in the strongest terms the continued killings, massive destruction, human rights abuses, and aerial and artillery attacks committed by the government," according to a statement by his press office. "He stressed that it was the Syrian people who were being killed every day, and appealed to the Government of Syria to show compassion to its own people."
Al-Moallem in his address invited the opposition to "work together to stop the shedding of Syrian blood" and said that a Syrian-led dialogue could produce a "more pluralistic and democratic" country.
The opposition called the speech a classic case of regime "propaganda" and dismissed his calls for dialogue as not genuine.
American journalist is shown alive - Austin Tice, an American freelance journalist in Syria who hasn't communicated with family and colleagues since mid-August, is shown alive and in the custody of armed men in a video posted on YouTube.
In the 47-second clip, headlined "Austin Tice still alive," he's shown blindfolded and disoriented, mangling an Islamic prayer before crying out, "Oh, Jesus." Masked gunmen surround him, calling out "God is great!" and wearing the baggy traditional outfits of fighters operating in Afghanistan.
The video was posted Wednesday but it escaped notice until early Monday, when a link to it appeared on a Facebook page that appears to support the Syrian government. Tips and other evidence previously gathered by the news organizations to which Tice contributed have suggested that he's in the custody of the Syrian government. "Knowing Austin is alive and well is comforting to our family," Tice's parents, Marc and Debra, said in a statement.

Load-Date: October 3, 2012


End of Document