Syrian Gains Are Seen In the Shift Toward U.S.
The New York Times
August 25, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 864 words
Byline: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: DAMASCUS, Syria, Aug. 24
Body


What has led President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, long viewed in the West as an intractable adversary, to align his nation with the United States in the Persian Gulf crisis?
Besides hatred for his archrival, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, Mr. Assad has a good deal to gain, diplomats and other political analysts here say. As one of the wiliest political maneuverers in the Middle East, Mr. Assad has now moved Syria from relative isolation to renewed importance, the experts say.
''Syria's position is very clear,'' said Edward P. Djerijian, the United States Ambassador in Damascus, who credits Syria with working very closely with Egypt to engineer the crucial Arab League resolution condemning Iraq's takeover of Kuwait and calling for Arab forces to agree to aid in the defense of Saudi Arabia. That put an Arab face on the American-led military deployment in the gulf.
''The bottom line of the Syrian position is the commonality of views between the United States and Syria on this issue,'' Ambassador Djerijian said.
 
A Change for Both Sides
It is a striking change for Syria. In recent years, Washington tilted toward President Hussein's Government, overlooking its more unsavory aspects and even slipping it intelligence data because Baghdad was at war with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's Iran, which had been seen in Washington as the more dangerous regime.
At the same time, Washington's relations with Damascus ranged from tense to hostile, and Syria played a spoiler role in the United States intervention in Lebanon, using Iranian-sponsored Shiite Muslim fundamentalists against American forces until the Shiites became unmanageable. Syria is also believed to have harbored terrorists, including Ahmed Jabril's Palestinian group, which was held responsible for blowing up a Pan American flight over Scotland.
Now, however, a rejuggling of alliances is taking place, and perhaps it could be explained away with the well-worn Middle East principle, ''The enemy of my enemy is my friend.''
But it is also part of a slow, painstaking mending of relationships over the last two years, Ambassador Djerijian said in an interview today, that reflected the Bush Administration's evaluation of the importance of Syria to three crucial Middle East issues: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the war in Lebanon and terrorism.
''I look at this like a real estate agent,'' Mr. Djerijian said. ''There are three principles: location, location, location.''
''There can be no peace with Israel without Syria; there can be no peace in Lebanon without Syria; there can be no real progress on combating terrorism without Syria,'' he said.
 
Bush Telephones Assad
President Bush has telephoned Mr. Assad twice, once during the current crisis to ''commend Syria for its positive role in Arab counsels,'' said Mr. Djerijian. Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has sent messages, and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near East Affairs, John Kelly, has visited here twice.
These are important and gratifying symbols for President Assad, who claims a historic role for Syria and, thus, himself. He was irritated in 1985, Arab and American officials say, when he successfully put considerable back-room pressure on Shiite Muslim hijackers who had taken a Trans World Airline flight to Beirut to release their hostages. In return, Mr. Assad received what he considered a less-than-duly-appreciated message from President Reagan.
''The U.S.-Syrian relationship has really evolved,'' said the Ambassador, who has had several meetings with Mr. Assad, an unusual move for an American envoy. ''We have built up a dialogue, a relationship in which both sides have interests in common ground.''
''We still have major differences on terrorism, but there is frankness at the highest level,'' he said.
Mr. Assad and Mr. Hussein, leaders of rival wings of the Baath Party, with its pan-Arab, secular, socialist ideology, enjoy a relationship of mutual hatred, which in a sense reflects the historic struggle for predominance in the Arab Muslim world between the Umayyad Caliphate of Damascus and the Abbasid Dynasty of Baghdad.
''Saddam is the arch-rival,'' a diplomat said, sketching the perspective of the Syrian President. ''In this crisis, either he's going to come out a winner or he's going to come out a loser. Certainly it's not in their interest that Saddam come out a winner.''
The Syrians moved quickly in the present crisis. ''Assad sees a realignment of Arab forces,'' a diplomat said. ''This is politically significant for the future if it holds up.''
The great bugaboo in the Middle East is foreign influence, the heritage of years of colonialism. Thus, acceptance of the American military presence in Saudi Arabia not only cannot be acknowledged by Syria, but must be cloaked as opposition to foreign involvement.
The way it was explained, a diplomat said, was that ''Syria will do everything to protect Iraq from its own folly, which has led to the danger of foreign intervention. Therefore, Iraq should remove the pretext of foreign intervention by withdrawing. This, then, justified the dispatching of troops, an enormous event, under the guise of a pan-Arab effort.''
''It was very clever,'' the diplomat said.


End of Document