Tabs for terrorism coverage on the rise
Crain's Cleveland Business
May 19, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 1000 words
Byline: JAY MILLER
Body


The cost of terrorism is beginning to show up on the budgets of various business and government entities as insurance companies are tacking sometimes-stiff charges for terrorism coverage onto property insurance premiums. Overall, however, the cost appears to be modest, in part because many property owners are declining the added coverage.
Exactly how much the terrorism coverage is costing the regional economy is unclear because many property owners are unwilling to discuss the subject. However, because of added coverage for terrorism, the city of Cleveland's property insurance at Cleveland Browns Stadium and Cleveland Hopkins International Airport has nearly doubled.
The city just negotiated a new insurance policy for Browns Stadium and will pay $375,000 for terrorism coverage on top of $175,000 for basic property insurance coverage. At the airport, the city pays $30,000 for terrorism coverage and $338,600 for its basic property coverage. The disparities in coverage reflect the different uses of the two properties and the higher likelihood the insurance industry attaches to a terrorist attack at a high-profile football stadium.
The high cost of terrorism coverage isn't unique to Browns Stadium among sports facilities. Mark Stornes, CEO of Cavs/Gund Arena Co., said his company was paying ''a substantial six-figure'' amount for terrorism coverage on the downtown arena where the NBA's Cavaliers play. Likewise, the Star Tribune of Minneapolis reports that insurance premiums for coverage at Giants Stadium and Continental Airlines Arena in New Jersey tripled to $4.6 million from $1.5 million because of the cost of terrorism coverage.
The Cleveland Indians have been reported to be part of a consortium of Major League Baseball teams that have purchased terrorism coverage as a group. However, Ken Stefanov, Indians senior vice president for finance and chief financial officer, failed to return four phone calls from Crain's Cleveland Business placed to discuss the touchy subject.
The reluctance to discuss terrorism insurance coverage is not limited to the Indians. Many owners of conspicuous properties are declining to say publicly whether they have coverage. Among them is Janice Witherow, a spokeswoman for the Cedar Point amusement park in Sandusky.
''We don't go into detail regarding our insurance program,'' Ms. Witherow said. ''However, we do have adequate coverage that certainly covers a wide variety of situations.''
A spokesman for Richard E. Jacobs Group, which owns Cleveland's tallest building, the 57-story Key Tower, said the company did not comment on financial matters, including the cost of insurance. Thomas Kmiecik, assistant treasurer of Forest City Enterprises Inc., owner of Tower City and the 52-story Terminal Tower downtown, did not return two phone calls last week.
Gateway Economic Development Corp., which controls 31 acres around Jacobs Field and Gund Arena, does acknowledge carrying terrorism insurance. Gateway executive director Todd Greathouse said the development corporation, which is responsible for a labyrinth of tunnels and service areas under the downtown ballpark and arena complex, saw its liability coverage increase this year to $85,000 from $70,000, including a $9,000 charge for terrorism coverage.
Even though it operates less high-profile properties, Cuyahoga County also chose to buy terrorism insurance. County commissioners earlier this year approved the payment of an additional $95,886 for 20 months of coverage on 24 county buildings within a five-mile radius of downtown Cleveland. The carrier is Factory Mutual Insurance Co.
The county currently pays $800,000 annually for property insurance. Its most expensive building, the Justice Center, is valued at about $300 million, but the county's existing insurance had a terrorism coverage limit of $1 million per occurrence with a $250,000 deductible.
The newly purchased expanded coverage means that should the county be the victim of a covered terrorist act that causes $100 million in damage, the county would pay its $250,000 deductible and the insurance carrier and the federal government would pay $99,750,000. Without the new coverage, the county would be responsible for $99,250,000 of the loss - it pays the first $250,000 and everything over $1 million.
While high-profile properties are being covered for terrorism damages, many property owners are passing on additional insurance.
Don Griffin, assistant vice president of business and personal lines for the National Association of Independent Insurers, said a study by the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers found that less than 10% of property owners with small- and medium-size properties were buying terrorism coverage. That figure rose to about 20% of property owners among insurance companies' biggest customers. Mr. Griffin said stadium and arena operators ''are the ones who are paying the freight.''
The council's survey found that while relatively low-profile properties could find terrorism coverage at a reasonable cost, those building owners were choosing not to buy coverage because they don't believe they are at risk.
''On the other hand,'' said the council's president, Ken A. Crerar, ''some of the riskier operations, with real exposures, choose to do without coverage because of the cost.''
Under the federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, insurance companies must offer property and casualty coverage against many, but not all, terrorist acts. The federal government provides a backstop to the insurers by covering damages in excess of $5 million.
Deepa Cook, director of national accounts for Keller-Thorner Alliant Inc., the Birmingham, Mich., insurance agency that handled Gateway's coverage, said while federal law requires every property/casualty insurer to offer terrorism coverage as an additional layer of coverage to all liability insurance customers, the act does not set prices. As a result, the cost of coverage varies widely and may reflect an insurer's reluctance to offer coverage.

Load-Date: May 22, 2003


End of Document