TACKLE TERRORISM WITH TACT; EXPLORING HOMEGROWN RADICALIZATION IS FINE IF DONE RIGHT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 8, 2011 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B-7
Length: 823 words
Byline: David Schanzer
Body


The polarization of the debate over U.S. Rep. Peter King's plans to conduct congressional hearings this week on radicalization among Muslim Americans is disturbing. A coalition of human rights, Muslim and other religious organizations claims this is an illegitimate and discriminatory inquiry. I disagree.
Muslim Americans comprise about 1 percent of the U.S population but account for a far higher percentage of the acts of violent extremism perpetrated inside our borders. Since 9/11, 161 Muslim Americans have committed terrorist acts or been accused of terrorism crimes, according to a recent study by University of North Carolina sociologist Charles Kurzman. This is hardly a radical insurgency, but it is cause for concern for all Americans.
That said, Muslim Americans have faced increasing discrimination in recent years and have every reason to be angry about many of Mr. King's previous statements and the direction he has charted for the hearings as chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee.
The New York congressman's claims that American mosques are hotbeds of radicalism and that Muslim Americans don't cooperate with law enforcement are just plain wrong. A research project I led found just the opposite -- Muslim Americans are virtually uniform in their rejection of extremism. And since 9/11, Muslim Americans have provided information leading to the arrest of at least 48 Muslim Americans suspected of terrorist activities.
Mr. King's hearings can serve a useful purpose if he re-sets the tone, educates the public about the true nature of the domestic threat and closely scrutinizes the government's strategy for countering violent extremism.
To establish the proper framework for this inquiry and his own credibility to lead it, Mr. King must take pains to emphasize the difference between the radical Islam that produces terrorism and the tolerant, peaceful Islam practiced by the vast majority of Muslim Americans.
This distinction is being lost in our public discourse. Wild accusations that Muslims are trying to impose shariah law in America have been stoking public animosity and leading to episodes like the Florida preacher who threatened to burn Korans on the anniversary of 9/11.
Mr. King needs to set the record straight. Most Muslim Americans abhor violence in the name of Islam, detest terrorists who have brought shame to their religion and want to solve this problem just as much, if not more, than other Americans.
Once the air is cleared, the hearings can get on to the key point: How do we prevent the radicalization of Muslim Americans and stop the tiny minority that might resort to violence?
First, Muslim-American leaders and organizations must explain to both Congress and the American public what they are doing to deter the spread of radical ideology. Our study found that Muslim Americans are both preventing radicals from preaching and pointing out suspicious behavior to law enforcement.
These are important steps, but not enough.
Muslim Americans must actively confront the concept of "jihadi cool" being shopped to young people over the Internet. Imams trained abroad and out of touch with American culture are ill-equipped to lead this effort. Muslim-American community leaders must craft the message to their youth.
Muslim American leaders also must do more than condemn terrorist acts after the fact, which they do every time there is one. We need Muslim Americans more aggressively refuting the lies of militants such as Osama bin Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki who claim that Islam condones violence against civilians.
Every Muslim-American community should establish a trusted channel of communication with law enforcement. Claims of government discrimination and civil rights abuses against Muslim Americans must be addressed. But Muslim Americans also must accept that legal law enforcement tactics, used every day against organized crime and drug traffickers, are legitimate means to detect potential terrorists, too.
Most importantly, the Homeland Security Committee should ask tough questions about what the government is doing to address the threat of domestic radicalization.
The terrorism threat has transformed in recent years from centralized, large-scale plots that leave a lot of clues to smaller attacks by individuals who live in the shadows. The best way to prevent such attacks is old-fashioned police work based on tips from the community, informants and surveillance. Information-sharing between federal agencies and local authorities also is needed, and the Bipartisan Policy Center has warned that no one seems in charge of this sprawling effort. Mr. King's committee should focus on fixing this problem.
Striking the right tone for these hearings will be a delicate task. Hearings that educate the American public and improve counterterrorism policy would make an important contribution. Hearings that inflame passions and damage our national unity would make us less safe.

Notes

David Schanzer is director of the Triangle Center on Terrorism and Homeland Security at Duke University and the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (schanzer@duke.edu)./

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP: U.S. Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., will chair congressional hearings on homegrown terrorism starting Thursday.

Load-Date: March 8, 2011


End of Document