TACKLING TERRORISM MUST INCLUDE FOREIGN POLICY REASSESSMENT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 23, 2001 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Greg Freeman Column; Pg. B1
Length: 625 words
Byline: Greg Freeman
Body


Anyone who has read this column knows that I love our country and believe that we're doing the right thing in Afghanistan.
But, like many Americans, I have begun to look closer at our foreign policy since the Sept. 11 attack on the United States.
And in many cases, I don't like what I see.
Like most of us, I didn't pay nearly as much attention to foreign policy as I should have. I kept up with the major developments, of course. The wars, the major tensions and any developments that directly affected the United States caught my attention.
But whom were we backing and why? I must admit that I didn't give as much attention to such things.
Looking closer now at our foreign policy, there seems to me to be no real rhyme or reason to whom we've supported over the years. While we have fought to make America safe for democracy, democracy doesn't always appear to have been our priority when it came to other countries.
Instead of supporting democracies or backing leaders who have the popular support of their nations, it looks to me like we've been more opportunistic in our selections of which countries to support. If the government in power could do something for us, we supported it. I've learned as I've looked deeper that if our foreign policy had a theme, it would be, "What's in it for us?"
Saudi Arabia seems to be a prime example. If we were as committed to democracy as we claim, I wonder why we didn't pressure the Saudis long ago to democratize instead of supporting a corrupt regime that is hated by its people. Was it because of our dependence on oil?
I've also learned more about our foreign policy decisions. I've gained insight into why so many nations hate us. Yes, envy, grievance, humiliation are all part of it. But there's more.
They see the double standards that we sometimes have when it comes to whom we support. It seems like we've propped up dictatorships and governments that don't believe in human rights, as long as they could do something for us.
Fanatics like Osama bin Laden have won popularity in some circles because he has made the United States a scapegoat. He tells his followers that their awful plight -- their poverty, their starvation, their violent lives -- is the result of our policies. While that may not be true, I can see how our foreign policies have not helped disprove his lies.
Despite bin Laden's assertions, the United States has often taken up arms to aid Muslims in places like Bosnia, Kuwait and Somalia. But it appears that many of our other foreign policies continue to provide bin Laden and others like him with ammunition to turn countless people against us.
I think we must continue in our battle to fight terrorism and to find bin Laden. But somewhere along the way, we should also take the time to re-evaluate our foreign policy.
It's easy for people to get political here -- for Democrats to blame President George W. Bush's earlier foreign policy or for Republicans to blame former President Bill Clinton's foreign policy. In fact, however, no one individual or administration can be blamed for the piecemeal foreign policy that we have now. It's a conglomeration of policies that have been stitched together for 20 years or more.
What's needed now is a policy that promotes what Chicago Tribune columnist Clarence Page calls a "new humanitarianism": a foreign policy based on tackling terrorism at its roots, where people can share the benefits of the modern world while holding on to the healthy values of their ancient traditions.
As our leaders develop short-term strategies to find bin Laden and other terrorists elsewhere, while weeding out terrorist cells in this country, let's also hope that they will work on long-term strategies that will put some common sense into our foreign policy.

Notes

STLtoday.com/freeman; gfreeman@post-dispatch.com  

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document