Taiwan Train Explosion Wasn't Organized Terrorism, Government Says
The New York Times 
July 8, 2016 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 382 words
Byline: PATRICK BOEHLER
Highlight: At least 25 people were injured in the blast, which Taiwan's premier said was most likely the work of "an individual person." A news agency said a suspect had been identified.
Body


Correction Appended
HONG KONG - The authorities in Taiwan said on Friday that they had ruled out organized terrorism in a bombing on a commuter train that left at least 25 people wounded.
The blast occurred on Thursday night in one of the train's cars as it was approaching Taipei, the capital. The official Central News Agency cited witnesses describing an explosion followed by flames that spread in the car.
Most of the injuries were minor, but one person was in critical condition, the local news media reported on Friday morning, citing an official at a Taipei hospital. Two other people were reported to be in serious condition.
Central News Agency reported later Friday that one of the wounded, a 55-year-old man, had been identified as a suspect in the bombing. It said that his fingerprints had been found on the bomb, which the authorities had described as an 18-inch           metal tube filled with an explosive substance. The report made no mention of a possible motive.
Speaking to reporters earlier Friday, Taiwan's premier, Lin Chuan, who visited some of the wounded during the night, said the bombing was not an organized terrorist attack. He said the police had information about a suspect, but he did not elaborate.
"The people should keep calm, because this is not a terror attack," Mr. Lin said. "This is not an organized attack." He said "an individual person" was probably to blame.
The episode is likely to revive concerns about security on public transportation in Taiwan. In May 2014, a student killed four people and wounded 24 others in a stabbing rampage on the Taipei subway. After that attack, ridership dropped sharply, and the city's subway operator later demanded compensation from the assailant, Cheng Chieh. Mr. Cheng, who was 21 at the time of the attack, was later convicted of murder and was executed in May of this year.
Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter @mrbaopanrui.
Correction: July 8, 2016, Friday
 A headline with an earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the train on which the bombing occurred. It is a commuter train, not a subway train.
Related Articles
American Kills Himself in Taiwan Court After 4-Year Drug Sentence
China to Prosecute Taiwanese in Fraud Case Despite Acquittals in Kenya
Taiwan Families Receive Goodbye Letters Decades After Executions

Load-Date: January 18, 2017


End of Document