TAKING CLERIC OFF YOUTUBE ISN'T SO EASY; CALLS TO JIHAD HAVE INSPIRED VIOLENT PLOTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 5, 2011 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 892 words
Byline: Scott Shane, The New York Times
Body


WASHINGTON -- From the Fort Hood, Texas, shootings to the stabbing of a British member of Parliament, investigators have identified Anwar al-Awlaki's online calls to jihad as an important instigator of terrorism.
So members of Congress last year appealed to YouTube to remove appeals for violence by Mr. Awlaki, the militant U.S.-born cleric now hiding in Yemen, and in an announcement reported around the world in November, YouTube agreed. End of story?
Not at all. A quick search for "Anwar al-Awlaki" on YouTube today finds hundreds of his videos, most of them scriptural commentary or clerical advice, but dozens that include calls for jihad or attacks on the United States.
As the House prepares for hearings next week on the radicalization of U.S. Muslims, the YouTube-Awlaki story is a revealing study in the complexity of limiting controversial speech in an age of do-it-yourself media.
In eloquent U.S. English or Arabic with English subtitles, Mr. Awlaki can be seen in videos decrying America's "war on Islam"; warning Muslims why they should "never, ever trust a kuffar," or non-Muslim; praising the attempt by his "student" to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner; and patiently explaining why U.S. civilians are legitimate targets for killings. Such videos have been posted in multiple copies and viewed hundreds or thousands of times.
Since YouTube relies on viewers to flag objectionable material, and only a fraction of Mr. Awlaki's videos violates its rules, it was never likely that his pronouncements would disappear from the site. Even if they did, scores of other sites without YouTube's rules also host Mr. Awlaki's written, audio or video declarations.
"There's no way as a practical matter to wipe this material off the face of the Internet," said John B. Morris Jr., general counsel at the Center for Democracy and Technology, a nonprofit group in Washington. "It's very unrealistic to believe that any action of any American company or American politician can keep this material off the Web."
Terrorism analyst Evan F. Kohlmann of the Flashpoint Global Partners consulting company, who has followed Mr. Awlaki for years, acknowledged the difficulties, but said YouTube should make a greater effort to curtail his terror message.
"YouTube has become a major alternative distribution point for jihadi propaganda, especially for homegrown militants who may not have the pedigree to gain access to the classic, password-protected jihadi chat forums," Mr. Kohlmann said, referring to militant sites that restrict access. "If you don't have online friends who can sneak you in, and if you don't speak Arabic, then YouTube may be the best available option."
Mr. Kohlmann said that while it might not be easy or cheap, "there are ways of removing this material in a relatively expeditious manner."
YouTube, the 6-year-old California-based powerhouse of Web video owned by Google, says that it receives an average of 35 hours of video every minute, day and night from millions of contributors. That ratio makes prescreening impractical, said Victoria Grand, YouTube's head of communications and policy.
Instead, just as YouTube relies on its users to provide content, it relies on them to police the content. The site posts its "community guidelines," which bar incitements to violence, hate speech, bomb-making instructions and postings by a member of a designated terrorist organization. A signed-in YouTube user who objects to a video clicks on the "flag" beneath it and indicates the reasons for a complaint by clicking on a label: for instance, "nudity," "child abuse," "animal abuse" or "mass advertising."
In the case of terrorism-related material, objections could fall in the categories "violent or repulsive conduct," including subcategories for "physical attack" or -- in a label added in November after complaints about Mr. Awlaki -- "promotes terrorism." Militant messages could be "hateful or abusive content," with a subcategory for "promotes hatred or violence."
Then YouTube reviewers look at the flagged videos with the assistance of sophisticated software. Any video that violates the company's guidelines is removed, Ms. Grand said. "We encourage our users to continue to bring this material to our attention," she said. "We review flagged videos around the clock."
The variety and volume of Mr. Awlaki's YouTube material makes it more difficult than might be supposed to decide its fate. Should his sermon on what makes a good marriage come down? His account of the final moments of the Prophet Muhammad? His counsel on the proper diet for a good Muslim? Such material does not violate any YouTube standard.
But there is evidence that those inspired by Mr. Awlaki to plot violence usually were first drawn by his engaging lectures, including Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, the Army psychiatrist charged in the Fort Hood shootings; the young men who planned to attack Fort Dix, N.J.; and the 21-year-old British student who told the police that she stabbed a member of Parliament in May after watching 100 hours of Awlaki videos.
It may be that the crowdsourcing that drives YouTube, its reliance on the masses, becomes the ultimate answer to violent messages on the site, more than company censors. Anti-jihad activists with names like the YouTube Smackdown Corps patrol the site constantly, flagging what they consider to be offensive material.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: SITE Intelligence Group: Anwar al-Awlaki speaks in a video message posted on radical websites. The U.S.-born radical Yemeni cleric linked to previous attacks on the U.S. said since all Americans are the enemy, clerics don't need to issue any special fatwas or religious rulings allowing them to be killed.

Load-Date: March 8, 2011


End of Document