TAKING STEPS TO CONTAIN TERRORISM
The New York Times
July 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 1100 words
Byline: By William E. Colby ; William E. Colby, who was Director of Central Intelligence from 1973 to 1976, is senior adviser to International Business-Government Counsellors Inc., a firm that analyzes country risks for possible investors.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorism is having yet another periodic revival as a major political issue.
 President Reagan and Secretary of State George P. Shultz have denounced state-supported terrorism and insisted at the economic summit meeting in London that the industrialized democracies collaborate better to bring this under control. Debate is raging over the implications of the Italian prosecutor's report on the attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II, which implies that the Bulgarian Government, and perhaps even the Soviet Government, were behind the attack. A bill has been submitted to Congress that would impose criminal sanctions on Americans assisting or training terrorists identified by the Secretary of State. Behind these problems looms the nightmare of possible nuclear terrorism.
This concern is hardly new. We heard much the same unease and the same call for a definitive remedy after the Palestine Liberation Organization attack on the Munich Olympics in 1972, the Red Brigades' kidnapping and murder of the former Italian Prime Minister Aldo Moro in 1978, the attack by the Japanese Red Army at Lod Airport in Israel in 1972, and on back to concerns about the Bolsheviks in the 1920's. None of this concern is unwarranted, but we
 should beware of undue alarmism and unrealistic hopes for a comprehensive solution.  In fact, the more grave the terrorist threat, the more certain it is that it will be suppressed before it causes serious disruption, threatening the state or the public order. Today, the Red Brigades are impotent, the Bader-Meinhoff gang, in West Germany, has been suppressed and the Japanese Red Army is hardly existent. The extensive terrorist actions in the 1960's by the Argentine Montoneros and the Uruguayan Tupemaros were brutally but effectively suppressed by the military of those countries. India's crackdown on the Sikhs is the latest demonstration of a state's ability to crush such a threat to its authority.  Besides, in most cases, the drama of terrorism grossly exaggerates its real effect. Thus, Irish Republican Army terrorism has made essentially no progress against British rule in Northern Ireland. Che Guevara's romanticism brought concern over possible mass insurgency in Latin America but little change in its political or social systems. Certainly, the Symbionese Liberation Army and the Weathermen had little effect upon the ordinary American citizen's life, compared to many social problems we tolerate with equanimity such as the 23,000 Americans who die each year from handgun misuse or the 25,000 killed by drunken drivers.  What exactly is terrorism? It is a tactic of indiscriminate violence used against innocent bystanders for political effect - and it must be distinguished from the selective use of violence against the symbols and institutions of a contested power, which is unfortunately a norm of international life.
The difference is critically important: Without it, there is no way to distinguish ''your'' terrorist from ''my'' freedom-fighter or to differentiate aid to terrorists from covert support of friendly forces like the Nicaraguan contras, or counterrevolutionary fighters. Aid to friendly guerrilla forces, from the American colonists to the Afghans today, is a regular part of the international contest, whereas the indiscriminate use of violence can be denounced on a solid moral basis.
We probably cannot eliminate terrorism, but we can take steps to contain it. Intelligence is the first arm of defense against the terrorist, identifying him, his cause and his supporters. Such intelligence can provide tips about general plans or specific tactics that can lead to the frustration or capture of the terrorist. Along with the careful accumulation and collation of data, it may often include exchanging information with other friendly nations and occasionally launching risky and difficult missions to infiltrate terrorist groups.  This requires resources, but it also requires that the intelligence services not be hamstrung in their operations by great public exposure or excessive legalistic restraints. Obviously, the innocent citizen must be protected from excessive Governmental intrusion, but reasonable protection can be obtained by legislative and judicial supervision.  The second major step to protect against terrorists involves security practices that make their task more difficult. The barriers around public buildings, the electronic screening of crowds, irregular schedules for multinational executives and effective police work can all be carried out with minimum inconvenience to the public but maximum deterrence against the would-be terrorist.  But finally - and this may be the most important rule for any government hoping to protect itself and its citizens from terrorists - success against terrorism can be achieved only if the public supports the effort. The difference between a public that reports evidence of terrorists to the authorities, even at some personal risk, and one giving covert support or even cowed to silence, can mean the entire difference between success and failure.  In this, international public opinion can also be enormously important. The international rejection of the South American tactic of ''disappearances'' severely weakened those governments who practiced such abduction and arbitrary killing. The death squads in Central America have made it difficult for international friends to support the governments in some of those nations.
Moreover, the best way to insure public support is to insist that the rule of law be fully applied in the fight against the terrorists. The French use of torture in Algeria in the 1950's was widely repudiated by French public opinion, greatly undermining what had been a successful strategy against the National Front for Liberation.
Why is the rule of law so important? The most successful tactic against the guerrilla or terrorist is to recruit him, not shoot him. To do that, he must be confident that he will benefit from any amnesty that is offered and be subjected only to a coherent rule of law. The terrorist also must be turned from his belief that violence can advance a cause valuable to his compatriots by a demonstration that a better result lies in the programs and policies of a government determined to ameliorate the lot of its people and to treat even its enemies with justice, even if this must be stern in some cases. If terrorism is the indiscriminate use of force against innocent bystanders, it is clear that a government resisting terrorism must be discriminate in its use of force to insure the safety of its bystanders.

Graphic

 
drawing


End of Document