TAKING THE FIRST STEPS TOWARD A WORLD WITHOUT TERRORISM;
It will take more than force to end terror.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
October 10, 2001 Wednesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2001 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 11A
Length: 814 words
Byline: Jack Beaudoin
Series: Letter To A Canadian
Body

Dear P.,
Tomorrow marks the one-month anniversary of the bloody attack on the United States, and the fourth day since the United States and its allies began the new war against terrorism. We are still trying to count the dead in New York and Washington, even as explosions in Kabul and Kandahar begin a new body count.
It is not too early, however, to begin envisioning a world without terrorism. The military campaign, no matter how long and how deadly it proves to be for Osama bin Laden and his ilk, will not be sufficient to this end. Even if the al-Qaida network were dismantled, can anyone truly believe that every man with a political complaint and a hand grenade will swear off civilian targets?
I think the fundamental problem is that the conditions of terror - a complaint of oppression and the availability of arms - are also the conditions of revolution. The British, no doubt, considered the Boston Tea Party and the battles at Lexington and Concord a form of terrorism (with the exception of a few opposition members of Parliament, no one there thought of the armed colonials as freedom fighters). Similarly, the African National Congress was labeled a terrorist organization by the apartheid government in South Africa.
Today, those who fail to confront their enemies in the open and target civilians rather than military assets we rightly call terrorists. But to the outgunned and undermanned opponents of established regimes, terrorism is an effective tool of rebellion. Both the Irish Republican Army and the paramilitary unionists in Ireland have blood on their hands. Many Israelis will never draw fine distinctions between Hamas, Hizballah and the Palestinian Authority of Yasser Arafat.
There have been calls for a worldwide conference on terrorism, but it is impossible to imagine consensus emerging about who the enemy is. Let's not fool ourselves for a minute: the underlying notion of jihad is not unique to Islam. Fighting and dying for a higher cause - God, country or freedom - has been considered valorous in virtually every society.
This is not moral relativism, I hasten to point out, but the relativism that necessarily adheres to any culturally conditioned point of view.
Are we therefore at an impasse? Instead of trying to define terrorists, it may be more useful to work against the two conditions of terror.
As you recently noted, the best way to understand someone is to figure out who he is arguing against. Thus, a worldwide conference should begin its work by defining the oppression terrorists say they are fighting. Any country that would be a signatory to an anti-terror convention ought to guarantee basic human rights of conscience, speech, religion and political participation. They ought to guarantee civil liberties to minority ethnic and religious groups. It is far better to face an opposition political party than a terrorist organization.
The second line of work in an anti-terror treaty concerns arms. While different countries have different standards when it comes to an individual's right to bear arms, any nation that would be a partner in the battle against international terrorism should not, at a bare minimum, be providing arms to terrorist groups.
How can we expect countries to participate in such an agreement? Would it be enforceable?
Here I think the United Nations needs to draw a clear line. Any country that does not sign the anti-terror agreement should not be eligible to receive anything but emergency-related international aid. These nations should not be permitted to sit on the U.N. Security Council or other major committees. World Trade Organization membership should be contingent on signing the treaty.
At the same time, I believe the new "Bush Doctrine" has a role to play. In the current campaign in Afghanistan, one very clear message is emerging to government sponsors of terrorism: the price of such support is your power. Providing safe haven to international terrorists - those non-governmental entities that have targeted and killed innocent civilians in other countries - should cost a regime its legitimacy in the family of nations and risk its sovereignty at home.
Such a treaty or convention could help guide this nation's own definition of strategic interests. It would have prevented us, for instance, from supporting nondemocratic regimes in the Middle East that have since either hardened into dictatorships or fallen to fundamentalists. It would force China to reform its politics before its economy gets a capitalist boost. It would add teeth to the Mitchell Plan as a step to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Would such a convention truly end terrorism? I admit that it would not be perfect, or easy to enforce, but it would, at the very least, offer a bit of hope in an otherwise gloomy future.
Jack Beaudoin, an editorial writer, can be reached at 791-6481
or jbeaudoin@pressherald.com.  

Load-Date: October 10, 2001


End of Document