Taking his research abroad UTPB professor wins fellowship to South African university
Odessa American (Texas)
January 5, 2016 Tuesday


Copyright 2016 Odessa American
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 1329 words
Byline: Ruth Campbell, Odessa American, Texas
Body


Jan. 05--University of Texas of the Permian Basin history professor Derek Catsam will be making what he terms a "grand return" to Rhodes University in Grahamstown, South Africa, on a Hugh le May Fellowship.
Catsam has made many trips to South Africa over the years and plans to spend from February to about mid-June in the country. The Hugh le May Fellowship is available in alternate years to senior scholars who wish to devote themselves to advanced work in one of the following subjects: Philosophy, classics and a variety of history and languages.
"It'll really be a great experience," Catsam said.
He added that he's currently juggling two book projects, both of which are relevant to South Africa and the United States, but he's going to focus on the 1981 visit to America by the national South African rugby team nicknamed the Springboks. The team came to this country to share their greatness and help improve American rugby, Catsam said.
Catsam, who is the Dunagan Fellow in the Humanities, said the team was the embodiment of apartheid in South Africa at the time, of a particular strain held by Afrikaner nationalists, "which raised a great deal of controversy when they came here."
The Springboks visited New Zealand first, an occasion that Catsam said was "very explosive."
"There were riots and protests and giant boycotts and some violence," he added.
The idea of coming to the United States was to share their greatness and help improve American rugby, Catsam said. "That didn't prove to be the case," he added, noting that it helped galvanize the U.S. struggle against apartheid.
His other book will look at bus boycotts in the United States and South Africa in the 40s and 50s. "I think it will be a solid project when I finally round the bend on it," Catsam said.
While in South Africa, Catsam said in an email that he also would be finishing up a couple of articles, would likely give a handful of public talks, meet with students and write some columns for South African newspapers.
Castsam earned his bachelor's degree from Williams College, his master's degree from the University of North Carolina-Charlotte and his Ph.D. from Ohio University, where he was a student in the Contemporary History Institute. He also spent a year as a postgraduate student at Rhodes University, where he was a Rotary fellow, according to the UTPB website.
Catsam wound up going to South Africa after finishing his master's degree. He'd been working on civil rights, but had never spent any time abroad.
"I grew up in a poor family, and so if I was going abroad I wanted somebody else to pay for it because I couldn't afford to it," Catsam said. He said he wanted to do something meaningful that matched up with his work and thought South Africa was a prime place to examine race and politics.
He applied for the Rotary fellowship about the same time as other students apply to universities for graduate programs. "So I applied and got it and ended up there and picked it up as a research, writing and teaching field. I write about ... South African history, but I also write a lot about contemporary politics, both in the U.S. and South Africa," he said.
Next fall, he plans to teach a course in the presidency and presidential elections to coincide with the election cycle and one in global terrorism.
When he teaches the global terrorism course, Catsam said it is "hugely" Middle East focused, but he can draw connections to South Africa, as well, with calling the African National Congress, the South African liberation movement, a terrorist organization. Calling them that, Catsam said, is a way to brand them as unworthy.
"They're terrorists, they're communists; therefore, you get the support of the United States and you can do anything you want when in fact every characteristic of your apartheid state is itself terrorist," Catsam said.
After the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Catsam said there were further uses -- and misuses -- of the term terrorism.
"You're seeing some of the uses and misuses of terrorism in the public dialogue now," he said.
In a lot of ways, Catsam said, his initial work and interest in terrorism came from sub-Saharan Africa and Northern Ireland. This meant he had a different framework to look at the concept.
"Furthermore, as someone who looks at civil rights in the United States, our concept of terrorism really needs to be wildly expanded in the light of the fact of centuries of racial violence, particularly in the Jim Crow period, and an extended run of serious, clearly politically motivated racial violence. Because I do largely post-1940 history, there is a lot of resonance with issues that we're still confronted with," Catsam said.
These days, he said, terrorism becomes "stuff I don't like."
"If everything can be terrorism, then nothing is terrorism, or if only everything that one group does can be terrorism, but we exclude a whole host of other things, then what does that say about our approach to terrorism?" he added.
Policies should deal with specific threats, but Catsam said policies should be flexible enough to recognize that ISIS isn't al-Qaeda. "And these organizations don't come out of nowhere. They come out of a wide-ranging geopolitical framework. So therefore, I look at the cynicism with which the American government across the whole, and especially the South African government, branded the ANC as a terrorist organization. It just has a lot of resonance with what I sometimes hear today," he said.
In early 2015, there was an attack on a satirical magazine, Charlie Hebdo, and a kosher supermarket in France, and recently in the United States there was the attack in San Bernardino, both carried out by solo attackers.
"And the lone wolves are scary because they can pop up anywhere, but the lone wolves are by definition isolated. While it could theoretically happen anywhere, I think that if we sort of fall into their trap if we do really succumb to the worst of the terror and undermine the things that supposedly are the values that make us better," Catsam said.
"I think we need to be willing to recognize that," Catsam said. He added after embassy attacks during President George W. Bush's administration, there was "nary a peep." But after four people were killed tragically at the embassy in Benghazi, Libya, there have been many congressional hearings and millions of dollars spent to "discover precisely what it was ... a tragic, horrible accident caught up in a range of circumstances that were hard to identify on the ground," Catsam said.
The reaction to the latest attacks, Catsam said, has felt "a little cartoonish" and it's exacerbated by the early phases of the presidential election nominating process.
Referencing the recent calls to restrict or bar Muslims from entering the United States, Catsam said there was the "Yellow Peril" during World War II that led to the internment of Japanese Americans.
Catsam said there also is a longstanding history of what historian Richard Hofstadter called "the paranoid style of American politics."
"You'll always see an element of this and the hope is that cooler minds prevail and it doesn't necessarily always happen. You can see the emergence of the John Birch Society, the 100 percent American, coupled with extreme nativism during the World War I era and into the 1920s," Catsam said.
"You can certainly see both a willingness to create an 'other,' who then becomes the monster, but we do have a bit of a confluence of circumstances now whereby the Republicans are trying to make substantial political hay out of a lot of these issues. It's not to say that many of these issues shouldn't be discussed, but they should be discussed a lot more rationally than what we're seeing right now," he said.
Ruth Campbell covers education for the Odessa American. Reach her at 432-333-7765432-333-7765 or rcampbell@oaoa.com
___ (c)2016 the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) Visit the Odessa American (Odessa, Texas) at www.oaoa.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: January 11, 2016


End of Document