Talent keeps tabs on terror Former senator is at the forefront of efforts to prevent or deal with another 9/11. - Correction Appended
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 11, 2009 Friday
THIRD EDITION


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 1176 words
Byline: By Bill Lambrecht • , blambrecht@post-dispatch.com,  > 202-298-6880
Dateline: 0 
Body


WASHINGTON - Jim Talent was in a meeting at a hotel in St. Louis planning his Senate candidacy when terrorists struck on Sept. 11. That fretful session watching the horrors unfold on television is seared into his memory.
With many politicians locked down in Washington after a hijacked plane hit the Pentagon eight years ago, the duty to help explain to the media what had happened fell to Talent, who had become a military expert during eight years as a congressman.
Nobody knew back then that Talent would become an anti-terrorism specialist who would co-author a book-length report with the ominous title "World at Risk."
But Talent had it mostly right on Sept. 11, 2001, when he put his finger on what was afoot.
"You had a sense that what happened was signaling a change in the world and that the Cold War was no longer the big thing," Talent recalled this week.
The new big thing - the topic that involves a vast planning apparatus in Washington and around the world - is how to fight terrorism and prevent more attacks.
Out of politics since losing his
Senate seat to Claire McCaskill in the 2006 election, Talent, a Republican, is looking at security threats from several angles these days. He is vice chairman of the Congress-ordered entity that grew out of the 9/11 Commission, a panel called the Commission on the Prevention of Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation and Terrorism.
He has the title of distinguished fellow at the Washington-based Heritage Commission, specializing in military readiness. He sits on an advisory panel for the chief of naval operations and served as national security adviser to Mitt Romney's quest for the GOP presidential nomination. In his main paying job, Talent is a consultant with Fleishman-Hillard, the public relations powerhouse.
This week, Talent was back in front of the cameras in Washington as part of a new effort to hasten preparations for what Talent's commission believes is the probability of another terrorist attack.
Last December, amid little fanfare, Talent's panel reached a frightening conclusion: "The commission believes that unless the world community acts decisively and with great urgency, it is more likely than not that a weapon of mass destruction will be used in a terrorist attack somewhere in the world by the end of 2013."
The weapon most likely to be used? A biological agent such as a virus, bacteria or disease-casusing toxin, the commission concluded.
Spelling out the threat at a news conference this week, Talent described the horrific scenario of a pickup truck blowing anthrax around the perimeter of Fourth of July celebrations in St. Louis.
"You're talking about killing a minimum of tens of thousands of people," he said.
READINESS STRESSED
National security has often become a partisan issue in recent years, but Talent says politics play no role in the mission of his panel: identifying threats and recommending ways to avoid them. Since early 2008, he has worked closely with the commission's chairman, former Sen. Bob Graham, a Florida Democrat. Last week, Talent stood alongside Sen. Joseph Lieberman, an Independent from Connecticut, to promote Lieberman's legislation, which aims to prepare for a biological attack.
In an interview, Talent explained why he believes that a biological attack is possible, if not probable. Terrorism is all but certain to continue, Talent said, pointing to intelligence obtained after 9/11 showing that al-Qaida is seeking destructive weapons.
"If you are ruthless enough, this is what you will gravitate to," he said. "It is perfectly logical that they will be trying to get this kind of weaponry."
Talent said his intention is not to frighten people, although his commission surely does so with its sobering possibilities.
"There are hundreds of thousands of people around the world trying to stop this," he said.
Talent argues for a much more focused effort by the government to get ready for an attack. After the new administration took power, he and Graham pushed to have Vice President Joe Biden put in charge of White House preparation. Graham said this week that they had received "no definite response to the request."
There is much to be done. For instance, the Government Accountability Office - the investigative arm of Congress - produced the eye-opening conclusion a year ago that two of the five American labs containing the world's most dangerous biological agents and disease pathogens had a "significant lack" of security.
Talent is squarely behind legislation introduced this week that, among other things, would mandate security standards for these so-called BSL-4 labs.
In addition, the bill requires a national strategy for dispensing antibiotics and other medicines to the public to combat a biological attack. As old school as it might sound, the legislation envisions the Postal Service as a principal means of distribution.
The bill also calls for providing medical kits to emergency responders, drugs Talent believes families also might also want to keep on hand.
"I think that a big part of preparation is for Americans to better understand the threat and to take steps to prepare," he said.
As far as Talent's own future, it remains uncertain how long this interlude away from electoral politics will last. This is the longest he has been away from elective office since the early 1980s. When Sen. Christopher "Kit" Bond declared this year that he wouldn't seek re-election in 2010, Talent's name came up automatically as a replacement.
Talent, who had been heavily involved in producing the "World at Risk" report in the weeks before, said no to the race, postponing any decision about running for statewide office in Missouri for two years.
For now, Talent is deep into some of the national and global issues that came to occupy his time in the Senate. His jobs lack the trappings of elected office. But he only has to be in Washington half the time that he used to, he noted. And, despite the scariness of his subject, he enjoys the intellectual part of anti-terrorism planning.
"You get into all the intelligence, and it energizes you," he said.
Some local 9/11 events
- A ceremony honoring first responders and remembering the victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks begins at 8:30 a.m. today at the 9/11 Memorial at O'Fallon Municipal Centre (City Hall), 100 North Main Street in O'Fallon, Mo.
- A traditional Mexican altar will be set up at Soldiers Memorial Park downtown from 4 to 10 p.m. today in honor of the 9/11 victims. This is part of the Greater St. Louis Hispanic Festival that runs through the weekend.
- The Fire Chaplains of Jefferson County will host two memorial services today in honor of the first responders who died in the line of duty on 9/11. The first service will be at 9 a.m. at Immaculate Conception's gymnasium, 2300 Church Road in Arnold. The second service will begin at 7 p.m. at St. Martin's Church, 7890 Dittmer Ridge Road in Dittmer.
- The city of Florissant is hosting a 9/11 remembrance ceremony at 1 p.m. Sunday at the James J. Eagan Center. The keynote speaker will be state Sen. Timothy Green.
Correction


Former U.S. Sen. Jim Talent is a distinguished fellow at the Heritage Foundation. The organization was incorrectly identified in a report in this story.
Correction-Date: September 12, 2009

Graphic

 
 Photo - Talent 

Load-Date: October 21, 2009


End of Document