TALIBAN CRIES TERRORISM;
GETS LITTLE SYMPATHY FROM REST OF THE WORLD
 Philadelphia Daily News
October 8, 2001 Monday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 22
Length: 616 words
Byline: ANDREW ROCHE Reuters
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Afghanistan's Taliban cried "terrorism" as the United States and Britain bombed its forces, but won only scraps of sympathy from a world that has increasingly isolated the hardline Islamists since Sept. 11.
First international reactions to the air raids were mostly ones of support, from Western allies whom the United States warned in advance that the onslaught was imminent. From the Islamic world, there were mixed reactions or silence.
"This attack by America is a terrorist act," Taliban ambassador to Pakistan Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef said.
His hardline movement found itself in Washington's firing line because it refused to hand over Osama bin Laden, blamed for the devastating attacks on New York and Washington last month.
"We cannot hand over Osama to America," Zaeef said. "Poor and common Afghans will die, for which America will be responsible . . . We will fight to the last breath."
But neighboring Pakistan, the only state still to recognize the Taliban as a legitimate government, said the Taliban had brought the strikes on themselves. Pakistan's military ruler, President General Pervez Musharraf, said early today that the U.S.-led attacks were precisely targeted and that the opposition Northern Alliance must not exploit them.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Washington's staunchest ally, said the U.S.-British attack were planned "to do all we humanly can to avoid civilian casualties."
President Jacques Chirac was quick to announce that French forces would also be taking part soon in the Afghan operation.
U.S. President Bush said in his public announcement of the attacks that Canada, Australia and Germany had also "pledged forces as the operation unfolds."
Leaders in many Muslim countries were still silent on the Afghan raids several hours after they began.
State-controlled television in Iraq, a frequent target of U.S. and British warplanes, described the strikes on Afghanistan as "treacherous aggression."
An Iranian spokesman said the air bombardment had been launched "regardless of world public opinion, especially opinion in the Islamic world." But he added: "I did not condemn it, it was conditionally condemned."
Lebanon said the strikes showed the United States was forcing its definition of terrorism on the world.
On the streets of the Middle East, many ordinary Arabs were more outspoken than their rulers. "What are the Americans thinking? The Afghans will hit back and strike the heart of America. This conflict will spread and engulf the whole world," said an Egyptian taxi driver.
Authorities tightened security measures worldwide as fears of retaliation for the Afghan raids ran high. U.S. diplomatic missions in Saudi Arabia closed indefinitely.
"There will be more strikes by terrorists against U.S. interests. Whether it's here or abroad, or both, remains to be seen," one U.S. official said.
"Italy is on the side of the United States and of all those who are committed to the fight against terrorism," Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said in Milan, later adding that his nation would participate in "military operations."
Russia issued a statement of strong support for the air raids, saying Afghanistan had become a haven for terrorists.
"It is time for decisive action with this evil," the statement said. "Terrorists wherever they are - in Afghanistan, Chechnya, Middle East or the Balkans - should know that they will be taken to justice."
Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres called the U.S. attack on Afghanistan a "brave decision" by Bush. "I think that all of us, first of all, are praying for the welfare of the American army and its allies," he said. Israeli officials said Prime Minister Ariel Sharon had been warned of the raids well in advance. *

Notes

AMERICA STRIKES BACK

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Associated Press
A young Afghan refugee flashes a victory sign at a refugee camp in the suburbs of Torbat-e-Jam city in Khorasan province, which borders Afghanistan, in northeast Iran.

Load-Date: November 13, 2001


End of Document