TALIBAN AND PAKISTANI LEADERS REJECT U.S. ENVOY'S PLEA FOR END TO TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 26, 2000, Wednesday, THREE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. A10
Length: 454 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN
Body


Afghanistan's ruling Taliban and the hard-line leaders of Pakistan have rebuffed U.S. appeals to crack down on terrorism.
On a visit to the region last week, a top American envoy urged the outlawing of a group blamed for hijacking an Indian plane last month and that steps be taken to bring terror suspect Osama bin Laden to justice.
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Karl Inderfurth discussed terrorism concerns last week when he met with ruling Gen. Pervez Musharraf and other leaders of Pakistan.
"We hope that the government of Pakistan will take steps against such extremist groups which carry out acts of violence inside Pakistan, as well as in the region," Inderfurth said, specifically mentioning Harkat ul-Mujahedeen.
 
Pakistan did not promise to crack down on such groups.
What Inderfurth got was a statement sharing Washington's concern about terrorism.
Pakistan's response undercuts the United States' public rejection of India's charges that Pakistan had a hand in the hijacking and attacks aimed at India.
And in neighboring Afghanistan, Taliban leaders have refused to hand over bin Laden, charged in the United States with masterminding the deadly bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
Of particular concern to the United States is Harkat ul-Mujahedeen, the successor to a Pakistani-based organization that has been declared a terrorist group by Washington.
Meanwhile, a spokesman for a brother organization, Harkat ul-Jehad, warned of violence if the government tried to close the group's offices in Pakistan.
"We will not hesitate to take any action, and believe me, there will be a free-for-all here in Pakistan. It will be anarchy," Abu Mahmood Ashraf said.
He added that his group trains in Pakistan and Afghanistan to fight in Kashmir - the flashpoint of two wars between India and Pakistan - and "in other Muslim countries where Muslims are being attacked."
 
Ashraf also called bin Laden a hero to Muslims worldwide.
"Any injury or his death would be a great shock to us, and we would not stop until we have severely punished the United States," he said.
India accuses Harkat ul-Mujahedeen of staging the Indian Airlines hijacking, which ended with 155 hostages freed in exchange for the Indian government's release of three members of the group.
The United States also has asked Pakistan, one of only three countries to recognize the Taliban, to use its influence against bin Laden.
Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil, the Taliban's foreign minister, said Monday that bin Laden would not be extradited or handed over to the United States or a third country for trial.
 
Taliban leaders had met with Inderfurth.
But of further discussions with the United States, Muttawakil said, "We don't want to talk to them."

Load-Date: January 26, 2000


End of Document