TALIBAN REPORTED WILLING TO TRY BIN LADEN IF EVIDENCE GIVEN
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 15, 1998 Thursday SF EDITION


Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A08
Length: 359 words
Byline: REUTERS
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan
Body


A U.N. envoy said yesterday that authorities with Afghanistan's ruling Taliban movement had told him they could put alleged terrorist Osama bin Laden on trial if they found evidence of his involvement in terrorism.
The U.N. envoy on Afghanistan, Lakhdar Brahimi, told reporters in Islamabad after a visit to the southern Afghan town of Kandahar that the Taliban's supreme leader, Mullah Mohammed Omar, had also indicated that such a trial could be conducted by a joint panel of Afghans and non-Afghans.
Bin Laden, a Saudi millionaire now living in exile in Afghanistan, is accused by the United States of masterminding attacks on its embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed more than 260 people in August. He escaped a U.S. cruise-missile strike on his suspected base in eastern Afghanistan later that month.
Brahimi, a former Algerian foreign minister now on a mission to ease tensions between Iran and the Taliban, said Omar told him that the Taliban did not indulge in terrorism. "They condemned terrorism."
He said he was told that bin Laden was "a former Jihadi person" (a holy warrior during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan) and that he was a guest not of the Taliban but of all the people of Afghanistan.
"The Taliban has asked for evidence of bin Laden's involvement in terrorist activities but has not received any evidence so far," Brahimi quoted Omar as telling him. "If and when they will, they will put him to trial."
He said Omar also told him that the Taliban would then welcome a joint Afghan and non-Afghan panel to decide this case.
"I pointed out to him that the world does not accuse the Taliban themselves of organizing terrorist acts outside of Afghanistan," Brahimi said. "But the world was very, very concerned indeed about the use of Afghan territory for the training of terrorists and the planning of terrorist acts."
Bin Laden, who moved to Afghanistan in 1996 after living in Sudan for several years, has denied any involvement in the embassy bombings but has made threats against U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia.
The Taliban says it has told bin Laden not to engage in any activity against any country while living in Afghanistan.

Load-Date: October 24, 2002


End of Document