Talking With Bob Graham About War On Terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 28, 2004 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: COMMENTARY; Pg. 5
Length: 1197 words
Body


Q. How would you have conducted the war on terrorism?
A. I would have stayed on task in Afghanistan until we had destroyed al-Qaida, and then I would have moved to the next — and some people think the more dangerous — terrorist organization, which is Hezbollah. And I would have confronted the Syrians with the sanctuary they have been giving to Hezbollah for the better part of 20 years.
Say, "Just as it was intolerable for Afghanistan to give sanctuary to al-Qaida for 10 years, it's intolerable for you to have given sanctuary to Hezbollah for 20 years, and we demand that you abide by your international responsibilities of not harboring murderers and terrorists, and if you do not follow your responsibilities, we're going to do it for you."
I don't think we would have had to go to war with Syria, but I think we would have had to have disrupted the ... even more dangerous training camps that Hezbollah was operating than Afghanistan did for the better part of the 1990s. And the leadership of Hezbollah, which is located in Syria and the Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon.
Q. Protests are happening in Syria ... that would never have happened before. So maybe taking the war into Iraq, and the administration's goal of having some spillover effect into countries in the region — maybe the war has had that impact?
A. I won't contend that the war was without benefit. I think it's a good thing that Saddam Hussein is in jail; I think it's a good thing that the Baathist Party seems to have been substantially disrupted. The issue is not one of good or bad in terms of a particular operation; it's the priorities.
The Middle East and central Asia is a region with many evil people and evil groups, and the question is: Which of these evils do you go after first? And then that gets you to the question of: What is the standard? Is it which person has put the most people in jail, which person has tortured the most people? My standard was a very simple and direct one: Which of these evil groups has the greatest ability to kill Americans, and what does it take to kill Americans?First you have to have some capability — which groups have the most trained killers, have the potential to do harm to Americans?
Second is the will. Saddam Hussein, according to our intelligence, was not a threat to the United States unless he was attacked. Like bees in the beehive, if you let them alone, they pretty much stay in the beehive. But if you hit it with a stick, be careful.
The third and most important thing is presence in the United States. It's hard, unless you're the Soviet Union of the Cold War, where they had thousands of missiles, to attack the United States effectively from long distance. Certainly none of the evils in the Middle East has the capability of doing it long distance.
So that says that if you're going to attack the United States, you've got have people inside the United States. And I had a pretty good idea of how many of those people Saddam Hussein, how many al-Qaida had and how many Hezbollah had, and I can tell you that there's no comparison [of] the scale of operations of both Hezbollah and al-Qaida in the United States to what Saddam had.
So, using those three factors to determine which group was the most dangerous to kill Americans, I concluded it was not Saddam Hussein, but rather, first al-Qaida and second Hezbollah. And those ought to be our first and second targets.
Q. Did you believe Saddam was not a threat to Israel and other neighbors in the Middle East?
A. Not much of a threat, but that wasn't the standard I used. If the United States is going to commit U.S. military forces, I think the standard ought to be which group has the greatest capacity to kill Americans. Speaking directly to Israel, Hezbollah has been a much more serious threat and an opponent of Israel than Saddam Hussein has been.
Q. What do you think the real motivation was for us to go to war?
A. That's going to be an issue for historians to answer, but I can speculate that some of it was the feeling that we should have taken Saddam Hussein out in 1991 and failed to do so. So there were some old scores to be settled.
Second, I think oil was a factor — that the idea of being able to take over the country which was the second- or third-largest reserve of petroleum was a factor.
And third, you have these people who had the idea that if you ousted Saddam Hussein, you could install a Jeffersonian democracy in Iraq and it would influence the rest of the region. I think that was naive. The British tried to install a democracy in Iraq for 30 years from the early '20s to the early '50s, and finally they gave up and appointed a king and left. We're not going to stay there 30 years.
Q. You said the biggest threat you saw to the United States was al-Qaida. How big is the al-Qaida threat in the United States?
A. Significant.
Q. What does that mean exactly?
A. I can't tell you the number, but I can tell you without question or fear of contradiction, it was multiple times what Saddam Hussein had in the United States.
Q. You were on the Senate Intelligence Committee at that time. What was the evidence of WMD?
A. The CIA had not been asked by the administration to do what's called a national intelligence estimate, which is the highest level of consensus about the intelligence agencies as to a particular circumstance — what would be the military and postmilitary consequences of war against Iraq. The Senate Intelligence Committee made such a request in early September, and by the end of September we had that.
And the report had as its conclusion that Saddam Hussein probably had weapons of mass destruction, chemical and biological, and had some program in place to try to go nuclear, but the nuclear was probably five years from being a military threat.
There were also a lot of caveats and dissents. ... Then we asked them to declassify the classified national intelligence estimate and they did, and in the first round of declassification stripped out all or most of the caveats and conditions that were in the underlying classified version. I thought [that] gave to the American people a very distorted view, and so we asked them to do a second declassification and they reluctantly did that.
It was in that declassification that the statement that Saddam Hussein was only a threat if he was attacked was publicly stated. ... I asked for a third declassification, which was refused. That got me feeling that the administration, either with the intelligence community's compliance or collaboration or without it, was manipulating the data. I personally think now it was a collaborative effort — both the intelligence agencies and administration have a share of the responsibility for the inaccurate information that was presented ... That there were, available for imminent use, weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. That, along with this feeling that whatever Iraq's capabilities might be, they were not as likely to be a threat to the people inside the United States as al-Qaida and Hezbollah and therefore didn't deserve to be the one that we confronted first.
Copyright © 2004, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Notes

TALKING WITH BOB GRAHAM

Graphic

 
PHOTO
Tribune photos by JAY CONNER Graham, a Democrat, has been sharply critical of President Bush's decision to go to war in Iraq.

Load-Date: March 30, 2004


End of Document