Talks to address terrorism defense
Chicago Daily Herald
January 16, 2002, Wednesday F3


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 341 words
Byline: Julianna Oleynik Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


How prepared is the Tri-Cities area for terrorist attacks?  
Three upcoming lectures will address that question.  
A program called "Health and Security in the Tri-Cities: Are We Prepared?" will take place Thursday. It is sponsored by the Leagues of Women Voters of Batavia and Geneva-St. Charles.  
The panel will present "several different scenarios to public health security," said member Janet Craft. "Each person on the panel would be telling what their department would take care of."  
Panelists include Mary Lou England, executive director of the Kane County Health Department; Don Bryant, director of Kane County Emergency Management; Batavia Mayor Jeffery Schielke; and representatives from the Geneva Police Department and U.S. Postal Service.  
The Leagues of Women Voters panel will be from 7 to 9 p.m. Thursday at the Geneva Public Library, located at 127 James St. Call Craft at (630) 232-9272.  
On Feb. 1, Dr. Phillip Brachman from Emory University will deliver a lecture at Fermilab about prevention plans for a variety of bioterrorism methods. Brachman will also discuss future research and other significant potential agents and methods of response, according to Fermilab spokeswoman Janet Mackay-Galbraith.  
Brachman's lecture will be at 8 p.m. at the Fermilab Ramsey Auditorium in Wilson Hall, located at Kirk Rd. and Pine St. in Batavia. Tickets are $5. For more tickets or for more information, call (630) 840-ARTS between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. on regular business days.  
Today, William Matens, a retired FBI investigator, will address the public about the FBI's role against terrorism in a breakfast program sponsored by the St. Charles Chamber of Commerce. Registration is closed for the event, which will be at the St. Charles Country Club.  
Matens, who led a search team at the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, also plans to discuss the Kane County area's potential terrorist targets.  
"I'm worried about the general infrastructure," he said. "I'm worried about water treatment, power (facilities) and the DuPage County Airport."

Load-Date: January 17, 2002


End of Document