Talk of the Town:The best laid plans against terrorism
The Capital (Annapolis, MD)
August 2, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: ARUNDEL; Pg. B1
Length: 617 words
Byline: Joe Gross
Body


Annapolis resident Thomas Strother wrote a book a couple of years ago that is getting some good play these days. Mr. Strother's book, "Beyond Duct Tape, How to Respond to Terrorist Attacks," preps teachers and community leaders to be prepared for a worst-case scenario in the event of a terrorist attack.
He says it wasn't written to scare anyone, but rather to provide a better understanding of possible threats. It is intended to answer questions that teachers or administrators may have about challenges of caring for students.
A former naval officer who had three tours as an instructor at the Naval Academy, Mr. Strother sometimes give a little bit too much information for the average teacher or man on the street, but he informs readers very well.
It's an easy book to flip through, but it's designed as an instructional manual He points out that it's also a valuable tool for businesses with a large number of employees and it can surely be helpful to private citizens.
The book is available at  http://www.annapolisbooks.com 
Getting clipped
In response to complaints about the obscured sight distance for the left turn from Rowe Boulevard to the eastbound Route 50 on ramp, the State Highway Administration sent a letter two weeks ago thanking a resident for his "observations which will help the SHA to provide safe and efficient roadways in our communities" and informing the resident that a crew has been instructed to trim the flowers in the median to improve the sight distance at the intersection.
The SHA district engineer said in the letter he expected work will be completed within 60 days.
Road rage
One reader who drives extensively within the Annapolis area for her business has sent several e-mails first pointing out, then mentioning, then almost begging that I try to work some wonders to get the city and county to repair the storm drains in the curb lanes on city streets and outside lanes of county roads.
"Almost every street or road has storm drain grates that have dips or bumps around them, causing some cars to swerve to the left to avoid hitting the grates that are not nearly even with the road surfaces. Other people simply hit the bumps and nearly lose control of their cars while ruining their tires or necessitating front end alignments.
"I don't know why it's so hard to fill the spaces around the grates to make driving over them, especially some on West Street and Jennifer Road, unnoticeable. I, for one, would feel safer if somebody could get that simple bit of work done. I thank you so much if you can get some of those problems taken care of."
I don't know if I have that type of power, but I did drive around town and did find several grate problems, including the ones the writer had to be thinking about when she mentioned West Street and Jennifer Road, but there are lots more that need attention to make the streets a little bit safer.
Remember when
On yesterday's date in 1914, World War I began when Germany and Russia declared war against each other, France ordered a general mobilization, and the first German army units crossed into Luxembourg in preparation for the German invasion of France.
On today's date in 1945, the Potsdam Conference, the last wartime conference of the Soviet Union, the United States and Great Britain concluded after two weeks of debate. The conference failed to settle most of the important issues and helped to create the Cold War that would began shortly after World War II ended.
On tomorrow's date in 1958, the U.S. nuclear submarine Nautilus made the first undersea voyage to the geographic North Pole. Nautilus dived at Point Barrow, Alaska, and traveled nearly 1,000 miles under the Arctic ice cap to reach the top of the world.

Load-Date: August 2, 2005


End of Document