Talking Security; on the go
The Forward
December 7, 2012


Copyright 2012 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Best of the Blogs; Pg. 2
Length: 354 words
Byline: 
For Masha Leon's complete coverage of this event and of The Golden Land and a Music for Medicine benefit, visit www.forward.com/sections/on- the-go
Body


'We gather together tonight  to pay tribute to the wonderful  friendship between Israel  and the United States and to support  the Rabin Medical Center,  said TV interviewer Charlie  Rose, master of ceremonies of the  November 19 American Friends  of Rabin Medical Center's 13th  annual gala. Addressing the  600-strong festive, chatty crowd  at Cipriani 42nd Street, Rose  said that the hospital, named for  Yitzhak Rabin, cares for 1 million  patients annually, including  Israeli Jews, Arabs and even  Palestinians from Gaza and the  West Bank. Rose queried NYC  Police Commissioner Raymond  Kelly and former director of the  Israel Security Agency, or Shin  Bet, Ami Ayalon about security.  Has the face of terrorism  changed in terms of tactics and  challenge? Rose asked. Kelly  responded that we have a relationship  with Israeli law enforcement,  and implied that terrorism  is not only an Israeli issue, but  also a reality here in New York  City. We have a very close relationship  with Israel, Kelly said.  We have some officers embedded  with the Israeli national  police [with] a regular exchange  of information.... We've had 15  [terrorist] plots here against New  York City . Thanks to a combination  of good work by the  Federal Government, the NYPD  and sheer luck, all of them have  been deterred.
In a way, we are fighting a new  kind of war, Ayalon said, a war  [where] success or victory is not  achieved on the battlefield but in  the eyes of spectators all over the  world.... We military people find it  very difficult to understand that no  matter what we do on the ground  or at sea, [victory] is achieved by  the side that controls the narrative  [and is able] to present to spectators  that he is a good guy. Because  for the eyes of the spectators, no  matter what was the moment   be it a picture of tank facing a  child  the tank will lose the battle  no matter what happened one  moment earlier or what will happen  a moment later. At the end  of the conversation, Rose thanked  both men, adding, It is because of  these two men great men that we  will live in a safer and more stable  world.
 

Graphic

 
IMAGE
IMAGE: Safety Measures:Former Israeli security chief Ami Ayalon (left)speaks with New York Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly.; KAREN LEON

Load-Date: December 10, 2012


End of Document