TAMIL PARTY LOSING SUPPORT TO MORE MILITANT IN SRI LANKA
The New York Times
August 29, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 620 words
Byline: By SANJOY HAZARIKA
Dateline: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka
Body


A three-day visit to Sri Lanka's northern province indicates that popular support is gradually moving away from the main political party representing Tamil separatism and toward militant groups committed to terrorism.
 ''We cannot say that it is going out of our hands, but definitely the militants are more assertive now and in the forefront of the struggle,'' said Appapillai Amirthalingam, the secretary of the Tamil United Liberation Front, which has advocated a separate nation for the Tamil minority by nonviolent methods.
Civil rights workers, intellectuals and Government employees in the northern province say reports of attacks on civilians by Government troops have deepened support for the extremists, who say they will never accept a negotiated settlement. Most of the troops are members of the country's Sinhalese majority.
Popular support in northern Sri Lanka is gradually shifting from main political party representing Tamil separatism toward militant groups committed to terrorism; civil rights workers, intellectuals and Government employees in north say reports of attacks on civilians by Government troops have deepened support for extremists; incidents in Velvettithurai reportedly occurred during major offensive aimed at smashing terrorism movement (M)
Mr. Amirthalingam said many young Tamils were also upset by his party's participation in talks with the Government of President Junius R. Jayawardene on a constitutonal settlement.
 
Loyalty Oath Is Shunned
Members of the Tamil United Liberation Front have been barred from holding elective office because the Constitution requires that members of Parliament swear an oath of loyalty to the unity of the country.
''We are being driven to the wall,'' said Rajendran Yarumuthu, who identified himself as a Tamil doctor. He was speaking to a reporter at the fishing village of Velvettithurai, where residents reported that troops had burned homes and stores after a terrorist bomb killed several soldiers in August. Navy gunboats are also said to have fired upon the hamlet.
Lalith Athulathmudali, Sri Lanka's Minister of Security Affairs, denied the charges against the troops.
The Velvettithurai incidents were said to have occurred during a major offensive by troops aimed at smashing the terrorist movement.
At least 100 people are said to have died in the incidents, nearly half of them civilians. At least 600 young Tamils from the northern province have been rounded up for questioning by security forces.
 
Officials Differ on Responsibility
The Security Minister accused the villagers at Velvettithurai of setting their own homes ablaze.  In a separate interview, however, a senior Government minister acknowledged that troops were responsible for the fires and had also attacked the port town of Mannar, south of Jaffna. The minister said that 33 soldiers had been arrested for their involvement in the violence and that the Government was determined to enforce discipline.
Many Sinhalese fear that escalating violence in the north could touch off an Indian invasion.  They are not assured by statements by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India that her country has no wish to intervene militarily.
The Tamils are viewed as having strong ethnic, cultural and religious links with India, where they dominate the southern state of Tamilnadu. They are predominantly Hindu while the Sinhalese, who are mostly Buddhist, look to Southeast Asia for cultural affinity.
Official sources say talks between various political groups on Aug. 21 and 22 indicate some progress on possible constitutional changes. Tne negotiations are based on a Government proposal to create a second parliamentary chamber that would give Sri Lanka's minority groups better representation.


End of Document