Taming the Patriot Act
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
November 2, 2005 Wednesday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12A; Newspaper
Length: 425 words
Series: EDITORIALS
Body


Since passage of the USA Patriot Act in October 2001, more than 300 states and communities, including St. Petersburg and Tampa, have passed civic resolutions condemning the act's intrusive reach and lack of safeguards for civil liberties. As the reauthorization of the act moves through Congress, it is clear that the Senate has heard these concerns while the House remains doorknob deaf. During conference committee negotiations, the Senate version is the one that deserves to emerge largely intact.
One of the most contentious areas of the act is the so-called "library records" provision. In the Senate version, rather than granting the government all records relevant to a terrorism investigation as is the case now, the government would be required to demonstrate to a judge that there is a connection between the records sought and a suspected terrorist or spy. The so-called "sneak and peek" provision would also be modified by the Senate version to grant the target of the search notification within seven days, except in exceptional circumstances. Also, businesses and organizations receiving broad orders to turn over records would have a right to challenge the order in court. And the most controversial provisions would again sunset after four years.
The House version has none of these modifications and, in fact, would greatly expand the death penalty in ways that are deeply troubling and probably unconstitutional.
Right now there are 20 terrorism-related offenses in federal law that carry the death penalty. The House would add another 25 death sentence crimes connected to terrorism, and it would strip prosecutors of the obligation of proving that the accused actually intended to kill someone or cause a grave threat to human life.
Theoretically, if someone sent money to an organization that they didn't know supported terrorist activities, they could be brought up on charges that carried the death penalty.
The bill also would give federal prosecutors the chance to try again if their first efforts to impose a death sentence resulted in a deadlocked jury. Under today's rules, if the sentencing jury isn't unanimous in voting for death, the defendant receives a life sentence. But the House would allow a prosecutor who has convinced a single juror to vote for death to empanel a new sentencing jury.
The version of the act that emerges from the conference committee negotiations will have a substantial impact on the future of American liberties. At least the Senate recognizes that national security and civil liberties can coexist.

Load-Date: November 2, 2005


End of Document