Tape threatens new attacks 'Osama to Obama': Bin Laden refers to airliner bomb plot on Christmas. WAR ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 25, 2010 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A8
Length: 601 words
Byline: By JASON KEYSER • Associated Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


CAIRO, Egypt - Osama bin Laden endorsed the failed attempt to blow up a U.S. airliner on Christmas Day and threatened new attacks against the United States in an audio message released Sunday that appeared aimed at asserting that he maintains some direct command over al-Qaida-inspired offshoots.
However, U.S. officials and several researchers who track terrorist groups said there was no indication bin Laden or any of his top lieutenants had anything to do with or even knew in advance of the Christmas plot by a Yemen-based group that is one of several largely independent al-Qaida franchises.
A U.S. State Department spokesman said al-Qaida's core leadership offered such groups strategic guidance but depended on them to carry it out.
"He's trying to continue to appear relevant" by talking up the attempted attack by an affiliate, the spokesman, P.J. Crowley, said.
The one-minute message was explicit in its threat of new attacks. Like the airline plot, bin Laden said, they would come in response to America's support for Israel.
"God willing, our raids on you will continue as long as your support for the Israelis continues," bin Laden said in the recording, which was released to the Al-Jazeera news channel.
"The message delivered to you through the plane of the heroic warrior Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab was a confirmation of the previous messages sent by the heroes of Sept. 11," he said of the Nigerian suspect in the Dec. 25 botched attack.
"If our messages had been able to reach you through words we wouldn't have been delivering them through planes."
Directing his statements at President Barack Obama - "from Osama to Obama," he said - bin Laden added: "America will never dream of security unless we will have it in reality in Palestine."
The message, which White House officials said could not immediately be authenticated, raised again the question of how much of a link exists between al-Qaida's top leadership along the Afghan-Pakistani border and the handful of loosely affiliated groups operating in the Arabian Peninsula, North Africa and Iraq.
The al-Qaida leader, who was last heard from in September, seemed intent on showing he remains more than an ideological figurehead, as most analysts have suggested he has become during the terrorist network's evolution into decentralized offshoots. But some questioned whether al-Qaida's core leadership was involved.
"They weren't putting the final touches on this operation," said Evan Kohlmann, a senior investigator for the New York-based NEFA Foundation, which researches Islamic militants.
Still, the Saudi and Yemeni leaders of al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, which formed in Yemen a year ago, have a long history of direct personal contact with bin Laden. It is plausible that - if they were able to - they would have informed bin Laden of the airliner plot and sought his approval, Kohlmann said.
The Yemen-based group's leader, Nasir al-Wahishi, was once bin Laden's personal secretary, and its top military commander, Qassim al-Raimi, trained in bin Laden's main camp in Afghanistan, Kohlmann said.
Two of the group's top members were detainees at the Guantanamo Bay U.S. military prison who were released in November 2007.
The Yemen offshoot is largely self-sustaining, with its own theological figures, bomb makers and a network for funneling in recruits.
"The training and the definition of the attack was by the local leaders of al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula," said Rohan Gunaratna, author of "Inside Al Qaeda: Global Network of Terror."
"So, in many ways you can say bin Laden is exploiting for his benefit this particular attack."

Load-Date: January 30, 2010


End of Document