TAPES LINK ALLEGED PLOTTER, TRADE CENTER EXPLOSION
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 8, 1994 TUESDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1994 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 529 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


The accused mastermind of a plot to bomb New York landmarks offered a place to stay overseas to a suspected bomber fleeing the country after the World Trade Center explosion, an FBI informant's taped conversations show.
But Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali's defense lawyer tried to discount what his client said in the secretly taped conversations, saying he was just bragging.
Prosecutors will use the tape transcripts to support their assertion that the Trade Center bombing was part of the larger, foiled terrorism conspiracy.
Fifteen men face trial in September on charges they plotted to blow up the United Nations, the FBI's New York headquarters and two tunnels and a bridge in the city. Assassinations and kidnappings also were part of the alleged terror rampage against the U.S. government.
The transcripts of the tapes, recorded last spring, quote the alleged ringleader, Siddig Ali, as saying he had tried to arrange safe refuge overseas for Mahmud Abouhalima, one of the men convicted last week in the Trade Center attack.
In another conversation, according to the transcripts, Siddig Ali told the informant that more than one person had carried out the Trade Center bombing, which killed six and wounded more than 1,000 on Feb. 26, 1993.
But William Kunstler, a lawyer for Siddig Ali, said Monday that much of what his client said on the tapes was merely bragging.
"I think a lot of it is talk, that he knows things. A lot of it is braggadocio, each one is trying to upstage each other. But to the jury it looks like the real thing, unfortunately," he said.
The tapes were recorded last spring by FBI informant Emad Salem. Hundreds of pages of transcripts were filed recently in U.S. District Court.
As previously reported, the transcripts also indicate that extremist Muslim cleric Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman approved the terrorism plot, though with reservations about attacking the United Nations and FBI office. He is one of the 15 defendants.
In one undated taped conversation, Salem asks why the first man arrested in the Trade Center bombing, Mohammad Salameh, rented an easily traced van to carry the bomb, rather than buy a junk vehicle for the attack.
"The operation was not done by one person, they did it as a group," Siddig Ali said.
"All the people are stupid," Siddig Ali said. "The car will be burned and they will never find out about it, this is their understanding."
FBI agents used a vehicle identification number on a van part found in the blast rubble to track down Salameh and eventually the other three convicted Friday. They will be sentenced May 4 and face life in prison without parole.
Siddig Ali later told Salem that he had given Abouhalima, painted by prosecutors as a leader of the Trade Center attack, letters of introduction so he could stay with his relatives in the Sudan and Saudi Arabia when he left the United States shortly after the bombing.
He also gave Abouhalima introductions to the head of judges in Sudan and a letter to the police chief in Sudan's Khartoum province.
At one point, Siddig Ali said he was with Abouhalima's brother, Mohammed, when he learned that Mahmud Abouhalima had moved on to Egypt the day after he left the United States.

Load-Date: September 1, 1994


End of Document