TAPES REVEAL MORE OF ALLEGED TERROR PLOT THE ALLEGED LEADER OFFERED REFUGE ABROAD TO ONE OF THE MEN CONVICTED IN THE TRADE CENTER BLAST.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 8, 1994 Tuesday FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A09
Length: 587 words
Byline: Larry Neumeister, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


The alleged mastermind of a plot to bomb New York landmarks offered an overseas haven to a suspected bomber fleeing the country after the World Trade Center explosion, according to transcripts of an FBI informant's conversations.
But William Kunstler, attorney for alleged ringleader Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, tried to discount what his client said in the secretly taped conversations, saying Siddig Ali was just bragging.
The transcripts also indicate that a Hollywood-style commando raid was in the works to assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak until the FBI was tipped off.
Prosecutors will use the tape transcripts, recorded last spring, to support their assertion that the trade center bombing was part of a larger, foiled terrorism conspiracy.
Fifteen men face trial in September on charges that they plotted to blow up the United Nations, the FBI's New York headquarters, and two tunnels and a bridge in the city. Assassinations and kidnappings also were part of the alleged terror spree against the U.S. government.
The tapes were recorded by FBI informant Emad Salem. Hundreds of pages of transcripts were filed recently in U.S. District Court and reviewed by the Associated Press.
The transcripts quote Siddig Ali as saying he had tried to arrange safe refuge overseas for Mahmud Abouhalima, one of four men convicted last week in the Feb. 26, 1993, trade center attack.
Siddig Ali told Salem that he had given Abouhalima, painted by prosecutors as a leader of the trade center attack, letters of introduction so he could stay with Siddig Ali's relatives in Sudan and Saudi Arabia when Abouhalima left the United States shortly after the bombing.
He also gave Abouhalima introductions to the head of judges in Sudan and a letter to the police chief in Sudan's Khartoum province.
In another conversation, according to the transcripts, Siddig Ali told Salem that more than one person had carried out the bombing, which killed six and injured 1,000.
On the tapes, the two men spoke frequently of Mubarak. They referred to him as the "Laughing Cow," an apparent reference to an expression the Egyptian leader made in a photograph.
Siddig Ali told Salem there were three potential plans to assassinate Mubarak during a visit to New York, according to the transcripts. Mubarak visited the White House last April, but his planned trip to New York was canceled.
In one plan, two men would shoot at the same time from different locations as Mubarak walked out a door of an unspecified location.
In the second, 10 men would overpower kitchen staff and security officers at the Waldorf Astoria hotel and don room-service uniforms.
"We'll go in with the president's order himself and his staff, we'll use guards, we'll deal with the reality as it is and the shooting will be merciless," Siddig Ali is quoted as saying. "No mercy. All the same, they will be all gone. It's going to be a suicidal operation."
In the third scenario, the men would overtake a United Parcel Service truck and park it a block from the Waldorf. As Mubarak arrived in a motorcade and stepped out of his car, "three will be shooting and throwing grenades, two will be covering them from the back," Siddig Ali is quoted as saying.
"It is a suicidal operation because the street will be covered with the police," he said.
As previously reported, the transcripts also indicate that extremist Muslim cleric Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman approved the terrorism plot, though with reservations about attacking the United Nations and FBI office. He is one of the 15 defendants.

Load-Date: October 21, 2002


End of Document