Targeting terrorism, future world hot spots
USA TODAY
October 18, 1996, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 315 words
Byline: Robert Oakley
Body


Roundtable participants discuss future trouble spots and controlling
terrorism:
-- Taiwan: "Taiwan is now closer to being a democracy
than any other east Asian state. That means it has a voice of
its own, and that means the old mantras about Chinese unification
being supported on both sides of the straits are outdated. We
will have to cope with that issue, as will the people on the Chinese
mainland as well as the Taiwanese, as well as all their neighbors
in East Asia. It's a time bomb if not managed correctly. Any president
is going to have to deal with that." -- Helmut Sonnenfeldt
-- Persian Gulf: "Our entire Middle East Persian Gulf
policy is very closely linked to cooperation with three key powers,
Turkey, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. And quite frankly, none of these
look like countries that are terribly reliable allies in the long
term. Turkey not only seems to be swinging away from the West,
but Egypt and Saudi Arabia have regimes whose grip on power is
certainly not as secure as it once was." -- Ted Carpenter
-- Terrorism: "It's the use of violence in politics,
whether in overthrowing governments in north Africa or attacking
. . . New York. I would like to see renewed effort given to efforts
that control the proliferation and technology of mass destruction.
And I think Bob Dole would work harder on this. I think also,
recognizing that everybody has failed, Bob Dole would take the
prudent steps and provide us a missile defense." -- Jeane Kirkpatrick
"People can deliver things in a suitcase. We no longer need missiles.
We saw what happened in the subways of Tokyo. It didn't require
a missile. That's plenty lethal. There are a lot of other ways
to deliver whatever sort of terrorist weapon you want to deliver.
If we spend all our money on that, we're protecting ourselves
against something that probably is not going to happen and we're
not going to have a foolproof missile defense in any event."

Load-Date: October 18, 1996


End of Document