Tarpon Springs' Hoskins is third so far in PBA event
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 25, 1991, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: SPORTS; SPORTS DIGEST; Pg.  2C; DIGEST
Length: 614 words
Byline: JOHN LUTTERMOSER
Body


Steve Hoskins of Tarpon Springs was in third place Thursday night after three rounds of the Professional Bowlers Association Pinole (Calif.) Open. Hoskins, the tour's 1989 Rookie of the Year, had 4,071 pins. He trailed leader Jim Pencak by 42 pins and second-place Tony Westlake by just one as the field was cut to 24 bowlers for match-play competition. First prize in the tournament is $ 21,000.
U.S. ski team arrives at World meet; security tight
 American skiers were on the slopes for the first time Thursday at the World Championships in Saalbach-Hinterglemm, Austria, leaving their terrorism fears behind in a heavily guarded hotel. Men and women downhillers trained Thursday, an off day at the championships. The next race is the downhill portion of the women's combined event today. The U.S. team, which flew home from Europe last week because of terrorism fears in the wake of the Persian Gulf war, arrived Wednesday two races after the start of the two-week event. Police, some armed with submachine guns, patrolled the men's training area. But security did not seem tighter than before the Americans' arrival. The skiers said security was much more evident at the team hotel, which was surrounded by about 10 guards. A.J. Kitt, the top American in the men's downhill, said the Gulf situation could help focus his desire to succeed. "A lot of guys my age are over there dying for what we're doing, what our cause is," he said. "I want to help and try to support them as much as possible in everything that I do."
 Japanese team scraps trip out of respect for troops
 The Yakult Swallows, a Japanese professional baseball team that has trained in Arizona each spring since 1978, won't come this year because of the Persian Gulf war. Yuma Mayor Bob Tippett said the team told him it thought it would be disrespectful if it were to send its young players to play baseball when the United States has sent its young people into war against Iraq. "Their major concern was not the safety of their ballplayers, terrorism or anything," Tippett said. "And they stressed to me they will be back next year."
 CFL may act to eliminate chip-shot field-goal tries
 Kickers will be looking at a 52-yard field goal attempt from the 25-yard line during the 1991 Canadian Football League exhibition season if recommendations by the league's rules committee are approved. Commissioner Donald Crump said that subject to clarification and feasibility, the goal posts will be moved to the back of the end zone on an experimental basis. End zones in the CFL are 20 yards deep, twice as deep as those in American football, and the goal posts are now stationed on the goal line. (The NFL moved the posts back to the end line in 1974.) Last year, said CFL chief of officials Don Barker, CFL kickers made 99.2 percent of their extra points, 95 percent of field goals from 20 yards or less and 90 percent from 30 or less.
 Frenchwoman rallies to win European skating title
 Surya Bonaly, a 17-year-old originally from Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean, became the first Frenchwoman to win a European figure skating title when she came from behind during the free skating event to win the championship in Sofia, Bulgaria. Bonaly overtook defending champion Evelyn Grossman of Germany, who finished second. Marina Kielmann, another German, was third.  Bonaly, a former world junior tumbling champion, uses her gymnastic technique to do a number of triple jumps. She landed on five, fell on one and two-footed another. Her marks were mostly 5.7 and 5.8 for technical merit and 5.6 and 5.7 for artistic impression.  Grossman looked nervous, fell once and cut a double axel to a single.
 Compiled by John Luttermoser.

Load-Date: November 12, 1992


End of Document