Tax increase on raceway 'disappointing'; ON YOUR MIND
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 24, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: IDEAS & VOICES; Pg. A7
Length: 517 words
Byline: Letters to the editor
Body


Gaming operator to cut expenses
On behalf of Penn National Gaming, operator of Hollywood Gaming at Dayton Raceway, I am writing to express our extreme dismay with the recent actions of the Ohio Senate in singling out our company for a new tax increase ("City of Dayton would get $1.5 million from racino deal," Dec. 11).
What was even more disappointing was the active role our local Senate delegation played in this discriminatory and punitive action. Despite paying $150 million in unprecedented "relocation fees" to move our racetracks to Dayton and to Austintown in the Youngstown area, members of our own host community delegations led the charge against us, while the money they sought could have easily come out of the $150 million we already provided the state.
Already, $2 million has been designated out of the relocation fees for the City of Dayton to use on such things as fire and police services. This extra money grab, which will cost us at least $1.5 million, could not come at a worse time as we are just getting underway with a full year of operations at our new racetrack in what is a very competitive environment.
Penn National has been a strong community partner and friend of Dayton and the Miami Valley area. We fought hard to bring our $250 million economic development project to Dayton, generated hundreds of new local jobs, and are supporting numerous worthwhile charities and civic organizations.
Sadly, this unanticipated tax hike on our businesses will force us to have to find ways to cut local expenses, both operational and civic related. We will also be forced to explore legal alternatives on a bill that penalizes our company alone. Originally the tax bill applied to all but one of the state's seven racetracks, but it was inexplicably pared down to target only our two facilities.
It is unfortunate that we enter this New Year with a feeling of utter shock and betrayal at the actions of those with whom we shared the excitement of our grand openings only a few short months ago.
ERIC SCHIPPERS, WYOMISSING, PA
MR. SCHIPPERS IS SR. VICE PRESIDENT, PUBLIC AFFAIRS & GOVERNMENT RELATIONS PENN NATIONAL
GAMING, INC.
Speak up
In this age of WMD's and terrorism, we need more Dick Cheneys than we do the Mike Peters-es of the world. Guys like Cheney tend to keep us safe; guys like Peters tend to get us all killed. To suggest that Cheney actually likes torture is to so trivialize the issue that intelligent people should rightfully dismiss it. I hate torture, but I hate terrorism even more.
So now the president wants to simplify the tax code. This is still another whopper right up there with the one he told us six years ago when he pledged to go through the budget to take out waste. If simplified is what he wants, why did he burden America with Obamacare? We all want everyone covered; but simply expanding Medicare would have done it without the massive costs, people losing coverage and needless complication. The 1935 Social Security Act, by the way, is just 37 pages long. But then, more and more of us are realizing health coverage was not really the purpose of Obamacare.

Load-Date: December 24, 2014


End of Document