Teach online surfers how to use privacy tools
USA TODAY
December 16, 2010 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDIT; Pg. 17A
Length: 468 words
Body


I am all for stopping the anonymous tracking of users' visits to websites and agree that  too much personal information is being recorded. However, I do not think that we need to get the government involved. What we need is to educate users that they can stop this tracking by using features provided by their Web browsers ("Push to limit tracking of Web users threatens ads," Cover story, News, Monday).
Microsoft's Internet Explorer has a feature called InPrivate browsing. This feature  can block a website from depositing cookies on your machine and  prevent a history being kept of the sites you visit. It also has a feature to limit  what kind of cookies are stored so you can choose the amount of anonymity you want.
Firefox also has a feature called private browsing.
How about writing an article that shows users how to use these features?  Let's tell the government to forget about more regulations and start working on balancing the budget.
Gene Madsen
Fort Collins, Colo.
'Do Not Track' makes sense
Let's put the  call for a "Do Not Track" plan to a real-life scenario. We wouldn't want someone following us around while we drove to and from work, were at school,  shopped or went on vacation, would we?
Placing this debate into perspective  would allow even proponents to second-guess their support of maintaining the status quo of self-regulation of the online advertising industry.
Mark Perry
Phoenix
A cost to add lawmakers
USA TODAY's article  about  a lawsuit in favor of increasing the number of U.S. representatives to create congressional districts with more equal sizes  ignored or disregarded a couple of key issues ("Size matters, lawsuit says of U.S. House," News, Monday).
The Founding Fathers were aware of the potential  imbalances of representation, so they created two legislative houses. The argument could be made that those states with  smaller populations are overrepresented in the Senate.
Another poignant question:  What is the taxpayer burden for adding each representative,  his or her staff, and their government benefits, expenses and pensions?
Don't the purveyors of this lawsuit, our justices and the government have anything better to do with their time?
George Irrgang
Chadds Ford, Pa.
Avoid bias or help FBI?
Commentary writer Tom Krattenmaker's piece "Soul-searching in Portland" about the attempted bombing at the Christmas tree-lighting ceremony was very sympathetic to Portland, Ore., and its over-the-top efforts to avoid discrimination (On Religion, The Forum, Dec. 6).
While he gave credit to the FBI for stopping the terrorism,  he was rather duplicitous in  failing to mention that the Portland City Council voted in 2005 to withdraw from participating in the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force.
I guess Portland was lucky that the FBI stuck to its task.
Jack James
Vilas, N.C. 

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W

Load-Date: December 16, 2010


End of Document