Teaching Class on Terrorism, After Losing Son to It 
 The New York Times
April 24, 2002 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Education Page; Pg. 9
Length: 1001 words
Byline:  By KAREN W. ARENSON 
Body


When a class on terrorism at Fordham University looked at slides of the attack on the World Trade Center on Monday, one of its two teachers purposely decided not to be there.
     The professor, Orlando Rodriguez, chairman of Fordham's sociology and anthropology department at Rose Hill, rarely misses classes. But he decided that seeing the pictures this week would be too painful. His 31-year-old son, Gregory, an assistant vice president at the eSpeed division of Cantor Fitzgerald, was killed in the Sept. 11 attack. 
 Yet it was Dr. Rodriguez who suggested last September that a new course on terrorism be created and lined up Kerry Sweet, a captain in the New York City Police Department and an adjunct professor at Fordham, to teach it. A short time later, Dr. Rodriguez signed on as a co-teacher. "I thought it was my duty to do something like this to commemorate my son," he said. "But I was also very scared. I didn't know if I could pull it off, to be before a class and talk about terrorism."
Psychologists say that losing a child is one of the most difficult kinds of grief to deal with, and Dr. Rodriguez, 60, says that has been true for him. But he also decided that as a social scientist, someone who typically approaches the world analytically and dispassionately, he should focus his skills on the events that led to his son's death.
"I feel that if my son and I could speak, he would thank me for this, and say it is typical of how I approach the world," Dr. Rodriguez said.
Important in his thinking was an article by the biologist Stephen Jay Gould that talked of how Mr. Gould had handled the devastating news that he had a usually fatal form of cancer. 
"After freaking out," Dr. Rodriguez said, "Gould decided that rather than acting just as a patient, he would use his professional training in his own service."
Dr. Rodriguez, who was born in Havana and came to New York at 13, decided to try some of that professional activism himself, by teaching a course aimed strictly at theory and analysis and avoiding any references to himself. He said that as a sociologist, he thought he could separate his emotions from his work. What had gripped him about sociology during his first class in the subject at City College, he said, was the "revelation that there is a real reality beyond the individual -- a social reality -- that we are individuals, but we're also social beings." 
The Fordham course, which is being offered this semester, is covering a lot of ground, including the history of terrorism; current terrorist groups and their ideologies and tactics; limits on military, civil and political authority; and logistics and control of terrorist crises. 
In one class last week, after Professor Sweet talked about the differences between three systems of justice (trial by jury, the Geneva Convention for treating prisoners of war, and military tribunals of the sort that President George W. Bush is calling for), Dr. Rodriguez talked about whether it mattered if the Sept. 11 attacks were labeled a crime or an act of war.
"The issue," he said, "is what motivation government officials would have for calling it a crime rather than an act of war." 
One student suggested that the terrorists might be considered soldiers. But another responded that they were criminals, because there had been no declaration of war on the United States.
"So words do mean something here?" Dr. Rodriguez asked. "If it is a crime," he continued, "is this a U.S. crime? Or is what happened a violation of the Geneva Convention? Is it a war crime?"
He also discussed American bombing in Afghanistan and challenged the class to find out how many civilian Afghans had been killed and how they could substantiate their information. And he compared the Sept. 11 attacks with the actions of Slobodan Milosevic, who is now being tried for alleged crimes in Kosovo, Croatia and Bosnia, and with the bombing of an American airplane over Lockerbie, Scotland, treating them all as if they were simply grist for study. 
"We try to get students to think about what the differences are, not tell them," Dr. Rodriguez said later. "We try to get them to think about different kinds of terrorism, the role of ideology, the use of terrorism by governments."
As a rule, he said he believed in sometimes talking about personal experiences in his classes -- relating, for example, the time he was victimized by a con man in a criminology class. But in this case, he has bent over backward not to mention his son in the twice-weekly class. 
"I suppose I could talk about my son in this class," he said. "But I just can't do it. But it is always right on the surface, or right under the surface. It's always there."
He said that the 60 students in the class have been good about not inquiring. And students in the class said that while they knew about the professor's personal loss, they had come to learn, not to pour out their emotions.
"I didn't want it to be an emotional, feel-good class after Sept. 11," said one of the students, Melissa Kull, a senior history major from Summit, N.J. "They said it wouldn't be, and that is why I stayed."
Still, Dr. Rodriguez, a kindly, worn-looking man, said he constantly found himself reliving the loss as he prepared his lectures, taught classes and graded papers. Besides not being able to attend certain classes, he found there were certain articles he could not tackle. And he said that while he never reached the point where he was so choked up that he could not deliver his lecture, on occasion he had come close.
Dr. Rodriguez said that his son, who left behind a wife and son, was far more instinctual than he was. In his office, he faces a photograph of himself and his son climbing together in the White Mountains in New Hampshire on a sunny day a few years ago. 
Dr. Rodriguez said that he at first thought teaching the class might be cathartic but that it had not turned out that way. "Catharsis conveys the idea that you cry and then it's over," he said. "It just doesn't happen that way."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Prof. Orlando Rodriguez, chairman of Fordham University's sociology and anthropology department at Rose Hill, suggested a new course in terrorism after the Sept. 11 attack. (Angel Franco/The New York Times) 

Load-Date: April 24, 2002


End of Document