Teacher beheaded in France
Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)
October 16, 2020 Friday


Copyright 2020 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 330 words
Byline:  Associated Press
Body


PARIS -- French President Emmanuel Macron denounced what he called an "Islamist terrorist attack" against a history teacher decapitated in a Paris suburb Friday, urging the nation to stand united against extremism. 
The teacher had discussed caricatures of Islam's Prophet Muhammad with his class, authorities said. The suspected attacker was shot to death by police after Friday's beheading. 
The French anti-terrorism prosecutor opened an investigation concerning murder with a suspected terrorist motive, the prosecutor's office said. 
Macron visited the school where the teacher worked in the town of Conflans-Sainte-Honorine and met with staff. An Associated Press reporter saw three ambulances arrive at the scene and heavily armed police surrounding the area and police vans lining leafy nearby streets. 
"One of our compatriots was murdered today because he taught ... the freedom of expression, the freedom to believe or not believe," Macron said. 
He said the attack shouldn't divide France because that's what the extremists want. "We must stand all together as citizens," he said. 
The gruesome killing of the teacher occurred in the town of Conflans-Sainte-Honorine while the suspect was killed by police in adjoining Eragny. 
A police official said the suspect, armed with a knife and an airsoft gun -- which fires plastic pellets -- was shot dead about 600 yards from where the male teacher was killed after he failed to respond to orders to put down his arms and acted in a threatening manner. 
The teacher had received threats after opening a discussion "for a debate" about the caricatures about 10 days ago, the police official said. The parent of a student had filed a complaint against the teacher, another police official said, adding the suspected killer did not have a child at the school. The suspect's identity was not made public. 
French media reported the suspect was an 18-year-old Chechen, born in Moscow. That information could not be immediately confirmed. 

Load-Date: October 18, 2020


End of Document