Technology helping fund terrorism;
Under guise of charities, groups are using Internet and 800 telephone lines, seminar reveals.
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
October 14, 1997, Tuesday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 03A
Length: 467 words
Byline: Ron Martz; STAFF WRITER
Body


International terrorist groups have gotten so sophisticated at raising money in the United States to support their activities overseas that a 1996 law prohibiting such activity is not likely to have much of an impact on them, participants in a seminar on terrorism said Monday in Atlanta.
By using the Internet and 800 telephone numbers to solicit funds through front organizations, often disguised as charities, these groups will continue to funnel money to other countries to train and equip terrorists who target Israel and the United States, according to Yehudit Barsky, a senior Middle East research analyst for the Anti-Defamation League.
"Islamic extremists who have come to this country have gotten very sophisticated in learning to deal with the freedoms that we take for granted. They have Americanized their appeals," Barsky said during the seminar, co-sponsored by the ADL, the Consulate General of Israel, the Atlanta Jewish Federation and the Georgia State University Department of Criminal Justice.
The State Department last week identified 30 foreign organizations, including 13 radical Islamic organizations in the Middle East, as terrorist groups to which it is now a crime to give money, weapons or other types of tangible support.  But trying to determine which of the named groups are benefiting from fund-raising activities by front organizations will be difficult, said Damon Camp, who teaches a class in terrorism at Georgia State University.
While the Irish Republican Army, which is not on the State Department's list, has openly solicited funds in Irish bars throughout the United States in the past, groups such as Hamas and Hezbollah are more circumspect.
"They're not going to set up a group and call it 'Friends of Hezbollah,' "Barsky said.
Instead, she said, they set up charitable groups with names such as "Benevolence International" or "Mercy International" and appeal through Web sites on the Internet for donations to help Palestinian refugees or victims of political terrorism in the Middle East. Or they set up political organizations that portray the problems in the Middle East in terms of the American civil rights movement. These front organizations "are raising the next generation of suicide bombers and the next generation of Hamas leaders," Barsky said.
Identifying a legitimate charity and what is a front for a terrorist organization can be a headache for law enforcement officials, according to Jack Daulton, head of the FBI's Atlanta office.
"We have very strict limits of what we can do as a federal agency gathering information. Because of the attorney general's guidelines, we can only get information available in the public sector," Daulton said. He said limits can be expanded if there is evidence a crime has been committed or is about to be committed.

Load-Date: October 15, 1997


End of Document