Technology, terrorism drive R&D spending
Federal Times
September 20, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 12
Length: 1240 words
Byline: By AL KARR
Body


Sparked by increased defense spending, the government's investment in research and development contracts is on a sharp rise.
Total R&D contracting in 2003 increased to $38.2 billion from $31.3 billion in 2002, and climbed nearly 62 percent from a low for recent years of $23.6 billion in 2000. At that low point, federal R&D contracts had declined from over $28 billion in the mid-1990s.
Stan Soloway, president of the Professional Services Council, an Arlington, Va.-based organization of federal services contractors, attributes the growth to the rapid pace of technology change and evolving federal needs, particularly in national security and homeland security.
"It's important for the government to keep up with the change in technology," Soloway said.
To do this, analysts say, agencies will have to continually make greater use of commercial-sector R&D. Some 40 years ago, the government's R&D spending was twice that of the private sector's; but industry now spends more on R&D than the government does. So the Pentagon in the 1990s began to realize that to find new ways to meet its missions, it had to use industrial R&D, Soloway said. Now, "that government partnership with the private sector needs to be increased," he said.
The administration has set a goal of boosting spending on science and technology to 3 percent of the defense budget, up from about 2 percent currently.
"What appears to be driving the increase in overall R&D funding is a large jump in defense research, and the increase in defense R&D is certainly driven by the Bush administration," said Paul Murphy, president of Eagle Eye Publishers Inc. of Fairfax, Va., a market research firm.
And the rebound seems bound to continue, at least for a few years. The administration aims to increase federal outlays for R&D -- including direct research and development work by agencies, contracts and grants -- by about 50 percent between 2000 and 2005. The projected increase mostly reflects gains by the Pentagon and the Homeland Security Department, which "will be draining increases in R&D money from other agencies," Murphy said.
The Defense Department accounted for the lion's share of 2003 R&D contracts -- $31.4 billion, or 82 percent of the total.
As an example of the growing military need for research and development work by contractors, the Army Materiel Command's Research, Development and Engineering Command, at the Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., is steadily boosting its outside contracting for R&D work to support chemical and biological support for deployed military forces and homeland security. And with military downsizing, the command is increasing its use of private contractors for on-post basic research as well, said Tom Dickson, a contracting officer for the unit.
The renewed emphasis is occurring in the wake of the 1991 Gulf War and the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, Dickson said. Making more use of contractors to develop means to fight chemical and biological warfare and terrorism is necessary because of the time it takes to field an item.
Homeland Security was fifth, at $258 million, or 0.7 percent, reflecting that agency's first seven months of existence, starting March 1, 2003. The department is spending its own full budget for the first time this year, and is destined for large R&D budget increases as a big player in the anti-terrorism effort, said Robert Shaw, vice president of business strategy for Raytheon Technical Services Co., a subsidiary of Raytheon Co.
"Homeland Security will be increasingly important in federal government R&D spending," Shaw said.
Homeland Security's R&D concerns are focused on such areas as medical countermeasures -- dealing with biological terrorism, for example; radiological and nuclear detection; protecting aircraft from surface-to-air missiles; and information technology.
But the Defense Department is still the big gorilla in the R&D arena and is likely to remain so, especially if Bush is re-elected, observers say. "The Bush administration is preparing the way for large expenditures on missile defense," said Murphy. As much as $3.4 billion of the 2003 R&D contracting budget is allocated to ballistic missile defense systems.
Indeed, Defense figures show procurement awards for defense systems research, development, testing and evaluation rising 56 percent, to $18.7 billion, between 2001 and 2003, while contracts for all R&D-related work on aircraft and airframe structural components increased only 26 percent, to $18.6 billion.
Raytheon's Shaw said additional changes are coming to reflect a new view by the Pentagon on weapons development. After 2010, Shaw said, the goal "is to accelerate transformation for the DoD to the next generation of systems," ones that are tailored to specific new requirements in the field, rather than just looking at the growing capabilities of the systems themselves. Learning from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, "recognizing the needs of the war fighters and the operational commanders is necessarily reflected in the privatization, technology spending and decision-making in how that [R&D] money is spent," Shaw said.
Leading the pack in 2003 was Lockheed Martin Corp., with contracts totaling $6.9 billion. Boeing Co. was second, at $5 billion. Halliburton Co. soared to fifth place, at $1 billion, from a lowly 68th place in 2002. One top 10 program in 2003 has disappeared: The Boeing-United Technologies Co. venture that was developing the Sikorsky Comanche helicopter for the Army was in sixth place in 2003, but the project was canceled early this year.
Halliburton spokespersons say their company doesn't define its business as including any R&D work for the government. But the Eagle Eye analysis of government contract data shows Halliburton receiving $1 billion-plus in Army R&D contracts. Some 52 percent of this work was in Houston, and the rest of it overseas, Eagle Eye's Murphy said.
The University of California, which ranked 10th in federal R&D contracts in 2003, was the top contractor running government R&D facilities in 2003, with $2 billion for managing the Los Alamos, N.M., National Laboratory for the Energy Department's National Nuclear Security Administration. The California Institute of Technology, 22nd in overall R&D contracts, held second place in R&D by government facilities managers, at $1.3 billion for running NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif.
R&D contracts are especially important to contractors because they are a foot in the door for larger production contracts. Weapons performance parameters set in R&D "may well wind up being the parameters that only one or a few companies can bid on," Murphy said. In fact, a third of the R&D contracts awarded in 2003 were sole-sourced, and only one bidder was reported for another 48 percent, he said.
But Soloway of the Professional Services Council said the business is more competitive and risky than those figures indicate.
"There's actually a fair amount of competition in R&D," and while federal R&D contractors are allowed profits of up to 15 percent of revenues, "very few companies come very close to that kind of return," he said.
Also, many companies will participate in an R&D contract competition, but refuse to be a part of later stages, because "very often the plan for a given system changes [many] times," and the number of airplanes the government buys, like the F/A-22, often ends up being far fewer than the original projection, he said.

Notes

2 COLOR GRAPHS. GRAPH HED: Facility managers in R&D. SOURCE: Eagle Eye Publishers Inc. SEE: FT-Facility Managers in R&D 9/20. GRAPH HED: Top 50 R&D contractors. SOURCE: Eagle Eye Publishers Inc. SEE: FT-Top 50 RD Contractors 9/20.

Load-Date: December 2, 2004


End of Document