TECHNOLOGY: CYBERSECURITY; Threat of Terrorism On U.S. Infrastructure
 The New York Times
December 31, 2001 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 339 words
Byline:  By JOHN SCHWARTZ
Body


Even before the World Trade Center towers fell, Richard Clarke was working to make the nation's computer networks, and the myriad industries and institutions that they connect, more secure.
     Mr. Clarke, a former Clinton administration official for counterterrorism, was working within the Bush administration to shore up the cyberspace portion of the nation's critical infrastructure, and to increase cooperation between business and government on security issues. 
 In October, Mr. Clarke was named special adviser to the president for cybersecurity within the new homeland security team. He was also named chairman of the President's Critical Infrastructure Protection Board, which will try to protect essential national systems like the power grid and telecommunications networks.
The appointment puts him at the center of the coming national scramble to prepare the nation for cyberterrorism before those who might commit such acts learn as much about the weaknesses of network technology as hackers have.
He has already come up with one major proposal: a secure network for government telecommunications. There will surely be more in 2002. Trying to get companies to share information about security breaches and attacks is also on Mr. Clarke's list. 
Outside of Mr. Clarke's bailiwick, other proposed high-technology responses to the threat of terrorism are coming from industry, Congress and elsewhere. Among those sure to be on the agenda in the coming year are renewed calls for a national identification card and extended wiretapping and Internet monitoring authority for law enforcement agents. A controversial system installed on a criminal suspect's computer by the government to capture the encryption passwords of a criminal suspect is nearing its second phase; the F.B.I. has acknowledged that it is developing a similar monitoring system, called Magic Lantern, that could be installed remotely. 
The national debate over the proper balance between privacy and security will surely stay in the news next year.   JOHN SCHWARTZ

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo

Load-Date: December 31, 2001


End of Document