Ted Cruz Ad Uses Scorpion to Depict Threat of Islamic Terror
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
September 15, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 339 words
Byline: TRIP GABRIEL
Highlight: During the Republican debate at the Reagan Library in California on Wednesday, the campaign of Senator Ted Cruz of Texas will evoke the threat of Middle East terrorism by using a scorpion crawling in the desert. 
Body


For aficionados of political ads, the line "There's a bear in the woods" still brings a shivery memory of a 1984 spot for Ronald Reagan that helped define his foreign policy of peace through strength.
During the Republican debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in California on Wednesday, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas will evoke that memory in a 30-second ad featuring a scorpion crawling in the desert.    
The text of "Scorpion" is a line-by-line homage to the Reagan spot, evoking the threat of Middle East terrorism rather than the Cold War-era Soviet Union, which the Reagan ad symbolized by using a grizzly bear walking menacingly in a forest. 
"There's a scorpion in the desert,'' an announcer says in the Cruz ad, as the camera shows various angles of the insect and its hooked stinger.
"For most of us, its venom is a clear and deadly threat," the announcer continues. "But others refuse to even speak its name.  Since the scorpion seeks our destruction, isn't it time we recognize the scorpion for what it is before it strikes again?''
A spokesman for Mr. Cruz said the campaign had paid for the ad to run in the early voting states of Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada during the debate on CNN and during post-debate analysis on Fox News.  
Like the original "Bear" ad, which contrasted Reagan with his Democratic opponent, Walter Mondale, "Scorpion" is mostly subtext: It is a jab at President Obama for his reluctance to use the term "radical Islamic terrorism" to refer to the Islamic State and Al Qaeda, a reluctance Republicans see as a form of weakness. The president has said the term gives terrorists a cover of religious legitimacy 
"Bear," which was written and narrated by Hal Riney, who died in 2008, has been copied before.  During his re-election campaign in 2004, President George W. Bush            ran "Wolves" comparing terrorists to timber wolves.  
 Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via            Facebook,            Twitter and            the First Draft newsletter. 

Load-Date: September 16, 2015


End of Document