TEDDY'S TEMPEST CLINTON'S WINING AND DINING MAJORS IS MORE AN ATTEMPT TO MAKE UP FOR ADAMS' VISIT
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
FEBRUARY 26, 1994, SATURDAY,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 796 words
Byline: MARY MCGRORY
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Of the many who were outraged by the granting of a U.S. visa to Sinn Fein spokesman Gerry Adams, none was more so than House Speaker Tom Foley, a notoriously even-tempered man. Foley explained his opposition to the author of the tempest, Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., who asked Foley to sign a letter he wrote to President Clinton on Adams' behalf. Foley said no.
He took it up with the State Department, the National Security Council, and the U.S. ambassador to Ireland, Jean Kennedy Smith. He sat next to the president at the Alfalfa Club dinner in late January and protested some more. At a private dinner party, he amazed guests by shouting at someone who tried to defend Kennedy's curious move for ''playing parlor games with people's lives.''
Foley and Kennedy were half of the famous Four Horsemen of Irish policy. The other two were former New York Gov. Hugh Carey and former House Speaker Tip O'Neill -- who for 15 years exhorted Irish Americans not to listen to the likes of Gerry Adams.
Kennedy put it to Clinton that the situation had changed, and that Adams could help the cause of peace in Northern Ireland. The British speculate that Kennedy and his sister the ambassador had dreams of becoming the Norwegians of '94 -- emulating the Norwegian foreign minister who pulled off the Middle East miracle.
Clinton never says no to Kennedy, for sentimental and political reasons. Another horseman, Sen. Daniel Moynihan, D-N.Y., joined in the call; nobody is quite sure why. Both Kennedy and Moynihan are up for re-election, but are virtually unopposed.
Adams came to the United States for 48 hours. He was given the star treatment and puffball questions from the U.S. press; he smiled his tight and ominous smile and failed to renounce terrorism. He encouraged all the wrong people in the United States and Ireland -- and brought Clinton eight days of coruscating stories in the British press, and headlines proclaiming the end of the ''special relationship'' between the United States and Britain.
The upshot of it all is that the cause of peace in Northern Ireland was not advanced by a centimeter, the president was demonized in a country that is an indispensable ally, and he has been forced into extraordinary compensatory hospitality to John Major, probably his least favorite prime minister.
Major, who tried to thwart Clinton's election, will sleep over at the White House next week, the first British prime minister to be so honored since Winston Churchill stayed with Franklin Roosevelt in 1942. Clinton will also visit Pittsburgh with Major, whose father once lived there.
These elaborate moves may gall Clinton, but he hates being hated, and the British press is taking the special treatment as an apology for a major foreign-policy blunder. ''It takes a big man to admit a mistake,'' a London tabloid editorialized approvingly.
Foley has heroically resisted the temptation to say ''I told you so.'' His reward may be that the next time the president has to make a decision about Ireland, he may turn to the horseman who held steady against terrorism.
Adams never wavered in his refusal to condemn IRA violence. He said he deplored violence against ''innocent civilians,'' thus keeping his credentials with the ''hard men'' of the IRA, who murder policemen and soldiers.
One of the casualties of the Adams dust-up was John Hume, the Northern Irish leader who actually represents a considerable constituency. He told Massachusetts' other senator, John Kerry, that he approved of the Adams visit. The trouble was that U.S. reporters trampled Hume in their rush to get to Adams.
Martin Walker, the U.S. correspondent for The Guardian newspaper, writes that one problem is that Clinton's views on Ireland go back 25 years to his Oxford days. The English wrongly think that Clinton's Rhodes scholars tilt toward Britain. Instead, Walker says: ''Cold rooms, snooty Brits, languid tutorials and bad food figure equally strongly in their memory.''
Clinton made several forays into Irish policy, none of them particularly well-advised. He floated and later shot down the idea of a special envoy to Northern Ireland. He is not the first politician to think he can play the Irish card.
Meanwhile, the hope for peace in Ireland has not been entirely extinguished. Despite a drumbeat of bombings and shootings, the Anglo-Irish summit has been resumed, and a certain shamed recognition has set in that if Israel and Palestine can make up, it certainly should be possible in the north.
The peace-seekers still need a terrorist they can talk to, but they know now that Gerry Adams -- ''a master of ambiguity and evasion,'' British foreign minister Douglas Hurd called him -- is everything the Four Horsemen used to call him. Kennedy can at least claim that he had a hand in exposing him.

Notes

Mary McGrory is a syndicated columnist for The Washington Post.

Graphic

 
DRAWING, Gerry Adams/Didn't renounce IRA terrorism

Load-Date: September 15, 1994


End of Document