Teens forced to 'grow up fast'
USA TODAY
July 30, 1996, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 287 words
Body


Eighteen-year-old Mark Hubbard of Fargo, N.D., says one of his
earliest TV memories is watching Ted Koppel talk about hijackings
on Nightline. He caught on early, Hubbard says, that we
"live in an age of terrorism."
Hubbard and most other members of USA TODAY's Teen Panel have
cut their teeth on tales of terrorism. Recent incidents hit close
to home.
The teens identify with the injured Fallon Stubbs, 14, whose mother
was killed by the pipe bomb in Atlanta, and the high school French
club that died on TWA Flight 800.
"Those students on TWA sounded like me and my friends," says
Aaron Benavidez , 16, of Stockton, Calif.
The two latest incidents "make you grow up faster, realize how
dangerous the world is," says Kyle Haden, 17, of Bethel Park,
Pa.
The bomb in Atlanta "sits like a dead weight on everyone's heart,"
Benavidez says. "You wonder if you are safe anywhere anymore."
Americans are centered on themselves, Haden adds, and should examine
terrorism in other countries.
Says Jennifer Tyus, 17, of Decatur, Ill.: "We don't learn anything
at all in school about terrorists. Where are they in our history
books?"
Some of the panelists worry that overemphasizing the bombings
lets the terrorists win. These are isolated incidents, says Tighe
Herren, 16, of Louisville. "There are idiots out there trying
to cash in on the threat of terrorism, which has been around forever.
This doesn't mean there is some resurgence of a terrorist threat."
But most agree with Tyus. "I take these bombings very seriously,"
she says. She had been in Germany just one day with the Decatur
Youth Symphony when TWA Flight 800 blew up. "Everybody was talking
about it. What if our plane blew up on the way home! . . .Finally,
I just said 'We have to take that risk.' "

Graphic

 
PHOTOS, b/w, AP(3); PHOTO, b/w, David Finch; PHOTO, b/w, Cindy Stucky; USA TODAY Teen Panel: From left, Hubbard, Benavidez, Haden, Tyus and Herren.

Load-Date: July 30, 1996


End of Document