Teenagers who plot violence being charged as terrorists
USA TODAY
June 5, 2006 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. 7D
Length: 483 words
Byline: Greg Toppo
Body


Schools cracking down on students who plot violent attacks against classmates and educators are increasingly turning to a new form of prosecution: charging the suspects as terrorists.
Typically, students involved in such crimes are charged with offenses such as conspiracy, attempted assault or making bomb threats. But prosecutors say state legislatures now allow them to get tough -- with charges that permit longer sentences -- to prevent attacks such as the 1999 shootings at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., which left 15 people  dead, including the two teenage gunmen.
Increasingly, authorities are willing to treat would-be shooters as troubled children, getting them access to psychological help, and as terrorists. They're backed up in several states by laws passed in the wake of Columbine and 9/11.
Overall, school safety actually has improved.  Fewer than 1% of violent incidents involving teens take place on campus.
But in April,  the nation's public schools saw a flurry of foiled plots reminiscent of Columbine, including:
*Authorities say four New Jersey teens planned an assault at Winslow Township High School on April 20, seven years to the day after Columbine.
Prosecutors lodged first-degree terrorism charges against the boys, as well as charges of making terroristic threats, conspiracy to make terroristic threats and conspiracy to commit murder.
*Authorities  charged two 17-year-old suburban Kansas City students with making a terroristic threat after the pair told classmates they planned an assault on Platte County R-3 High School on the Columbine anniversary.
*In Macomb County, Mich., jurors found Andrew Osantowski, 18, guilty last June of terrorism after prosecutors uncovered Internet instant messages he wrote in 2004 threatening to kill classmates at his suburban Detroit high school. Authorities say a search of his home turned up an AK-47, pipe bombs, a schematic diagram of the school and Nazi paraphernalia.
Macomb County  prosecutor Eric Smith acknowledges that some people would view terrorism charges as extreme, but he says people would think differently if they saw "the sheer fear of the parents" and others in his community.
"You would see that this was clearly an act of terrorism," he says. "It wasn't a fight between two kids. It was, essentially, one kid holding a school hostage."
Not so fast, says Michael Greenberger, a law professor who directs the University of Maryland Center for Health and Homeland Security. Although terrorism charges may be appropriate in domestic attacks such as the 2002 sniper shootings around Washington, D.C., charging troubled teenagers as terrorists "cheapens the war on terror."
"I don't know what they achieve except (that) it looks like a prosecutor is doing a wonderful job," Greenberger says. "In the end of the year, when they tote up what they've done for terrorism, they include these kinds of cases in it."

Load-Date: June 5, 2006


End of Document