Teenage jihadi's grounded at Chicago airport FBI nabs ISIS wannabe who left note for kin
Daily News (New York)
October 7, 2014 Tuesday
SPORTS EXTRA EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 371 words
Byline: BY MICHAEL WALSH and BILL HUTCHINSON NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


A WANNABE teen terrorist tried to join Islamic State fighters in Syria but got busted before he could fly out of a Chicago airport, officials said Monday.
Mohammed Hamzah Khan, 19, of Bolingbrook, Ill., bragged of being a "lion of war" but his trip to the jihadi battlefield ended at O'Hare International Airport without incident, officials said.
The FBI's Chicago Joint Terrorism Task Force nabbed the goateed Khan, a U.S. citizen, on Saturday after he blew his nefarious plans by leaving a sloppy trail of evidence - including a three-page letter to his parents with the plea not to alert anyone.
"My dear parents, there are a number of reasons I will be going to the blessed land of Shaam (another name for Syria) and leaving my home," reads the letter included in a criminal complaint.
"Western societies are getting more immoral day by day," he wrote. "I do not want my children to be exposed to filth like this."
In the letter, Khan stated his desire to go to Syria or Iraq to join ISIS, FBI officials said.
"I extend an invitation, to my family, to join me in the Islamic State," he wrote. "We are the lions of war. My nation, the dawn has emerged."
In capital letters, Khan begged his parents: "Please make sure not to tell the authorities."
He signed the letter, "Your loving son."
Austrian Airlines said Khan's roundtrip ticket was purchased on Sept. 26. He was scheduled to fly to Istanbul via Austria and return to Chicago.
He was detained by U.S. Customs agents and questioned for three hours by agents with the FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force.
While being held at the airport, FBI agents raided his suburban Chicago home, seizing handwritten documents and maps with arrows pointing from the Turkish border into Iraq and Syria, the complaint says.
Agents also seized an ISIS flag from his bedroom with the words "Come to jihad" written in Arabic.
Khan allegedly met a contact online who promised to transport him to ISIS strongholds in Iraq and Syria once he reached Istanbul, officials said.
He was charged with one count of attempting to provide material support or resources to a terrorist group, and faces up to 15 years in prison if convicted. Khan was ordered held without bail pending his next court appearance on Thursday.

Graphic

 
Parents of Mohammed Hamzah Khan (top), who was cuffed before he could fly to Istanbul. [AP]

Load-Date: October 7, 2014


End of Document