Teens affected by terrorism camp together
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 5, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 405 words
Byline: SHAWN POGATCHNIK The Associated Press
Body


DUBLIN - Teenagers who lost loved ones in acts of terror and civil strife worldwide are camping together this week in Northern Ireland as they learn to move beyond their grief - and become peacemakers themselves. The project, sponsored chiefly by the post-9/11 charity Tuesday's Children, involves 65 teens who have lost parents or other relatives in a wide range of terror attacks and ethnic conflicts. Half of the campers had family members killed in the Sept. 
11, 2001, al-Qaida attacks on the World Trade Center. Some come from opposite sides of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Others are Spaniards targeted by the Basque separatist group ETA. Alongside arts, crafts, sports and tourism, the kids are receiving trauma counseling and coaching from Harvard Law School specialists in the arts of negotiation and mediation. The kids don't all speak English, and their daily lives might be worlds apart. But veterans of the annual camp - called Project Common Bond, and being held outside the United States for the first time - say such differences are minor compared to what they share. "A lot of the most important communication in these camps is nonverbal. I experienced it straight on and it's extraordinary," said New York native Caitlin Leavey, 19, who participated in the two U.S. camps as well as the Belfast gathering. "The language barrier does not take away from creating friendships." Her father, Lt. Joseph G. Leavey, died on 9/11 when he led firefighters from Ladder 15 into the south tower of the World Trade Center before its collapse. Leavey said she's trying to honor her father's memory by training to become a conflict-resolution expert - both formally as a sophomore at New York University and informally by making friends in faraway conflict zones. "Dad was always big about community and talking to everyone. He loved saving people," she said. "The Common Bond camps are all about that too. You help people who've been through terrible hurts to open up, to relieve themselves of this burden. It's still hard for me to talk about losing my father, but I'm trying, and at the camp you find yourself surrounded by young people in exactly the same boat as yourself. It's powerful." From their weeklong base at Queen's University in Belfast, the campers expect to learn from their Northern Ireland hosts, who are emerging from nearly four decades of conflict that left 3,700 dead and maimed tens of thousands more.

Load-Date: August 5, 2010


End of Document