Television at a Terrorism Trial 
 The New York Times
January 15, 2002 Tuesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 586 words
Body


In a letter to his mother from prison last November, Zacarias Moussaoui, thought to be the intended 20th hijacker in September's terror attacks, said he would prove his innocence at trial even though he expected American prosecutors to fabricate evidence against him. His case is scheduled for October in a federal court in Virginia. It should be televised so that the world can assess his claims as they are made and challenged. 
     Just as hundreds of millions of people watched the World Trade Center towers collapse on television, so they should be able to watch the trial of someone accused of being central to the hijacking plot. Just as the power of American arms was on display in Afghanistan, so should the workings of our criminal justice system be widely viewed. 
 Judicial rules prohibit the televising of federal criminal proceedings. Nonetheless Court TV has asked the trial judge, Leonie Brinkema, to permit a camera in the courtroom. To her credit, the judge held a hearing on the question last week and listened carefully to arguments on all sides. She should challenge the federal judicial code of conduct, imposed by the Judicial Conference, a 27-member group of senior judges that administers the federal courts, by agreeing to televise the trial.
In every state in the nation, some courts allow cameras. These include venues of sometimes difficult and sensitive murder trials and other cases where witnesses feel exposed by the prospect of their faces and words being broadcast to a larger public. In the Moussaoui case, the government has asked the court not to grant the broadcasters' request because it fears that Al Qaeda will retaliate against witnesses. But in state trials, judges use their discretion and often obscure the faces of jurors and nervous witnesses while the trial is being televised. The same could be done in this case.  Mr. Moussaoui's trial is likely to be broadcast on closed-circuit television. Last month the Senate passed a bill allowing survivors of the Sept. 11 attack and victims' relatives to view the proceedings just as the relatives of the Oklahoma victims watched the trial of Timothy McVeigh. Auditoriums will probably be set up in a number of spots around the country for closed-circuit viewing. But that is not enough. The larger public should be able to view the proceedings as well.
A key argument against televising trials is that sensation, ratings and entertainment would squeeze out deliberation and dignity, undermining the judicial process. But a good judge can make sure that does not occur.
Many federal judges may not be receptive to allowing cameras in their courtrooms. But today, when proceedings can be captured by a single camera positioned in a corner of the courtroom, the right to a "public" trial should be interpreted to allow Americans to view criminal trials via television.
Moreover, the societal case for televising the trial is strong. We were all, in some sense, victims of Sept. 11 and should be able to see the Moussaoui trial. We need to understand how the cells worked, what the terrorists thought of us and how they planned to carry out their plot. Equally important, those who doubt that Al Qaeda was behind this plot should see the evidence. 
People around the world are watching to see how the United States conducts itself in the battle against terrorism. It would surely enhance respect for American values, in this country and abroad, to let this compelling judicial proceeding play out in full view of the television audience. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 15, 2002


End of Document