TELEVISION REVIEW;
A Bad Year for Terrorism in Peru
The New York Times
April 18, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 17; Column 4; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk ; Column 4; ; Review
Length: 338 words
Byline: By WALTER GOODMAN 

By WALTER GOODMAN 
Body


If you don't mind the commercials for Alberto K. Fujimori, the President of Peru, tonight's account of the taking and freeing of hostages in Lima in 1996 is an attention-holder. The news clips, many of which were shown as the events unfolded, are exciting, and the interviews offer insiders' asides from a few of the hostages, one of the commandos who freed them and the omnipresent President Fujimori, who is celebrated as the presiding genius of this victory over terrorism.
"Hostages: Rescue in Peru" begins with the break-in at a Christmas party at the Japanese Ambassador's residence, when a masked band captured everybody who was anybody in Peru's diplomatic set. That was the last victory for the rebels, young Tupac Amaru peasants led by the briefly famous Nestor Cerpa Cartoli.
The narration, which seems at times to have been written for or by adolescents ("Seventy-two men wanted their freedom even if it meant losing their lives"), concentrates on the Peruvian Government's tactics in keeping up the pressure for months as it planned a break-in via tunnels. The hostages evidently behaved with bravery and enterprise. Two-way radios, sneaked into the residence along with food and medicine, enabled them to pass along information that saved their lives and quickly ended the lives of the rebels when the commandos crashed in.
Except for a passing mention of a class struggle in Peru, you learn little here about the issues that the revolutionaries were hoping to bring to the world's attention or new information about whether any of the rebels were trying to surrender when gunned down. But there is plenty about the shrewdness and toughness of Peru's President ("Fujimori faced the greatest challenge of his political career"), who demonstrates that he can handle documentary makers as effectively as he handles rebels.
 
REAL LIFE, REAL HEROES
Hostages: Rescue in Peru
The Learning Channel, tonight at 8
 
Produced for TLC by CBS News Productions. Patti Hassler, executive producer; Nancy Lavin, executive producer for TLC.

Load-Date: April 18, 1998


End of Document