TELEPHONE TERRORISM SUSPECT FACES 18 CHARGES IN EDWARDSVILLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 3, 1990, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 508 words
Body


Police in Edwardsville say that they believe they have solved the puzzling case of a man who for five years has picked women's names out of the front pages of the local newspaper and then terrorized them with threatening phone calls.  Police arrested Richard E. Sullivan Jr., 50, on Wednesday. He was being held at the Madison County Jail in lieu of $405,000 bond after being charged in warrants with 18 felony counts of intimidation and making harassing telephone calls involving 10 women.  Additional charges may be filed against Sullivan, authorities said.  Sullivan operates a coin laundry in the Edwardsville area.  Police say the harassing caller often claimed that he was holding captive the victim's daughter, sister or mother. Sometimes he claimed that he had taken sexually provocative pictures of the victim's relative, which he offered to sell.  Sometimes he claimed that he had had sex with the victim's relative.  None of his claims ever was true. But some of the victims told police that they had been devastated until they were able to determine that their relative was safe.  Sometimes the caller demanded money. On at least one occasion, he told a woman that he had her sister and demanded that the victim meet him at a remote area outside of Edwardsville wearing nothing but a raincoat.  Instead, she called police. None of the victims was physically harmed.  One of the calls went to a woman who is a bailiff for a judge at the Madison County Courthouse.
She too called police.  During their five-year investigation, police withheld all publicity while they worked to catch the mysterious caller.  For most of the last five years, police remained mystified.  ''We had an absolutely difficult time trying to develop a pattern to these phone calls,'' said Edwardsville Police Chief Bennett W. Dickmann.  The investigation was hampered because the man never called any woman more than once, although he often threatened to call again.  A major breakthrough came when police discovered the pattern: The caller, they found, picked his victims out of the Edwardsville Intelligencer when their names or photos appeared, often on the front page.  At least one victim apparently was selected when her name appeared in a birth announcement in the newspaper.  The caller often waited long periods - the longest was eight or nine months - between phone calls, which left police frustrated and the victims anxious.  ''We had no easy way of predicting his next step,'' Dickmann said. ''There was no warning when he would strike again.'' Police wouldn't say exactly what led them to Sullivan. But Dickmann said police had cooperation from officials at Illinois Bell Telephone Co. and at the Edwardsville newspaper.  ''Fortunately, we got lucky,'' Dickmann said.  Employees at the newspaper sometimes notified police in advance when they thought an article about to published might be of interest, Dickmann said.  Edwardsville police said they were sharing their information with authorities in Glen Carbon, where victims also had been reported.

Load-Date: October 14, 1993


End of Document