Tell it like it is: The Planned Parenthood shooting is an act of terrorism
The Breeze: James Madison University
December 2, 2015 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 518 words
Byline: Kevan Hulligan
Body


subscriber-premium">
By now, you've definitely heard about the attack on a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado Springs. What you probably haven't heard is any major media or political figure refer to the man responsible, Robert Lewis Dear, as a terrorist. More often than not, you hear him called the "shooter," the "suspect" or even just a "troubled loner."
In fact, the only person I can recall who called what Dear did an act of terrorism was Mike Huckabee of all people, and even that was done while he took potshots at Planned Parenthood. 
This is something that's become sadly endemic of American media: whenever it's white, right-wing extremists who go out and kill people, they're just lone wolves with mental problems and that's it. However, whenever perpetrators are non-white Muslims, the media are very quick to refer to them as terrorists and the acts as terrorist attacks.
Everyone's eager to point out the danger we face from Islamic terrorism and turn away innocent Syrian refugees from a safe home here, yet the fact remains that more people in this country have been killed by right-wing extremists than Islamic extremists since 2001. Numerous cases keep happening across the country, yet we don't see the same kind of hysteria about them like what we see about Islamic extremists.
We don't even have to look too far back to see the works of right-wing terrorists in this country and abroad. Anders Breivik killed 77 people in a terrorist attack, and just a few months ago, Dylann Roof killed nine people in the name of white supremacy after they welcomed him with open arms into their Bible study.
The difference between the two? Breivik was charged and convicted of terrorism charges, while Roof wasn't. What reasonable justification is there for either Dear or Roof not being charged with terrorism? The answer is that there isn't one.
The media and society in general completely downplay the very real threat posed by the far right because they like to keep repeating the tired old mantra that "terrorist" equals "Muslim."
Terrorism, by definition, is using force and violence to achieve political goals. It knows no color, creed, ideology, national origin or gender. If what Dear and Roof did doesn't count as terrorism, then I don't know what does.
These terrorists don't exist in a bubble; they're encouraged by not only far-right extremist groups, but by presidential candidates. I'm completely sure in saying that the anti-abortion rhetoric surrounding Planned Parenthood from the Republican candidates led this man to commit the atrocities that he did last week, and every Republican candidate who used the slanderous lies against Planned Parenthood should be ashamed of themselves.
We can't continue to live with our heads in the sand about this issue. This kind of ignorance has led to very real violence against innocent people across the world, and we as a society can't allow for this to continue. We must wake up to the threat of right-wing extremists and fight against them, or we'll all lose.
Kevan Hulligan is a senior political science major. Contact Kevan at hulligkx@dukes.jmu.edu

Load-Date: December 4, 2015


End of Document