TEMPLE TERROR; GUNMAN IS SHOT AFTER KILLING SIX AT SIKH SERVICE IN OAK CREEK
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
August 6, 2012 Monday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. A1
Length: 1158 words
Byline: State Journal staff and wire services
Dateline: OAK CREEK 
Body


Members of the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin had just started to gather for services Sunday morning when their peaceful world was shattered in what authorities called a possible act of "domestic terrorism."
As worshippers gathered to eat, sing and pray, a man entered the temple in a suburb just south of Milwaukee and started shooting, police said. The surprising cracks of gunfire sent many inside scurrying for a hiding place, including a group of women who sought refuge in a pantry while they telephoned relatives and instructed them in whispers not to come to the temple.
The gunman - described by federal authorities as a white man in his 40s - shot and killed six people and injured three more, including a police officer, police said.
A 20-year veteran of the Oak Creek Police Department responded to a 911 call around 10:25 a.m. and was tending to a victim outside the temple when the gunman ambushed him, Police Chief John Edwards said. Another police officer shot and killed the gunman, he said.
After the shooting, tactical units went through the temple and found four people dead inside and two outside, in addition to the shooter. The three injured were in critical condition Sunday evening, according to Froedtert Hospital.
By late Sunday, the investigation into the incident centered on a neighborhood of duplexes and single-family homes in nearby Cudahy, where authorities evacuated several homes and roped off four blocks around the house where their attention seemed to be focused. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives agent Tom Ahern said warrants were being served at the home of the gunman.
The owner of one of the duplexes said authorities were targeting his property. Kurt Weins said authorities haven't told him why they're searching his duplex or whether it's related to the shooting. He said he rented the duplex's upper unit to a man about a month ago. He wouldn't identify the tenant.
Milwaukee County sheriff's spokeswoman Fran McLaughlin said the department's bomb squad was on the scene, though she had no details about why the unit was called.
'Domestic terrorism'
Late Sunday, the FBI said while it was investigating "whether this matter might be an act of domestic terrorism, no motive has been determined at this time."
Tattoos on the body of the slain gunman and certain biographical details lead the FBI to classify the incident that way, according to a White House administration official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. He would not say if the gunman was believed to belong to a hate group or some other violent group because the investigation, led by the FBI, is unfolding.
But federal officials cautioned against thinking a concrete link to a domestic terrorism group or hate group was established.
"We don't know much about the motive at this point," said a federal law enforcement official who was briefed on the early planning for the case.
Sikhs often are mistaken for Muslims because of the religion's requirement that men wear turbans and leave their beards uncut. There have been incidents since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in which Sikh members have been victims of hate crimes, said Jasjit Singh, executive director of the Sikh American Legal Defense and Education Fund, noting vandalism at gas stations, taxi cab driver beatings and instances of school discrimination.
"Given that overview, when something like this happens, our first thought is that this isn't an isolated incident. It's an outgrowth of a xenophobic trend toward our community members," Singh said.
Chaos outside temple
For hours after the incident, there was a chaotic scene outside the temple as family, friends and congregants gathered to wait for details, which came slowly. After the shooting, platoons of police and FBI agents interviewed witnesses in the basement of a bowling alley across the street but prohibited them from initially contacting their family or friends.
Gurpreet Kaur, 24, of Oak Creek, said she spent the afternoon serving as a translator between law enforcement and survivors at the bowling alley. Police investigators kept witnesses inside the bowling alley's basement into the evening.
The parking lot of a day care center across the street from the bowling alley was filled with people representing media outlets from around the world. It also served as a gathering place for Sikhs who were not at the temple at the time of the shooting.
Edwards declined to describe the shooter or speculate on the motive, and he said he did not have details on the total number of people inside the temple at the time of the attack.
He confirmed authorities found weapons on the scene but declined to say how many or what kind.
Edwards said the names of those killed and injured, and the name of the gunman, would not be released Sunday.
Greenfield Police Chief Bradley Wentlandt, who assisted the investigation, said the police officer who was shot had surgery and is expected to survive.
Meditation, singing and a meal
Many Sikhs in the U.S. worship on Sundays at a temple, or gurdwara, and a typical service consists of meditation and singing in a prayer room where worshippers remove their shoes and sit on the floor. Worshippers gather afterward for a meal that is open to community members, regardless of their religious beliefs.
Kaur said her mother and a group of about 14 other women were preparing a meal in the temple kitchen when the gunman entered and started firing. Kaur said her mother felt two bullets fly by her as the group fled to the pantry.
"These are people I've grown up with," she said. "They're like aunts and uncles to me. To see our community go through something like this is numbing."
Jaspreet Singh, 16, of Oak Creek, said her mother also hid in the pantry. She called Singh's cousin and whispered into the cellphone to stay away from the temple before hurriedly hanging up.
"It's really scary," Singh said. The temple "is a place that's so peaceful."
One of those shot, according to his son, was Satwant Singh Kaleka, who founded the 17,500-square-foot temple in 1997. Kaleka was the temple's president and reportedly was shot while inside the temple.
"He's an amazing, brave man and he's done his best to get the Sikh community together," said his son, Amar-deep Kaleka. "This (violence) is not what the Sikh community is about. We're more about peace and calmness and meditation and more yogic traditions, which is the craziest part about this whole situation. My dad was more of a yogi than he was anything else. He would never even touch a gun or even lift a finger for a drink."
Cab driver Raj Singh, 39, said he was on his way to the temple from downtown Milwaukee when he received a phone call from a friend who told him about the shooting.
"Everybody is scared," Singh said. "I come every Sunday for prayer but now I think I'll maybe stay home because we are not safe right now."
The Chicago Tribune, the Associated Press, and State Journal reporter Barry Adams contributed to this report.

Graphic

 
Photos by JEFFREY PHELPS - Associated Press People react outside the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin in Oak Creek, where a shooting took place Sunday that police say killed six people. The gunman was killed in a shootout with police. Police converge on the Sikh Temple after Sunday's shooting that left terrified congregants hiding in closets and others texting friends outside for help. Police watch the outside of the Sikh Temple on Sunday in Oak Creek, where officials and witnesses described a chaotic situation that left seven dead, including the gunman. Photos by MIKE DE SISTI - Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (top) and JEFFREY PHELPS - Associated Press Groups of Sikh men and women, some with family members in the temple at the time of the shooting, wait together for information. Associated Press SOURCE: ESRI Map of Shooting at Sikh temple

Load-Date: August 7, 2012


End of Document