Tempers Flare in Anti-Terror Debate
New York Sun (Archive)
October 21, 2003 Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC
Section: NEW YORK; Pg. 2
Length: 489 words
Byline: By DANIELA GERSON Staff Reporter of the Sun
Body


Angry debate was the order of the day yesterday at a City Council hearing on a resolution that would condemn federal anti-terrorism measures such as the Patriot Act and special registration of men from Arab countries.
The nonbinding resolution, to which 29 council members have signed on as primary sponsors, calls on government officials to affirm constitutional protections of privacy, political expression, and due process of law.
In testimony submitted to the committee in support of the resolution, the chairman of Freedom and Privacy at the American Conservative Union, Bob Barr, wrote, "Resolution 909 is a key symbol of Americans' unwillingness to allow understandable concern over terrorism to mutate into the irrational crippling of our most cherished rights and freedoms."
What got blood boiling at the hearing was the assertion that expanded use of special courts in Washington, where proceedings are conducted in secret, provide the government with access to private records without due process.
Council Member Peter Vallone Jr. emphatically countered that these secret courts are a necessary, and lawful, anti-terrorism measure.
The director of the New York Civil Liberties Union Bill of Rights Defense Campaign, Udi Ofer, said the courts bypass judiciary oversight by allowing the government "broad and unfettered access to the private records of U.S. citizens, including private medical, financial, Internet, and library records" without having to "prove probable cause or even reasonable suspicion, but simply that the information is relevant to an ongoing terrorism investigation."
Mr. Vallone, disregarding a catcall from the crowded audience of "you no longer believe in Democracy," addressed Mr. Ofer saying, "You're absolutely wrong."
Mr. Vallone said the "Patriot Act is a large part of the reason this country has not been attacked since September 11." He said the courts have proper judiciary oversight, and that secrecy is a necessary counter-terrorism measure. "Do you think we should have a public proceeding to search, say, Al Qaeda headquarters in New York City?"
"Let's be perfectly clear," cut in Donna Lieberman ,director of the New York Civil Liberties Union. "Nobody has said that the government should not be able to engage in secret proceedings when it is necessary; however the government, under the leadership of President Bush and Attorney General Ashcroft have decided to make secrecy the norm.
"Just because something is relevant to terrorism does not mean that our government needs to act in secret," Ms. Lieberman said. "There is nothing about terrorism that should change the operating norms of our criminal justice system."
The resolution should be subject to further hearing within a week. If it passes, it will become one of more than 100 nationwide resolutions holding governments accountable for federal anti-terrorism measures for infringements on civil rights and liberties since September 11.

Load-Date: October 21, 2003


End of Document