Tenants should be covered
Business Insurance
March 8, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 844 words
Byline: By SARA MARLEY, Michael Schachner contributed to this report.
Body


World Trade Center tenants denied access to their offices following last month's explosion likely will have some insurance coverage for lost profits and relocation expenses.
Tenants will be able to claim business interruption and extra-expense coverage under the civil authority clause that is standard in most business interruption and extra-expense insurance policies -- as long as they purchased the coverage.
Tenants also will be eligible for coverage if they sustained sufficient property damage to require a shutdown in operations, even if they had been allowed to enter their offices.
Under the civil authority clause in the Insurance Services Office Inc.'s standard business interruption and extra-expense policy forms, up to two weeks' coverage is available if a policyholder is denied access to its premises by civil authorities because of damage to other property.
Business interruption insurance covers the loss of profits, as well as continuing operating expenses like payroll, while a business is restoring normal operations after a property loss. Extra-expense insurance covers extraordinary costs -- up to a specified limit -- to keep a business running after a property loss, like relocation expenses. Business interruption and extra-expense coverage usually is not triggered unless the policyholder's property is damaged.
Unlike last year's Chicago ''flood,'' where many of the tenants denied access to offices in flooded buildings had no property damage, most World Trade Center tenants incurred property damage from smoke and soot. That also will entitle them to business interruption and extra-expense coverage if the damage is severe enough to halt normal business once they re-enter their offices.
''The way I understand the loss, everyone will have some form of property damage,'' said William D. O'Connell, principal with Deloitte & Touche's risk management consulting division in Dallas.
The extent of the damage to individual offices is unclear since tenants have only been allowed in their offices for short periods of time.
With the reopening of the twin towers of the World Trade Center possibly a month away, some businesses that rely on the standard civil authority clause for coverage may find their limits exhausted before they can return to their offices.
''Some larger firms may buy up to six months' (coverage), but it's very unusual,'' said Suzanne Douglass, senior vp of Alexander & Alexander Services Inc. in New York. Policyholders commonly add two to four weeks of coverage to the standard two weeks.
''There's been increased emphasis'' on the civil authority clause ''because of the Meridian fire in Philadelphia,'' Ms. Douglass said, referring to a 1991 fire that swept through a downtown skyscraper and forced the relocation of tenants (BI, March 4, 1991).
''It's possible to extend the normal two weeks' coverage, but it's not common,'' said Tom Radziewicz, senior consultant with Towers Perrin/Tillinghast in Boston.
For World Trade Center tenants, ''extra-expense might be the coverage that is most important in this loss,'' said Lawrence L. Drake, managing director of Marsh & McLennan Inc. in New York.
Unlike the hotel and restaurants affected, the business of the broker ages, financial institutions, law firms and accountants in the center is not tied to their location, Mr. O'Connell said.
''I suspect that the larger portion of the two claims will be extra expense,'' he said.
Extra-expense losses will be concentrated during the first two weeks after the disaster -- during the period the civil authority coverage applies --as companies establish alternative sites, said Charles Fiske, group marketing director at Sedgwick James Inc. in Memphis.
However, if the World Trade Center is closed for two months, ''business interruption could overtake extra expense,'' he said. ''It's a situation where business interruption could carry on for some time.''
Both coverages are ''definitely worth the price,'' Mr. Fiske added.
''The costs are at historic lows for property and business interruption insurance,'' Mr. Drake said. ''It shouldn't have been a burden for anyone to buy it.''
''Business interruption is readily available,'' said Michael D. Dangelo, executive vp of Minet Risk Services, a unit of broker Minet Group P.L.C. ''Underwriters think if you're a good enough risk for direct property damage, you're a good risk for business interruption.''
Because limits and premiums for business interruption are based on sales, it's important to review the policy annually, brokers said.
Tenants generally should not be concerned that business interruption coverage will be voided because the explosion was an act of terrorism.
''There is no question of coverage,'' said a Chubb Corp. spokeswoman in Warren, N.J. ''Terrorism is not excluded under our policy.''
''If operations are shut down by ruling of civil authority, it's an insured peril,'' agreed Jim Black, vp and director of regional operations for Protection Mutual Insurance Co. in Park Ridge, Ill. ''Most contracts would cover explosion; it doesn't matter if it's terrorism.''


End of Document