TENSION IN LIBYA: TRIPOLI AND THE HOSTAGES;
BRITAIN CITES 'EVIDENCE' OF LIBYAN ROLE
The New York Times
April 19, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1027 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, April 18
Body


Britain said today that it had ''firm evidence of direct Libyan involvement'' in the kidnapping of two British teachers who were killed in Lebanon in reprisal for the bombing raid by American F-111's flying from British bases.
A statement by Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Foreign Secretary, stopped short of charging the Government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi with having ordered the execution of the hostages, whose bodies were discovered Thursday outside Beirut. But it said the British Government ''had good reason to believe'' the hostages, Philip Padfield and Leigh Douglas, ''were in Libyan hands.''
The term ''Libyan hands'' might be taken as meaning either the hands of terrorists directed by Libya or Libyan nationals, an official said, interpreting the Foreign Secretary's statement. Asked whether the statement meant Libya had control of the hostages this week at the time of the bombing raid or, subsequently, their murder, the official replied that he could not be that specific. But he said what the authorities here knew was more than enough for them to hold Libya responsible for their fate.
On Thursday, the leader of the Labor Party opposition, Neil Kinnock, said Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had ''blood on her hands'' because her agreement to the request made by President Reagan for the use of the bases here had led directly to the executions in Beirut.
 
'Conscious of Great Danger'
Sir Geoffrey's statement dealt directly with that charge. ''We have, of course, been conscious throughout of the great danger they were in,'' he said, speaking of the hostages. ''Although we decided not to publicize it because of the risk to their lives, this was part of the evidence we had before us of Libyan state-directed terrorism.''
Both the Foreign Secretary and Mrs. Thatcher have tried to argue that democratic governments could not allow themselves to be paralyzed in the face of terrorism by such dangers. But the argument that the reprisal murders could have been avoided if Mrs. Thatcher had turned down the American request seemed overwhelming to many Britons, among them Edgar Douglas, whose 34-year-old son, a science teacher, was one of those killed.
''I feel disgusted that those planes were allowed to fly from Britain,'' Mr. Douglas said. ''But for that my son would still be alive.''
Under photographs of the corpses, a stark headline in large type on the front page of Today, a new tabloid, said, ''The Price.''
 
Headline Says 'They Paid'
A similar headline in The Daily Mirror said, ''They Paid.''
An editorial in The Mirror contained a caveat, however, against ascribing all the violence to Americans. It said: ''It would be the gravest mistake now to believe that future acts of terrorism would never have occurred but for the American raid.''
But after a heated debate, the National Union of Journalists at its annual conference in Sheffield resolved to send a telegram of condolence to Colonel Qaddafi along with a condemnation of the bombing raid.
Various union locals condemned the plans for a condolence telegram. One in Manchester ascribed it to ''witless buffoons.''
A third body found with those of the two British hostages was mistakenly identified Thursday as having been that of a third Briton, Alec Collett. But today it was reported to have been that of an American, Peter Kilburn, librarian at the American University in Beirut, who was kidnapped Dec. 3, 1984.
 
Editorial in Telegraph
The Daily Telegraph, normally a staunch backer of Mrs. Thatcher and the Conservative Party, pointed out this morning in an editorial an apparent paradox that has arisen in the Government's position on terrorism as a result of the Prime Minister's readiness to justify this week's raid.
The paper said: ''Having been a party to American retaliation for an act of terrorism on Monday, does Britain now propose to retaliate against Libya for an act of terrorism against herself? And if not, in logic why not?''
A Foreign Office official provided one answer. The United States is a superpower that was ''goaded beyond endurance,'' he said. Britain might find itself in an analagous situation, the official continued, but it could not act in an analagous way.
There was no call here from any source today, political or otherwise, for military reprisals for the deaths of the two Britons.
 
London Remains on Alert
But London remained on the alert for terrorist incidents. Warnings about bombs went up in office buildings, especially those with offices of American companies. At some theaters, women in the audiences had their handbags searched.
For the second day in a row, a terrorist attempt was foiled. The police said a letter bomb addressed to Malcolm Rifkind, the Secretary of State for Scotland, was intercepted and defused at the House of Commons. Mr. Rifkind is one of four Jewish members of Mrs. Thatcher's Cabinet. On Thursday, security agents found a bomb in the bag of a woman about to board an El Al Boeing 747 for Tel Aviv at Heathrow Airport.
The Labor Party, which has been calling for economic sanctions against Libya as a better way of combating terrorism than military reprisals, promised today ''to re-establish British control over United States bases in Britain.''
 
Labor Party Statement
A statement issued by the party's national executive committee said: ''The use of United States bases in Britain for non-NATO purposes calls into question the Reagan Administration's understanding of the Atlantic alliance - and Mrs. Thatcher's willingness and ability to restrict their use to the defense of Britain and Europe.''
The secret agreement that regulates use of the bases - negotiated 35 years ago by a Labor Prime Minister, Clement Attlee - was not directly called into question by the statement. But the party executive promised to impose ''a physical British veto over the use of the base facilities.''
Asked what this meant, the party's general secretary, Larry Whitty, replied at a news conference that steps would be taken to insure that the bases were not operational without British participation.
Offering a description of the present British presence on the bases, he said: ''In other words, you wouldn't have one wing commander and a dog.''

Graphic

 
Table lists hostages still held in Lebanon


End of Document