TENSION IN LIBYA: POLLING THE AMERICAN PUBLIC;
A POLL FINDS 77% IN U.S. APPROVE RAID ON LIBYA
The New York Times
April 17, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1240 words
Byline: By ADAM CLYMER
Body


The American people overwhelmingly support the bombing of Libya, despite widespread fears that it will lead to more international terrorism and even to war with that country, a New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. But a poll in Britain found very heavy disapproval.
The telephone survey of 704 Americans Tuesday night showed that 77 percent of the public approved of the bombing and 14 percent disapproved. Thirty percent thought it would reduce terrorism, but 43 percent thought it would lead to more.
The attack led to a huge surge in backing for President Reagan's handling of foreign policy. Last week 51 percent of the public approved; after Monday night's bombing the figure was 76 percent. His highest previous rating level was 56 percent just before the Geneva summit meeting.
Thirty percent said they thought the bombing would lead to war with Libya. But majorities of those who feared more terrorism or war still approved of the bombing. The margin of sampling error in the poll was plus or minus 4 percentage points. #29% Approve in Britain But the British poll, taken for The Times of London, showed a very different reaction in the country from which F-111 bombers took off for the attack. There, only 29 percent said Mr. Reagan was right to order the bombing, and dissatisfaction with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's job performance reached a near record 68 percent.
The poll, conducted Tuesday night and Wednesday, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.
Twenty-eight percent of the 1,051 Britons interviewed in person by Market & Opinion Research International said they had only ''a little confidence'' that the United States would ''deal wisely with the Libyan situation over the next few weeks,'' and 43 percent said they had ''no confidence at all.''
In contrast, the findings in the United States poll reflected much greater confidence in Mr. Reagan than appeared even after the invasion of Grenada in October 1983. Then, 44 percent said they had confidence in his handling of an international crisis, while 49 percent said they were ''uneasy about his approach.'' On Tuesday, 66 percent they were confident, and only 30 percent said they were uneasy.
One key reason for that confidence may have been the widespread agreement that the Administration had made thorough diplomatic efforts before ordering the bombing.
 
Dissatisfaction With Allies
The Times/CBS News Poll also showed unhappiness with Western European allies in general and France in particular.
Sixty-five percent said the allies ''should have given us more help against Libya.'' Asked about the refusal of the French to let planes fly over their territory, 47 percent said ''they were being poor allies,'' though 38 percent said that was ''understandable.''
Asked about the British decision to permit bombers to take off from bases in that country, 45 percent of the Americans said they were ''being especially good allies,'' 34 percent said they ''were simply acting in their own best interests,'' and 10 percent said both descriptions applied.
In the British poll, however, only 25 percent of the public said they thought Mrs. Thatcher was right to allow the bombers to take off. Satisfaction with her performance declined to 28 percent, from 32 percent late last month. The lowest rating ever measured for her or any recent British Prime Minister is 25 percent, in November 1981. #57% Support Sanctions Asked to choose among a list of actions Britain could take in the future, 57 percent supported economic sanctions, and another 57 percent favored encouraging other European nations to withdraw diplomatic recognition of Libya.
Twenty-eight percent backed a blocking of Libyan airfields, 27 percent supported a blockade of Libyan ports, 13 percent favored allowing future American bombing missions and 5 percent wanted to use British planes to attack Libyan targets. Only 8 percent favored none of the actions, and 7 percent had no answer.
But while the results in the American poll showed 43 percent saying the bombing would lead to more terrorism, in Britain 84 percent said it would ''increase the likelihood of terrorist backed attacks by Libya in Britain.''
While The Times/CBS News Poll showed very heavy support for the bombing, there were some important variations in the degree of backing. Blacks, with only 53 percent approving, were least supportive, and Republicans, among whom 90 percent approved, were most enthusiastic.
 
More Men Than Women Approve
Eighty-three percent of men and 71 percent of women approved of it. People over 64 were less supportive than younger respondents, with 65 percent of the older people approving and 20 percent disapproving.
Fear that a war would result was strongest among blacks, of whom 56 percent said it would and 23 percent said it would not. But respondents with family incomes under $25,000, women and people 18 to 29 were all about evenly split on the question.
Overall, 45 percent said war would not result, but 30 percent said it would. Even in the latter group, however, 67 percent approved of the bombing while 23 percent did not. In the more optimistic group, 87 percent approved and 8 percent disapproved.
In just about every demographic group measured - except for Republicans - more people thought the bombing would lead to an increase in terrorism than expected a reduction.
 
Not a Decisive Influence
But that, too, did not seem to exert decisive influence on their attitude toward the bombing. Those who expected more terrorism to result split 65 percent to 27 for approving the bombing. Those in the smaller group who thought there would be less terrorism, however, were lopsidedly in favor, 91 percent to 1 percent, with the rest having no opinion.
Finally, 57 percent said they thought terrorism would be reduced ''in the long run'' if the United States made it a policy to take military action against governments that trained or financed terrorists, while 27 percent thought such a general policy would make things worse.
In a Times/CBS News Poll in January, a similar question produced 40 percent favoring such a policy and 46 percent thinking it would do more harm than good.
 
HOW THE POLL WAS CONDUCTED
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted on April 15 with 704 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.
The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen so as to insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted residential numbers.
The results have been weighted and number of residential telephones and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education. race, sex, age and education.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ by no more than 4 percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, the potential error for men is plus or minus 6 percentage points, and for women it is plus or minus 5 percentage points.
In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

Graphic

 
Graph illustrating poll's results (NYT/April 17,1986)


End of Document