TENSION OVER LIBYA: TOUGH WORDS FROM MOSCOW;
BILL WOULD GIVE REAGAN A FREE HAND ON TERROR
The New York Times
April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 639 words
Byline: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 17
Body


A bill authorizing the President to respond to foreign terrorism without consulting Congress in advance was introduced by Republicans in both houses of Congress today.
Although the subject of some dispute among the sponsors, the bill would apparently permit the President to order the assassination of a foreign head of state under some circumstances. Such action is now prohibited by both Federal law and an executive order.
The bill would exempt from the constraints of the War Powers Act a decision by the President to respond to a terrorist act or threat of terrorism with ''deadly force.'' The War Powers Act, which Congress approved over President Nixon's veto in 1973, requires the President to consult with Congress before introducing American forces into ''hostilities'' and to report to Congress on the action within 48 hours.
Bill Faces Uncertain Future
The only requirement under the bill is a report by the President to Congress within 10 days after the antiterrorist action. The bill applies to pre-emptive strikes as well as to action in response to a completed act of terrorism.
The bill faces an uncertain future in both houses. Many members of Congress complained this week that President Reagan failed to give Congress adequate notice of the air strikes against Libya. The bombers were already in the air by the time the White House informed Congressional leaders of the mission.
At the same time, a number of members observed that the War Powers Act, designed to give Congress a voice in a prolonged conflict, did not adequately deal with an operation that was completed in hours.
 
House Hearings Set
The bill may serve as a focus for a renewed debate about what role, if any, Congress should play in the unconventional war against terrorism. Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, is planning to hold hearings on the general subject later this year. He is a strong believer in maintaining a consulting role for Congress.
Senator Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader and one of the bill's sponsors, said a purpose of his bill was ''to avoid these pointless debates about whether consultations three hours in advance is enough or whether you need four or five hours or whatever.'' The Kansas Republican said at a news conference that the War Powers Act, of which he was a co-sponsor, had not considered terrorism and that the President's authority to act in this area needed ''clarification.''
The bill defines terrorism as violent action by a foreign individual or group, directed against Americans, and intended to ''intimidate or coerce a civilian population'' or to influence Government policy through intimidation, coercion, kidnapping or assassination. The bill provides that those who commit acts of terrorism ''may be pursued with deadly force.''
At the news conference, another of the sponsors, Senator Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, said that in the case of state-sponsored terrorism, the bill would authorize the assassination of a head of state who was personally involved in the terrorist actions.
 
'Within Intent of Bill'
Senator Denton said that if Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi ''became deceased as the result of our counter-strike, that would have been within the intent of the bill.''
But another of the sponsors, Representative Joe L. Barton, Republican of Texas, appeared startled by that assertion. ''That's not my understanding,'' he said in an interview. ''We certainly don't want to put the Government on record as condoning assassination.''
An aide to Senator Dole said that the bill would authorize assassination when a foreign leader was directly tied to planning or committing a specific act of terrorism aimed at Americans overseas. In those circumstances, he said, the current prohibitions against assassination would be superseded.

Graphic

 
photo of Senator Bob Dole (AP)


End of Document