TENSION OVER LIBYA: ECHOES IN ROME AND TRIPOLI;
ITALIAN PROMISES TO ANSWER TERROR
The New York Times
April 20, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 886 words
Byline: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, April 19
Body


Prime Minister Bettino Craxi said today that Italy would respond with ''severity'' to any new Libyan attacks on Italian territory, and a senior aide said this meant Italy would take military action.
The Italian leader also said the number of Italians in Libya had been cut in half in recent months to 4,000.
Mr. Craxi's statements and those of a senior aide were the toughest by a European ally since the American raid on Libya early Tuesday morning. They followed criticism by United States officials Wednesday that the allies had not done enough to counter terrorism or, with the exception of Britain, support the American action.
The next day, however, Secretary of State George P. Shultz went out of his way not to criticize the French, who refused permission for American warplanes to use French airspace on their way to Libya, or other allies for their lack of public support.
 
Rejects Economic Sanctions
Mr. Craxi rejected, for the time being, economic sanctions against Libya, citing Italy's range of economic interests. He specifically rejected the idea of seizing Libya's 15 percent share in Fiat, Italy's most important industrial company.
But although conceding that Europe had initially underestimated the problem of Libyan terrorism, he vigorously defended the allies against charges that they had been soft on terrorism Noting that Europe, not the United States, had been the area hit by terrorist actions, Mr. Craxi said, ''To characterize Europe as cowering before terrorism is a great mistake.''
''I won't accept any charges of cowardice,'' he said.
He also said the proof offered by the United States implicating Libya in the bombing of a discotheque in West Berlin on April 5 was ''absolutely convincing.''
 
Seeking Careful Balance
Mr. Craxi, who strongly criticized the American air raids on Tripoli and Benghazi, made his comments at a news conference called to discuss Italy's stand on the Libyan crisis. His comments offered the clearest view of the strike to date from the European nation closest to Libya's shores.
But Mr. Craxi seemed to be seeking a careful, almost ambiguous, balance between toughness and a desire for what he termed a ''cease-fire'' between the United States and Libya. He said he hoped the Soviet Union would be able to push Libya toward a more moderate stance.
A senior Italian official, in the meantime, said Italy believed the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, had strengthend his control in Libya over the last few days but had still not won back the full power he held before the raid.
The official also said Italy believed that the Soviet Union ''may be dictating some conditions on him'' and increasing its influence in Libya.
''We cannot say that Qaddafi is in full control,'' the official said. ''He's behaving in a different way.''
 
Anger Over Libyan Attack
At his news conference at Palazzo Chigi in Rome's historic center that houses the Prime Minister's offices, Mr. Craxi sought to make clear Italy's anger at Libya for its failed attack on the island of Lampedusa.
Libya fired two Soviet-built SCUD missiles at the island, Italy's southernmost point, just 200 miles from Tripoli. The missiles fell into the sea, although Mr. Craxi said the consequences could have been grave had they struck.
Italy sent a strongly worded note to Libya protesting the attack, but Mr. Craxi said he had also given ''clear directives to the Italian armed forces.''
''What do you think we should do next time?'' Mr. Craxi asked rhetorically. ''Send another note of protest?
That would not be the view of the Italian Government, nor would it be the view of the overwhelming majority of Italians.''
Mr. Craxi said, ''The Tripoli Government must abandon its threats of war and military action.''
Asked what Mr. Craxi's comments meant in the event of another Libyan attack, Antonio Badini, Mr. Craxi's diplomatic counselor, replied, ''You can assume that the answer would be military.''
In his news conference, Mr. Craxi seemed to concede that the European Community's political response to Libyan terrorism had been inadequate.
''There may have been an underestimation of some aspects of the problem - some reluctance to face the major questions,'' he said.
But he said Europe, and his country in particular, had acted ''very courageously'' in fighting domestic and Middle East-related terrorism.
 
'Europe That's Being Hit'
''The United States has never had terrorist actions in its own country,'' Mr. Craxi said. ''It's Europe that's being hit.''
''We intend to deal with any form of terrorism that hits us or our friends with all the determination and the severity required,'' the Italian leader said. ''What is at stake is the choice of the most effective strategies.''
The remark was an implicit criticism of the American raids, and Mr. Craxi added, ''I believe the stronger you are, the more just and fair you should be, and this applies in particular to the large, civilized countries of the world.''
Mr. Craxi responded with unusual frankness when asked if he would consider seizing the share of Fiat held by the Libyan Arab investment bank.
He said such an action would endanger Italy's co-ownership with Libya of oil wells in Libyan territory and Italy's economic relations with Libya ''would enter into crisis if the situation were to worsen.''
Italy is Libya's biggest Western trading partner.


End of Document