TENSION OVER LIBYA: TRYING TO TOPPLE QADDAFI;
KEY SECTIONS OF SHULTZ PRESS TALK ON LIBYA AND OTHER ISSUES
The New York Times
April 18, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk; TEXT
Length: 2956 words
Body


Following are key sections of Secretary of State George P. Shultz's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:
Q. Mr. Secretary, I was wondering what kind of message, really, that the U.S. is trying to send on terrorism. Here we are attacking Libya and yet a few days later pulling out of Sudan. Isn't that a mixture of resolve and retreat?
A. We are successfully sending the message that terrorism is going to pay a cost. And that it is a very serious problem and people need to focus in on it, and recognize in the case of the Libya that this is a country that is heavily involved with terrorism and people are going to have to do something about it.
Now, I think there is a rapidly escalating realization of those propositions. And we were very heartened, for example, by the general tone and outlook of the meeting of the European foreign ministers today in Paris that John Whitehead attended, that I think was very positive.
Now, as far as the Sudan is concerned, the Ambassador in the Sudan had judged several days ago - he was unaware of what was going to happen in Libya - that the situation was of such a nature, that we should reduce the numbers of people, particulary dependents. We will be in the Sudan, our mission is there. We will carry on our functions, but we reduced the general level of exposure. But our message is very clear about terrorism, and I think that the actions in Tripoli helped to underscore.
 
More Military Force
Q. Is the Administration prepared, Mr. Secretary, if Libya is tied to the shooting in Sudan, to respond once again with military force?
A. We will judge each situation as it goes and we're not going to get put in a position where we're put on some sort of automatic pilot here. But certainly we are investigating the shooting and we will take steps.
Q. Mr. Secretary, could you discuss whether on the night of the raid, did you hope that a bomb might have knocked Colonel Qaddafi out of business? A. He was not a direct target. Q. But his home was.
A. But we had in our minds, in the targeting, first of all to hit things that were directly fostering terrorism, such as the training facility, and things in the Libyan infrastructure that were in one way or another supporting it.
And we also, recognizing that there is a considerable dissidence in the armed forces in Libya with Qaddafi and what he's doing, tried in the targeting to send two messages: first of all, that from the standpoint of equipment that the military puts store by, that the terrorist activities in Libya may cost them some of that equipment, and it literally did.
And second, that the Praetorian Guards that surround Qaddafi and intimidate people, are not invulnerable, so they were a target. So that was part of the conception of how the targets were selected. Terrorist-oriented, in the sense that I described. A Coup in Libya?  Q. Did you think that a coup could be encouraged in the aftermath of this bombing raid?
A. If a coup takes place, that's all to the good. We know there are people, lots of people in Libya, who think that Libya would be better off if Qaddafi weren't there. And there are even more people, not in Libya, who think that. Whether there is a movement toward a coup taking place, I don't have enough information to feel confident to talk about it.
 
Shooting in Tripoli
Q. What do you make of this shooting that was reported from Tripoli the last few days?
A. I hesitate to try to make, to characterize it because the information that I have is not - I'm not confident enough of it to want to talk about it.
Q. Could I follow up my other question? Would you have shed a tear if Colonel Qaddafi had been in that house that got destroyed, and had been knocked out? You know some people say well, if Qaddafi is gone then maybe there's a big pro-Soviet element might take over and that might be worse.
A. I think that those who would take over in the absence of Qaddafi would undoubtedly have a more Libya-oriented orientation. And certainly there are plenty of problems in Libya that they need to address. And the resources they have to do it with are a lot less, given the very big drop in the foreign exchange available to Libya.
 
Allied Support
Q. The British have taken it on the chin in the last couple of days for aiding us in our attack on Libya. Do you think that's going to make it more difficult to win allied support for antiterror measures?
A. I think that everybody has to recognize that appeasement of terrorists and being intimidated by terrorists only feeds them. We have to get out of that psychology. So it seems to me, in Europe, what's happening, as evidenced by the attitudes of the foreign ministers meeting last Monday and then the meeting today, is one of saying we have this major, difficult, important, debilitating problem.
And we're, we're going to have to face up to it and be as effective as we possibly can and deal with it, deal with it, and we're not going to be intimidated. And we're not going to temporize with it. That's the mood, and I think that's the right mood. And I think the British are playing a very strong and effective and laudable role in all of this.
Q. Mr. Secretary, do you think the irritation that has been displayed this week by some people about the lack of allied response to American troops will encourage the mood which rises and falls in this city about pulling out some of the American troops?
A. I don't think so. I think that the value and importance of our alliance is clear and as we consider further actions on terrorism, and of course as we continue the process of a kind of dual-track strategy - of deterrence on the one hand and readiness to work at problems on the other with the East, a U.S. troop presence people regard here and there as very significant. And I pointed up, and they have pointed up, in our discussions, including the session I had with Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the fact that the events in Germany, the fact that the person killed was a U.S. soldier in Berlin, is a matter of especially deep concern.
So I think that this is one of those cases where of course there were differences of view and we took an action that we felt we had to take. People's views about it vary. On the other hand, the key element here is that we have very quickly coalesced in recognizing the problem and having really on a much stronger basis than was true, let's say, a week or so ago, a sense of motion, of commitment.
 
Summit Plans
Q. Mr. Secretary, do you believe that the Soviet cancellation of the Shevardnadze meeting with you is a tactical move and that the meeting will be put back on track before too long?
A. Well, I hope that the meeting will be put back on the track. But what I can say is, from the U.S. standpoint, we think that terrorism is a major problem and we have to do what we have to do about it and take action against it. And we feel that we dealt properly with the Soviets in this instance. We told them in advance the nature of the problem.
After the bombing we told them that we had conclusive evidence. So they knew quite well what the nature of this general evolving situation was likely to look like. They heard the President's press conference on Monday night.
From our standpoint, that's one thing and the fact is there are many problems, there are many important matters that can be worked at, negotiated about, discussed, with the Soviet Union. That hasn't changed. And I think it's time to roll up our sleeves and get at it.
In the meetings that I had with Ambassador Dobrynin, the President had with Ambassador Dobryin, just exactly that spirit was engendered, and I hope that we can carry on along those lines. From the standpoint of the United States, that what's we intend to do. But, of course, it takes two to do it.
 
Soviet and Libya
Q. Mr. Secretary, on that point, Mr. Gorbachev in his letter to Colonel Qaddafi, which was released last night by Tass, said that we repeatedly made serious warnings to the American Administration about the dangerous consequences of the continuation of its anti-Libyan policy, not only for the situation in the Mediterranean but the entire international situation. What kind of warnings were received from the Soviets, and what do you expect of them now in the area?
A. Well I don't know precisely what he's referring to and I don't want to speculate about what they may or may not do, but let me point out to you that our action was not anti-Libyan. It was antiterrorism and anti the kind of activity that Qaddafi is promoting, using the assets of Libya.
The President went out of his way to say we have nothing against the people of Libya, it's the terrorism that's coming from there which is our problem. Insofar as our assertion of rights to international waters are concerned, that is not only a proper thing to do but it works in the Soviet interest as well as any other maritime power, that individual countries not just be able to assert rights to international waters and have that get accepted.
 
Soviet Sea Rights
Q. What does it mean when they say as they have last night apparently, to envoys in Moscow that they have a right in international waters, does this mean that they contemplate to do something?
A. They absolutely do. We agree completely with that. They even have a right go to in the Gulf of Sidra, just as we do.
Q. Mr. Secretary, did you foresee that the Soviets might cancel the meeting with Mr. Shevardnadze as a result of the attack?
A. Well, we didn't try to predict. I think it's a mistake to do too much of that. We have to consider what we think is the right thing to do here in relation to our own efforts to do something about terrorism and to make our point of view clear and to raise the costs to terrorists, and obviously we think about all the different consequences. But we didn't try to predict in some precise way.
I am not surprised that they took some action. On the other hand, as I said, I hope that the meeting will be re-established. However, that's for them to decide. From our standpoint, we're prepared to roll up our sleeves and get to work on the problem that are there.
 
The Tokyo Meeting
Q. Sir, on the subject of terrorism, what kind of atmosphere will President Reagan run into in Tokyo, and on the subject, what would you want to achieve there?
A. Well, I'll say that Prime Minister Nakasone in our meetings with him couldn't have been stronger in his view about the threat of terrorism and the importance of countering it. And judging from the outlook, and tone and content of the European foreign ministers today, which undoubtedly reflects the views of their heads of state, that is very much their view. So I would look for a constructive discussion on the subject.
Q. Just a connecting point here, predicting what may happen after the raid. What about the American hostages? Have you received anything that would suggest that their lives are in greater danger now, aside from what one could speculate about?
A. We haven't received anything in any direct way. We work on that problem continuously, and feel that it would be best to work on it and not to comment about it.
 
Actions by France
Q. Mr. Secretary, since the French refusal to allow overflights on Monday, they have been criticized by everyone. Is that still justified in view of the latest dealings that you have had, that the Administration has had with the French in the past 24 hours? Do you see any change in their attitude since they made that decision before the strike?
A. They were part of this meeting that I referred to, which was a harmonious meeting, in the sense that people were generally agreeing. In the meeting that I had with Chirac, whenever that was, about two weeks ago, two and a half weeks ago anyway, Chirac has a very strong view of the importance of strong action and cooperative action on terrorism, So he said to me, and Mitterrand also volunteered statements to me on this subject. The French are working at this. We're very well aware, did abort a terrorist attack that could have done a lot of damage to innocents. So the French are, I think, increasingly very much alert to this problem. They chose not to let us overfly France, and we regret that, but that doesn't mean France doesn't take the problem seriously.
Q. You don't have problems beyond this particular decision?
A. Well, we have, as you, and we all, recognize - the French are very special to deal with. They are discreet about each individual thing. They are a joy in some cases and not so much of a joy in other cases. This was one we didn't so much enjoy.
 
Future of '79 Pact
Q. Mr. Secretary, Bernard Kalb said carefully at the briefing today that the President had not arrived at a final decision on whether to continue abiding by SALT II, but he did say that Ambassadors Rowny and Nitze were going to discuss a proposed decision with the allies next week. Can you tell us what that proposed decision was?
A. No, and I don't think that the President, so far as I know, has decided how he wants to approach that. The Nitze-Rowny statement is by way of saying that in this process of the final deciding what the President decides, we will, in a systematic and careful way, listen to the views of our allies.
Of course, we have been listening to their views. We've had cables in from all of them and we've had quite a lot of discussions, for example, yesterday Hans-Dietrich Genscher appeared and commented on the subject and so on. So there's a great deal. But we believe it's useful at a certain stage in the process to do it on a careful and systematic basis through Nitze and Rowney who know the subject well and have been very successful in explaining our views, eliciting their views and bringing them back a very good readout. So we'll do that.
Q. Do you expect that that will support your position, that is the position of those who argue that SALT II should not be under attack and it will help you prevail?
A. The consultative process is something that we as a good ally do. And it has been a very important part of the strong cohesion, the strength of the alliance. It has paid big dividends for everybody, both us, for Europeans and Japan. They like us. Insofar as whatever my views or other people's views are concerned, I provide them to the President and then he decides what he wants to do and I support that.
 
Moving Against Libya
Q. Mr. Secretary, I want to come back for a minute and share a little bit of the personal feelings that you, there must be, you must have some personal feelings this week after the attacks on Libya about your long efforts that began a couple of years ago to bring along the American public and convince them that even if there were casualties, it was important to take this step. Can you tell us a little bit about how you feel about that evolution? I assume you wouldn't want to gloat, but there's a certain feeling that I can imagine you might have in being on a roll in a way, and finally getting over a hump of some sort in dealing with this issue. Can you comment on that?
A. Well, I think there's been an evolution in our, I think, in all of us. I wish that we weren't at this point. I wish that somehow, years ago, we had been able to so discourage terrorism that we wouldn't have this problem on our hands. So if having felt that it was a growing menace I had been proved wrong, I would've liked that a lot better. Aiming at Qaddafi?  Q. Mr. Secretary, could I try to clarify your response to Bernie Gwertzman, whether we were aiming at Qaddafi. I'm confused. You said we weren't aiming at him. But we were aiming at the infrastructure, we wanted to cripple, we wanted to hurt the military there. I mean, if Qaddafi is the source of all the terrorism, why would you want to bombard three of his lieutenants? Why wouldn't you kill the man himself? I mean, I don't understand the logic or the explanation of whether or not we were really aiming for Qaddafi. We apparently killed at least one member of his family.
A. We had a strategy and target selection, which I explained to you. And we didn't have a strategy of saying that we wanted to go after Qaddafi personally. We have a general stance that opposes direct efforts of that kind and the spirit and intent was in accord with those undertakings.
 
Foreseeing Results
Q. During this whole situation, there have been a number of obvious negative results that we've had. We've had problems with the allies. We lost an airplane. Now there are reports all over the world on various kinds of tensions, dealing with potential terrorism. Could you say at this point first, whether you had foreseen any of all of those negative factors in advance, and whether you could point to any specific accomplishments on the plus side which have taken place. A.  I think the net, broadly speaking, we did what we expected to do. I might say I think as an aside the military skill or professionalism that we exhibited was extraordinary. And once again we see some of the weaponry that the Libyans had didn't seem to perform all that well. Because the Libyans were using it or what, I don't know, but it was not that great.
So broadly we did what we intended to do and I think on the whole the results taking a balance are very positive. And certainly we have an immediate spectrum of views from our friends around the world, some very much in support and some with different views and so on. But, leading off with today's meeting as an example, I think the awareness of the problem and the need to do something about it is certainly much sharper and stronger and I don't say just because of what we did. It's really because of the fact that people are only too aware that all of these threats that people are so aware of today, made it come about since our action, they were there.

Graphic

 
photo of George Shultz and Caspar Weinberger (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)


End of Document