Terrorism to grow, CIA director tells panel
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 20, 1995, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 322 words
Byline: A Tribune Wire Report
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


CIA Director John Deutch warned Congress Tuesday that he expects "tremendous growth" in international terrorism over the coming decade, which will have a major impact both on U.S. foreign policy and on the way in which American businesses operate abroad.
Deutch told the House Intelligence Committee that the expected surge in terrorism is one of the best arguments for strengthening the CIA's ability to conduct espionage with a network of spies around the world, since spy satellites and other technical intelligence resources are often of little value in tracking small terrorist cells.      - Softer shackles OK'd to link mother, daughter  CHARLESTON, S.C. - The judge who ordered a teenager shackled to her mother for a month to keep her out of trouble decided to make the arrangement more comfortable for both.
Family Court Judge Wayne Creech ruled that 15-year-old Tonya Kline may be connected to her mother by a nylon belt around her waist that is attached to a strap instead of by the traditional prisoner's shackles. And he said the girl's mother, Deborah Harter, may opt to share the 24-hour responsibility of watching Tonya with Harter's husband, Richard.      - Library pulls exhibit on slavery after complaints  WASHINGTON - For the second time this month, the Library of Congress bowed to criticism and Tuesday scrapped an exhibit - this time, on the day the show was supposed to open to the public.
Library workers dismantled "Back of the Big House: The Cultural Landscape of the Plantation," an exhibit depicting slave life on Southern plantations through the library's collection of photographs and first-person accounts by former slaves.
"There were many African American staff members and officials who took umbrage" after the exhibit was installed Monday, library spokeswoman Jill Brett said Tuesday night. "It was up and now it is down. It just was felt that if a lot of people were offended, it just wasn't worth it."

Notes

BRIEF; THE NATION

Graphic

 
SIGNATURE

Load-Date: December 22, 1995


End of Document