TERRORISM STILL ELUDES DEFINITION
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 7, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWSWATCH; Pg. B1
Length: 1055 words
Byline: Harry Levins Post-Dispatch Senior Writer
Body


THE NEWS: Delegates from 53 Islamic nations failed to pin down a definition of terrorism at a conference in Malaysia last week.
THE ISSUE: Despite decades of the word's use, no one definition has gained universal acceptance. But people seem to have their own understanding of what terrorism is.
Defining "terrorist" is simple: "One who commits acts of terrorism." But defining "terrorism" gets sticky.
The consensus: There is no consensus on defining "terrorism."
The issue boiled up last week in two disparate locales, Malaysia and Minneapolis.
In Malaysia, delegates at a conference of 53 Islamic nations failed to pin down a definition. Their host, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed, wanted "terrorism" to cover all attacks on civilians -- for example, attacks by Palestinian suicide bombers.
But the Arab delegates would have none of it. They called such bombings legitimate acts of opposition to an illegitimate occupation.
In Minneapolis, Jewish leaders formed a group called Minnesotans Against Terrorism. Its first target was the Minneapolis Star Tribune.
In a full-page ad (in the Star Tribune), the group complained that the paper refused to "refer to those who intentionally kill Israeli civilians as terrorists." The paper has said it prefers to use more specific terms, such as "suicide bomber" or "gunman."
Even President George W. Bush limits his use of the word in a Mideast conext. Bush has refused to label Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat a "terrorist," citing Arafat's past efforts to negotiate peace.
(Post-Dispatch Managing Editor Arnie Robbins said, "We prefer to be as precise as possible in identifying groups and individuals -- such as 'suicide bombers' -- who specifically target and attack civilians. But we do permit the use of the words 'terrorist' or 'terrorist attack' as well.")
When it comes to precision in prose, diplomats are sticklers. If you call the State Department and ask for a definition of "terrorism," you'll get referred to Joe Reap of the department's counterrorism office. In turn, he'll refer you to the State Department's Web site, to a section titled "Patterns of Global Terrorism."
The section opens with a boldface heading: "Definitions." Its first words: "No one definition of terrorism has gained universal acceptance."
That's an understatement. Back in 1977, scholar Walter Laqueur wrote, "The disputes about a detailed, comprehensive definition of terrorism will continue for a long time, they will not result in a consensus and they will make no notable contribution toward the understanding of terrorism."
But again, for the record, the State Department says that for "statistical and analytical purposes," the government uses the definition in the federal criminal code:
"The term 'terrorism' means premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience."
Sounds reasonable. But political scientist James Davis of Washington University suggests that the devil is in the adjectives.
Take the adjective "noncombatant." In an interview Friday, Davis said, "You can make a strong case that the attack on the destroyer Cole was terrorism, and the Cole was not exactly civilian. Or look at the plane that struck the Pentagon on Sept. 11. There isn't a more military target in the whole country than the Pentagon."
And then there's the adjective "subnational" -- free agents, with no box in a governmental organizational chart. Still, Davis said, "Keep in mind that we've gone after Libya and Iraq for state-sponsored terrorism."
As for influencing an audience . . . Time was when terrorists followed modern architects in holding that less is more. In the case of terrorists, the saying was, "Kill a few and frighten the rest" -- influence the mass audience.
"The goal was to make a statement," said Washington University's Davis. But he added, "There's no question that on Sept. 11, carnage itself was the goal."
For lexicographers, such changes make "terrorism" a moving target. As far back as 1937, the old League of Nations tried to define terrorism this way:
"All criminal acts directed against a State and intended or calculated to create a state of terror in the minds of particular persons or a group of persons or the general public."
But that definition had enough elasticity to cover robbers who storm a government post office and terrorize the clerks. At any rate, it went nowhere.
The League of Nations finally gave way to the United Nations. But the struggle to define terrorism remains just where it was -- stuck.
Washington University's Davis said that pinning down a definition would always be tough, "because no one will admit that he or his forces are terrorists."
Geopolitical writer Ralph Peters said in a phone interview from his home in Virginia, "You always come back to that old saw: 'One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.'"
Peters said human vocabulary lagged behind human developments. "In international relations, we still rely largely on a 19th-century voc abulary," he said. "So 'terrorism' is a catch-all phrase."
Peters paused and said, "Still, I feel about terrorism the way that Supeme Court justice" -- that would be Potter Stewart, writing in a 1964 case -- "felt about pornography.
"I can't define it -- but I know it when I see it."
What is terrorism?
Last October, a U.N. debate on terrorism produced the following sound bites:
Britain's ambassador: "For the most part, terrorism is terrorism. . . . What looks, smells and kills like terrorism is terrorism. "
India: "The Conventions on terrorist bombings have precise definitions of what constitutes an explosive; no one thought a plane would ever be used as an explosive. Therefore, as experts on international law now realize - and our citizens will find hard to believe - under the framework of the existing Conventions on terrorism, the international community could not take action."
The Netherlands: "'Ground Zero' has made it painfully clear that terrorism in its true manifestation defines itself."
Israel: "Terrorism is defined by what one does, not by what one does it for."
Sierra Leone: "We all know what it is, but that is not enough. We must demonstrate the political will and commitment to agree on a definition."
Fiji: "Terrorism has defied attempts at its definition."

Notes

WHAT IS A TERRORIST?; Senior writer Harry Levins covers military and foreign policy issues for the Post-Dispatch.; Reporter Harry Levins:; E-mail: hlevins@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 314-340-8144  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; COLOR PHOTO by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Abdelouahed Belkeziz (from left), the Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad pray during the opening ceremony of the organization's meeting in Malaysia on Monday. Delegates from the world's Muslim nations were unable to agree on a definition of terrorism during the conference.

Load-Date: April 7, 2002


End of Document