Terrorism upstages Bush agenda
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
June 26, 1985, Wednesday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: International; Pg. 9
Length: 667 words
Byline: By Elizabeth Pond, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Bonn
Highlight: Vice-president builds allied front against terrorists
Body


Terrorism has upstaged ''star wars'' on Vice-President George Bush's 11-day, seven-nation tour of Europe.
The keynote of Mr. Bush's seven-hour working day in Bonn Tuesday came in his greeting to his host, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl: ''Just as civilized nations united against piracy a century ago, today we of the democratic world will need to act in concert if we are to eliminate this modern scourge (of terrorism.)''
To this end security experts from West Germany, France, Britain, Italy, Japan, Canada, and the United States will meet next month to discuss what concrete measures might be taken in defense against terrorists, a Bonn government spokesman announced Tuesday.
The heightened world concern about terrorism arises from the continued holding of US hijack hostages in Beirut and the crash of an Air India flight in the North Atlantic, apparently after explosion of a bomb planted in the plane. Following these and other hijacking and bombing incidents Bush was named by President Reagan as administration coordinator of a task force to fight terrorism.
For his part Dr. Kohl has called for toughening security checks at airports. The already tight security at West German airports has in fact been increased in recent days.
Officials decline to describe the measures, since they don't want to tip off would-be terrorists on ways to avoid them.
But observable steps have included requiring positive identification of baggage by passengers before boarding planes and removing wastepaper baskets in airports. The last incident in a West German airport involved a bomb explosion in a Frankfurt departure lounge June 19.
Vice-President Bush said at a press conference in Bonn Tuesday that he also discussed with Chancellor Kohl the US Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI, or ''star wars,'' as it is popularly called) - the original focus of his European swing.
Little new on this subject seems to have been said by either side, however.
At the press conference Bush described his role in the conversation as ''enhancing understanding'' for SDI in Europe and explaining further the ''noble concept'' of putting weapons rather than people at risk. He said that he and his German interlocutors agreed that the West must make ''common cause'' on SDI research. He stressed that it is only research at this stage. He noted further that Kohl has promised nothing on West German participation in SDI research. But the vice-president said he had the feeling that Kohl is ''more on board in terms of the objective'' of SDI research.
Bush said the US has no objection to any independent European research effort in antimissile defense, and in addressing the still-vague ''Eureka'' project for European research cooperation he specified, ''We're not uptight about that at all.'' The French-backed Eureka is officially described as a civilian project, but the technologies it is promoting are identical with those being explored in SDI.
In lesser issues Bush also discussed in West Germany the threat of a US-European agricultural-trade war and other trade differences. This was a more prominent topic in his talks in Rome Monday, where the ''spaghetti war'' over US imports of pasta figured prominently.
On leaving Bonn Tuesday night Bush traveled to The Hague.
His further stops before returning to Washington on July 3 will be Brussels, Geneva, Paris, and London.
Besides seeing Kohl in Bonn, the vice-president met with an array of other officials and politicians, including President Richard von Weizsacker, Foreign Minister and ex-Liberal chairman Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Christian Social Union chairman and Bavarian Premier Franz Josef Strauss, opposition Social Democratic chairman Willy Brandt, and past and likely future chancellor candidates Hans-Jochen Vogel and Johannes Rau.
The US hopes that Bush's meeting with Mr. Brandt will help remove the bad feeling left after President Reagan broke with the usual practice on his state visit here in May and declined to meet with the sometimes acerbic Mr. Brandt.

Graphic

 
Picture, Bush: Kohl is 'on board' with 'star wars', AP


End of Document