Terrorism down for Americans
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 4, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; NATION IN BRIEF; Pg. 5A; DIGEST
Length: 488 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON; HUNTSVILLE, Texas; PHOENIX; CAPE CANAVERAL
Body


Terrorist attacks against Americans dropped sharply last year, despite a  failed plot against former President George Bush in Kuwait and the World Trade  Center explosion, the State Department says.
Around the world, terrorist attacks rebounded after declining 35 percent  the previous year. There were 427 terrorist attacks, compared to 364 in 1992,  according to the government's annual report on international terrorism.
Compiled from Times WiresGACY-EXECUTI
The attacks resulted in 109 deaths and 1,393 people wounded, the highest  total in five years.
Anti-U.S. attacks fell to 88, down from 142 in 1992.
Individual American casualties, however, were high, due to the massive  explosion Feb. 26 at the World Trade Center in New York.
Six Americans died, the only Americans killed by terrorism during 1993, and  1,000 were injured in the bombing. 
 
Texas executes officer's killer 
 
    HUNTSVILLE, Texas - A Louisiana native who was twice convicted of killing  an off-duty police officer was executed by lethal injection Tuesday.
Paul Rougeau, 46, was pronounced dead at 1:20 a.m. EDT. He made no final  statement.
Rougeau's execution came several hours after his appeal for a reprieve was  denied by the U.S. Supreme Court.
Rougeau was convicted in the January 1978 murder of Albert Wilkins, 50, a  deputy constable killed during an attempted robbery at a Houston lounge where  he worked as a security guard. 
 
Arizona sues U.S. over cost of aliens 
 
   PHOENIX - Arizona has become the latest state to sue the federal government  for the cost of imprisoning illegal aliens, demanding more than $ 121-million.
The amount represents what Arizona should have received under a 1986  federal law requiring that the U.S. government reimburse states for costs of  incarcerating illegal aliens, said state Attorney General Grant Woods.
Arizona says it is owed the money for incarcerating 1,700 illegal aliens  convicted of felonies.
California filed a similar lawsuit Friday asking for $ 377-million to cover  the cost of incarcerating about 16,700 illegal aliens and $ 1.6-billion more to  pay for the prisons that house them.
Florida filed a complaint earlier this year. Texas and New Jersey are  considering joining it. 
 
Air Force rocket 
 
is launched 
 
    CAPE CANAVERAL - An Air Force Titan 4 rocket lifted off Tuesday with a  mysterious military cargo thought to be a $ 1-billion eavesdropping satellite.
The Martin Marietta rocket darted skyward from the Cape Canaveral Air  Station at 11:55 a.m.
Citing national security concerns, the Air Force refused to say what was  aboard the Titan 4. But published reports have identified the payload as a  gigantic signals intelligence satellite, code-named Aquacade, equipped with an  antenna as long as a football field.
It would listen in on private telephone conversations, radio chatter and  other satellite transmissions to gather information about missile tests and  nuclear blasts, the reports say. 

Load-Date: May 5, 1994


End of Document