Terrorism Suspect Blamed in Co-Defendant's Beating
The New York Times
July 9, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 712 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED 

By JOSEPH P. FRIED 
Body


The trial of two men charged with plotting to bomb a subway station was disrupted yesterday when, the judge said, one of the defendants assaulted the other in a cell near the courtroom during a recess.
Spectators in the courtroom in Federal District Court in Brooklyn could not see the assault, but they could hear thumping noises and a voice crying out, "They're going to kill me!"
Shortly afterward, the defendant said to have been assaulted, Lafi Khalil, 23, was returned to the courtroom by Federal marshals with blood streaming down his face.
The jury was still in its room at that point, and was later reported by court officials not to have been aware of the attack. The panel was not told about the incident when the judge, Reena Raggi, cut short the day's session and dismissed the jurors late yesterday morning.
Mr. Khalil was treated for his injuries at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn and was later returned to jail. The trial is expected to resume this morning, with more bailiffs assigned to the case.
Judge Raggi warned the defendant she said had committed the assault, Ghazi Ibrahim Abu Maizar, that he would be removed from the courtroom, and would have to watch his trial from a courthouse cell via closed-circuit television, if he caused any disruption in the courtroom. The judge also said the two men would be kept separated in the future.
The two men, Palestinian immigrants, are accused of conspiring to explode a powerful pipe bomb in the New York City subway in what prosecutors said was a planned "act of international terrorism." The prosecutors, from the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn, hold that the men were motivated by a hatred of Israel and opposition to the Middle East peace process.
Jan A. Rostal, a lawyer for Mr. Abu Maizar, told the jury when testimony began Monday that her client had not intended to set off the pipe bomb the police found when they raided his Park Slope, Brooklyn, apartment last July 31, but rather that he had planned to use it in a plot to defraud a Government antiterrorism program of money. Mr. Khalil's lawyer has not yet addressed the jury, but Mr. Khalil told Federal agents after his arrest that he had not known about the bomb's existence.
Yesterday, after the incident in the cell, another lawyer for Mr. Abu Maizar, Michael P. Padden, told the judge that his client had informed him that "this was not an unprovoked incident" but that "Mr. Khalil had made some highly provocative comments" about Mr. Abu Maizar and his family. Other people familiar with the incident, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, later said that the reported remarks were threats to Mr. Abu Maizar's family should Mr. Khalil be convicted.
But Judge Raggi made clear that she held Mr. Abu Maizar, 24, responsible for the incident, adding -- as he sat before her without expression at a defense table where Mr. Khalil was no longer present -- that this was "only the latest in a string of reckless actions" by Mr. Abu Maizar that included what she termed "foolhardy escape attempts."
"We are all here biting our nails for what he is going to do next," she said. But she said she was rejecting a suggestion by marshals that Mr. Abu Maizar be made to wear leg irons in court. Judge Raggi said it could prejudice jurors against Mr. Abu Maizar.
Court officials have said that Mr. Abu Maizar, who faces a sentence of up to life in prison if he is convicted, made two short-lived escape attempts during pretrial hearings last month.
In one, officials said, he jumped onto a courtroom table but marshals quickly tackled him. In the other, they said, he tore a section of ceiling panels down in a courthouse cell in an apparent effort to find a crawl space or air duct to squeeze through, but his effort quickly ended when a ceiling support collapsed after he grabbed it.
In addition, according to Marshal Daniel C. Byrne, on Monday -- as Mr. Abu Maizar was being led to the discharge area of the Manhattan jail where he is being held, in preparation for being brought to court for his trial -- he managed to slip one hand out of his handcuffs. When asked why he did this "right before the eyes of authority," the marshal wrote in a letter to Judge Raggi, Mr. Abu Maizar "replied that nothing could hold him for long."
      

Load-Date: July 9, 1998


End of Document