Terrorists in Rome Kill 3 and Steal $900,000
The New York Times
February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 2, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 296 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ROME, Feb. 14
Body


In a clockwork assault that authorities said bore the handwriting of terror organizations, a postal van was robbed in a residential neighborhood here today, and three police guards were slain by assailants who made off with $900,000.
At least nine of the terrorists, one a woman, escaped, the police said.
In telephone calls to newspapers in Bologna and Florence, callers took responsibility in the name of the Red Brigades-Fighting Communist Party.
The attack came less than a week before Parliament is to deal with measures that could lead to the release of Red Brigades terrorists from prison. It was the first major terrorist attack in Italy in almost a year, when assailants shot and wounded an aide to Prime Minister Bettino Craxi, and one of the attackers was slain.
Mr. Craxi, who was in Florence today, said the Government would ''use all the means at its disposal to see to it that the guilty are apprehended.''
Political leaders said they feared the attack might mark the beginning of a new round of terrorism, since its aim appeared to be the replenishment of war chests. Witnesses said the terrorists used a Renault automobile to block passage of the van and an accompanying police car in the Portuense quarter about 8:40 A.M. Assailants then leaped from other cars and opened fire with rifles and pistols, they said.
Officials said three postal workers in the van were not hurt. One police guard was killed at the site, and two others died later in hospitals.
Two of the assailants' cars, together with blue overalls worn during the assault, were later found.
Though a revival of leftist terrorism has plagued other European countries, Italian authorities have largely succeeded in breaking guerrilla groups that terrorized the country in the late 1970's and early 1980's.


End of Document