Terrorist given life sentence
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
January 26, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 296 words
Byline: McClatchy Newspapers
Body


NEW YORK -- Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani was sentenced Tuesday in New York to life in prison for his role in the 1998 U.S. Embassy bombings in East Africa -- making him the first terrorist to be plucked from the prison camp at the U.S. Naval Base on Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and successfully prosecuted in a civilian court. 
The term of life without parole likely will boost the argument of the Obama administration, eager to close the Caribbean military prison and move prisoners to civilian courts in the United States, that terrorists can safely be tried, convicted and sentenced in a U.S. civilian courtroom -- including Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and other plotters in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. 
It has been more than a year since Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. postponed plans for a New York trial for the Sept. 11 plotters, and now with the Ghailani trial over and the midterm elections done, a decision likely will come soon as to where that larger trial is held. 
"Hundreds of individuals have now been convicted in federal court of terrorism or terrorism-related crimes since Sept. 11, 2001," Holder said. "As this case demonstrates, we will not rest in bringing to justice terrorists who seek to harm the American people, and we will use every tool available to the government to do so." 
Hina Shamsi, director of the ACLU National Security Project, said the life sentence proves that "federal courts work; military commissions don't." 
House Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith, R-Texas, called the case a "near disaster" in that they "barely won a guilty verdict." 
"The trial proved what Republicans have been saying all along: that civilian trials grant foreign terrorists the same rights as U.S. citizens. This makes it harder for prosecutors to obtain a conviction." 

Load-Date: January 26, 2011


End of Document