Terrorism Strains Peru's Reforms
The New York Times
December 16, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk; Column 3;
Length: 1593 words
Byline: By JAMES BROOKE,

By JAMES BROOKE,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: HUACHO, Peru
Body


A fortress of a factory stands anonymously on the Pan American Highway here. Sawhorses have been erected to block car bombers from parking areas. Guards wearing bulletproof vests and toting shotguns search visitors. A concrete watchtower, dominating a perimeter wall, is equipped with gun slits, a steel trapdoor and a battery-powered radio system.
Inside this top-security installation, lines of nimble-fingered women peel, wash and can asparagus and baby ears of corn.
A year ago, terrorists blew up the cannery. That was after 40 of them invaded the owner's home. "My crime," said Julio Favre Carranza, the cannery's owner, "is that I give employment to 1,000 people."
At a time when Peru's President, Alberto K. Fujimori, seeks a sweeping free-market revolution, his main obstacle is terrorism by the radical leftist Shining Path movement. Preferring Mao Zedong to Margaret Thatcher, the terrorists believe the road to revolution is through the destruction of Peru's economy.
American companies, accounting for half of the $1.2 billion in foreign investment in Peru and planning to invest more, have been the targets of several terrorist attacks. After guerrillas killed three people at an oil-drilling site, the Mobil Oil Corporation responded by housing and feeding its own detachment of the Peruvian Army.
A decade of growing terrorism by the Sendero Luminoso, or Shining Path, has led many Peruvian and foreign business executives to list security as their primary problem. In an annual survey, the percentage of Peruvian business leaders identifying terrorism as the nation's top challenge jumped to 45 percent this year from 10 percent in 1990.
In Lima, the nation's capital 80 miles south of here, factories in the industrial zone look like maximum-security prisons -- protected by concertina wire, watchtowers and dog runs. Instead of signs with company logos, there are signs ordering visitors to "Identify Yourself!"
While Peru's economy contracted sharply in the 1980's, the number of security companies registered in Lima surged -- from 64 in 1980 to 323 today.
In world rankings, Peru has had the highest number of "politically inspired" terrorist incidents, according to Pinkerton's Inc., the security and investigation organization based in Van Nuys, Calif.
"Peru has hovered around first or second place for the last few years," Gene Mastrangelo, manager of the risk assessment information service at Pinkerton's, said in a telephone interview. "The reason Peru will remain at No. 1 this year is because Shining Path operates at will virtually all over the country."
 
Freer Business Climate
 The terrorism comes just when an avalanche of decrees is giving business executives the most economic freedom in Peru's 459-year history.  Seeking to end monopolies, many of which persist from the Spanish colonial era that ended in the early 19th century, the Government has allowed private-sector competition in the mail and telephone services, the railroads, road and sewer construction, electricity generation, oil and gas production and distribution, education, airport management and the production of fish meal used in animal feed and fertilizer.
Copying programs that proved successful in Chile, Peru's southern neighbor, Peru now allows its citizens to choose between state and private pension funds and between state and private health programs.
In the reversal of a socialist legacy that dates to the 1960's, employers have won greater power to hire and fire workers, landlords have won an end to rent controls, and private companies have won the right to buy, sell and mortgage farmland.
Other Government decrees have deregulated airlines, trucking and long-distance bus routes, simplified registration of small businesses and placed foreign banks on an equal footing with local banks.
 
U.S. Embassy's View
 "The Government of President Alberto Fujimori has adopted orthodox, market-oriented economic policies to an extent previously unknown in Peru," reads a new report by the United States Embassy here.
In Peru's lucrative mining and drilling sectors, decrees have allowed foreign investors to make full and free remittance of profits abroad and have encouraged Peru's three main state mining companies to establish joint ventures with private companies, local or foreign. Bidding openly for Hong Kong flight capital, Peru grants any foreigner a Peruvian passport in return for a five-year, $35,000 deposit in the state-run Banco de la Nacion.
While many Peruvians and foreigners are still trying to digest these radical changes, some pioneers have started exploring investment possibilities. Some flight capital is making the return trip home.
"One billion dollars in Peruvian capital has come back this year; if security was such a problem, it would not have come," the Minister of Labor and Social Promotion, Alfonso de los Heros, said in an interview in Lima.
While he was speaking, the lights went out -- either as the result of a terrorist attack or because of the power rationing that has resulted from past damage to transmission lines.
 
Money From Chile and the U.S.
 Investment in Lima's stock market and in southern agricultural land is reportedly coming from Chile, a country where business executives have learned over the last two decades to live with low levels of terrorism.
Peru's largest trading partner, the United States, had about 100 companies participating in a trade fair in Lima in November, the largest participation in memory.
"Assets are cheap, and inflation is headed down," said an American economist here. Inflation in October and November was 4 percent monthly -- the lowest rate in five years.
In the largest American investment seen here in more than a decade, the Southern Peru Copper Corporation, which is 52 percent owned by Asarco Inc. of New York, has announced that it will invest $300 million in new mining technology at two of its copper mines.
 
Big Investment by Occidental
 In another big new American investment, the Occidental Petroleum Corporation recently signed a contract to invest $60 million over the next four years. Occidental, which produces half of Peru's oil, plans to drill 32 new wells by 1995, double the rate of the last five years.
Mobil is drilling its first exploratory well in the Upper Huallaga Valley, the start of a six-year commitment to invest at least $107 million in exploration. Mobil's activities could grow much larger. "If production equals Mobil's expectations, total investment in the project could reach $1 billion," according to the American Embassy report.
One year ago, the Shining Path attacked Mobil's drilling site, killing three people and damaging about $1 million worth of equipment. This year, Mobil is back, protected by its Peruvian Army detachment.
 
Security First
 Indeed, all discussions of investment projects here inevitably return to hard-eyed assessments of security.  In this year's survey by the Confederation of Peruvian Industrialists, half of the 400 respondents said they suspected that terrorist sympathizers had infiltrated their labor force; 47 percent said they had received telephone threats; 19 percent said their companies had endured terrorist attacks, and 4 percent said their companies had been victimized by kidnappers. One percent admitted to paying "revolutionary taxes" -- or extortion -- to guerrilla groups.
"We think it is going to be difficult for the nation to recover, if order is not restored," said Mr. Favre, the cannery owner who organized the confederation's annual conference in September under the slogan "Development and Security."
Dressed in a navy blue blazer and a designer tie on a recent morning, Mr. Favre looked like a typical Latin American company president, except for the loaded 9-millimeter Beretta pistol on his office desk.
The Beretta is the last line of defense in a private security system that eats up 9 percent of his company's operating costs and fills a vacuum left by Peru's crumbling state.  At a monthly cost of $50,000, Mr. Favre protects the 11 factories of his Atahuampa Group with 80 armed guards and a 150-man Peruvian Army unit that he feeds and houses. In May, a terrorist attack on an army truck killed four of the soldiers.
"Until 1983, we had one watchman for this complex," Victor Lau Chang, Atahuampa's security director, said of a feed-grain mill where the army detachment is bivouacked. Atahuampa is Peru's third-largest canner of asparagus and the third-largest poultry hatchery.
In a region where most farmers have abandoned their land to avoid paying "revolutionary taxes," Ata huampa's security measures are warranted.
 
A Bulletproof Pickup Truck
 In 1989, a squad of guerrillas invaded Mr. Favre's hilltop residential compound here. Finding the owner absent, they killed a guard dog. Since then, he visits his factories only sporadically, driving in a bulletproof pickup truck equipped with four-wheel drive and wide tires in case a trip across the desert becomes necessary to elude kidnappers.
Last year, the Shining Path guerrillas returned. They stopped a company bus, donned the workers' uniforms and drove into the cannery. Once inside, the guerrillas gave a political harangue and then set off enough dynamite to do $1.5 million in damage.
Mr. Favre swore to rebuild his factory in a month. "The next day, I visited the factory with television stations from Lima and challenged Sendero to build its own factory in one month," Mr. Favre said.
"We worked day and night, and in 33 days, the factory was ready. I went on television again. This time, I asked the nation, 'Where is Sendero's factory?' "

Graphic

 
Photo: Personal and plant security have become primary business problems for many Peruvian executives. Julio Favre Carranza, a cannery owner, lives and works surrounded by heavily armed men and guard dogs. (James Brooke/The New York Times) (pg. D1)
 
Map of Peru highlighting Huacho (pg. D5)

Load-Date: December 16, 1991


End of Document