TERRORISM'S NEW AGE;
JIHADIST RAGE IN EUROPE
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 24, 2005, Monday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; TERRORISM'S NEW AGE; Pg. 1A
Length: 2357 words
Byline: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer
Dateline: London, England
Body


Wrestling with the enemy within
The front lines in the war on terrorism aren't all in Iraq and Afghanistan. In Europe, rising jihadist rage is testing not just counterterrorism strategies but democracy. And no one is more concerned than those in the Muslim communities.
One recent Sunday in Hyde Park, Mohammed Hussein climbed a three-step ladder and began shouting: "Americans are killers.   Every one of you will die through your barbaric thinking.   When the bombs start coming down here, you are going to start worrying."
Some in the crowd scurried away, shock and fear distorting their faces.
Others heckled Hussein: "Liar   hate preacher.   Go home to Mummy and shave your beard."
Still others defended him: "We have free speech in this country. He can say what he likes."
Once little more than a tourist attraction, Speakers Corner in Hyde Park now is a microcosm of an urgent new debate about extremism - not in the Middle East, but in the home of America's closest cultural cousins and political allies.
Jihadist rage is rising in England and across Europe, posing a major challenge in the fight against terrorism. It is testing the strengths and limits of democracy and forcing a reassessment of U.S. antiterrorism strategies.
It also is fueling an emotional debate over how the Western world can live in harmony with its Muslim communities - where a few radicals can recruit followers while most people seek respectful coexistence with non-Muslims.
One strategy for defusing the terrorist crisis is to promote democracy in the Middle East and Asia.
But the suicide bombers suspected in the London attack on July 7 were British, not stealth visitors from another country. They were surrounded by a model democracy, and they were engaged in its institutions.
Mohammad Sidique Khan, who police say was the ringleader, worked as a classroom assistant in a primary school. His mother-in-law had received a community service award from the queen at Buckingham Palace.
"You want to believe in someone who was born here and benefited from the educational system, the health care system and the civil liberties of a democratic society," said Julian Lew, a prominent London attorney who has taught law students from St. Paul's Hamline University.
"The bombers' [Yorkshire] accents made them sound like local boys," he said. "That's why it was so shocking.   New York didn't have to deal with homegrown terrorists."
Democracy can take it
Now, in an abrupt turnabout, one of the key questions roiling Britain is how much freedom a democracy should yield for the sake of security.
Antiterrorism experts on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean differ over prospects for planting democracy in the Middle East. But they tend to agree that established democracies can stand tough against terrorism without violating their core values.
"I view terrorism as a form of crime," said Prof. Juan Cole of the University of Michigan, who is a leading international expert on Islamic movements. "Combating crime is not incompatible with democratic values. So the real issue is what specific policies are being adopted by the police.   Clearly, in some countries, the focus was inadequate."
By a large measure, Europe's democracies have helped to impede the spread of radical rage, Cole said.
"Terrorist thinking will catch hold only on a radical fringe in western Europe, whereas in the Middle East and parts of Asia it is potentially a political movement of massive proportions," he said.
Much of Afghanistan, for example, was overtaken for several years during the 1990s by the Taliban.
"In Europe, we really are dealing with groups that are like our Ku Klux Klan in the United States," Cole said. "They are a fringe movement, and they don't have much chance of emerging as mass political movements."
Potentially deadly radical thinking
Step out of the subway station at Edgeware Road, and you could be in Beirut or Kuwait City or Islamabad.
The street hosts a vibrant enclave of Arabic-language bookstores and kebob houses where bearded men in long white robes smoke water pipes in the tea shops, and black-veiled women push baby strollers into stores advertising halal meats.
The community had been celebrated as an honorary badge of Britain's ethnic diversity. Now it's called "Londistan," an expression of the seismic change set in motion when Khan allegedly blew himself up at the Edgeware station in one of four suicide bombings that killed 52 commuters on July 7.
Around the world, those blasts drove home a chilling reminder that the front lines of the war against terrorism do not stop in Afghanistan or the Middle East.
While radical thinking may be outside of Europe's mainstream, it is nevertheless potentially deadly on both sides of the Atlantic.
Long before the London bombings, U.S. authorities had warily watched an escalation of terrorist attacks in Europe, and there had been trans-Atlantic cooperation on many antiterrorism fronts - from sharing intelligence to freezing funding for terrorists' networks.
But recent State Department reports and congressional hearings have highlighted a host of unresolved concerns.
Visa-exempt mujahedeen?
One worry is what some critics see as a gaping hole in U.S. immigration procedures. Since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, it has been much more difficult for men with passports from Middle Eastern countries to get visas to visit the United States.
But Khan's British passport could have entitled him to enter without a visa.
"The Pentagon wages war in the Middle East to stop terrorist attacks on the United States, but the growing nightmare of officials at the Department of Homeland Security is passport-carrying, visa-exempt mujahedeen coming from the United States' western European allies," Robert Leiken wrote in the July/August issue of Foreign Affairs. He directs the Immigration and National Security Program at the Nixon Center in Washington.
Leiken was referring to a U.S. policy that allows travelers from 27 low-risk countries, 19 of them European, to visit the United States for up to 90 days without visas. Thousands of tourists and business travelers use it to crisscross the Atlantic every day with relative ease. And the notion of tinkering with it sets off alarms in business circles.
International business suffered a painful contraction after the 2001 attacks in the United States when companies "pulled in their horns and didn't really do much," said Jim Pedersen, who has routinely crossed the Atlantic while representing clients for the Minneapolis law firm Dorsey & Whitney. The firm moved him from Minnetonka to London this year.
Adding to the pain now isn't warranted, he said, because the United States hasn't suffered a major attack since 2001.
"To be cracking down on the ability of people from France and Germany and Sweden to come to the United States doesn't seem advisable," Pedersen said.
Unlike some Congress members who have called for scrapping the visa waiver program, Leiken says it should be preserved but tightened. He advocates more screening before a traveler ever leaves Europe. Airlines should be required to collect and report passport data and other information when someone buys a ticket, he said, allowing more time for background checks.
Short of scrapping the visa exemption policy, the United States is taking steps to screen more European visitors. Beginning this week, for example, newly issued European passports must include digital photos that are difficult to alter, and a year from now they will include integrated chips containing identifiers such as face-recognition data. Europeans also can be fingerprinted and subject to other scrutiny upon arrival.
Curry, not fish and chips
The crackdowns on both sides of the Atlantic are forcing a supreme test of the American melting-pot model that Europe adopted after the shame of Nazi Germany.
Not all European countries handled immigration well, and some experts argue that the resulting tension explains the turn to jihad.
But Britain took pride in its ethnic diversity.
The British are quick to point out that their national cuisine today is curry, not fish and chips. The latest Miss England is a Muslim who was born in Uzbekistan.
On a Saturday in central London's Trafalgar Square, you will meet couples distinguished by their Muslim veils and beards enjoying the fountains alongside recently arrived Eastern Europeans in revealing tank tops and tight jeans. African, Pakistani and Hispanic children climb together over the rumps and manes of the square's huge bronze lions.
Tough new laws are on their way
"There was a belief that we are different from continental Europe, that we had behaved better, and therefore the Muslim immigrants will behave better toward us," said Robert Springborg, a native of Roseville who directs the London Middle East Institute. The July bombers shattered that complacency, leaving the fear that radical Islamists have somehow created a fifth column within Britain, he said.
Tough new antiterrorism laws being considered in Britain will be an important first step, Springborg said. But the problem won't be fully addressed until Europe finds a way to reach scattered pockets of isolated and alienated individuals and draw them closer to the mainstream.
"There is nothing you can do to force that," Springborg said. "You can't have a government policy of making friends, so forget that one. But you can have a government policy that does try to draw people into the political system and the economy. If you do that, then I think they might be drawn into the social system."
Whatever the strategy, there is no going back to the pre-World War II era - before the huge Muslim migration to Europe and before the United States thrust itself into the global arena - said Lew, the British attorney whose expertise is in international arbitration.
"We can't seal our borders against one another," Lew said. "It's too late for that.    Everybody is so dependent on everybody else."
Muslims are conflicted, too
No one has more at stake in the new antiterrorism strategies than Muslims. At the same time they worry about a backlash against their communities, they also have their own divisions over issues underlying the rage that has erupted in their midst.
In the Al Furqan bookstore on Whitechapel Road, a 25-year-old clerk who gave his name as Uddin was stacking copies of the Quran and religious CDs.
"You are not going to get anyone around here to talk to you," he said. "They are all afraid to say anything about the government, afraid it will mark them as criminals.   If you get up at six o'clock in the morning and go to the mosque and pray, that makes you a criminal today."
British leaders have said repeatedly that they value law-abiding Muslims in their communities, and they have invited leaders from the mosques and major Muslim organizations as advisers in the official response to the July bombings.
So deep is suspicion on the streets, though, that even such olive branches are resented.
"Go to the mosque and ask them," Uddin said. "They will tell you what the government wants them to say."
Across the city in Southall, Mohammad Kalim, a 41-year-old electrical engineer, stopped on his way into a mosque to talk about the mixed emotions that tear at him.
"I'm nervous," Kalim said. "I like to do photography, but I've stopped carrying my camera bag for fear it will draw suspicion on me."
He also feels helpless and conflicted: "I'm very strongly against extremism, and I wish I could do something to cool it down. That isn't simple. I can stand outside the mosque and make a voice, but there is so much anger, such a strong feeling that the world's great powers are against Muslims.   I feel angry, as well."
He also worries deeply about his 9-year-old son: "I am a very moderate Muslim and I tell him that even when the extremists have the right cause, they have the wrong way of doing it.   I hope he doesn't get into bad hands where he doesn't talk to us as a teenager and he talks to the wrong people instead."
Politics leads to loud division
Along with the passions generated by fear and anger, politics also divides Muslims.
Back at Hyde Park, some of Hussein's toughest critics were his fellow Muslims, especially when he called for opposing the United States and British forces in Iraq.
"I am a Muslim too, and I have a question for you: Why don't you leave Iraq alone?" shouted Sadiq Al Wohali, a British citizen of Iraqi descent. "You declared fatwa in Iraq. But you aren't killing Americans there. You are killing innocent Iraqi children.   You are terrorists. You hate human beings. You hate Iraqi people."
Fatima Mousa, 18, jumped into the debate, demanding of Hussein, "Do you justify the killing of innocent women and kids in Iraq with your suicide bombs?"
"Go and talk with women," he told her. "This is for men."
Mousa persisted. Hussein, a Sunni Muslim, derided her Shiite heritage. She told him his beard needed washing.
"You apostate. You apostate," he screamed at her.
At the Muslim Council of Britain, spokesman Inayat Bunglawala said, "There is a lot of finger-pointing going on."
British Muslims are engaged in a painful self-examination over the fact that the suspected bombers were "homegrown," he said.
But Bunglawala also is arguing in meetings with top British officials, he said, that their policies - going to war in Iraq, for example - "have helped radicalize a whole sector of Muslim youth."
Sharon Schmickle - 612-673-4432
BRITAIN'S ANTITERRORISM BILL
British Prime Minister Tony Blair recently proposed new antiterrorism legislation. It is subject to approval by Parliament. Among other provisions, the bill would:
- Allow authorities to detain terror suspects for as long as 90 days without charges (up from the current 14 days).
- Make it illegal to glorify or encourage terrorism in Britain or abroad.
- Make it illegal to publish, disseminate or sell material that incites terrorism.
- Outlaw participation in terrorist training.
The government also has moved under existing law to ban 15 international Islamic groups, to deport foreign nationals who glorify terrorist violence and to make it easier to strip British citizenship from dual nationals considered a threat.
Source: Associated Press

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 26, 2005


End of Document