Terrorism Report: 9/14
Horizons: Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
September 13, 2016 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 515 words
Byline: James Ritchey
Body


Turkey claimed that allied forces had completely driven Islamic State forces from the Turkey-Syria border, an important step towards restricting the reach of the Islamic State .
On 30 August, it was reported that the second most powerful Islamic State commander, Abu Muhammed al-Adnani, was killed by an airstrike from the US-led coalition in the area. Abu Muhammed al-Adnani was the chief spokesman for IS and was in charge of most operations outside of the Middle East. He coordinated attacks and actions with jihadists around the world and was one of the most powerful leaders that called for "lone wolf" attacks around the world.
On 31 August, a bomb exploded in the Beqaa Valley of Lebanon, killing one person and injuring 11. The blast occurred near the city of Zahle, which is predominantly Christian. No group has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Meanwhile, the Islamic State has claimed attacks in Government-held cities in Syria. Bombings in Tartus, Homs, and Saboura, a suburb of Damascus, all occurred within an hour on 5 September. Another bombing occurred in the Kurd-controlled area of al-Hasaka. In total, these four attacks killed at least 40 people, and came at a time when the Islamic State has suffered several defeats in the past few months.
North Korea has conducted several ballistic missile tests. Three ballistic missiles were fired off the east coast of the Korean Peninsula and flew approximately 1000 kilometers, close enough to be detected by the Japanese air defense identification system. The tests coincide with the G20 summit in China, where the world's most powerful leaders meet to discuss the environment and other issues. In July, the United States and South Korea agreed to deploy a Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system; however, the deployment has been delayed due to opposition from China.
In Thailand, a remotely detonated bomb was set off in the southern province of Narathiwat on 6 September, killing three and injuring at least seven. No group has yet claimed responsibility, but several other similar attacks in the past few months have gone unclaimed as well. A separatist insurgency in Thailand's southern provinces has killed thousands of people over the past five years.
In Nigeria, the militant group Niger Delta Avengers kidnapped 14 oil workers on 3 September. The rise of the Niger Delta Avengers has disrupted oil production in Nigeria several times over the past year, including a bombing of a Chevron facility in May, a Shell pipeline in February, and multiple worker kidnappings over the past months.
On 2 September, a bomb was detonated in Davao, Philippines, killing 14 people at a night market. The Islamist group Abu Sayyaf have claimed responsibility. Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte, whose home city is Davao, declared a State of Lawlessness in the country, meaning that the police and military will be collaborating in a greater fashion. Duterte has run a campaign encouraging vigilante justice against drug dealers and terror groups in the Philippines in an attempt to subdue the numerous insurgent groups based there.

Load-Date: January 9, 2017


End of Document