Terrorism not ruled out in Ohio campus attack; FBI joins investigation after knife- wielding suspect is killed by police officer; at least 11 people hurt in violence
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 29, 2016 Tuesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. Z1
Length: 553 words
Byline: John Bacon
Body


Ohio Munezero State shelters student Gilles in place during while police active check -shooter buildings alert.
JOE MAIORANA, USA TODAY NETWORK Columbus versity. "We police prepare seal for off a situations parking garage like this near , but Ohio we hope State we uni-never have one," school President Michael Drake said.
Wisconsin a requested Elections recount of Commission the state's presidential Chair Mark Thomsen election results speaks in Monday Madison to , the Wis media . regarding
An Ohio State student crashed his vehicle into pedestrians on the Columbus campus Monday, then slashed students with a butcher knife before being fatally shot by a university police officer, authorities said.
Eleven people were rushed to hospitals and one was in critical condition, according to university Police Chief Craig Stone.
The drama began shortly before 10 a.m. ET, when the suspect deliberately drove over a curb and began his attack, Stone said. He said the officer arrived about a minute later and engaged the suspect.
"We are very fortunate that an OSUPD officer was there and took quick action," Stone said.
Monica Moll, the university's public safety director, identified the assailant as Abdul Razak Ali Artan, a student at the school. Multiple media outlets including NBC News and the Associated Press, citing sources who requested anonymity, described him as a native of Somalia living in the United States as a legal permanent resident. The Associated Press reported he was 20.
He was shot by officer Alan Horujko, 28, who has been on the university force for almost two years, Moll said.
Columbus Police Chief Kim Jacobs, whose officers also responded to the attack, said terrorism had not been ruled out. "That's why our federal partners are here and helping," she said.
Homeland security adviser Lisa Monaco briefed President Obama on the incident, White House press secretary Josh Earnest said. He said FBI agents in Columbus were assisting with the investigation.
"Buckeye Alert: Active Shooter No evidence of fraud was given.
The states must complete their recounts by a Dec. 13 deadline set by the federal government. The big deadline is Dec. 19 when all of the states' electors must meet to cast their Electoral College votes. States that miss those deadlines risk not having their electoral votes counted.
Unless Stein wins her lawsuit in Dane County Circuit Court, officials in each of Wisconsin's 72 counties would decide on their own whether to do their recounts by hand. That could mean some counties perform recounts by machine and some by hand.
Citing the results of a 2011 statewide recount that changed only 300 votes, Elections Commission chairman Mark Thom-sen, a Democrat, said this presidential recount is unlikely to change Trump's win in the state.
"It may not be 22,177," said Thomsen, referring to Trump's lead over Democrat Hillary Clinton in the vote count. "But I don't doubt that the president-elect is going to win that."
Thomsen dismissed Stein's claims of problems with the vote as unfounded and misleading. But he directed his toughest criticism to Trump's unsupported allegations that millions of people voted illegally nationwide, calling them "an insult to the people that run our elections."
Gray Contributing , Detroit : Free Paul Press Egan , and and Kathleen Will Cummings, USA TODAY.

Load-Date: November 29, 2016


End of Document