Terror act deemed inadequate; TRIA leaves problems unsolved, study says
Business Insurance
March 3, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 4
Length: 733 words
Byline: MEG FLETCHER
Body


The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 has done little to solve the problems that businesses and insurers face in dealing with terrorism risk, according a study released last week by Conning Research & Consulting Inc.
''The placebo effect of passing this legislation is beginning to wear off,'' said Bruce Thomas, a New York-based vp with Conning. ''While the act will provide some capital relief in the event of another large-scale terrorist attack, it will not prevent insurers from becoming insolvent if their exposures are too concentrated,'' he said.
From a policyholder's perspective, there are three reasons that the coverage mandated by TRIA's federal backstop program is inadequate, according to the 53-page report, ''Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002: Problem Not Solved.'' They are:
* The act does not address all losses that may arise from terrorism, because it does not address domestic terrorism or losses from nuclear, biological and chemical hazards.
* Many policyholders still believe that the price of the coverage is too high.
That situation, though, is expected to improve due to competition for all but the most high-risk properties, Mr. Thomas said.
* The U.S. Secretary of the Treasury has substantial authority to interpret the law, including helping to determine whether or not losses from a terrorist attack were certified. TRIA's granting of this authority is both a benefit and a source of uncertainty, the report says.
In addition, the Conning study said that while there are ''a number of methods to estimate insurers' exposure to terrorism losses...in our view, none of the methods is able to estimate the probability of an attack reliably.''
That statement conflicts with the position of statistical rating agencies such as the Insurance Services Offices Inc., which uses terrorism catastrophe modeling and defends the credibility of the process (BI, Jan. 20).
Disagreeing, in part, with Conning's assessment is the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. RIMS continues to be a major proponent of the law, said President Chris Mandel.
From RIMS' perspective, it is still too early to assess TRIA's effectiveness, Mr. Mandel said. He noted that the insurance industry is still in the initial phase of implementing the act, under which insurers were required to provide quotes for terrorism coverage and give policyholders time to respond.
While Mr. Mandel acknowledges that the law does not address all terrorism-related losses, it does help risk managers respond to lenders who have balked at making loans for new construction projects. Because of the law, a risk manager now can at least quote the cost of terrorism coverage for a proposed building project and discuss alternatives for financing it, he said.
In addition, the option of obtaining terrorism coverage helps alleviate some concerns of companies' boards of directors that want to be able to evaluate options as part of their due diligence in reviewing operations, he said.
But the law's failure to provide coverage for some exposures, especially biological and chemical attacks, is ''a big hole,'' Mr. Mandel said. To help fill the void, risk managers must emphasize traditional loss control practices such as enhancing security.
Risk managers also are benefiting because the law has encouraged some insurers to offer coverage for risks, such as domestic terrorism, that are not covered by the law, he said.
Furthermore, Mr. Mandel said, ''initial indications are that terrorism coverage pricing is generally reasonable for most nontrophy risks.'' Owners of such high-risk properties, though, ''are, in many cases, still seeing exorbitant premiums,'' he said.
The TRIA's three-year sunset on the federal backstop makes it ''a quick fix,'' Mr. Thomas said, although he and Mr. Mandel agree that the insurance industry and its customers will need a long-term solution to dealing with terrorism risks.
In a companion study released last week, ''The Insurability of Terrorism Risk: It's Not That Simple,'' Conning examines the nature of terrorism as a risk and the obstacles policyholders and insurers face in trying to respond to it, Mr. Thomas said. He expects to review alternative risk financing solutions to terrorism in a third study, which will be completed later this year.
Copies of the first two reports are available by contacting Conning at 888-707-1177 or by visiting www.conningresearch.com. 

Graphic

 
Under TRIA, Treasury Secretary John Snow has the authority to determine whether a terrorist act meets the requirements needed to trigger the federal backstop.

Load-Date: March 7, 2003


End of Document