Terrorism and relative solidarity: Why we should refuse to French filter Facebook
The University Star: Texas State University - San Marcos
November 17, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 767 words
Byline: Brandon Sams
Body


Illustration by: Brandon Sams | Opinions Editor
Fuck the Facebook French flag filters.
I refuse to support relativism, privilege and eurocentrism. While the Nov. 13 attack in Paris is a horrendous act of terrorism to be rightfully admonished, as a cultural critic I cannot help but view the global response through an analytic lens.
The answer is obvious, but consider why Facebook and YouTube have "gone French" for the week in solidarity but did not do the same for Lebanon when just the night before the country's capital suffered an attack from the Islamic State group that left 45 people dead.
In April, 147 people were murdered by Islamic extremists at Garissa University in northeastern Kenya. In January, 2,000 people were murdered by the Islamic terrorist group Boko Haram in northern Nigeria. Dozens die every day in the Middle East due to geo-political struggles for power, liberty and resources.
No one seems to bat an eye when these tragedies occur. No one seeks to uplift the victims of mass violence or institute a "safety check" unless they fit a very strict narrative: white, Christian and western.
On Facebook, there's a sea of well-meaning, generally obtuse people hopping on the latest bandwagon trend. However, something much more sinister lies under the borders of the blue, white and red filters. Underneath it all is an emphatic statement that some lives are more deserving of commemoration and support, while others are delegated to fleeting evocation.
"When my people died, no country bothered to light up its landmarks in the colors of their flag," wrote Lebanese blogger Elie Fares. "So here's your Facebook safety check: we've, as of now, survived all of Beirut's terrorist attacks."
In an attempt to disengage in relative existence, I said no to the France filter. In an effort to show solidarity and support with all the murdered, terrorized people of the marginalized world, think before going French.
While it goes without saying, crimes committed against French citizens that left 129 people dead and at least 352 more wounded are horrendous. It was a depraved act of mass violence and an attack on what is perceived to be western values, and meddling in the socio-political affairs of the Arab world.
However, I am most fearful for the lives of those Muslim and Arab people around the world in the wake of these attacks. This is what the terrorists wanted. They baited well-intentioned people into fits of anti-Muslim rage and hardened Islamophobic sentiments to isolate and demoralize Muslims and Arabs in conventional Christian or non-Arab spaces.
This isolation breeds resentment and the defensive desires, leaving some to contemplate unity and camaraderie in what seems like a cultural warzone. This effectively leads some dejected souls right into the clutches and grips of the very terrorist organizations western culture demonizes. It's a cyclical trend.
So while the French flag filter is an attractive way to show support, it rings on deaf ears and erupts in the stark faces of those who face the constant, impeding threat of mass terrorism.
Paris doesn't need thoughts or prayers, not from me anyway. An unbalanced scale is an imbalance of capital and fellowship.
Palestine, Nigeria, Kenya, Lebanon and Syria-those are the forgotten zones of terrorism and desolation. Instead of concentrating media and the global gaze to a first-world, western nation, world leaders should relegate resources proportionally, starting with those most in need.
Take a second to ponder what message it sends to people facing daily oppression and constant threats of terrorism. To ardently and resoundingly show support and solidarity to France, but ignore their plights shows the symptomatic depression of their lowly status on the global hierarchy. Imagine the defeated psyche and weathered bodies of those yearning for international support to no avail, as privilege and priority intersect and leave them left in the margins.
I refuse to reinforce a system that prioritizes the bodies and suffering of some, while simultaneously refusing to acknowledge or shudder with any sense of compassion or consideration for others.
I stand in solidarity with France in the wake of destruction on their soil, but I also stand with the countries that do not get media attention and support as war is waged in the name of terrorism and extremism against them.
Choosing a "France filter" to show my support of Paris definitively illustrates to those suffering in media silence that their lives do not matter as much as their white, western counterparts. I refuse to make that statement, and you should too.

Load-Date: November 17, 2015


End of Document