Terrorism Focus Overshadows Other Missions
Federal Times
June 24, 2002 Monday Dom Edition


Copyright 2002 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 624
Length: 708 words
Byline: By BRIDGETTE BLAIR, Customs Service
Body


Concern is growing among lawmakers   and former government officials that the   intense focus on homeland security could   leave other domestic missions lacking.
Rep. Mark Souder, R-Ind., chairman of   the House Government Reform subcommittee on criminal justice, drug policy and   human resources, said he believes an intense focus on homeland security cannot   be maintained without coming at the expense of other tasks.
Souder said he is concerned that the   drug interdiction and trade efforts of   homeland security agencies will be lost in   the discussion of counterterrorism.
The government's challenge as it mulls   over the president's proposed reorganization of 22 agencies, bureaus and offices   into one Homeland Security Department is   to determine how best to make sure   missions other than homeland security are   preserved within the new department, he   said.
"It is inevitable that there will be a profound impact on federal law enforcement   activities unrelated to terrorism, on our nation's drug interdiction and border control   efforts and on operations at several federal departments within the subcommittee's   jurisdiction," Souder said at a June 17 hearing on homeland security reorganization.
Souder also questioned the absence of   intelligence agencies in the president's   proposed consolidation. He said he wonders how homeland security would improve if those agencies continued to compete with each other for information.
Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Md., ranking   member of the subcommittee, said he is   unsure whether the agency functions not   related to terrorism will benefit from a   move to a new department.
"The war on terrorism must be waged in   a way that does not compromise other vital missions that homeland security agencies carry out," Cummings said.
Many of the agencies involved in the proposed department have functions other   than homeland security. The Immigration   and Naturalization Service regulates the   residency status of immigrants. The Customs Service collects revenue from ships   importing goods. The Coast Guard provides enforcement of fishing rights and   drug interdiction.
Former leaders of the Coast Guard and   Customs, which would be rolled into the   proposed department, said those agencies   should be kept intact and provided with   more funding to deal with both homeland   security and other missions.
The new department would need to keep   all of the Customs missions, including   trade oversight, intact, said Samuel Banks,   former acting Customs commissioner.
Most Customs officers fulfill trade and   enforcement duties at the same time, and   dividing those functions would muddle the   focus on Customs' mission, he said.
Similarly, the Coast Guard should remain   a multimission agency involved in blocking the influx of drugs and migrants and   search and rescue, said retired Adm.   Robert Kramek, former Coast Guard commandant. In addition, the present plan to   keep homeland security funding at $37 billion, the amount the administration requested in its fiscal 2003 budget proposal,   will be detrimental to the Coast Guard's   other missions, Kramek said.
"This is not the time to strengthen one   aspect of our national security at the expense of weakening others," he said.
The president is requesting $7.3 billion   for the Coast Guard in fiscal 2003, a $1.6   billion increase over fiscal 2002.
But as it stands, Kramek said the fiscal   2003 budget request reduces the Coast   Guard's missions other than counterterrorism by about 5 percent. This reduction   is compounded by the fact that the Coast   Guard has been underfunded and underresourced for decades, he added.
The government's neglect of homeland   security agencies is not limited to the   Coast Guard, said retired Cmdr. Stephen   Flynn, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, a New York-based nonpartisan organization addressing international affairs and foreign policy. Federal departments, the Office of Management and   Budget and Congress have neglected the   law enforcement and regulatory agencies   involved with homeland security for years.
"We should not be surprised that these   agencies are so poorly positioned to get   from where we are to where we need to   be," Flynn said.

Notes

1 b&w photo

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document