Terrorism: It's getting less disciplined, more dangerous
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 1, 1999, Thursday
Metro Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 3A
Length: 545 words
Byline: John Harmon, Staff
Dateline: Cullowhee, N.C.
Body

Stopping terrorists is becoming more challenging because more acts are being carried out by loosely organized groups or loners, the FBI's chief of counterterrorism told a public safety conference at Western Carolina University on Wednesday.
"There have been drastic changes in the makeup of terrorist organizations in the last decade," said Neil Gallagher, assistant director of the FBI's National Security Division. "No longer are groups made up of individuals from the same small town or one religious sect."
Constitution
As a result, it is harder for agents to monitor and infiltrate terrorist operations, Gallagher told the gathering of some 400 public safety officers from across the South.
Although Gallagher did not mention Eric Robert Rudolph, the North Carolina man who is accused of a wave of bomb attacks in Atlanta and Birmingham, Rudolph was a topic of conversation among participants. Many of them have helped in the yearlong search for the fugitive in the mountains about 30 miles west of here.
"Here in western North Carolina, you know we've been looking for Eric Rudolph, and you also know we haven't found him," said David Martinez, who directs the FBI's domestic terrorism efforts in North Carolina. "Eventually, he will come out, unless he's already been lunch for some bear."
Rudolph is accused of a string of homemade nail-bomb attacks that targeted Centennial Olympic Park in 1996; a Sandy Springs abortion clinic and an Atlanta gay nightclub in 1997; and a Birmingham abortion clinic in January of last year.
Of special concern to those attending the conference was the fact that two of those attacks included secondary devices set to go off once rescue, fire and law officers arrived on the scene.
"He is not the folk hero he's made out to be," said Robert Clifford, an FBI agent who has worked on the Rudolph case. "He's a murderer, ruthless."
At the Sandy Springs clinic, the second bomb exploded and injured one person, while at the Otherside Lounge the bomb was spotted by a police officer and later detonated by a robot.
Frank Malter, a bomb expert with the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, said the Atlanta bombings marked the first time in 35 years that an American terrorist act had included bombs to specifically kill public safety officers once they arrived on the scene.
"Why would a terrorist attack government officers? To show that the government has lack of control," added the FBI's Martinez.
Because of those attacks, public safety agencies around the country have changed their response strategies for terrorist attacks.  During the conference, a video produced by the Georgia Emergency Management Agency warned about lessons learned from the Atlanta bombs. The video suggested that authorities evacuate all but essential personnel from an area no less than 1, 000 feet from the attack site. It also recommended that emergency medical teams remove victims from the area before beginning treatment.
Also discussed was the attempted bombing of an Asheville abortion clinic last month as a sign that no American town is immune from terrorists. Authorities say Rudolph is not a suspect. The bomb misfired and did little damage, but investigators said it would have destroyed a sizable portion of the building had it detonated fully.

Graphic

 
Photo :
Neil Gallagher

Load-Date: April 1, 1999


End of Document