Terrorism response their work since '98
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 28, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Times Publishing Company
Section: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; Pg. 1
Length: 449 words
Byline: JULIE CHURCH
Dateline: PALM HARBOR
Body


Terrorism in Pinellas County?
Before Sept. 11, most people probably wouldn't have given it a thought.
But it turns outthat a small group of professionals in Pinellas County has been thinking about terrorism and how public safety agencies should respond to it all along.
NPTERROR
At 8 a.m. Tuesday, local terrorism response planner David Puckett will speak at a free forum, "Anti-Terrorism . . . Are We Prepared?" sponsored by the Greater Palm Harbor Area Chamber of Commerce at the Palm Harbor Library, 1151 Nebraska Ave.
Puckett is the deputy director of the National Terrorism Preparedness Institute at St. Petersburg College's Allstate campus in St. Petersburg.
It is the institute's job to work with fire and police departments, not to gather intelligence about terrorists but to help local officials plan what to do if and when the worst happens.
Those plans were in place last fall, Puckett said.
"We want people to know that Sept. 11 did not catch our government off guard," he said. "Our government has spent billions of dollars preparing for a terrorist act."
The institute was formed in 1998 to prepare rescue workers to respond to attacks by weapons of mass destruction, including biological agents.
"The focus is to become more aware and become broader in our preparedness," Puckett said.
The institute, which is funded by the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S. Department of Justice, is designed for "first responders," including police, fire and emergency medical personnel. Its staff of 14 also provides information to hospitals, medical clinics and utility companies on bioterrorism.
The cities of St. Petersburg and Tampa have participated in extensive training provided by the NTPI, Puckett said. They, in turn, have trained other local municipalities on responding to terrorist attacks, not only from foreign terrorists, but also from Americans.
Puckett said that since Sept. 11 his office has been flooded with questions about everything from nuclear weapons to anthrax.
"What we've started to do is work with local communities to provide information to the public," he said.
Puckett's 45-minute presentation Tuesday will address how and why his agency was created and will offer suggestions to individuals and businesses on how to be prepared. Also scheduled to participate is Ed Smolik, director of safety and security at Morton Plant Mease Health Care.
"I would hate to think what would happen if we had a bioterrorism scare and we weren't prepared," said Doug Polander, chairman of the chamber's economic/government affairs committee. "The more good information that is out there, the better it is for all of us."
- Julie Church can be reached at (727) 445-4229 or church@sptimes.com.  

Load-Date: January 28, 2002


End of Document