Terrorism, taxes, CheeriXs: They're all hard to swallow
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 27, 1993, Sunday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE WEEK; Pg. 3A; COLUMN
Length: 1029 words
Byline: HOWARD TROXLER
Body


What do you think was the biggest news in the nation last week? It would be  hard to decide between:
Terrorism: The FBI foiled a bizarre plot to bomb the United Nations and  other New York landmarks. But two college professors on opposite coasts  received mail bombs.
Politics: President Clinton won a squeaker when the Senate voted 50-49 for  his plan to cut the deficit.
Science: The House barely kept the space station alive, but voted to kill  that huge supercollider in Texas. Meanwhile, the space shuttle Endeavour did a  nifty job of repairing a satellite.
TROX 6/27
Federal agents in New York on Thursday arrested eight Muslim  fundamentalists in what they said was a terrorist plot inspired by the bombing  of the World Trade Center.
The targets, the feds said, included the United Nations, the Holland and  Lincoln tunnels, and the Jacob J. Javits Federal Building.
Would they actually have pulled it off? Who knows? The FBI said the men  were arrested even as they were mixing their explosives in 55-gallon drums at  a Queens warehouse.
Meanwhile, professors at Yale University and the University of California  at San Francisco were injured by mail bombs last week. Authorities feared it  marked the return of a man who sent a dozen such bombs in the 1970s and '80s,  apparently holding a grudge against academics, airlines and high technology.  He was never caught.
In Washington, the president won a narrow but important victory when the  Senate passed his economic and deficit plan. The vote was 49-49 at 3 a.m.  Friday when Vice President Al Gore broke the tie and voted for his boss' plan.
It was the first time in six years a vice president had used his power  under the Constitution to break a Senate tie. Now the House and Senate have to  work out their differences and pass a final version, so Clinton hasn't won  yet.
"The plan is bold and fair; it'll work," Clinton told the American people  in his Saturday radio address. About half of his plan is spending cuts, and  the other half is higher taxes, mostly on the rich and business.
The biggest unanswered question: How much of a tax increase, if any, will  Congress pass on gasoline and other kinds of energy?
(In a sour counter-note, the government reported last week that the gross  domestic product grew by a crummy 0.7 percent in the first quarter. In other  words: No recovery.)
There was a lot of science news. Our proposed space station, named Freedom,  was kept alive in the House by a tight 216-215 vote, a week after the  president announced a scaled-back version. It would still cost us $ 16-billion  over the next seven years. The issue: Is it essential to our future, or a big  pork barrel in the sky?
Another big science project in the news, the supercollider in Texas that is  supposed to teach us more secrets of the universe, did not fare as well. The  House voted 280-150 to kill it. The House voted to kill it last year, too, but  the Senate kept it alive. No word yet from the Senate this year.
While the politicians talked science, the space shuttle Endeavour orbited  250 nautical miles above their heads. The shuttle was launched Monday and the  crew retrieved a satellite, repaired it in a spacewalk and conducted more than  two dozen experiments. It was good practice for the December mission to repair  the Hubble Space Telescope.
But the oddest and most disturbing science news of the week was the  discovery by an Arizona astronomer that an asteroid missed the Earth by only  90,000 miles last month, the closest miss ever. It was only 30 feet wide, but  at the weight of a naval destroyer, it could have done a lot of damage, and we  never saw it coming.
Elsewhere in the nation last week, our second-largest city, Los Angeles,  banned smoking in all 7,000 restaurants. But the tobacco industry is fighting  back; it sued the Environmental Protection Agency for calling second-hand  smoke a cause of cancer.
The 20-year mayor of Detroit, Coleman Young, announced he will not run for  re-election. In Washington, D.C., a man on Tuesday opened fire on a crowded  children's swimming pool, injuring six. He got away. Also in Washington, the  Supreme Court ruled 8-1 in favor of the government's policy of sending Haitian  immigrants home. Critics said the ruling allows the United States to turn its  back on freedom-seekers and ignore the spirit of an international treaty on  political refugees.
In California, a man received a transplanted heart that had been  transplanted once before, apparently only the second time it's been done.  Another California man may be a long-lost half-brother to the president; he  and Clinton talked on Friday.
In Chicago, violence broke out after the Chicago Bulls won their third  National Basketball Association championship in a row. The city was prepared -  hero Michael Jordan taped appeals for calm - and it wasn't as bad as last  time.
David Letterman, the host of NBC's Late Night, taped his last show in New  York on Friday after an 11-year run. He is moving to rival CBS in August,  which explains why NBC gave Letterman none of the fanfare it gave to the  farewell of Cheers. Letterman had a surprise final guest: rocker Bruce  Springsteen.
Pat Nixon, the stoic wife of former president Richard Nixon, died Tuesday  at the age of 81. All who knew her spoke well of her. She was taken home to  California in the old Air Force One in which she and her husband made historic  trips to Russia and China.
Here's good news: Prevention magazine, which one would guess writes about  how to prevent things, released a survey that showed Americans are living much  more safely than they used to. The survey said 71 percent of us buckle our  seat belts, up from only 19 percent in 1983, and 89 percent of us have smoke  detectors, up from 67 percent. But most of us reported still being overweight.
Finally, this major news: General Mills announced the first change in  Cheerios since they hit the market in 1941. Besides the familiar Os, the  cereal-maker will add Xs and game boards on the back of the box. General Mills  wants more of us to play with our food. But the name will stay the same, which  is good, since "CheeriXs" doesn't have the same ring to it. 

Load-Date: June 29, 1993


End of Document