Terrorist Task Force, Joint enforcement effort will focus first on 2002; JTTF Opens Shop In Utah
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
September 21, 1999, Tuesday


Copyright 1999 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. B1
Length: 590 words
Byline: GREG BURTON , THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


With an eye on the 2002 Olympics, the Department of Justice is expected to approve funding this month for a domestic-terrorism task force in Utah.
Organized under the FBI's domestic terrorism unit, Utah's Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) has requested a budget for office space, surveillance equipment, vehicles and overtime for state and local officers. They would work alongside agents from the FBI, Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco & Firearms, Immigration and Naturalization Service, Secret Service and U.S. Customs.
While the task force presumably would live beyond 2002, its primary function until then would be to intercept and extinguish threats to the Winter Games.
"It will be a proactive measure in this community as we move forward with the Olympics," said FBI Special Agent Ray Mey. "We recognize the Olympics are an inherent target for terrorism. This is a reasonable response."
There are 18 JTTFs in the United States, many organized after the 1995 bombing of the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City when the federal government adopted a pre-emptive strategy for potentially violent homegrown conspiracies.
"We don't target groups but we do target criminality," said Mey. "We obviously have had a lot of extremist activity north of us: the Freemen, the Aryan Nations Brotherhood and the Phineas Priesthood [a group whose members were convicted of robbing a bank and bombing a newspaper and Planned Parenthood clinic in Spokane]. All of this activity in the past tells us the Olympics could be a target."
Before the bombing in Oklahoma City, the FBI was investigating about 100 incidents of domestic terrorism, according to Department of Justice figures.
Today, the FBI has 900 such cases including the 1995 plot to blow up an Internal Revenue Service building in Austin, Texas, and the alleged 1997 conspiracy to overthrow the government hatched by Chevie Kehoe, Daniel Lee and Faron Lovelace.
Before their arrest, Kehoe and his brother Cheyne Kehoe hid in Utah's desert wilderness after their 1997 videotaped shootout with police in Ohio.
"Five years ago, no one would have thought about the Olympics as a target of American terrorists," said Mark Potok, who tracks hate groups for the Southern Poverty Law Center. "But in fact an American terrorist did attack the Olympics in Atlanta. As far as the white supremacist movement is concerned, the Olympics represent everything they despise: race mixing, international bodies and the New World Order."
Over the last three years, JTTF operations have generated celebrated arrests. In Arizona, these specialized surveillance units confiscated bombs and firearms from the Viper militia. In Atlanta, they headed off what was rumored to be a plot by the Georgia Republic Militia to disrupt the Atlanta Olympics.
But while arrests have been splashy, critics say the government crackdown more often nets cranks and crackpots, not domestic terrorists.
Federal prosecutors dropped the most serious terrorism charges against several of the Viper defendants. And in Atlanta, a jury convicted three defendants of possessing pipe bombs and conspiring to use them in a violent crime, but acquitted them of charges associated with terrorism.
"Every neo-Nazi attack can't be stopped before it occurs, but the FBI's record is good since Oklahoma City," Potok said. "We need to make sure the Justice Department and law enforcement in general have enough tools to deal with this threat.
"I'm not predicting any attacks on Salt Lake City, but it has happened in recent memory and it certainly could happen again."

Load-Date: September 22, 1999


End of Document