TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE LEGISLATION;
Anti-Terrorism Bill Is Expected to Receive Little Opposition
The New York Times
April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk  
Section: Section B;  ; Section B;   Page 6;   Column 1;   National Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 924 words
Byline: By NEIL A. LEWIS  

By NEIL A. LEWIS  
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 23
Body


President Clinton's promise today to seek legislation strengthening the Federal Bureau of Investigation's tools to combat terrorism will probably face little opposition in Congress.
Since the F.B.I. became an effective Federal anti-crime agency in the 1930's, lawmakers have acceded swiftly to such requests at times of public anxiety and anger about crime. But it is also during such periods that civil liberties advocates worry that government may be too quick to seize the opportunity to expand its powers.
Although Mr. Clinton did not specify what his new legislative proposal would contain, White House officials said it would be aimed at making it easier for for F.B.I. agents to gather information about people and groups suspected of plotting terrorist acts. The officials said the legislation would, for example, seek to lower the threshold necessary for F.B.I. agents to gather information from banks and telephone companies.
Although the bureau is today widely admired and especially lauded for its work in investigating the Oklahoma City bombing, it has a troubling history of abusing its authority at various times.
"The bureau is capable of doing wondrous things when it is set loose and applies itself to a problem," said Sanford J. Ungar, the author of a history of the the bureau, "F.B.I.: A Look Behind the Walls" (1975, Atlantic-Little Brown). "But unfortunately, it's also capable of some dangerous things when it gets carried away."
The most notorious efforts of the bureau were the so-called Counter-Intelligence Programs, known as Cointelpro, of the late 1960's and early 1970's in which J. Edgar Hoover, the F.B.I.'s longtime director, turned the agency's resources first against black political organizations and then against the New Left. Under the program, the bureau not only infiltrated the groups on which they kept extensive records, but also planted false information against the leaders to discredit them.
It was modeled on the first Cointelpro program set up by Hoover in the 1930's, which was aimed at shattering the Communist Party and other allied groups in the country.
In 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson persuaded Hoover to use the same tactics against the Ku Klux Klan. In a short time, according to some accounts, the bureau had nearly one in five Klan members enrolled as informers.
As protests over the Vietnam War heated up, President Johnson and Hoover joined together to find what they thought was a conspiracy behind the urban riots and protests against the war.
The program ended abruptly in 1971 when someone broke into the F.B.I. office in Media, Pa., and took numerous files disclosing the bureau's domestic security program.
After Edward H. Levi was named Attorney General in 1975 by President Gerald R. Ford, he put into place a series of strict guidelines for the F.B.I. to follow when they wanted to wiretap, bug or infiltrate potential terrorists.
But in 1983, William French Smith, the Attorney General under President Ronald Reagan acceded to an F.B.I. request to to loosen the regulations to give the bureau more latitude in investigating "violence-prone groups" and combatting terrorism. Under the Smith guidelines, the bureau needed only to show a "reasonable indication" of a threat to domestic security to begin an investigation. Mr. Smith said the new guidelines would preserve a balance between civil liberties and security largely because the modern bureau had demonstrated its professional competence and ability to adhere to the law.
Yet, later that year, the bureau undertook an investigation into a group known as the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador.
When the files were disclosed in 1988, it was apparent that the bureau had improperly if not illegally collected intelligence files on thousands of people.
Philip S. Gutis, a spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union, said his organization feared that events like the Oklahoma bombing made people more amenable to having their civil liberties eroded.
He said that while his group did not know the details of the President's proposal, civil liberties lawyers had been bracing for a renewed effort by Congress or the Administration to seek to curtail constitutional rights.
"The F.B.I. now has all the power it needs to investigate wrongdoing," he said. "It doesn't need any additional power. It may need additional resources." He added: "Our fundamental liberties are never more in danger than after incidents such as what occurred last week, but we must guard against overreacting in such times of tragedy."
The F.B.I. first came to national prominence in the 1930's, when there was a national crime wave of bank robberies and car thefts. In response, the Congress enacted six bills on one day in May 1932 to expand the bureau's powers, Mr. Ungar said.
A similar quick response is expected from Congress in the weeks ahead. In addition to the new legislation he spoke of tonight, President Clinton also urged Congress to pass quickly the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995. The measure had been been the subject of strong debate over whether it curtailed basic constitutional rights including the right to confront one's accuser.
The provision that has drawn the most opposition is one that would allow the Government to deport aliens on the basis of secret evidence. The bill would allow the Government to keep confidential sources and the exact nature of the charges against someone accused of involvement with terrorism.
Scores of Federal lawmakers endorsed the measure on the day after the Oklahoma explosion.

Load-Date: April 24, 1995


End of Document