Terrorism May Alter Sri Lankan Election
The New York Times
December 21, 1999, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 578 words
Byline: AP 
Dateline: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka, Dec. 20
Body


President Chandrika Kumaratunga was released from a downtown hospital today after she was treated for facial injuries from a bomb that exploded in an assassination attempt on Saturday.
She was taken to her home, which was cordoned off by the police. Sri Lankan authorities apparently feared another attack.
Mrs. Kumaratunga had not been expected to do well in elections on Tuesday because she has failed to end a lengthy war with Tamil separatists. But some analysts said today that the attack that injured her could arouse a sympathy vote.
Disillusionment had grown deep over the president's failure during her five-year term to end the war with Tamil separatists. But it was counterbalanced by uncertainty over whether her chief rival, Ranil Wickremesinghe, could do any better.
The separatist group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, "has made it very clear that it wants Mrs. Kumaratunga out of the picture at all cost, and this may harden attitudes of many Sinhalese against the L.T.T.E.," said Jehan Perera of the Peace Council, an independent research group. "My feeling is that this would create a sympathy vote and will help her at the election."
Mrs. Kumaratunga had just finished a campaign speech when a suspected member of the separatist group detonated explosives strapped to her body, wounding the president in the face and eye and killing 22 people. Almost simultaneously, another explosion killed 11 people at an opposition rally nine miles away.
Pakiasothy Saravanamuttu of the Center for Policy Alternatives said, though, that even if the blasts swing votes in Mrs. Kumaratunga's favor, it may not be enough.
"The vote was expected to be very close," he said. "It's difficult to say at this stage which way the vote will go. A sympathy vote is bound to take place. We can't discount it."
Other analysts suggested that the bombings could highlight the president's inability to defeat the rebels and the desperate need for a negotiated end to the conflict -- which Mr. Wickremesinghe advocates.
Until two months ago, Mrs. Kumaratunga's re-election seemed assured.
Her 120,000-member army had gradually pushed the rebels deep into the northern jungles. Although unable to defeat them, she had reduced the Tigers to a shadow of the group that once ruled northern Sri Lanka like an independent kingdom.
Then in a military campaign beginning Nov. 2, the Tigers reclaimed most of the territory they had lost in the previous 18 months, throwing the army into disarray and casting doubt on the president's re-election prospects.
The rebels, who want to carve out a Tamil homeland in the north and the east, accuse the Sinhalese majority of discriminating against Tamils in jobs and education. An estimated 61,000 people have been killed since the war began in 1983.
There is no reliable opinion polling in Sri Lanka, but analysts said the battlefield setbacks since November had narrowed the gap between Mrs. Kumaratunga and Mr. Wickremesinghe, the leader of the United National Party.
Now Mrs. Kumaratunga says she wants a renewed mandate to end the civil war, which has also displaced 1.2 million people out of a population of 18 million.
But some analysts say that Mr. Wickremesinghe has tapped into a deep yearning to end the conflict -- although it was during his own party's 17 years in power that the ethnic conflict slid into war.
"Most Sri Lankans are fed up with this war, and they really want an end to it, either way," said another analyst, Charitha Ratwatte.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Sri Lankan President Chandrika Kumaratunga yesterday.
      

Load-Date: December 21, 1999


End of Document