Terrorism's versatility hits home with poisoning Two cases may not have been preventable
USA TODAY
August 6, 1997, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;
Length: 299 words
Byline: Anita Manning
Body


Two incidents of deliberate food contamination reported today
by federal health officials underscore how vulnerable Americans
are to attack by terrorists armed not with machine guns but with
microbes, scientists say.
Regulations in the 1996 anti-terrorism bill aim to restrict shipping
of dangerous biologic agents, but they might not have prevented
either of the events, say researchers in today's Journal of
the American Medical Association:
-- An outbreak of salmonella poisoning in September 1984 affected
751 people who ate at restaurants in The Dalles, Ore.
Investigators
concluded that followers of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, leader of
a local religious commune whose members were at odds with town
residents, had poured cultures of salmonella on salad bar items
and into coffee creamers in 10 restaurants. Commune members admitted
they were trying out a plan to influence an upcoming election
by making voters too sick to go to polls.
Because salmonella can be found in raw foods and produced with
simple equipment and skills, writes Thomas J. Torok of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, "it seems unlikely that any
regulation of commercially available pathogens could have prevented
this outbreak."
-- Last October, someone left doughnuts and muffins in a break
room at St. Paul Medical Center, Dallas. A dozen lab workers who
ate the pastries suffered severe illness traced to poisoning by
Shigella dysenteriae type 2, which came from a freezer in the
medical center where lab cultures are kept. A criminal investigation
is ongoing, says CDC epidemiologist Shellie A. Kolavic, but it
appears that the culprit was someone with access to the lab freezer
and the know-how to cultivate the organisms.
When a scientist "decides to commit a crime," she says, "there's
not much we can do."
-- Biological threats, 3D

Load-Date: August 6, 1997


End of Document