Terrorism Police Arrest 6 in London-Area Raids
The New York Times
April 25, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 619 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Dateline: LONDON, April 24 
Body


The British counterterrorism police raided homes around dawn on Tuesday, arresting six men, including one said to be a well-known advocate of radical Islam who once called the London bombings of 2005 ''praiseworthy.''
  The police said the arrests resulted from a ''long-term, proactive and complex investigation into alleged incitement and radicalization for the purpose of terrorism'' and inquiries into financing.
 The raids, in London and Luton, coincided with the inauguration on Tuesday of a high-level security committee that was briefed by Jonathan Evans, 49, the new director general of MI5, the domestic intelligence agency. Mr. Evans took over the agency last Saturday, succeeding Dame Eliza Manningham-Buller, who retired.
  The committee of government ministers, intelligence agency representatives and police officers is supposed to smooth the flow of information on security and terrorism. Its deliberations were not made public in any detail. The committee was created after a decision by the government to reorganize Britain's Home Office to focus more narrowly on security and policing. 
  The British security authorities may face criticism for their handling of some earlier investigations related to the London bombings on July 7, 2005. David Davis, the opposition spokesman for Home Affairs, said it was ''extraordinary'' that the government had taken so long to establish the panel.
  A spokesman for Prime Minister Tony Blair, who attended the meeting, said the committee had agreed on ''a program to look at international terrorism and linkages to the U.K. as well as the struggle for values and ideas.''
  Mr. Blair struck a similar theme in a BBC interview, saying terrorism was a ''global'' threat to be challenged in ''Iraq, Afghanistan or anywhere else.'' 
  The prime minister's frequent insistence on the global nature of terrorism is part of his response to criticism from a variety of people, including Muslims, who maintain that Britain's close alliance to the United States in Iraq and Afghanistan inspires terrorism at home.
  After the raids on Tuesday, for instance, Anjem Choudhury, an Islamic scholar, said the arrests ''must be seen in the light of the crusade which the Blair regime has launched against the Muslim community, trying to justify their foreign policy through demonizing Muslims who have the fortitude to speak out.'' Speaking to reporters, Mr. Choudhury said one of the six arrested was Abu Izzadeen, a convert to Islam who was born into a Christian family from Jamaica and was once named Trevor Brooks. His name was also leaked by many publications.
  Mr. Izzadeen, 31, was arrested and released on bail in February on charges relating to counterterrorism laws forbidding the encouragement of terrorism. Last year he was seen on national television haranguing the home secretary, John Reid, at a public meeting in east London. The police have associated him with Al Muhajiroun and Al Ghurabaa, outlawed Islamic organizations.
  In the raids on Tuesday, unidentified men 21 to 35 years old were arrested at four addresses in east London, one in west London and one in Luton, just north of London.
  The arrests occurred as British prosecutors pursued several terrorism cases in court. Six men are on trial charged with conspiracy to murder and cause explosions on July 21, 2005. Seven British men arrested in 2004 are on trial, accused of plotting to bomb British targets. 
  In a case that opened Monday, three men suspected of ties to Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia are charged with incitement to commit acts of terrorism, among other offenses. They are Moroccan-born Younis Tsouli, 23; British-born Waseem Mughal, 24; and Tariq al-Daour, 21, born in the United Arab Emirates. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 25, 2007


End of Document