TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE PRESIDENT;
Clinton Warns Partisan Bickering Could Stall Efforts to Combat Terrorism
The New York Times
April 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk  
Section: Section 1;  ; Section 1;   Page 11;   Column 1;   National Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 686 words
Byline: By TODD S. PURDUM  

By TODD S. PURDUM  
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 28
Body


President Clinton said today that "we must not dawdle or delay"in expanding Federal powers to investigate terrorists -- a statement aimed at staving off Republican efforts to link anti-terrorism legislation to disputed measures like limits on death-row appeals.
"We must not allow politics to drag us into endless quibbling over an important national item," Mr. Clinton said at a ceremony honoring teachers in the White House Rose Garden. "We must not dawdle or delay. Congress must act, and act promptly."
The President said he was "encouraged so far by the response from members of Congress in both parties" to proposals he announced this week to expand wiretapping authority and increase investigators' access to hotel and travel records of suspected terrorists. But aides said he wanted to make sure the proposals did not fall victim to longstanding partisan fighting over other anti-crime measures.
On Thursday, the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, offered his own proposals, many of which mirrored those of the White House, but that also included a one-year limit on appeals by inmates on death row. Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, said that if Democrats accepted that provision, Republicans would not seek to attach a repeal of last year's ban on assault-style weapons to a counterterrorism bill.
But the effort to repeal the weapons ban, which Mr. Clinton has repeatedly threatened to veto, appears to have stalled after the bombing in Oklahoma City last week, so the White House would have little incentive to accept such a swap.
The ranking Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee, Joseph R. Biden of Delaware, warned that including measures to limit death-row appeals could endanger passage of a terrorism bill by opening the way for any number of unrelated amendments that could bog it down in partisan disputes. For example, Democrats might well insist on bringing up amendments on subjects like "cop killer" bullets or other gun control measures that could touch off new confrontations.
For his part, Mr. Dole said in introducing his bill that "fighting terrorism is not, and should not be, a partisan issue." Like Mr. Clinton's plan, the Republican bill, co-sponsored by Mr. Hatch and Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma, calls for barring fund raising by foreign terrorist organizations and requiring that explosives be "tagged" with microscopic particles that would make them easier to trace.
Mr. Dole also pointed to Mr. Clinton's own call, in an interview on "60 Minutes" last Sunday for overhauling habeas corpus laws, to argue that Mr. Clinton should support the Republican bill. Such laws allow state inmates who have been sentenced to death to file appeals in Federal courts.
The President said then: "I do believe the habeas corpus provisions of the Federal law, which permit these appeals sometimes to be delayed seven, eight, nine years should be changed. I have advocated that. I tried to pass it last year. I hope the Congress will pass a review and a reform of the habeas corpus provisions, because it should not take eight or nine years and three trips to the Supreme Court to finalize whether a person, in fact, was properly convicted or not."
Last year, the White House backed a bill that would have limited appeals to one-year and one petition, but it foundered amid partisan objections on both sides. White House aides said Mr. Clinton's reluctance to consider the issue now had nothing to do with the merits of the Republican proposal or his own support for overhauling habeas corpus laws.
"We just think it would be a mistake to bring in a potentially divisive partisan squabble that could slow down this urgent anti-terrorism bill," a senior aide said. "We would be happy to take it up as a stand-alone measure," or as part of Republican efforts to revise last year's crime bill.
George Stephanopoulos, a senior adviser to the President, said Mr. Clinton simply wanted to make sure that neither side moved to attach "extraneous amendments" to a counterterrorism bill. "Don't make this into a political football," Mr. Stephanopoulos said. "Just get it done."

Load-Date: April 30, 1995


End of Document