TERRORISM CLAIMS CAN PACK CLOUT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 28, 1993, SUNDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 290 words
Byline: Bob Adams Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau Chief
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Why would 19 people call the police to claim responsibility for Friday's disaster at the New York World Trade Center?
In Israel, where attacks by terrorists are a daily fact of life, an official wryly described the psychology years ago.
"Every time there's a fire on the West Bank," he said, "the PLO (Palestine Liberation Organization) claims responsibility."
Some of the 19 callers in New York may have been only cranks. But others may have been rebels, or terrorists, with a cause.
New York authorities say the explosion that killed five people and injured more than 1,000 could have been a bomb, and possibly a terrorist attack.
Experts in terrorist tactics say radical groups would have two motives for taking responsibility regardless of whether they actually planted a bomb - or whether it was really a bomb at all.
First, such credit-taking inflates the size and power of the group. Many radical groups compete with others of the same ethnic stripe. Infighting among Palestinian factions in the Middle East has gone on for years. Pull off a bombing - or make it look as if you did - and others may treat you with more respect.
Second, the object of terrorism is to change policy. A terrorist planting a bomb wants people to know why: The hope is that the United States will stop doing whatever the terrorist finds objectionable.
A Serbian nationalist, for example, might want the United States to stop its planned airdrop of supplies to Serbian adversaries - the Muslims of eastern Bosnia. That would give the Serb a motive to claim credit for planting a bomb in the Trade Center - even if he didn't do it.
A PLO terrorist might want to stop the U.S.-sponsored peace talks between Israel and the Arabs. Hence a motive to claim PLO responsibility.

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document