Terrorism charges against RNC 8 to be dropped
University Wire
April 10, 2009 Friday


Copyright 2009 Minnesota Daily via U-Wire
Length: 703 words
Byline: By Karlee Weinmann, Minnesota Daily; SOURCE: U. Minnesota
Dateline: MINNEAPOLIS 
Body


More than seven months after their arrest, the
Ramsey County Attorney's Office dropped terrorism charges against the
RNC 8 on Thursday morning.
The activists, who police arrested preemptively before September's
Republican National Convention, are accused of allegedly plotting to
violently disrupt the convention.
The terrorism enhancements to the conspiracy counts came under Minnesota's version of the controversial PATRIOT Act.
"It was becoming clear that the terrorism enhancement to the charges
was going to be a major issue at trial," Ramsey County Attorney Susan
Gaertner said, citing that the connotation of the word "terrorism"
could distract the jury.
The Legislature passed the law sanctioning the terrorism charges in 2002, during a time of national tension after 9/11.
The statute "clearly covers the alleged conduct here," Gaertner said, but whether it was meant to is another story.
"I do know that if they didn't mean it to apply in this case, they should amend the law," she said.
The activists, including University of Minnesota student Max Specktor,
still face felony charges of criminal conspiracy to riot and damage
property that carry a penalty of more than 10 years in prison, if
convicted.
The dropped charges will have no impact on sentencing if the eight are ultimately convicted, Gaertner said.
Rob Czernik, a member of the RNC 8, said the activists face a bigger challenge now to get the non-terrorism charges dropped.
"We've been defining the charges based on the terrorism enhancement and
now that's gone," he said. "Hopefully people realize they're charging
us with the same stuff, just with different language."
Specktor agreed, but said the decision to drop some charges and not others is sign that prosecutors are getting serious.
"It kind of scares me because by dropping these two and only those two,
it's like they're saying that those are the only two to go," he said.
"They're actually trying to make a case that isn't as ridiculous."
Attorney Jordan Kushner, who is representing RNC 8 member Luce
Guillen-Givins, said although the "extremely inflammatory" terrorism
charges are to be dismissed, the charges that remain are significant
and equally unfounded.
"They're accused of conspiring to commit illegal acts and in reality
they're being prosecuted for their political organizing activities,"
said Kushner, who graduated from the University of Minnesota Law School.
Specktor said Thursday's developments were a somewhat surprising step toward vindication.
"Not only are we saying the work we are doing isn't terrorism," he
said, "if we drop the other charges, then what we were doing isn't even
a crime."
The eight have said the terrorism enhancements, added to their battery
of charges in December, were politically motivated. Czernik said
politics also factored into the charges' dismissal.
Gaertner last fall announced her gubernatorial bid and will be speaking at DFL events across the state in the coming months.
"The timing for her was very politically expedient," Czernik said. "This is a very, very calculated move by her."
Gaertner wouldn't comment on the timing of dropping the charges, except to say that the RNC 8 cases are complicated.
"There's going to be ongoing investigation, ongoing preparation and
ongoing evaluation of trial strategy," she said. "And this is an
example of that."
The RNC 8 and their supporters have previously showed up to Gaertner's
campaign functions and have called on DFL voters to consider the
charges against the RNC 8 when considering who they'll endorse for
governor.
Calling his client and the other seven members of the RNC 8 "political
pawns," Kushner cited public outcry directed toward Gaertner as a key
factor in the dismissal of charges.
"There just wasn't any way she could justify pursuing these kinds of
charges," he said. "At the end it couldn't be politically justified, in
part because it can't be legally justified."
Gaertner has made no mention of politics in relation to the case, and
when asked about the matter Thursday afternoon only spoke generally.
"This case, as is true of many, is a no-win situation for the county
attorney," she said. "Somebody is going to be unhappy with whatever
decision you make, that comes with the territory."
(C) 2008 Minnesota Daily via UWIRE

Load-Date: April 10, 2009


End of Document