Terrorism suspects deserve due process
Anchorage Daily News  (Alaska)
March 12, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 Anchorage Daily News  (Alaska) All Rights Reserved
Length: 569 words
Byline:  GARY ZIPKIN
Body


"Sentence first -- verdict afterwards."
-- The Red Queen, in Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland"
Liz Cheney and a few others have recently suggested or implied that the attorneys who represented suspected terrorists on a pro bono basis in legal proceedings (including successful legal proceedings before the U.S. Supreme Court) are nothing more than al-Qaida sympathizers, or somehow the equivalent of "mob lawyers" hired and controlled by some mob boss, and should be publicly condemned. Those sentiments might just as well have been uttered by the Red Queen herself.
Such sentiments fly directly in the face of the core principles underlying our American system of justice, the Constitution of the United States, and the ethical obligations of the attorneys in question. Our system of justice is founded on the belief that those who are accused of crimes, including those suspected of terrorist acts or sympathies, are entitled to basic guarantees of due process, including the right to a fair trial, the right to face their accusers, and the right to counsel, whether before a civilian court or military tribunal.
The right to counsel becomes meaningless if the attorney appointed to represent the defendant is only there for the mere appearance of fairness and not for the purpose of actually putting the government to its proof following a rigorous analysis of the evidence -- making the government prove beyond a reasonable doubt each element of the offense. Some of us may be prepared to dispense with a trial for those incarcerated in Guantanamo, thereby dispensing with the presentation of admissible evidence, the cross-examination of witnesses by competent counsel, and the return of a fair verdict based on the evidence -- preferring instead that a military tribunal simply proceed directly to the imposition of sentence without the burden of conducting a trial. That would certainly be the Red Queen's preference.
But unless the trial is simply intended as a sham (like the show trials in Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union), the trial must be conducted fairly and in accordance with principles of due process, where the accused has counsel dedicated to a careful evaluation of the case, marshaling whatever evidence may be available to support legally recognized defenses, and requiring that the government prove its case. That does not mean that our courts must countenance frivolous defenses or any dishonesty by either side.
Simply stated, we should all want those who have been accused of serious offenses (and especially those who have been accused of offenses which may result in death sentences or life in prison) to have the right to such attorneys. And instead of attacking the attorneys who honorably perform such responsibilities (many with no fee), we should respect their efforts and, more importantly, recognize that they perform an invaluable role in our administration of justice.
Without them, we're not much better than that Red Queen, screaming "Off with her head!"
The Preamble of the American Board of Trial Attorneys, of which I am a member, confirms our belief "that our traditional jury system, both civil and criminal, is one system of jurisprudence which guarantees necessary safeguards for the protection of the rights of person and property, and that this system should be preserved in its essence."
Gary A. Zipkin is an attorney with the Anchorage firm of Guess and Rudd.

Load-Date: March 15, 2010


End of Document