Terrorism suspect goes before judge Lawyer enters plea as Nigerian man accused of trying to bring down plane on Christmas Day stands mute.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 9, 2010 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A15
Length: 494 words
Byline: Detroit Free Press
Dateline: 0 
Body


DETROIT - Standing shackled at the ankles and speaking in barely audible tones, Nigerian terror suspect Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab faced a judge on Friday over his alleged attempt to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner on Christmas Day.
Abdulmutallab told the judge that he understood the charges levied against him by a grand jury in a six-count indictment.
After a series of questions from Magistrate Judge Mark Randon, Abdulmutallab's lawyers informed the court that their client would stand mute - meaning he did not plead guilty or not guilty, but a plea of not guilty was entered on his behalf by the court.
Abdulmutallab, 23, stood in court in khaki pants and an oversize white T-shirt with his lawyer, Federal Defender Miriam Siefer, during the three-minute arraignment.
Randon repeatedly questioned Abdulmatallab to ensure he understood the proceedings and the charges against him and to ensure that his lawyer consented to his continued detention at a federal prison near Ann Arbor, Mich.
Among the questions asked by the magistrate was whether the suspect had taken any kind of medication in the past 24 hours.
Abdulmutallab, who suffered severe burns during his alleged effort to blow up Northwest Flight 253 as it made its way to Detroit from Amsterdam, answered that he had taken some pain pills but insisted that he nevertheless understood what was happening at the court hearing.
After the questioning, Siefer said: "At this time, our client would stand mute."
She then asked Randon to enter not guilty pleas to all six counts.
Abdulmatallab is accused of trying to detonate a weapon of mass destruction - a homemade bomb hidden in his underwear - to bring down the jetliner, which contained nearly 300 passengers and crew members. If found guilty, he faces punishment of up to life in prison plus 90 years, according to the federal charges.
Legal experts say that, given the reported admissions he made to people on the plane and to investigators on the ground in Detroit, his case is unlikely to go to trial.
Experts say the best he can hope for is that federal prosecutors agree to some sort of plea deal that might shorten his sentence in exchange for his willingness to fully cooperate in explaining his alleged terrorist training in Yemen and anything else he can pass on.
Two flights diverted - Disruptive passengers caused two commercial airplanes to be diverted Friday, with military jets scrambling to escort a San Francisco-bound flight into a Colorado airport, authorities said.
The Colorado-based North American Aerospace Defense Command says two F-16s launched after reports of an unruly passenger on a flight from Atlanta to San Francisco. The flight was diverted to Colorado Springs, where police detained the man.
Also Friday, a Hawaii-bound flight had to change course and land in Los Angeles after a man was accused of harassing a woman. The man was interviewed and released after the woman declined to press charges.
- More, stltoday.com/thewire/nation

Load-Date: January 16, 2010


End of Document