TERRORISM ALIVE DESPITE RELEASE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 5, 1991, THURSDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 22A
Length: 723 words
Byline: David Wood 1991, Newhouse News Service
Body


WASHINGTON - Amid celebrations over the end of the American hostages' long ordeal in Lebanon are disturbing indications that the terrorists reaped some gains from their captives and could again seize hostages.  U.S. officials deny that the United States broke its long-held policy of refusing to make concessions to terrorist kidnappers. But as details emerge of the deal brokered by the United Nations, it was clear that the terrorists have not been dealt a humiliating defeat that would deter them from kidnapping.  ''This is not the end of hostage-taking, because it works - it's easy and effective and difficult to counter,'' says Yonah Alexander, a terrorism expert at George Washington University. ''The war continues.'' The last American abducted in the Middle East was in 1988, when U.S. Marine Lt. Col. William R. Higgins was seized and then killed by Lebanese terrorists.  Since then, U.S. officials say, terrorism has abated largely because the Persian Gulf War, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the new momentum toward a Middle East peace agreement have all transformed the region's political landscape.  Iran, after a decade of renegade radicalism, now curries U.S. favor and economic help. Syria, another sponsor of terrorism and kidnapping, is also eager to be seen as a cooperative moderate. In Lebanon itself, a new central government is reasserting its authority.  There is hope, also, that the kidnappers who abducted 16 Americans during the 1980s were taught a lesson by the patient U.S. ''no-concessions'' policy and its refusal to treat the hostages publicly as a top priority.
But others fear that this could be the lull before the storm.  ''All the anger and resentments are still there beneath the surface, ready to explode again,'' says Mehran Kamrava, a native Iranian who teaches international relations at Rhodes College in Memphis, Tenn.  Would-be kidnappers might be encouraged by the terms of the deal that led to the final stage of the hostages' release. It was negotiated by U.N.  officials with Israel, Syria, the terrorist organization Islamic Jihad, and its chief supporter, Iran.  According to Tehran radio, U.N. officials and communiques from the kidnappers, the deal included these provisions: The freeing of an estimated 300 Lebanese prisoners held by Israel and the Israeli-backed South Lebanese Army in southern Lebanon.  The release of two Muslim Shiite brothers being held in Germany on terrorism charges.  A ''no-retaliation'' pledge by the United States and Germany, according to Tehran radio.  Separately, the United States this week paid $260 million to Iran to compensate for weapons that Washington impounded during the 1979 Iranian hostage crisis. The payment, which came under the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, coincided with the release of U.S. hostage Joseph Cicippio. Iranian and U.S.  officials denied any connection.  Veteran hostage negotiators say there is nothing wrong with bargaining with terrorists to reach a face-saving resolution, as long as no major concessions are made. But they stress that such efforts be kept secret or ''deniable'' so as not to encourage other hostage-takers.  Whatever lessons potential terrorists draw from the convoluted history of this hostage ordeal, experts say conditions may soon be ripe for a resumption of anti-American terrorism. The Middle East peace talks are the key, they say.  ''If these talks collapse - if the United States brings Arabs into negotiations without ultimate success - then we could see violence once again being used as a way of exerting leverage on the United States and Israel,'' says Neil Livingstone, who has advised the White House and Pentagon on terrorism. ''This could take the form of hostage-taking, simply because there are so many available targets and most of them are unprotected.'' Kamrava, an expert on Middle East politics, agrees that ''the Palestinian issue is the critical factor.'' When Palestinian statehood was put on the back burner in the 1970s, a rash of bombings and skyjackings resulted. Terrorism abated when the Camp David peace accords were signed in 1979, but as progress stalled, terrorism erupted again with the seizure of the first American hostage in Lebanon in 1984.  Today, Kamrava says, both Iran and Syria are waiting to see if their new links to the United States will pay off.

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document