Terrorism preparations give children short shrift
USA TODAY
February 19, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;
Length: 411 words
Byline: Anita Manning
Body

The emergency planners in each state charged with preparing for a terrorist attack are overlooking the smallest Americans, children's health experts say.
Children are more vulnerable than adults to the chemical and biological agents most likely to be used in an attack, but supplies of child-sized medical equipment and pediatric medications are inadequate, there are too few pediatric hospital beds and there is not enough training to handle a major attack involving large numbers of children, according to experts who met last week in Washington, D.C.
Children are "smaller, so it's more difficult to do procedures on them," such as inserting IV lines or breathing tubes, even without the heavy protective suits emergency teams would wear in a biological or chemical attack, says Fred Henretig, pediatric emergency physician and toxicologist at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. "Imagine the nightmare scenario of a school auditorium targeted by terrorism, or Disney On Ice . . .  and you see dozens or hundreds of children suddenly critically ill."
The meeting was held to bring together experts to develop guidelines on responding to terrorism or any other disaster involving children and to identify areas of research, says co-chair David Markenson, director of the pediatric preparedness program at Children's Hospital at Montefiore in New York City. An official report will be completed by next week, he says, and will be sent to state and federal emergency planners and medical associations.
Among the recommendations:
 * Child-size doses of nerve gas antidote should be obtained. Ambulances in most major cities carry penlike injectors containing atropine and pralidoxine, developed by the military, that can be easily jabbed into a victim's thigh after exposure to nerve gas. The experts urge approval of pediatric-dosed injectors, which have long been available in Israel, Markenson says. Meanwhile, the adult injectors can be used for children as young as 3 if needed, and for those under 3, the recommendation is to draw a smaller dose from the injector.
 * Communities should plan ways to assure that all children exposed to radioactive material are given potassium iodide within two hours to prevent thyroid cancer.
 * Mental health services for children will be needed. Families need help coping with this "very uncomfortable time in our lives," says pediatrician Irwin Redlener, president of the Children's Health Fund, which organized the conference.

Load-Date: February 19, 2003


End of Document