TERRORISM KILLS 28 ALGERIAN OFFICERS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 9, 2007 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 404 words
Byline: HASSANE MEFTAHI, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ALGIERS, Algeria 
Body


A car bombing killed 28 coast guard officers in Algeria yesterday, just days after a blast ripped through a crowd waiting for the president. Both suspected al-Qaida-linked attacks targeted symbols of the government as it tries to wipe out an Islamist insurgency.
Although there was no claim of responsibility in either attack, al-Qaida's North African affiliate has carried out a spate of recent bombings that have shattered the Algerian government's efforts -- successful until recently -- to restore calm after a 15-year Islamist insurgency.
The government has responded by intensifying military crackdowns on Islamic militants hiding out in remote scrubland. Interior Minister Noureddine Yazid Zerhouni warned terrorists Friday that they have "one choice: turn themselves in, or die."
In yesterday's blast, explosives planted in a van ripped through barracks in the northern coastal town of Dellys, about 30 miles from the capital, Algiers.
The bombing appeared timed to kill as many officers as possible, when they were grouped together to raise the flag.
It was not immediately clear if the bomber was killed in the blast.
The 28 victims were all coast guard officials, hospital authorities said, speaking on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to the media. About 20 others were injured.
It was Algeria's deadliest attack since April, when triple suicide bombings against the prime minister's office and a police station killed 32.
Jean-Maurice Ripert, France's ambassador to the United Nations and president of the Security Council, condemned the bombing.
A bombing Thursday killed at least 22 in a crowd of people in eastern Algeria who were waiting to see visiting President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who has devoted his eight years in office to ending violence by insurgents. His government is also a staunch U.S. ally in the war against terror.
There was widespread speculation that Mr. Bouteflika was the intended target in the Thursday attack, although officials have not commented on the likelihood.
Algeria's insurgency broke out in 1992 after the army canceled elections that a now-banned Islamic party was poised to win. Up to 200,000 people were killed in the ensuing violence.
Widespread killings were on the wane until this year, when the Algerian militant group Salafist Group for Call and Combat, or GSPC, officially linked up with al-Qaida, taking the name al-Qaida in Islamic North Africa.

Load-Date: September 11, 2007


End of Document