Terrorism in the home
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 21, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: VIEWPOINT;
Length: 357 words
Byline: Deseret News editorial
Body


For too many women in Utah, terrorism isn't a distant threat from a network of fanatics. It is something they live with at home.
In the five years between 1994 and 1999, 131 women were murdered in Utah, according to a survey conducted by the Utah Department of Health's violence and injury-prevention program. About half of them were killed by their spouse, or by someone else they knew intimately. In other words, they were killed by someone they trusted and loved.
That is an alarming report. It ought to be a call to action.
Domestic violence has another side to it that is just as alarming. Children often observe what is happening. The survey found that children either witnessed or were in the house when 20 of the murders were committed. Violence is a learned behavior. Many children are traumatized by watching it within their homes. Many of them grow up to repeat the behavior. A report last year by the National Association of Attorneys General found that violence in the home is the leading cause of youth violence overall.
Despite the number of murders committed, too many people still regard domestic violence as a personal matter. They don't want to get involved. Many others are oblivious to the signs that a friend or loved one is being abused. Even worse, too many doctors, judges, clergy and police officers are ill-trained to recognize the problem and its potential for getting out of hand.
The report recommends that the state establish a database to track abusers. This would be accessible to police, courts, appropriate state workers and the Department of Corrections. Considering many of the killers identified by the survey had previous records of abuse, such a database would be helpful. The report also recommends developing a metro area task force to concentrate on the problem.
Americans are appropriately focused on the war on terrorism these days, fretting over the sudden appearance of anthrax-laden letters in the mail. Yet these scares, as frightening as they are, do not yet compare to the carnage wrought each year in Utah alone by domestic abuse.
It's time for a little more outrage and focus on this problem, as well.

Load-Date: October 21, 2001


End of Document