TERRORISM AND TRAVEL IS STUDY AT COLLEGE
The New York Times
August 10, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 11CN; Page 6, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk
Length: 608 words
Byline: By SHARON L. BASS
Body


ANNE PHILIPPON said that the fear of terrorism in Europe was why her East Hartford travel business has not done too well this year.
''We didn't have one trip going to Europe because of it,'' Ms. Philippon, a franchisee of Value Travel Club, said recently as she sat in a class at the University of New Haven. ''I think people have their heads in the sand.''
To understand the problem better, Ms. Philippon and 25 others enrolled in a university course called ''Terrorism and Travel.'' Taught by Dr. Caroline Dinegar, professor of political science, the class is geared toward people in law enforcement, political science, sociology and the travel and hotel industries. The three-credit course, which runs five weeks, is being offered for the first time this summer.
Dr. Dineger, the former head of the Peace Corps in Malaysia, said her course explores what terrorism is, where it is found and, she hopes, how to avoid it while overseas. She said she hoped her course would supply enough information so that her students could in turn educate their clients and others with whom they come in contact.
Her lectures are complemented by films that depict the roots of terrorism, such as ''Algeria,'' about a terrorist organization that existed in the last days of French colonization in North Africa, and ''The Molly Maguires,'' about a labor organization in the Pennsylvania coal mines in the 1860's that often used physical force.
According to Dr. Dinegar, terrorism is increasing at a rate of 30 percent a year. Worldwide urbanization, repressive governments and simply ''being able to get away with it,'' she theorized, may be the cause.
''As we examine terrorism, we're finding that it's becoming more and more indiscriminate,'' she said. ''Anyone can be killed at any time.'' ''It's much worse than the average citizen imagines,'' she added. ''This is warfare, though we haven't defined it as that.''
She told her class that many leaders of terrorist organizations had gone to Paris to study foreign languages. ''We don't have to be intellectual geniuses to figure out that they were doing more than studying,'' she said. ''They were forming contacts and linkages.''
Terrorist organizations are dangerous primarily because they are unpredictable and uncontrollable, she said. ''If the guy who is at the center of a terrorist organization goes mad, who's going to control him?'' she asked.
And from the terrorist's point of view, violence such as car bombings and attacks at airports are intellectual acts, although ''it doesn't appear that way when you hear that 'x' number of people were gunned down,'' Dr. Dinegar said.
Painting a picture of the ''typical'' terrorist, she described him as being prone to violence and having feelings of alienation. The terrorist, she postulated, ''finds himself in the group.''
''The terrorist is not a nut,'' Dr. Dinegar explained. ''He takes action because of his allegiance with his group.''
Ms. Philippon said the course was helping her overcome her fear of terrorism. ''The more you know about it, the better you are,'' she said. As a result of the course, she said, she will be better able to discuss with her customers their fears regarding foreign travel.
Another student, Toni Perricone of West Haven, said she took the course because she was confused about all she had heard and read about terrorism, and that she wanted to get another perspective.
As for advice on avoiding terrorists, Dr. Dinegar conceded that she did not have all the answers. However, with a wry bit of humor, she did share one tip she said she learned while in Europe. ''If you hear any noise down the street,'' she said, ''go the other way.''


End of Document