Terrorism against gays is not acceptable Huntington should be able to say just that

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
April 25, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P5A
Length: 474 words
Byline: Dave Peyton
Body


HUNTINGTON City Council met earlier this week and voted down a proposed hate crimes ordinance.
As chaotic as Huntington City Council is these days, it's a miracle they can get it together long enough to vote yea or nay on anything.
The element of the ordinance that killed it was the part dealing with sexuality. It was the same ordinance that the Charleston City Council adopted on a 23-3 vote in February.
So why did Charleston vote it up and Huntington vote it down?
The debate on the ordinance raged for two and one-half hours. Leading the fight against the ordinance was Keith Wiebe, pastor of Huntington's Grace Gospel Church.
Wiebe believes homosexuality is a sin. Wiebe believes the ordinance would elevate gay people to a special class. He believes that homosexuality can be cured. He assumes it's a sickness.
He and other preachers in Huntington believe that a hate crimes ordinance will prevent them from preaching against homosexuality from the pulpit. That's rubbish, of course. The First Amendment not only protects freedom of religion, it protects speech, even if the speaker wants to badmouth a minority. The same amendment protects the right of the KKK to spew their brand of hatred at public rallies.
The preacher brought several students from Grace Christian School. His son, Keith Wiebe Jr., who is also the church's assistant pastor, gave council a petition that he said had 338 signatures of people who are against the ordinance and probably against homosexuality as well.
Council caved like an old coal mine in the throes of subsidence. The words of proponents Ken Fox and Ken Epperly, owners of Magic Makers Costumes downtown, fell on deaf ears. They told the story of how their employee, Michael Fiffe, was beaten in November because he dressed flashily and the macho men who beat him up perceived him to be gay.
Fiffe's story is extreme but not uncommon in Huntington. I have too many gay friends who have been beaten or harassed as they were coming out of Huntington's gay bars. I've known too many gays who have stood before me with tears in their eyes and said: "Do you really think I'm so dumb that I would choose to be gay?"
I've known too many gays who have been literally driven out of town by rumors, allegations and threats from "good Christian people."
And, alas, I have former gay friends who are dead, mostly by their own hand. They couldn't take the terrorism any longer.
Terrorism? Yes. That's what hate crimes against gay folks is. Even Huntington Mayor David Felinton said that in support of the ordinance. It's why such an ordinance is needed.
And the fact it's an apparently acceptable form of terrorism is why an ordinance outlawing it is never likely to be enacted in Huntington.
Peyton's column appears in the Daily Mail on Monday and Thursday. He can be reached at 522-0179 or by e-mail at dpeyton@davepeyton.com.  

Load-Date: April 27, 2002


End of Document