Terrorism class syllabus prompts critiques of bias, racism in UW political science department
Badger Herald: University of Wisconsin - Madison
September 6, 2018 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 638 words
Byline: Parker Schorr
Body


A University of Wisconsin student's Facebook post criticizing a political science class on terrorism Wednesday prompted outcry from hundreds of other students who believed the class promoted a racist and narrowly-defined conception of terrorism.
Ali Khan, the student in the class who posted a photo and critique of the syllabus on Facebook, quickly tallied over 300 likes and dozens of comments and shares from students both from UW and from other institutions across the U.S.
Photo courtesy of Ali Khan
The class - Political Science 347: Terrorism, taught by professor Andrew Kydd - contains five "modules," two of which took the brunt of critiques.
Khan said that one of these modules, a 20-day segment entitled "Jihad," legitimizes a simplistic view of jihad that is "one-dimensional, single-faceted and inherently violent and connected to terrorism."
"Will we be discussing the different types of jihad (by the heart, tongue, and hand)?" Khan wrote. "Is the professor an Islamic scholar who can accurately speak about jihad?"
Following clashes at Israel-Palestine border, pro-Palestine group discuss experiences in Gaza, West BankMembers of the International Solidarity Movement, a pro-Palestinian group, discussed their experiences in Gaza and the West Bank, as well Read...
The other module, "Counter-terrorism," drew critiques for framing state-sponsored acts of violence, like regime change and drone assassinations, as something other than terrorism.
Khan said the syllabus ignores the violence endured by Palestinians, Somalis, Afghans and Rohingyas - all people who have faced attacks from state actors.  
Commenters on Khan's Facebook post agreed, calling the syllabus "inexcusable and surpassing even the worst course content I've seen here at UW," "underwhelming and one-sided" and "not only ... horrible course design ... but ...  ridiculous that the faculty thought this was an ok way to talk about this subject."
UW spokesperson Meredith McGlone cautioned against judging the entire content of a course by its syllabus, but said faculty and staff provide their contact information to students to encourage them to react, ask questions and engage with the course material.
McGlone emphasized that the intent, however, is not to create additional work, particularly for students from traditionally underrepresented groups, but to emphasize that faculty members want to engage with students and respond to their input.
"Our courses tend to incorporate multiple competing perspectives on contentious issues," McGlone said. "Our instructors don't expect students to parrot their beliefs; however, they do expect students to engage in a systematic, serious and respectful scholarly conversation with them, with the scholarly literature and with their peers."
Brushed aside: Students, faculty struggle to define what ethnic studies mean at UWBreanna Dioni enters through a set of double doors, scanning the room for an empty seat. A few moments pass Read...
Khan, who plans on dropping the class, enrolled to see if the class would be as biased as other political science and international relations courses he has taken. He said this syllabus, which he believes presents a "Zionist, orientalist, and/or neocolonialist agenda," was worse than he expected.
Khan said that other courses, specifically within Middle East studies and South Asian studies, approach similar topics with greater nuance and broader context. Some of these courses include Edward Said's "Orientalism" as required reading at the beginning of the semester, which provides a better understanding of what he described as the long-standing, racist view of the Middle East and Asia advanced by the West.
"There are courses that are doing the right thing," Khan concluded. "I just think the international studies and political science departments need to step up a bit."

Load-Date: September 6, 2018


End of Document