Terrorism worries rank first in survey
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 19, 2004 Thursday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D; COLUMN
Length: 848 words
Byline: ROBERT TRIGAUX
Series: POLITICS 2004
Body


Business economists tend to be just the facts, ma'am types who go out of their way to avoid politics and controversy. But not this time.
A new survey this month of 172 business economists by the normally staid National Association of Business Economics warned that the Middle East and terrorism - not the rising federal deficit or unemployment - is their No. 1 worry for the U.S. economy over the next two years.
In an unorthodox move, the group urged that the presidential candidate who wins the November election "should concentrate" one-quarter of his time on terrorism, more than on any other matter.
This is not your father's group of business economists. Then again, not every association of number-crunchers spent the morning of Sept. 11, 2001, running for their lives from lower Manhattan. More on that later.
"Terrorism produces the greatest short-term risk to the economy," said Duncan Meldrum, National Association of Business Economics president and chief economist of Air Products and Chemicals Inc.
If that's true, maybe presidential candidates George W. Bush and John Kerry should pause long enough to rethink their political messages. Americans who tune into the campaigns hear an awful lot about fighting terrorism, and even more about fixing the U.S. economy. But they do not hear much about one undermining the strength of the other.
Let's read between the lines of these anxious economists. They see a fragile U.S. economy that appears to be gaining strength, at least in fits and starts. They see nervous U.S. companies that remain reluctant to commit the resources to expand their businesses and hire more workers. And they see a constant cycle of government terrorism warnings and the threat of another 9/11 attack as a pox upon any major gains in economic prosperity in the next two years.
Their recommendation: Persuade the next president to focus more on quelling the terrorist threat and easing tensions in the Middle East. There are no quick cures for such matters. But the economy will not rebound soon without stronger signs of genuine progress.
For example, don't expect the record high prices of oil to decline much without progress against terrorism. Pricey oil is shaving a full percentage point off the U.S. economy's growth rate.
"Fundamentals suggest oil prices should be lower now," said Scott J. Brown, chief economist at St. Petersburg's Raymond James & Associates and a member of the National Association of Business Economics. "There is a terrorism risk premium embedded in those prices that won't go away any time soon. We will be involved in Iraq for awhile."
Another terrorist attack and continued military spending also would influence the U.S. economy, said Rick Harper, director of the Haas Center for business research and economic development at the University of West Florida in Pensacola. An attack could shock consumers and slow their spending. Government spending on Middle East peacekeeping puts pressure on the already large federal deficit and rising interest rates.
In the association's latest survey, 40 percent identified terrorism as their gravest immediate worry. That's the largest proportion since the U.S. invasion of Iraq in March 2003.
Only 23 percent of the economists surveyed picked the federal deficit as their biggest short-term concern. The deficit had ranked No. 1 in the past two surveys, in March and in August 2003.
The period of the survey this month overlapped with the government's heightened alert from possible threats to financial institutions in New York, Washington and New Jersey. That may have influenced the responses of survey participants in those cities.
"There's nothing like the sight of soldiers with rifles while going to work to focus your attention," Brown said.
The survey asked economists to separate and rank both their short-term and longer-term concerns for the economy. While terrorism ranked tops in the short term, it was not even mentioned among longer-term issues.
The No. 1 longer-term problem was the growth of the nation's elderly population, closely followed by health care. But those are topics for another day.
While advising the next president to spend 25 percent of his time on terrorism, the economist group said he should devote 17 percent to reducing the deficit, 16 percent on health care reform, 14 percent on Social Security reform and the remainder on energy policy, trade and education.
Will Bush or Kerry listen to the wish list of a bunch of egghead economists? Doubtful.
But this association knows more than most about terrorism. On the morning of 9/11, the group held its annual conference in the Marriott Hotel at 3 World Trade Center, sandwiched between the World Trade towers in lower Manhattan.
When hijacked planes struck the towers, debris began to fall on the hotel. The attending economists (including Pensacola's Harper) fled, leaving their belongings, and survived. The hotel soon was crushed by the falling towers.
There are far worse reasons to hear what economists might counsel the next president.
 
Robert Trigaux can be reached at trigaux@sptimes.com or (727) 893-8405.  

Load-Date: August 19, 2004


End of Document