Terrorism, free speech collide at trial U.S. says grad student aided terrorists by posting cleric's lecture on Web site
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
May 5, 2004 Wednesday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 882 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


Free speech and terrorism clashed in a Boise courtroom Tuesday as federal
 prosecutors argued that Sami Al-Hussayen aided terrorists by helping broadcast
 a controversial Muslim cleric's lecture.
 ''It is full of violence," Assistant U.S.
 Attorney Kim Lindquist told the court. ''The evidence shows how he
 deceitfully facilitated the broadcast of this particular lecture, knowing that
 it was forbidden, sensitive."
 Defense attorneys strongly objected. ''This is not about recruitment and
 funding," lead defense attorney David Nevin told the court. ''This is the
 government saying, 'You may not say these things. You're a terrorist if you
 express these views, you're a terrorist if you help somebody else express
 these views."'
Al-Hussayen faces charges of providing material support to terrorists, in
 part by operating Web sites for various Islamic groups that the government
 portrays as a recruitment and fund-raising campaign for terrorists. He also
 faces 11 counts of immigration fraud for the same activities because he's in
 the country on a student visa.
 Al-Hussayen maintains his innocence, saying he's a peaceful student who
 merely volunteered for legitimate religious outreach groups.
 The lecture, given in Arabic, runs 80 pages in just a partial translation.
 Titled ''The Intifada and the New Tartars," it is Saudi Sheikh Safar
 Al-Hawali's commentary on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, and includes
 praise for Muslim fighters and anti-American rhetoric.
 ''Somewhere in that 80 pages is material that will offend everyone," Nevin
 said. ''It's very critical of American foreign policy. It's harshly worded."
 However, Nevin said under the First Amendment, he'd have every right to go
 down to a park today, stand on a soapbox, and give that speech. He likened the
 prosecution's theory to prosecuting someone who gave him a ride to that park
 to give the speech.
 Lindquist said prosecutors will show that Al-Hussayen, a University of
 Idaho graduate student in computer science, schemed to set up an Internet
 broadcast of the lecture through a computer server that wouldn't tie it to the
 Islamic Assembly of North America (IANA), a group with whom he worked.
 Prosecutors also plan to present intercepted e-mail chats that show
 Al-Hussayen declining to give concluding remarks to close the broadcast, and
 another person then calling him a ''coward."
 ''This evidence shows compellingly and firmly that the defendant did
 believe in this despicable stuff, he had his hands on this despicable stuff.
 He had knowledge of it, and he intended it," Lindquist said.
 The defense asked U.S. District Judge Edward Lodge not to let the lecture
 be used as evidence in the case. Nevin said it was being offered not to show
 any guilt, but ''to stir everybody up, to get everybody mad, and to get
 everybody mad at Mr. Al-Hussayen."
 But Lodge declined to block the evidence. Instead, he said it will be
 allowed, but with certain limitations that he plans to outline to the jury
 today.
 Lodge said he was making no ruling about freedom of speech. ''The charges
 against the defendant do not criminalize speech itself," he said. ''The
 evidence relates to the defendant's knowledge or intent as it relates to
 providing of material support for terrorists."
 The jury will have to decide for itself whether the evidence supports the
 charge, the judge said. After reviewing the lecture during the trial's lunch
 break on Tuesday, Lodge said, ''It does not appear to be unduly prejudicial."
 Snippets of the lecture, displayed to the court by Lindquist on Tuesday,
 showed expressions of ''joy" about ''martyrdom" operations including suicide
 bombings in Israel, and suggestions that ''the power of the American army will
 fail and the American morale will be destroyed."
 Another section said American missiles could destroy any Arab city, but
 then asked, ''Can this improved power catch the mujahid who infiltrates a
 settlement and kills tens of people ...?" It praises Palestinian fighters for
 waging ''this new type of war which they never expected."
 Lindquist said, ''This suicide lecture has the stated purpose of promoting,
 causing suicide, maiming, killing and kidnapping. … It goes to the very
 heart of what the defendant is being charged with."
 Nevin said helping with the broadcast doesn't show Al-Hussayen agreed with
 the sentiments, and likened it to CNN's broadcast of an interview with Osama
 bin Laden.
 He told the court, ''They want to say, 'Here's what the defendant thinks,
 so convict him, because these are bad thoughts."'   He also said the
 government's translation was missing the lecture's conclusion, which advises
 listeners that if they want to help, they should adopt a Palestinian child.
 The admission of the controversial lecture marked a turning point in the
 trial, which thus far has focused mainly on the government's painstaking
 rundown of various Web site registration records, bills, and the like, to
 document Al-Hussayen's activities for IANA. The defense has acknowledged that
 Al-Hussayen lent his computer skills to the Muslim group, but said he did so
 only as a volunteer acting on the precepts of his religion.
 From this point on, Lindquist told the court, prosecutors will seek to
 ''make the bridge from mere visa fraud and false statements, if you will, to
 material support to terrorism."

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached toll-free at (866) 336-2854, or by e-mail at bzrussell@Rmci.net. For more on the trial, see her Web log at  www.spokesmanreview.com/boise. 

Load-Date: May 7, 2004


End of Document