Terrorism is now a high-tech problem with no easy solution
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
May 17, 1997, Saturday


Copyright 1997 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL;
Length: 651 words
Byline: By Holger Jensen, Scripps Howard News Service
Body


Two out of three Americans, according to a Time/CNN poll, believe terrorism is one of six major problems facing this country - less serious than drugs or crime but more serious than the likelihood of another war.
Our State Department, spy agencies and law enforcers agree.
Testifying before the Senate Appropriations Committee this week, Attorney General Janet Reno, FBI chief Louis Freeh and CIA acting Director George Tenet all described terrorism as a "growing threat" agravated by new trends.
Among the most worrisome:
- State-sponsored terrorism such as that blamed on Iran and Libya is giving way to freelance groups not backed by an foreign government.
- Terrorism within U.S. borders can no longer be attributed to disaffected foreigners but, increasingly, to disenchanted Americans. Witness the Oklahoma City bombing.
- Although the number of terrorist attacks has decreased, casualties are rising, suggesting that terrorists are becoming choosier but more ruthless in picking targets and dreaming up new ways to annihilate them.
- Poor supervision of Russian nukes and the growing black market in other weapons of mass destruction enhances the danger of them falling into terrorist hands.
The State Department's 1996 report on Global Patterns of Terrorism lists 296 attacks last year, down from a peak of 665 a decade ago and a 25-year low. Moreover, about two-thirds of them were minor acts of politically motivated violence against commercial targets, causing no deaths.
But the other third killed 311 people and wounded 2,652, a significant increase over the 1995 death toll of 163.
A quarter of last year's attacks were against Americans, the worst being the bombing of a military barracks in Saudi Arabia that killed 19 GIs and wounded more than 500. Another five Americans were killed in drive-by shootings and bus bombings by Palestinian terrorists in Israel.
Because of the Saudi bombing, twice as many Americans were killed in 1996 as in 1995. But the deadliest terrorist attack of the year occurred in Sri Lankan capital of Colombo, where Tamil rebels rammed an explosive-filled truck into the central bank. More than 90 people were killed and 1,400 wounded.
Freeh told the Senate committee a "long list" of attacks planned by terrorists were averted by law enforcement agencies last year, including the bombing of two U.S. embassies. And he indicated that some of these operations did not emanate from the so-called "rogue" states that are our traditional enemies.
"There are many, many groups with no affiliation to a sponsoring state," he said. "I see them proliferating and becoming a more serious threat than state-sponsored terrorism."
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa, asked a good question: If terrorism is a greater threat than conventional war, why are we spending so little fighting it? The proposed budget for counterterrorism next year is $417 million compared to a military budget of $254 billion.
But, unusual for government officials appearing before appropriations committees, the department heads at Tuesday's hearing echoed Tenet's assertion that it wasn't "a question of money but of focus."
The focus has certainly been there. Six international conferences on terrorism were held last year - two in Asia, a "Summit of Peacemakers" hosted by President Clinton in Egypt, a Latin American summit hosted by Peru and a Group of Seven foreign ministers meeting in Paris.
Clinton also signed the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 and the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act. And the State Department brags that we have trained 19,000 foreign law enforcement officials from more than 80 countries in modern counterterrorism techniques.
Doubtless there will be more resolutions on terrorism at the Denver Summit of Eight. But there is still no way to prevent a determined fanatic - especially a suicidal one - from killing innocent people for some personal, political or religious cause.

Load-Date: April 3, 1998


End of Document