TERRORISM AS VIEWED BY YOUTHS
The New York Times
June 9, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 10, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 777 words
Byline: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY
Body


The Foreign Policy Association, a New York-based group that encourages the study of global affairs, invited high school students in the New York area a few months ago to compete for awards by writing essays on any of six international topics.
More than a third of the 200 pieces submitted dealt with terrorism, and those offer a glimpse of how students wrestle with a topic that engages them deeply, but that unlike many classroom assignments, has no easy answers.
Drawing from school discussions, news accounts and materials supplied by the association, most of the students endorsed tough international sanctions against countries that harbor what one writer called ''ragtag renegades.''
 
'Our National Self-Image'
Others, however, emphasized the need to deal with the problems of poverty and repression that they felt terrorist acts are intended to publicize.
The winner of the contest, Andrew Freed, a senior at White Plains High School, argued that in 1985 ''each failure to respond contributed to the decline of our national self-image.''
''If we do not perceive ourselves as being strong enough to cope with terrorism, other countries will lose their confidence in the strength of America,'' he wrote.
Following are excerpts from other essays:
Mitchell Baker Ramaz School, Manhattan Terrorists pose no quantitative threat to our national security. The danger of terrorism lies in the paranoia it inspires. However we respond to terrorism, our highest priority at all times must be to insure that we do not become our own enemy by sinking to their level.
The main weakness in the approach of the current administration is its lack of consistency. Its support of the contras in Nicaragua sends a message that terrorism is not wrong, only occasionally misguided. The Nicaraguan government may or may not be more vicious than the contras. That is not the issue. The issue is ends and means. No ends justify the means of terror. The executive's policy must demonstrate to this country and the world that the means of terror are not practical and not permissible.
 
Stephen Shealy
Greenwich (Conn.) High School We must not be unwilling to commit our massive military power in combatting terrorism. Also it is necessary for Congress to yield power to the executive branch. I recommend that massive bombing of terrorist bases wherever they are, whether responsible directly or not for the act we are retaliating against, take place after every anti-American terrorist act. We must teach the world to fear America.
 
Roger C. Matthews
West Morris-Mendham (N.J.) High School America has difficulty in capturing terrorists because of the high standards we place on justice and human lives. In our nation, criminals are rarely given the death penalty in even the most blatant crimes. Other nations, though, have preferred to deal on an ''eye-for-an-eye'' retaliatory level. Can the U.S. employ this radical code of ethics and still keep our judicial beliefs?
 
Drew Sweetman
Eastern Christian High School, North Haledon, N.J.
The option that would best foster international justice would be to eliminate the causes and, at the same time, improve relations with the nations that sponsor these actions. The United States is a very rich nation and could provide the food and shelter for these people. Other nations could also help, especially the European countries.
 
Drue Arju
John Bowne High School, Flushing, Queens Television is giving terrorists too much attention. It has become the international telephone for terrorists. The movie industry is now filming a movie about the TWA ordeal. This only reminds the public and makes the terrorists heroes.
 
Scott C. Lush
Bronx High School of Science The irony in U.S. policy is that action languishes in the very sight of solutions. I propose: (1) Refusal to negotiate with terrorists once an act has occurred. No jailed collaborators of the terrorists will be released from prison, no hijacked plane or ship will be granted permission to land in any Western port, and no time will be granted on television or on radio for the terrorists to voice their views. (2) Granting of a temporary and weak power to the Congress and the President to suspend press coverage of terrorist incidents similar to that used to ban press when it poses a clear and present danger. (3) Increasing security at high-risk spots. (4) Increased monetary support for anti-terrorist commando units. (5) Creation and maintenance of an international network for gathering and relaying sensitive information concerning terrorist groups. (6) A cessation of relations, both political and economic, with any nation supporting, harboring or training terrorists within its borders.


End of Document