Terrorism Alleged in Policeman Killing in Athens
The New York Times
June 18, 2009 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 
Length: 278 words
Byline: By ANTHEE CARASSAVA
Dateline: ATHENS 
Body


Masked gunmen ambushed and killed an undercover policeman guarding a key witness in a terror trial in what authorities said was an escalation in recent attacks by domestic terrorists, authorities said Wednesday.
  There was no immediate claim of responsibility, but police officials said the some of the bullets used in the attack matched those used in a previous shooting carried out by Greek far-left militant group, Sect of Revolutionaries.
  ''This is the work of terrorists,'' said National Police spokesman Panagiotis Stathis. ''It was a cold-blooded murder.''
  The shooting took place at 6:20 a.m. in one of the capital's most populated residential districts, Patissia. Police found 24 bullet shells scattered around the crime scene and the policeman's body slumped in the driver's seat of his car.
  The 41-year-old officer was a member of the country's counter-terrorism squa, who at the time of his killing, was guarding a Greek woman who had testified against her former husband, a member another far-left domestic terror group, the People's Revolutionary Struggle, or ELA. 
  In 2004, four people were convicted of being involved with ELA and sentenced to 25 years in prison. All have appealed their convictions. The witness the officer was guarding had been involved in the original trial, and also testified in the appeals case earlier this year. The appeals case is expected to continue until later this year.
  Wednesday's attack marked the first fatality caused by a series of mostly late-night bombings set by various domestic terror groups since December, when violent riots gripped the country in response to the fatal police shooting of a 15 -year-old boy.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 18, 2009


End of Document