Terror attacks prompt NIC to rethink security Current emergency plans don't account for acts of terrorism
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 25, 2001 Thursday Idaho Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: THE HANDLE; Pg.B1
Length: 304 words
Byline: Julia Silverman Staff writer
Dateline: COEUR D'ALENE
Body


In accordance with a request by the state Board of Education, North Idaho
 College is updating its security and emergency policies to include strategies
 for responding to terrorist attacks.
 The college has existing crisis plans, said Mike Halpern, director of
 Campus Safety and Support Services at a board of trustees meeting Wednesday
 night, but, ''nothing in there suggests acts of terrorism."
 Halpern acknowledged that the chances NIC might be a terrorism target are
 slim but said the campus could be a site of a school shooting, like the one at
 Columbine High School in Colorado.
And as of now, the school's emergency response teams are not where they
 need to be, he said.
 The school needs to improve its emergency training for employees, hire more
 security officers and work more closely with local police.
 ''We could do a better job," Halpern said. ''Sadly, sometimes it takes a
 September 11 to get us off our heels and move forward."
 The Office of Campus Safety will conduct a self-audit, he said, and by Nov.
 6 will present to the state Board of Education a plan for how it intends to
 update campus security procedures.
 In other business Wednesday night, the board heard a draft of proposals NIC
 might support during the upcoming legislative session in Boise. Those
 included:
 Support for funding of a $2 million enrollment management center, because
 of steady growth in the college's enrollment.
 A request for $10 million to build a new professionaltechnical building at
 NIC's Workforce Training Center in Post Falls, or for $15 million to build a
 larger facility that would be used by both NIC and the University of Idaho.
 Support for ''more flexibility in setting tuition and fees," which can be
 a touchy issue, between students who want to keep tuition the lowest in Idaho
 and officials who are concerned about revenues.

Notes

Julia Silverman can be reached at (208) 765-7126 or by email at julias@spokesman.com  

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document