Terrorism-plot probe focuses on 2 brothers; British officials emphasize that danger still exists
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
August 13, 2006 Sunday


Copyright 2006 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD; Pg. a9
Length: 438 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


The investigation into a plot to blow up jetliners over the Atlantic zeroed in Saturday on brothers arrested in Pakistan and Britain, one named as a key al-Qaida suspect who left the family's home in England years ago and the other described as gentle and polite.
British authorities, meanwhile, warned against complacency, saying the detention of several dozen suspects had not eliminated the danger. The terror threat level in Britain remained "critical" - its highest designation - and delays, flight cancellations and intense security continued to greet travelers at London airports.
"No one should be under any illusion that the threat ended with the recent arrests. It didn't," Home Secretary John Reid told police chiefs at a breakfast meeting. "All of us know that this investigation hasn't ended."
Among the questions British police are studying is whether any of the suspects had links to last year's London suicide bombers and how many visited Pakistan in recent months. They also are examining Internet cafes near the suspects' homes, looking into the possibility of tracking e-mails or instant messages, Scotland Yard said.
With U.S. authorities urgently investigating whether the British plotters had ties in America, a news report said at least one of the men under arrest in Britain had contact in Germany with the wife of Sept. 11 fugitive Said Bahaji. The report in Focus, a German weekly, did not specify the suspect involved or say when the contact occurred.
British investigators and officials have not said how close the plot was to fruition when the arrests were made.
A swirl of attention has focused on the role that the brothers, Rashid and Tayib Rauf, might have played in the airliner plot. Their father, Abdul Rauf, immigrated to Britain from the Mirpur district of Pakistan several decades ago, and his five children were all born in Britain, the family said.
Rashid Rauf was arrested about a week ago along the Pakistan-Afghan border, and Pakistani officials have characterized him as a "key person" in the airline plot. They said evidence linked him to an "Afghanistan-based al-Qaida connection" but gave no details.
His 22-year-old brother, Tayib, was taken into custody in Britain during the sweeps that nabbed 24 people here, and unconfirmed reports said a third brother might have been detained.
A great-uncle of the Rauf brothers said Tayib is partially deaf due to a childhood illness.
"He is very, very polite, the kindest person you could hope to meet," Qazi Amir Kulzum was quoted as saying in Saturday's edition of the Birmingham Post. "No one can believe that he would be involved in such matters."

Load-Date: August 14, 2006


End of Document