Terrorism fears cancel 6 flights on Air France; Homeland Security chief is personally involved in security briefing with French officials and others
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 25, 2003 Thursday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. a10
Length: 404 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Six airline flights between Paris and Los Angeles were canceled at the U.S. Embassy's urging because of terrorism fears, the French government and Air France said Wednesday.
The flights scheduled for Wednesday and today were called off because of information obtained "in the framework of the French-American fight against terrorism," the French prime minister's office said.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security had been meeting with French officials in recent days over concerns about a possible terrorist attack.
A spokesman for French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin said the decision to cancel the six Air France flights came early Wednesday after American authorities notified France that "two or three" suspicious people, possibly Tunisian nationals, were planning to board the flights.
One U.S. official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the U.S. government had been trying to keep the negotiations with France confidential, "hoping that we would be able to lure some of these people in."
The official said there was some frustration within the Department of Homeland Security that the flights were canceled, thus allowing the word to get out about the security concerns.
Three of the flights were scheduled to depart Wednesday - two from Paris and one from Los Angeles. Air France gave the flight numbers as 68, 69 and 70.
The three other flights were scheduled to leave today - two from Los Angeles and one from Paris. Air France listed those flight numbers as 68, 69 and 71.
The airline said it was working to arrange accommodations for stranded passengers.
"These flights have been canceled for security reasons. It comes out of a disposition given by American authorities in France," said Anna Laban, deputy press attache at the French consulate in Los Angeles.
In recent days, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge had personally been involved in security briefings with French officials, as well as officials from other nations, spokesman Brian Doyle said.
He would not name other countries that had been contacted.
"We're talking to our counterparts in other countries about security concerns," Doyle said.
Security at Los Angeles International Airport had already been tightened to its highest level in two years.
With 2.6 million travelers expected to use the airport between Dec. 19 and Jan. 4, airport officials on Wednesday searched cars bound for terminals and prohibited curbside dropoffs and pickups.

Load-Date: December 25, 2003


End of Document