Terrorism impacts classrooms
University Wire
October 18, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Technician via U-Wire
Length: 818 words
Byline: By Haley Huie, Technician; SOURCE: N.C. State
Dateline: RALEIGH, N.C. 
Body


From the Twin Towers to the Bell Tower, terrorism has had a far-reaching impact on institutions in American society.
Higher education is no exception.
Michael Olivas, the William B. Bates Professor of Law at the University of Houston Law Center and director of the Institute for Higher Education Law and Governance, addressed an audience composed of students and educators from around the state for the 2005 Joseph D. Moore lecture, titled "College Campuses after 9/11."
Olivas began by recounting the morning of Sept. 11, saying that he went to the University Medical Center and performed routine tasks until he saw the news on television.
"I knew then that life had irrevocably changed," Olivas said.
He said he felt a sense of dread when he thought of the impact that the attacks would have on the classroom.
The Patriot Act, passed less than two months after the attacks, has "played out in a most distressing way," according to Olivas.
He pointed to the act, which gives federal officials a greater ability to track and intercept communications for intelligence and law enforcement, as way to lock up information and close borders.
Olivas also highlighted other pieces of legislation similar to the Patriot Act that allowed the government to restrict freedoms of international students.
Olivas also said he knew Algerian students who were forced to change their majors because they could no longer study in fields related to science because of chemicals used in labs. He said it is unfortunate for the U.S. because students educated here will either stay and work in domestic labs, or return to their homelands and tout the educational system within the country -- bringing funding to universities and more research.
"These were kids who would have worked in U.S. labs and would have helped us," Olivas said.
He explained that it is a huge detriment to the higher education institutions in the U.S. if we restrict the educational opportunities of international students.
Olivas said many of the tools thought to be a risk to national security are commercially available -- citing the Microsoft program he said was used in flight schools that simulated flying between buildings. The game was used to teach students how to avoid the buildings and used the World Trade Center towers as a graphic.
He said legislation had been in the works for a long time, but the attacks on New York City and Washington, D.C., prompted Congress to act more quickly, leading to the adoption of the Patriot Act.
The effect of similar legislation has functioned as a severe impediment to the flow of international students and researchers into the U.S.
According to Olivas, Australia recently ranked as the most desirable country for students and researches studying abroad.
"We used to be the leaders," he said. "We have lost momentum to Australia."
Olivas said the enactment of legislation dealing with standards for higher education for multi-national students will have a long-term corrosive effect on the international standard of higher education.
"Our children and grandchildren will point to this as the beginning of the decline of our reputation as the international leader in education," Olivas said.
Olivas said there has not been much research conducted to analyze the long-term effects, but said he hopes people will realize the injustice and say, "no," to intrusive communication scanning and background checks.
"We are taking off our shoes at the airport, and not addressing the fundamental issue," he said.
He said he has chosen not to view certain sites on the Internet and through electronic databases because he could be monitored.
"I will concede that there are entire topics that I have chosen not to look at because I did not want to leave a cookie there," he said.
Olivas discussed the decision of UNC-CH students to boycott a summer reading assignment about the Koran.
"Who told them that college was supposed to make them feel comfortable?" he asked. "Everyone should not only be reading books about the Koran, but the Koran itself."
Regina Cucurullo, a sophomore in political science, said she was impressed with the number of people from the community that attended the lecture.
"It blew my mind to think that the library can look up anything you search on the computers," she said. "It's more shocking to know that N.C. State can, or does, surveil e-mail accounts."
She pointed to the drawbacks for the University if the number of international students is impacted because of terrorism legislation.
"It has the potential to limit our learning and intellectual growth," Mary A. Tetro, a first year college academic adviser, said.
She pointed to the decrease in diversity of culture as unfortunate because it eliminates people that would be able to engage in discussions and offer a different perspective.
"[The presentation] has made me more aware of the intricacies of the Patriot Act," Tetro said.
(C) 2005 Technician via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 18, 2005


End of Document