Terrorism: A Growing International Concern
Herald: Arkansas State University
April 3, 2016 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: COLUMNISTS; Pg. 1
Length: 459 words
Byline: Micah Prock
Body


I'm not sure how many more of these articles there are left to write; I know that even though each circumstance is different, it all falls under the same umbrella of terrorism.
There is nothing we can ever do to completely eradicate this sinister motivator from the hearts and minds of our fellow human beings, but that doesn't mean we shouldn't unite in our outspoken stance against it.
The most recent terrorist attack gaining international media attention is the attack in the Brussels international airport and metro where at least 3 men brought homemade bombs onto the premise and detonated them killing eleven people at the airport and twenty people at the metro station.
Words cannot begin to describe the helplessness that these types of terrorist attacks breed within our communities, and the urge to react and lash out is almost irresistible, and rightfully so. I submit that we must resist the temptation and be the bigger people, our reaction must guide the rest of the world in how to address such a serious issue. Armed with facts, love, patience, and most importantly, resilience I believe we can make a huge impact on the international approach to terrorism.
The similarities can be easily drawn between the gun man on our own campus along with the administrations reaction, and how I believe the world should
handle themselves when terrorism strikes. Instead of lashing out in fear and ignorance, we should attack the problem head on with facts and a willingness to help in anyway we can. The whole goal of terrorism is to create fear and disorganization in a society so that the citizens become distrusting of each other and eventually, lead to a dysfunctional system. To allow these types of people to have any sort of control over our lives would be a failure of the highest degree.
Terrorism is a unique threat in the fact that it encourages the government, especially a democratic one, to turn on the people and try and search out the terrorists from amongst the regular citizens.
In America especially, this presents a very troubling problem when our country holds privacy in such high regard.
To begin to craft our approach to terrorism we must first answer the very tough and uncomfortable question about how much privacy are we willing to give up in order to catch would be harmful citizens?
While I don't think there is a definitive answer to that question, that's part of the beauty of living in a democracy, it allows us to figure out the solution that is most widely accepted, and we can begin to work from there.
Of course that's how it's supposed to work, on paper, but looking at our current political system, one can't help but wonder if we are all apart of some really lame reality TV show where the writers have all but given up.

Load-Date: January 4, 2017


End of Document