Terrorism on our turf
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 2, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 20A; EDITORIAL
Length: 594 words
Body


The explosion that crippled the World Trade Center's twin towers in New York  City also blew away Americans' false security about the extent of our  vulnerability to the kind of terrorist violence that has brought so much fear  and disruption to the major cities of Western Europe since the 1970s.
Little more than luck accounts for the fact that our public buildings and  urban centers have been the targets of so few terrorist attacks until now. If  anything, our major cities are less secure than those in Europe, and the  quality of our counterterrorism intelligence generally is not up to the  standards that many other governments have developed out of necessity.
TERROR
The terrorist attack on the twin towers, if that is indeed what it turns  out to have been, should spur a national reassessment of our ability to  protect our people, our government operations and our major business  enterprises from sophisticated political terrorists.
Some of the strategies for bolstering the country's security against  domestic terrorism would require the imposition of measures that visibly alter  the sense of openness and freedom of movement that historically has  characterized American society. Are we prepared to tolerate the sight of  heavily armed police and security guards on every street corner of our centers  of government and commerce? Are we willing to submit to new layers of security  checks in our offices, subways and airports? Those have become elements of  everyday life in London, Paris and Rome. If less drastic measures prove  futile, similar sights may soon become commonplace in Washington and New York.
First, though, U.S. authorities should be implementing common-sense  measures that can make our urban areas more secure without placing severe new  limits on people's freedoms. For example, a study done more than seven years  ago came to the conclusion that access to the parking lots underneath the  World Trade Center should be closed to the public because of their  susceptibility to terrorist attack. In- 
 
stead, the complex typically has granted virtually unrestricted access to  about 80,000 visitors a day.
Authorities believe that Friday's blast was caused by a huge bomb placed in  the underground parking area. They suspect that more than one person was  involved in sneaking hundreds of pounds of explosives into the building.  Considering the sensitive nature of the work performed by many of the hundreds  of businesses, banks and commodities exchanges housed in the World Trade  Center complex, the normal security prior to Friday's explosion was notably  lax.
American authorities also can learn a great deal from the European and  Middle Eastern governments that have been forced to develop state-of-the-art  counterterrorism operations. With the end of the Cold War, there is now a much  greater opportunity for international cooperation in identifying terrorists,  monitoring their activities and bringing them to justice.
Beyond those prudent steps, it is important that we not overreact, either  as individuals or as a society, to isolated acts of terrorism. If individuals  give in to fear, or if governments resort to overly repressive measures,  terrorism will have begun to win its war with the civilized world.
President Clinton called on Americans, especially those in New York, to  "keep your courage up and go about your lives."
That's good advice, but it will be easier to follow once people are  confident that authorities are taking all reasonable steps to assure that they  can go about their lives in relative safety. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, Clay Bennett; Clinton as baseball player holding up a bat.  Balls are flying toward him labeled 'economy,''jobs,' 'taxes,' 'health care.'

Load-Date: March 9, 1993


End of Document