TERRORISM AND ANTHRAX SCARES ARE TAXING AMERICAN CITIES, MAYORS FEAR;
 MANY SAY THEY NEED MASSIVE FEDERAL AID
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 25, 2001 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 882 words
Byline: Karen Branch-Brioso Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


On a tightrope strung between calming constituents on one side and preparing for doomsday on the other, mayors from across the nation held an emergency meeting Wednesday to beg for federal help.
Atop their wish list is money to tackle potential terrorist threats -- and the resulting economic hardships.
"Our budget is literally being terrorized by the additional cost of providing safety for the people who live in the city and who travel and visit our city," Philadelphia Mayor John Street told FBI Director Robert Mueller. "We want to do our part. How do we pay for it?"
Mueller didn't have an answer: "I'm not an expert in that area."
But the mayors know who the experts are. And during their two-day session at the Capitol Hilton, they are being beseeched by the conference's leader to lobby their members of Congress for a piece of a wartime deficit-spending budget.
"We don't mind if the big dogs eat first," said the conference president, New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial, making reference to a recently approved bailout for airlines and billions in proposed business tax breaks. "We do mind if we don't eat at all."
reference to a recently approved bailout for airlines and billions in proposed business tax breaks. "We do mind if we don't eat at all."
The U.S. Conference of Mayors, representing cities of 30,000 or more, has endorsed billions of dollars in spending to boost public health facilities as they prepare for response to terrorism attacks. But the mayors also are pushing for spending proposals that pre-date the Sept. 11 terrorism attacks that inspired their emergency meeting.
St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay was among the 77 conference members in town for the talks. He, too, is lobbying for money for infrastructure projects - and for help for laid-off airline workers as well.
"We're trying to do what we can as one united voice to lobby for additional resources from the federal level to help us be more prepared," Slay said in an interview.
He added that he was heeding advice from medical experts at the conference to nudge private health care providers to cooperate, rather than compete, in the event of a disaster
He said he tapped Dr. Jeffrey Lowell, acting director of abdominal organ transplantation at Washington University and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, to fill a new part-time position in the city Health Department, "to help us develop a better response plan, to coordinate any type of response from the medical community in the event of bio-terrorism."
While Slay was in Washington, health officials in St. Louis were checking a city postal worker who thought she had a spider bite on her leg. A biopsy was ordered to find out if the illness was the skin form of anthrax.
Slay said his priority was to keep the community calm.
"It's important that we as government leaders ensure the people we represent that we have systems in place that respond," Slay said, "and that we do everything on a daily basis to improve our efforts to prevent any sort of eventuality in the future."
Kansas City's view
Kansas City Health Director Rex Archer had a different approach in mind.
He counseled the nation's mayors that their public health systems are sorely lacking in the ability to respond to bioterrorism attacks. Dressed somberly in a black shirt and black suit, Archer offered a slide show that included photographs of a patient ravaged by bloody smallpox lesions.
Another slide showed a poster plastered with the words "THINK OUTBREAK!" that the Kansas City Health Department began distributing in 1999 to persuade doctors and hospitals to be on the alert for epidemics.
Archer told the mayors the national scare over anthrax-laced letters was little more than "a two-alarm fire" and "we have to prepare for several four-alarm fires at once. We have to ramp up now."
It was Archer's way of spurring the mayors in their pleas for federal money to include their support for funds to boost the nation's public health care system. Specifically, he mentioned plans by Sens. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., and Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., to devote at least $635 million to help local health agencies identify and respond to bio-terrorism.
"The cities are losing more citizens from infectious diseases now than homicides or burns or crashes combined, yet look at the resources put into police and fire versus public health," Archer said in an interview. "We see homicides and burns on TV all the time. We don't see infectious diseases."
But Archer is doing all that he can to get the word out to the mayors that they need to focus more of their public money into public health. And he, like they, has the perfect preferred source.
"During wartime, the federal government has the ability to go into deficit-spending," Archer said. "And this war isn't in Afghanistan. The casualties are not primarily going to be on our troops. The casualties are going to be our people at home."
The mayors back a proposal by Sen. Harry Reid, R-Nev., to divert $40 billion of a proposed $100 billion economic stimulus plan of tax breaks into city coffers. Reid wants the money to go to local governments for rail, transit, highway and water projects to boost jobs.
"For every billion dollars we spend, we create 42,000 new jobs," Reid told the mayors. "While tax cuts are important, they do little for an American out of work."

Notes

Reporter Karen Branch-Brioso; E-mail: kbranch@post-dispatch.com; Phone: 202-298-6880  

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Color PHOTO headshot - (Francis) Slay - Says mayors should be united; (John) Street - Says budget is being terrorized

Load-Date: October 25, 2001


End of Document