TERROR ATTACKS ON ARABS DEEPLY DIVIDE THE ISRAELILS
The New York Times
June 21, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 942 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER
Dateline: JERUSALEM, June 20
Body


After bombing attacks this month crippled two Arab Mayors who support the Palestine Liberation Organization, a 10-year-old Israeli girl named Noah came home from school confused.
''Mommy,'' she asked, ''are we glad or not glad it happened?'' Her mother explained that they were definitely not glad, that violence was never the right way. The next day, when Noah came home from school, she said: ''Mommy, you're wrong. We are glad.''
AN-A
Israelis, who have lived for a long time as the targets of terrorism, have never had trouble mustering unanimous outrage. But since the morning of June 2, when Arabs became the targets in the four bomb explosions in four Arab cities in the occupied West Bank, Israel has been deeply divided in its response.
Prime Minister Menachem Begin and other political leaders condemned the attacks, in which Mayor Bassam al-Shaka of Nablus lost both legs, Mayor Karim Khalef of Ramallah lost a foot and eight others were wounded, including an Israeli bomb-disposal expert who was blinded. Right-wing settlers in the West Bank generally hailed the assaults and anonymous callers to news organizations asserted that a Jewish group named Terror Against Terror was responsible. No arrests have been made.
 
Fault Line of Ambivalence
Beneath the firm positions of the officials and the extremists runs a fault line of ambivalence. A Jerusalemite seemed to speak for many when she explained that she was disgusted by the attacks but that because the Mayors had supported terrorism, at least tacitly, she did not have the same sympathy for them that she had for Jewish victims.  She is ashamed of herself for feeling that way, she added.
The severity of the split over the issue was disclosed yesterday in a survey of 1,200 Israeli men and women 18 and older from all over the country. They were asked, ''Would you be in favor of extending the war against terror by using the tactics of Terror Against Terror?''
The results, published in the newspaper Haaretz, showed 54 percent answering no and 36.6 percent saying yes. The greatest support was expressed by @Sephardic Jews, mostly from Arab countries, 46 percent of whom favored the terror tactics and 45 percent of whom were opposed. 
An additional 3.7 percent said they would support such terrorism within certain limits, bringing overall support to 40.3 percent. The limits would include an assurance that no innocent people would be hurt, that the action had Government approval and that it would be a temporary measure.
 
Herzog Calls It Disturbing
''Disturbing'' was the characterization given to the results by Chaim Herzog, a former Israeli representative at the United Nations.  ''There is a feeling that the only way you can deal with the Arabs is to pay them back in their own coin,'' he said. ''There has been an undercurrent of this for a long time. It's something that cuts right across party and is based more on country of origin. He won't do it himself, but he doesn't mind if somebody else does.''
The poll also found 67.1 percent supporting ''expansion of the war against terrorists to their centers in Arab countries'' and 20.8 percent against. To the question whether the Government was right to deport three leading Palestinians from the Hebron area after a terrorist attack on Jewish worshipers on May 2, 69.3 percent said yes and 19 percent said no. The three are Mayor Fahd Kawasmeh of Hebron, Mayor Mohammed Milhem of Halhoul and Sheik Raja Bayud Tamimi of Hebron.
''I was appalled, appalled at the reactions to the bombings,'' said Beth Elon, a supporter of the Peace Now movement, which advocates a more flexible official policy on the Palestinian question. ''One even heard about this poor Druse who got blown up, that he was only an Arab.'' The Israeli demolition expert was a Druse.
 
Where Are the Moderate Arabs?
Another liberal recently turned the question around, asking where the moderate voices were among the Arabs. Asher Maniv, who edits the Labor Party magazine, Migvan, and who was among 250 prominent Israelis who signed a recent statement urging moderation and territorial compromise, wrote in The Jerusalem Post:
''Is there any chance of a similar pronouncement by Arab moderates, trying this time to put their weight against what seems the otherwise inevitable cycle of hatred, incitement and violence? Where was the Palestinian counterpart to our Peace Now movement after last week's statement by the Fatah congress reaffirming its policy of liquidating the state of Israel and calling again for armed struggle as the only way to achieve its aims?''
Occasionally an event strikes Israel and unites it with the force of war. At 6 P.M. on Sunday, June 8, while the country was still reeling from the attacks on the Mayors, an 8-year-old boy named Oron Yarden was seen talking to a young man in an Israeli Army uniform in Savyon, a suburb of Tel Aviv. Two hours later the telephone rang in his parents' home, and his mother, Pnina, heard the words, ''We have your son.''
The kidnappers demanded a ransom of 200,000 shekels ($42,000), and suddenly all of Israel became as tightly knit as a small village. As far as anyone could remember it was only the third kidnapping in the country's history.
 
Ranson Paid Without Result
The police provided the ransom. The money was picked up but the boy was not returned. Mr. Begin made two public appeals for his, as did Ofira Navon, wife of President Yitzhak Navon.
More than 1,000 policemen and soldiers were sent on house-to-house searches. Private detectives offered their services and 1,500 civilian volunteers joined the search. Intelligence experts and psychologists were called in.
There is still no sign of the boy.


End of Document