Terrorism Update: International
Horizons: Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
September 28, 2016 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 577 words
Byline: James Ritchey
Body


The past few weeks have been very eventful in terms of conflict in world affairs. On 15 Sept., Bahrain started experiencing a string of protests over the trial of Shia cleric Sheikh Isa Qassim. Bahrain's Sunni leadership is growing more and more unpopular with the citizens of the small Shia- majority nation. Qassim has had his citizenship taken away, and has been accused of inciting unrest and sectarianism.
On 16 September, the Pentagon reported that a US drone strike had killed another top Islamic State leader. Wael Adel Salman, also known as Abu Muhammad Furqan, was the information minister of the extremist group. Salman was reportedly one of the few commanders with direct access to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State. Salman's death, along with Abu Muhammad al-Adnani's death on 30 Aug. has dealt a major blow to the Islamic State.
A United Nations humanitarian convoy was struck on 19 Sept., destroying at least 18 trucks and killing at least 12 aid workers. It is believed that either Russian or Syrian aircraft carried out the strike, raising tensions between Russia and the West. Because of this, the United Nations has declared that it is suspending all humanitarian convoys in Syria.
Israel's Iron Dome missile defense system activated on 17 Sept. after a stray projectile from the Syrian conflict was projected to land in a populated Israeli area. This is the first time that the defense system has been activated to protect from spillover from the war in Syria. Palestinian militants often target Iron Dome batteries in Israel's southern and western borders.
In the Philippines, Islamic extremist group Abu Sayyaf released Kjartan Sekkingstad, a Norwegian man who had been taken hostage. Sekkingstad was the last of a group of four hostages seized from a resort last year. Abu Sayyaf killed two Canadian men in April, and released a Filipina woman in June. Hours after Sekkingstad was released, the extremist group also released three Indonesian fishermen. Abu Sayyaf raises much of its funds from ransoms, allowing them to continue their operations despite Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte's hardline policies.
Police forces around the world are working to deter the Islamic State's reach. Pakistani forces arrested four members of ISIS in Lahore on 17 Sept. In a raid in Istanbul, Turkish police detained 24 people suspected to be working with the Islamic State. They also arrested a Syrian man in Ankara after evidence that he was plotting an attack arose. French police arrested eight people suspected to have helped plan the truck attack in Nice on 14 July. France's Interior Minister claimed that police forces have arrested over 300 people in 2016 that were reportedly planning terror attacks.
In India, four militants attacked an Indian Army base in Kashmir on 18 Sept. After a three-hour gunfight that resulted in the death of 17 Indian soldiers, Indian security forces killed the gunmen. No group claimed responsibility for the attack, but Indian officials told reporters that the attackers were foreign and acted with the hallmarks of the Pakistani militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed. The Pakistani government denied any involvement. Two days later, Indian border guards shot several people trying to cross the India-Pakistan border in Kashmir. It is not clear how many were killed in the exchange. Tensions are extremely high in the Kashmir region and may soon boil over into armed conflict between Pakistan and India.

Load-Date: January 9, 2017


End of Document