Terror 1,000 attacks in 2004?
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 29, 2005, Friday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 363 words
Byline: Gzedit
Body


TERRORIST attacks nearly quadrupled around the world last year, according to reports this week.
The State Department deleted attack numbers from its yearly report on global terrorism, but the National Counterterrorism Center issued these grim figures:
A total of 651 "international" strikes (those across borders, or killing foreigners, not war-related) occurred in 2004, taking 1,907 lives and wounding 6,704 people. In contrast, 2003 had only 175 attacks, with much smaller casualties.
In Iraq, the attack count jumped ninefold, from 22 in 2003 to 201 in 2004, the center said.
Unfortunately, these tragic statistics don't tell the full story. When Iraqi Sunnis blow up Iraqi Shiites, it isn't an "international" event. And when Iraqi militants blow up American soldiers, it's counted as warfare, not terrorism. Bloomberg news service added this complication:
"Officials cited the example of the twin bombings by Chechen suicide bombers of Russian jets last August. One flight is included in the total number of incidents because an Israeli was among the dead, while the rest of the victims were Russian citizens. The other flight was not counted because all on board were Russian."
This is hair-splitting. Both suicide bombings were terrorism, pure and simple. Perhaps the total of fanatic attacks would pass 1,000, if all were counted.
Meanwhile, the State Department's report warned that militants are closer to obtaining weapons of mass destruction, such as germ warfare or nuclear threats. "WMD technology and know-how is proliferating in the jihadist community," the State Department said. It added that al-Qaida is urging "new groups of Sunni Muslim extremists to undertake violent acts in the name of jihad" (holy war).
Clearly, these reports undermine the White House claim that hard-fisted U.S. military action is winning the war against terrorists. The Washington Post quoted former top State Department counterterrorism expert Larry Johnson:
"Last year was bad. This year is worse. They are deliberately trying to withhold data because it shows that, [regarding] the war on terrorism internationally, we're losing."
That sobering assessment should be pondered by all Americans.

Load-Date: June 2, 2005


End of Document