TERRORISM ARRIVES IN AMERICA'S 'BURBS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 25, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7C
Length: 609 words
Byline: Timothy Egan
Body


new york times service
DEMING, Wash. - The house painter who lives in this little country
town is a family man, his neighbor Sharon Pietila says. "Middle class,
very clean, he wouldn't blow anyone up," she said of John I. Pitner.
Pitner has been in jail for nearly a month now, joined by a chimney
sweep, two Boeing Co. workers, a mason, a religious teacher, a
television repairman and assorted odd jobbers. They are being held
without bail in Seattle, indicted this month on federal charges of
conspiring to make bombs for use against the American government and
the United Nations.
The case against them reads, in part, like Ozzie and Harriet go to
terrorism school. Pipe bombs capable of shattering a courtroom were
stashed in barbecues, and transported by bicycle, according to the
indictment. At potluck dinners, they learned how to pack black
gunpowder into metal cylinders and to make fertilizer do considerably
more than spur tomato growth.
Like the members of an Arizona paramilitary group arrested last month
on charges of conspiring to blow up government buildings, the eight
men and one woman indicted in Seattle do not fit the stereotype of a
foreign menace trying to blow up American targets. Increasingly,
officials say, the face of domestic terrorism is a bomber next door.
Across the nation, bombings and attempted bombings are soaring. They
increased by more than 50 percent in the last five years, and have
nearly tripled over the last decade. The number of criminal explosions
and attempts went from 1,103 in 1985 to 3,163 in 1994.
Cases like the explosion in New York's World Trade Center in 1993, the
Oklahoma City bombing last year, and the Unabomb attacks have been
receiving most of the attention from law enforcement. But in small
towns and suburban neighborhoods, as well as among inner-city street
gangs, there has been a proliferation of a sort of garden variety
bomber.
In the last two months alone, federal officials have arrested groups
of mostly white lower-middle class suburban people in Georgia,
Arizona, and Washington state.
In Spokane, the very picture of middle-class American life, a series
of unsolved bombings at City Hall, the office of the local newspaper,
The Spokesman-Review, and other targets have put the city in eastern
Washington on edge. One blast in late April sprayed three-inch nails
at a site where, just a few days later, nearly 50,000 runners gathered
at the finish line of an annual foot race. Another explosion, last
month, blew out walls at the Planned Parenthood office in Spokane.
It has always been relatively easy to find materials to assemble a
bomb. But what has changed in recent years is the ease of finding
bomb-building information, particularly through the Internet,
law-enforcement officials say.
Recipes, newsgroup discussions and step-by-step manuals on assembling
powerful explosives can be found with the click of a computer mouse.
"It's a fun game to search out the material that can be put together
to make something go 'Boom,'" reads the introduction of the
Anarchists' Cookbook on the Internet. "It's very difficult for a
home-experimenter to make a firecracker, but a bomb capable of blowing
the walls out of a building is easy. You can find what you need in
grocery stores, hardware stores and farm supplies."
Another online manual, "The Terrorist's Handbook," says the purpose of
the book is to show how "any lunatic or social deviant could obtain
this information," then goes on to give detailed information on a
variety of lethal explosives.
"I don't want to call it a fad, but it almost seems like that's what
is going on with these bombers," said Steve Ott, a supervisor with the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

Load-Date: August 27, 1996


End of Document