Terrorism fight tramples liberties, U.N. official says
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 8, 2002 Sunday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. A06; news
Length: 620 words
Byline: Clare Nullis Associated Press
Dateline: GENEVA, Switzerland
Body


Departing U.N. human-rights chief Mary Robinson, in a bleak assessment of the state of human rights, accused governments of hiding behind the war on terrorism to trample civil liberties and crush troublesome opponents.
"Suddenly the T-word is used all the time," Robinson said, referring to terrorism. "And that's the problem."
The United States, Russia, and China were among the nations she said were ignoring civil rights in the name of combating international terrorist groups.
"Everything is justified by that T-word," the former Irish president, 58, said in an interview. "I hope that countries will put human rights back on the agenda because it tended to slip after Sept. 11."
Robinson argued that the Bush administration set the tone by holding detainees from Afghanistan without charge at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. She also criticized Washington's opposition to the new International Criminal Court.
"The world needs leadership in human rights, and the United States could give great leadership. It's not giving it at the moment, unfortunately," said Robinson, who leaves her post Wednesday.
When Robinson took other governments to task for abuses in the post-Sept. 11 era, they often cited the United States as an example in arguing that human-rights standards had changed, she said.
"And I've had to say the standards have not changed," Robinson said. "The United States must be seen to fully uphold international human rights and humanitarian standards. The attacks on New York didn't just kill many innocent people - they were an attack on freedom and democracy, and we must uphold these standards. And we can do that and effectively combat terrorism."
Robinson said a number of countries were using the excuse of fighting terrorism to clamp down on legitimate opposition and curtail freedom of expression. She singled out Russian military operations in the restive republic of Chechnya and China's clampdowns in Tibet and on Muslim Uighurs in Xinjiang.
It was Robinson's willingness to use her office as U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights to criticize such big powers that made her a darling of activists such as Amnesty International. But it ultimately caused her downfall.
Robinson initially wanted to quit last year at the end of her four-year term, saying she was frustrated by a lack of funding. She was persuaded by U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan to stay an additional year, then she let it be known she was willing to remain in office until 2005.
That offer was declined, diplomats have said, because of U.S. annoyance at her criticism of the Guantanamo detention camp and her perceived anti-Israel stance, and anger in Moscow over her persistent clamoring for an inquiry into the suppression of Chechen rebels.
"I do most of the work constructively, diplomatically… but there are times when there must be a voice in the United Nations for the victims of violations," Robinson said.
Asked what she considered the worst human-rights violation, she said, "Extreme poverty." She said the United States, in particular, needed to show more recognition of economic and social rights.
Robinson said she felt no bitterness at being eased out, saying she would campaign for a "more ethical globalization and a fairer world." She also wants to use her contacts to tap universities and foundations for more resources to promote human rights in developing countries.
Robinson said she was confident that her successor, Sergio Vieira de Mello, a Brazilian diplomat who headed the interim U.N. administration in East Timor, was capable and committed.
And she offers him one bit of advice given to her by an Irish poet friend: "If you become too popular in that job, you're probably not doing a good job."

Load-Date: September 8, 2002


End of Document