Terrorism has no borders;

The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 22, 1998, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 1317 words
Body


This is in reference to your editorial "Foreign policy or missionary activity?" (Oct. 13). As a  Sri Lankan American keeping track of terrorist activities in Sri Lanka, I thought interested  readers may have been misled by the statement that Tamils in Sri Lanka are engaged in a violent  effort to achieve national independence.
Sri Lanka's problem is unique. Sri Lanka won national independence in 1948. Tamils (15 percent)  in Sri Lanka are not engaged in a violent effort to achieve any kind of independence. A minute  minority of the Tamils form a terrorist group, The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Ealam (LTTE), who are  fighting government forces dominated by the Sinhalese (75 percent) to get a separate state in a  land mass of 25,330 square miles.
The government of the United States has declared the LTTE as a terrorist organization. In  keeping with U.S. foreign policy of countering terrorism globally, the U.S. government helps the  Sri Lankan government to fight this menacing, internationally funded terrorist organization.
Terrorism has no borders. It is indeed the responsibility of the world at large to combat it.  TILAK RATNASEKERA  Tampa  Hidden intentions
Citizens of Tampa need to understand the true intent of Revision 9 in the upcoming election.
It has been worded in such a way as to make it appear to be providing equality between men and  women under the state's constitution. It does so by defining "male" and "female" as "alike" under the  law. This amendment is superfluous, for the state constitution has already been carefully reworded  in the past to provide equality between males and females. The hidden agenda involved with this  proposal is to give special rights to homosexuals.
By defining "males" and "females" as "alike" (or interchangeable) under the law, the revision will  open the door for same-sex marriages and adoption privileges for homosexual partners. Don't be  fooled by those who promote this proposition under the guise of women's rights.  CHRIS WORKMAN  Tampa  On being Republican
The two letters from Jay Palmer and Richard L. Rockstroh on the Oct. 16 editorial page came as  refreshing October breezes. I too have been a Republican all my life, and I too deplore what has  happened to my party. My great-grandfather voted for Abraham Lincoln in 1864. (He was too young to  vote for Lincoln in 1860.) My grandfather voted Republican in every general election except 1912,  when he voted for Teddy Roosevelt.
The ruination of the Republican Party is best described by Andrew Sullivan in a very recent  issue of The New York Times Magazine: "Even those conservative thinkers who still argue for a  low-tax, small-government philosophy have been unable to make headway with their peers without  cloaking their case in the austerity of moral revival. The blithe optimism of Reagan, the joy that  conservatives once took in the sheer unpredictability of a free people in a free society, has been  replaced by a dark dread of how people could misuse such freedom, and the desperate need to coerce  them back into line."
I will not waste my vote by sitting on my hands in next month's election. I will vote a straight  ticket - something I've never done before - and it will be the Democratic ticket.
As I told my spouse last week, I'm going to vote for every Democrat in sight. In today's  political environment, my grandfather would approve. Then, in 2000, we can reassess the situation  in Congress.  JOHN G. CHASE  Palm Harbor
After reading the letters section daily to see how my fellow Americans feel about various  current events and most recently the problems with our president, I am astonished at the  gullibility of some writers who present themselves as Republicans or conservatives, or any American  who complains that the "right-wing" extremists in the Congress are bad, bad, bad! They are going to  vote the Democratic ticket this election.
My whole life of 54 years has been spent in a country that bore the burden of the world fighting  the "left." Most of my life the "left" was the communism of the Soviet Union. Now the "left" is called  liberalism, but that is just another word for socialism, a watered-down version of Marxism, the  direct opposite of what democracy and free people stand for.
Are my fellow Americans really going to vote for a president of a party that seems proud to be  on the left? If they do, I certainly will not be proud of them, and I am sure our forefathers would  not be proud either.  WILLIAM T. HAMRICK  Haines City  Doubting Oprah's motives
I just read an article on Oprah Winfrey's new movie "Beloved." It professes her dedication to  bring slavery and racism against blacks to the forefront of the nation's collective conscience. If  her motives were so altruistic, why isn't the movie on network television for all to see instead of  in movie theaters, where you have to pay to see it?
I agree that slavery is a major blight on the history of our nation, but blacks don't have a  monopoly when it comes to hate crimes. Just ask the Jews, abortion activists, schoolchildren and  gays who have been the victims of relentless, senseless violence. And it's becoming more frequent.
There may not be many senior black politicians or Fortune 500 CEOs, but when you bring it down  to the level of the average American, there are more opportunities for minorities than for  nonminorities. These come in the form of government-subsidized sustenance programs, tax breaks for  minority-owned businesses, educational scholarships and grants, and the list goes on. It's  politically correct to have black-only scholarships and black entertainment television, but could a  Caucasian group get away with the same thing?
The opportunities are there, particularly in our growing economy. People just have to accept  their responsibilities as members of the American work force and as parents.
Just for the record, my grandparents were full-blooded Cherokee Indians, so I know about  oppression.  GEORGE ELDRIDGE  Lake Wales  On airline deregulation
I am in total agreement with Edwin A. Roberts, Jr.'s current assessment of airline travel  (Commentary, Oct. 18). It is almost invariably a dehumanizing ordeal. Also, when a nonstop from  Tampa to Charlotte, N.C., with a two-week advance purchase costs more than a trip to London ($ 750  on US Airways), something is seriously wrong!  SHIRLEY A. MAGNER  Tampa  Comparison of mayor's pay
My husband was employed by the city of Tampa for many years prior to his retirement in the early  1970s. He retired a short time before the cost-of-living adjustment was made for current city  employees and future retirees, but there were no retroactive provisions made for previously retired  employees who were receiving pensions. I now receive a pension from my dead husband, and even  though the cost-of-living adjustment would be small, the cost of living has increased in these 25  years and no adjustment has been made.
Now, I see in the paper that they are planning to add another $ 25,000 each year to Mayor Greco's  already very generous salary and probably also to their own.
I now live in Hillsborough County, and I am not eligible to vote in the city elections, but I  can assure you that I have lived here for almost 80 years, and I do know a lot of people, and I  will try to convince them to vote against the mayor or any such raise.  SARA STRIBLING  Tampa  Worrisome traffic hazard
There ought to be a law, and maybe there is, against the way many people (mainly men with bleary  eyes, some without shirts) commandeer the medians, holding up homemade signs with key words like  "hungry" and "veteran" and "homeless." The will-work-for-food gang has apparently moved on. I doubt these  people have a business license and wonder why police tolerate this hazard. I fear the day one of  them stumbles in front of my car. This is undoubtedly true all over Tampa. I ask why?  DOUG DUPERRAULT  Tampa

Notes

LETTERS

Load-Date: October 23, 1998


End of Document