TERRORISM LEVIES TAXES ON GLOBALIZATION
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
November 11, 2001 Sunday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2001 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1F
Length: 618 words
Byline: Christopher Montgomery Dayton Daily News
Body


Globalization - a word coined to identify the growing interconnectedness of world economies - became part of the nation's lexicon in the booming 1990s.
Capital, people and products were pouring across borders. Technology was drawing disparate nations closer together. Free-market thinkers saw the day coming when the artificial barriers to trade would be torn down, galvanizing the growth of developed and emerging markets alike.
In the wake of Sept. 11, however, globalization is looking less like a foregone conclusion. Even its staunchest proponents admit globalization has been dealt a blow by the terrorist attacks and slumping world economy. And a growing number of market observers are predicting its demise.
There may be no bigger booster of globalization than Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. Greenspan has said time and again that globalization is vital to the long-term health of the world economy.
"Globalization . . . needs to be seen as offering opportunities to raise the standards of living of all participants in the world trading system," Greenspan said in a recent speech.
Greenspan acknowledged the resistance to globalization, manifested in the protests that accompany meetings of the World Trade Organization and International Monetary Fund. But he said the major stumbling blocks preventing universal acceptance of globalization - such as the flight of American jobs to cheaper labor markets and the perceived exploitation of underdeveloped countries - can be solved by more open markets and safety nets for workers when needed.
Terrorism, however, has cast significant doubts on the potential for increased market liberalization, said Stephen Roach, chief economist and director of global economics for Morgan Stanley, in a Financial Times article.
"The rules of the game have changed," Roach said. "Terrorism puts sand in the gears of cross-border connectivity and the result threatens the increasingly frictionless world of globalization."
According to Roach, increased security and travel costs have, in effect, levied a tax on international transactions. As a result, companies might lose their appetite for cross-border alliances.
At the same time, Roach said, nations are pouring money into national defense, which shifts output away from productivity enhancements and likely signals the end of the post-Cold War peace dividend. The same nations, primarily from the West, are creating a united front against terrorism, which some say only widens the gap between rich and poor nations.
"Such growing fragmentation means that the world may be turning its back on globalization," Roach said.
Others disagree.
It's premature to predict the end of globalization, according to Animesh Ghoshal, a professor of economics at DePaul University in Chicago.
"Sept. 11 was certainly a setback, but globalization is a very strong force," Ghoshal said. "It would take much more than a few terrorist attacks to grind it to a halt."
The terrorist attacks might even prompt the emergence of a healthier form of globalism, said Paul Laudicina, vice president and managing director of the Global Business Policy Council, a division of the consultant firm A.T. Kearney.
"Something fundamental has happened," Laudicina said. "We now know that it's not possible for one part of the world to grow at one speed, and one part of the world to grow at another speed, or not at all, without there being some type of consequence.
"I think, and hope, that this will spawn greater geopolitical awareness among companies, and a kind of trans-border governmental cohesiveness that can take us to the next level of globalization," he said.
Contact Christopher Montgomery at 225-2348 or e-mail him at cmontgomery@coxohio.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO, EVERYTHING ABOUT globalization is both fluid and complicated. U.S. transportation corridors are overburdened, planning is hindered by the difficulty of predicting future need.

Load-Date: November 13, 2001


End of Document