Terrorism unlikely in disaster
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
February 2, 2003 Sunday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A9; NOTEBOOK
Length: 887 words
Byline: From staff and wire reports
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Government officials quickly concluded Saturday that terrorism or other
 foul play were not the likely causes of the breakup of the space shuttle
 Columbia over Texas, though they cautioned that they will investigate all
 possibilities.
 Within an hour of the disaster, Tom Ridge, secretary of the Department of
 Homeland Security, who is responsible for evaluating all major domestic
 incidents, was conferring with intelligence analysts and national security
 officials at the White House.
 The Pentagon assumed a supporting role, assisting federal civilian
 authorities in scouring Texas for space shuttle debris. At no point - even in
 the first minutes after word of the missing spacecraft was relayed to
 government leaders - were military forces scrambled on suspicion that Columbia
 may somehow have been downed by a hostile act, according to a senior military
 officer.
 Flags at half-staff until Wednesday
 President Bush signed a proclamation Saturday honoring the memory of the
 astronauts aboard the space shuttle Columbia.
 As a mark of respect for the dead, he ordered the flag flown at half-staff
 at the White House, all public buildings and grounds, at all military posts
 and naval stations, and on all naval vessels of the Federal Government in the
 District of Columbia and throughout the United States and its Territories and
 possessions through Wednesday.
 Embassies, consular offices and other U.S. facilities abroad were also
 ordered to lower the flag.
 Two shared Northwest roots
 HOUSTON - During a NASA media briefing, a solemn shuttle manager Ron
 Dittemore noted that he shared Inland Northwest roots with astronaut Michael
 Anderson.
 Dittemore said he attended Medical Lake High School, the ''rival" of
 Anderson's Cheney High.
 ''I'm going to miss the closeness that we had," Dittemore said, adding
 that the two men both spent part of their childhoods at Fairchild Air Force
 Base and both met their wives in Spokane.
 Idaho teacher was to fly Columbia
 Idaho's only astronaut, Barbara Morgan, was scheduled to be aboard the next
 flight of Columbia when it was to launch in November.
 Morgan recently quit her job as a McCall schoolteacher to prepare for the
 flight. In 1986, Morgan was the backup for teacher Christa McAuliffe, who was
 killed in the 1986 Challenger shuttle disaster.
 NASA plans to hire as many as six teachers for its next astronaut class,
 and has received more than 1,000 nominations for the positions.
 WSU researcher followed flight of Columbia
 PULLMAN - Norman Lewis was awake by 5 a.m. Saturday to watch the space
 shuttle Columbia return to Earth after its 16-day mission.
 Lewis, a Washington State University plant researcher, has had experiments
 ride into space aboard Columbia. WSU had no experiments on this flight.
 WSU's Institute of Biological Chemistry ''is a program that really tries to
 understand how plants work," Lewis said. The institute has worked with NASA
 since the mid-1980s and has had several experiments conducted aboard shuttles
 and the Mir space station.
 ''You get involved in astronaut training … and you develop bonds, so
 therefore it is just a frightful tragedy," he said of the crash. ''It really
 does emphasize how these people are heroic.
 Columbia's ill-fated mission featured more than 80 scientific experiments
 ranging from the effects of space travel on astronauts to the possibility of
 creating a new perfume from outer space.
 Web site blocks shuttle debris auctions
 Within minutes of the Columbia tragedy, many Americans were trying to make
 a buck.
 To no cynic's surprise, the Internet's leading auction Web site was fast
 replete with shuttle materials - T-shirts, commemorative medals, patches,
 launch photographs. The items even included alleged actual shuttle materials -
 debris, tiles, a prototype tailpiece.
 EBay deleted several items billed as debris the from site, warning that
 anyone attempting to sell fragments from the doomed shuttle could be
 prosecuted. Executives may report the sellers to federal authorities.
 Taking a part of an aircraft involved in an accident is a federal offense,
 U.S. attorneys in Texas warned, and a conviction could result in up to 10
 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
 Moments of silence in arenas
 SUNRISE, Fla. - By Saturday night, the shooting stars, the constellations
 and all other references to outer space were gone.
 The National Hockey League needed another theme for its All-Star opening
 ceremony.
 The league spent much of the day amending its plans after seven astronauts
 were killed aboard the space shuttle Columbia. Instead of a space-based visual
 presentation to introduce players at its YoungStars Game, there was a moment
 of silence.
 ''We reacted with great sadness," said Frank Supovicz, an event planner
 for the NHL. ''We eliminated a fair amount of the opening, out of respect to
 the tragedy."
 All over the country, the tragedy touched sporting events. Before ''The
 Star Spangled Banner," a moment of silence was observed at the Gonzaga-Santa
 Clara men's basketball game.
 Holocaust remembrance
 Israel's first astronaut, Col. Ilan Ramon, took with him into orbit a copy
 of the Torah that was brought to Israel by a Holocaust survivor after World
 War II. He also took a pencil drawing by Peter Ginz. Ginz, 14, who was killed
 at the Auschwitz death camp, had drawn Earth as he thought it might look from
 space.

Load-Date: February 6, 2003


End of Document