Terrorism And Indefinite Warnings
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 21, 2002, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 483 words
Body


The Bush White House had a clue terrorists were planning to fly jetliners into buildings, and the suggestion is being floated that our leaders should have found a way to stop the deadly plot.
The biggest terrorist attack in U.S. history was a shock but not a total surprise. Around the globe on Sept. 11, people who follow the news immediately suspected Osama bin Laden.
Now it is widely agreed that a band of his terrorists planned, trained and conducted their mission under the radar of U.S. intelligence. And it was recently reported that President Bush was warned last August that, among many other possibilities, bin Laden's operatives might try to hijack U.S. airliners. Back in 1999 the CIA even speculated that bin Laden's more fanatical followers might try to crash an airplane into the Pentagon.
It is easy to take the few bits of intelligence that proved true and make a case that Bush was asleep at the wheel. Some Democrats even demand to know what he knew and when he knew it, as if he were part of a cover-up.
The entire nation had long been too relaxed about terrorism. In August, after a suspicious foreign student was arrested at a Minnesota flight school, the FAA decided it had insufficient cause to warn the airlines.
And even if a warning had been issued, what are the chances security would have been increased enough to make a difference?
Now the FBI is warning of a possible plot by bin Laden to blow up U.S. apartment buildings, yet what can be done?
In Orlando, a recent threat was received that terrorists would soon attack the water supply. But why there, and why a warning?
FBI Director Robert Mueller now says it is inevitable that U.S. stores or public places will, sooner or later, be hit by suicide bombers. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has issued more than 30 warnings about possible terrorist attacks on nuclear power plants.
The most serious threat to date was initially kept quiet. In October, intelligence was received that bin Laden had a small nuclear bomb and was planning to explode it in Manhattan, where it could have killed 100,000 people, Time magazine has reported. The White House decided to keep the threat secret.
Now sensors have been deployed in key areas to detect radiation. In hindsight, we know Bush acted wisely and avoided public panic. No one is asking what he knew and when.
If Bush were to explain exactly what he was told about all terrorist threats and when, bin Laden and his captains would have a good idea where the intelligence originated. If he tells exactly what he did in response to credible clues, as well as how he reacted to the incredible ones, he also will be schooling terrorists in how best to avoid detection or cause maximum anxiety.
Those willing to make a suicidal attack on unguarded civilians will always have the advantage of surprise. To publicize all we know about their plans would only put Americans at greater risk.

Notes

OUR OPINION

Load-Date: May 22, 2002


End of Document