Terrorism fears prompt calls for U.S. vigilance
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 23, 1999, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1999 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A; DIGEST
Length: 872 words
Body


An Algerian accused of smuggling bomb materials pleads innocent as President Clinton calls for caution.
An Algerian accused of trying to smuggle nitroglycerin and other bombmaking materials into the United States from Canada pleaded innocent Wednesday to all five counts of a federal indictment.
The plea came amid promises that security had been stepped up, though there were questions about how real those efforts are, given that many agencies had already heightened their precautions because of worries about the year 2000 computer bug.
There were also warnings from officials including President Clinton that Americans should be watchful this holiday season, not just when traveling abroad, and not just when traveling at home, but anywhere, particularly at the sites of holiday or millennium events that might attract large crowds.
Compiled from Times Wires1A TERROR
In response, FBI officials across the country were inundated with tips, leading to such incidents as a search in Washington, D.C., for a van because of "suspicious activities" by its occupants.
In Seattle, Ahmed Ressam, 32, was indicted on charges that he made false statements to U.S. customs officers; smuggled nitroglycerin across the border; transported explosives; and possessed unregistered firearms - the apparent timing devices found in Ressam's car.
He could get up to 40 years in prison and be fined more than $ 1-million if convicted on all counts.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Francis Diskin told the judge at Wednesday's hearing that material found in Ressam's car was sufficient to build a powerful bomb.
"This destructive device would easily have taken down a building," he said.
Ressam, speaking through an Arabic interpreter, answered affirmatively when U.S. District Judge John Weinberg asked him if he understood the charges and the meaning of his pleas. Weinberg ordered Ressam to continue to be held without bail.
Tom Hillier, Ressam's public defender, said the defense did not object to the lack of bail. He said there was nothing they could have presented to convince the judge otherwise.
Ressam was stopped by U.S. customs officers Dec. 14 after he took a ferry from Victoria, British Columbia, to Port Angeles, Wash., about 60 miles northwest of Seattle. Investigators have not said what Ressam's target might have been.
The New York Times reported Wednesday that French officials believe Ressam has links to an Algerian terrorist group responsible for a number of bombings in France in 1996. The newspaper also reported that American officials have unconfirmed intelligence reports that Ressam was seen in Islamic fundamentalist training camps during the 1980s.
Law enforcement officials said they are searching for as many as three other people who may have ties to Ressam. The FBI asked the public for help identifying everyone who traveled on the ferry Coho the day Ressam was arrested.
U.S. officials have tried to assure Americans they are doing all they can to prevent terrorist attacks over the holidays, including tightening security at airports and investigating whether there are links between Ressam and suspected Saudi terrorist Osama bin Laden.
The Federal Aviation Administration said travelers at American airports should expect tightened security precautions, including stricter enforcement of parking regulations.
As he visited a soup kitchen in Washington, President Clinton said: "For the citizens, I would say they ought to go about their holidays and enjoy themselves and make the most of it. But I would ask them to just be aware of their circumstances and, if they see anything suspicious, to report it immediately, and meanwhile to know that we are doing everything we possibly can."
Reports of packages left unattended or people behaving suspiciously have been flooding FBI offices around the country, bureau officials said.
Incidents included:
WASHINGTON: The FBI and local police were seeking leads on a blue Mitsubishi van with Texas license plates. A private citizen reported the van to police because of "suspicious activities" by its occupants, FBI Deputy Director Dale Watson said at a news conference.
NEWARK, N.J.: An off-duty pilot was charged with making a terroristic threat for mentioning a bomb after being removed from a jet bound for Los Angeles from Newark International Airport.
The remark Tuesday prompted the captain of the Continental Airlines jet to have security officers and bomb-sniffing dogs check the 757, delaying the flight more than six hours, officials said.
BAHAMAS: U.S. Customs Service agents detained an American who was acting suspiciously and was found carrying wires and magnetic coils. FBI officials questioned him in Nassau, but a thorough search of the suspect uncovered nothing more alarming, the State Department reported.
The State Department's deputy spokesman, James Foley, said, "We have information that leads us to conclude that terrorists may be planning attacks around the world."
Pressed on whether this meant Americans should call off Christmas, New Year's and millennial celebrations, Foley said the warnings were "a cautionary light, not a red light."
- Information from the Associated Press, New York Times, Scripps Howard News Service and Knight Ridder Newspapers was used in this report.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press, (2); Holiday travelers line up at New York's LaGuardia Airport on Wednesday.; Airport police officers have a police dog sniff luggage at Reagan National Airport in Washington on Wednesday.

Load-Date: December 23, 1999


End of Document