TERRORISM?  WE'LL CROSS THAT BRIDGE
Daily News (New York)
May 23, 2002, Thursday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2002 Daily News, L.P.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 410 words
Byline: BY JOANNE WASSERMAN DAILY NEWS CITY HALL BUREAU
Body

It was more than a bridge yesterday. It was a span of hope.
On a brilliant day in May, New Yorkers and tourists refused to let terrorist threats take away the exhilaration of crossing the Brooklyn Bridge.
So, over they came, each with a story to tell about why they were there.
A family from Wales refused to "let the terrorists win." A Brooklyn Heights writer insisted "this is my city!" and said she would not give up her thrice-a-week ritual. A jogger said he would be "damned" if he had to stop his daily run that once included a loop around the World Trade Center.
And a Holocaust survivor now living in Kew Gardens, Queens, said he wanted to see the harbor on a beautiful day.
Before terrorism struck New York, these outings would have been nothing more than springtime jaunts. Now they are viewed as simple acts of defiance.
They saw the bridge in all its glory yesterday, partaking of the stunning views and smelling the breeze dusted with a salt-water fragrance.
But many said they haven't been able to shake the image of the majestic bridge being used as an escape route for thousands of New Yorkers on Sept. 11, when the subways weren't running and people were forced to use the span to flee Manhattan.
That the bridge was now the subject of a terrorist threat made them more determined to be there.
"Oh forget it! This is my city," declared writer Tsurah Litzy, out for her three-times-a-week walking ritual that she refused to give up, even in the face of threats against the bridge and other city landmarks.
At a fast clip came Charles McCullagh, doing his daily jog, which once circled the twin towers. "I'll be damned. This is not going to change my pattern," said McCullagh. "They already ruined half my run."
John Grossman, 75, whose mother had to send him alone to England at 12 to escape the Nazis, took the threats in stride.
After a meeting in lower Manhattan, he walked onto the bridge. "I wanted to see the river and the boats," he said.
Life-long New Yorker Christopher Conway displayed his this-city-is-the-center-of-the-universe attitude as he walked to a law school class.
"What choice do I have? Where am I going to go?" he asked. "They don't have bagels anyplace else."
Daniel Evans, 12, of Wales had to overcome a pang of fear when his family wanted to walk over the bridge.
"We can't let them take over our life, can we?" said the boy, proud he had made the journey.
"If we hadn't walked the bridge," said Daniel, "the terrorists would have won."

Graphic

 
KRISTEN ARTZ SUNNY STROLL Tourists and New Yorkers alike don't let terror threat prevent them from crossing Brooklyn Bridge yesterday.

Load-Date: May 23, 2002


End of Document