Terrorism policy should go deeper, say USC experts
University Wire
October 24, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Length: 578 words
Byline: By Lindsay Merkle, Daily Trojan
Dateline: Los Angeles
Body


The question of who is to blame for terrorist actions has been far too simplified and a deeper look is needed to understand how military decisions will solve terrorist problems or simply provoke more conflict, international and religious experts said during a panel discussion at the University of Southern California on Tuesday.
"People think that if we get rid of Saddam Hussein then Iraq will no longer be in the power of (his regime) -- but they will not give up the power," said Scott Ritter, chief U.N. Arms Inspector of Iraq. "Similarly, if we take out Osama bin Laden and the al Qaeda, the power in Afghanistan will not just change hands. It will stay the way it is no matter who the leader is."
U. Southern California
About 60 University of Southern California students attended "Target: America," a panel discussion of Middle Eastern politics sponsored by Program Board.
The panel of four discussed a variety of issues such as religion, domestic and international foreign policy, military action and their roles in terrorism in America.
The problem of terrorism is larger than Americans have made it out to be, Ritter said. Americans are eager for military action, even if it is pointed in the wrong direction, he said.
Iraq has been stripped of the capability to produce either weapons of mass destruction or biochemical weapons and should not be identified as the source of the anthrax, Ritter said, adding that he thinks the poisonous substance is coming from inside the United States.
Additionally, speakers said the label "terrorism" itself has not been adequately defined, and must be clarified to be used effectively in policies, said Richard Dekmejian, professor of political science.
"Terrorism is a very bad word -- but what exactly does it mean to the U.S. and the war on terrorism?" Dekmejian asked.
Ritter criticized the U.S. government response.
"Our definition of global terror really means a war on global terrorists that kill Americans," Ritter said.
Ritter's ideas on how to solve the problems "depend on if you want me to be a four- or eight-year president," he said. While he could make decisions that would get the job done, they would be unpopular with Americans, which would prevent a re-election.
The fundamentalist religions tend to have a propensity toward violence, said John Crossley, director of the School of Religion.
"In Judaism, Islam and Christianity, individuals have a need to conquer opposing ideas," Crossley said. "Throughout time, if the ideas themselves did not conquer others, then force would be used. That is where bin Laden is coming from for religious fundamentalists."
Steven Lamy, director of the School of International Relations, said America is looking at the next Cold War.
"Our current policy is one of containment, but that is not working, because in the traditional sense, nobody can be contained or isolated without negative results," Lamy said
Student reactions to the panel were mostly positive.
Deb Wicox, a junior majoring in political science, said the panel opened her eyes to the variance of issues involved.
"I was intrigued by the encompassing answers given and the descriptions of the larger-scale issues the speakers provided," she said.
Rick Connoly, a senior majoring in political science, also gained new insight from the discussion.
"The panel was thorough and I saw new aspects of the topic that I didn't take into account previously."
(C) 2001 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 24, 2001


End of Document