Terrorism knows no boundaries
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
December 18, 2004, Saturday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LIFESTYLE,; FREESTYLE
Length: 394 words
Byline: Justine Maki, 20
Body


Justine Maki is a junior majoring in journalism and Spanish at Penn State University. She is studying in Madrid, Spain, for a year.
Terrorism is relatively new to the United States, but Spain has suffered from attacks by a separatist group called ETA for more than 30 years.
#JUSTINE-TERRORISM#
"Pas Vasco," or Basque Country, is in the north of Spain and a minority of the population, perhaps 10 percent, wants their land to separate into its own country. Many Basques are nationalistic, and their culture differs from the rest of Spain. The people speak a language with roots investigators have yet to prove; local lore says it came from Adam and Eve.
On Dec. 3, the eve of a long weekend in Spain, five bombs were placed at gas stations on the highways leaving Madrid. Two police officers were injured but nobody died, thanks to the quick action of police who evacuated the area.
Unlike what you or I may think of terrorist actions, ETA was not looking to kill that Friday. They were looking to scare people. The group often places bombs and calls the police just an hour before detonation. Sometimes the police can defuse them, but often there's no time as their first priority is to evacuate crowded areas.
The amazing thing about the Spanish people is fear doesn't stop them.
I went out to buy a couple of Christmas presents that same evening and there were so many people on the streets I could hardly move. Men and women of all ages, entire families with little children, everyone was out on the street window-shopping, getting coffee or looking at Christmas decorations.
Just because the bombs were in gas stations this time doesn't mean there is no danger: Four years ago, ETA placed bombs in a big bookstore a five-minute walk from my house. I went there Friday and it was full to the brim.
I asked my host mother how the people can be so fearless. She immediately replied that if the Spanish hid in their homes it would be "letting the terrorists win." They have suffered through so many years of threats; most people can't afford to change their lives around a new one.
As much as I complain to my friends about the old women who walk arm in arm, taking up the whole sidewalk on the busiest street in the city, I have to admire them. They and other Spaniards make me realize that this "war on terror" may never end, but life can maintain some semblance of normality.

Load-Date: February 3, 2005


End of Document