Terrorism today: Threat level is high; The players and tactics are evolving, and U.S. remains at risk.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 1, 2010 Tuesday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2010 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 659 words
Body


Almost nine years after 9/11, terrorism is a fast-evolving, mostly underestimated worldwide threat, and America may be more vulnerable to attacks today than it was on that sunny September morning.
That grim assessment was the consensus of experts who spoke at a recent journalism conference on terror and security issues held, fittingly, in an office tower on Times Square in New York.
"Terrorists can win and have won,'' said Sebastian Gorka, assistant professor of irregular warfare at the College of International Security Affairs in Washington. To borrow a sports cliche, Gorka's warning can best be summarized this way: We can't stop acts of terror, we can only hope to contain them. To that end, counterterrorism today is a complex exercise in risk management.
The tactics of terror have morphed since 9/11. Terrorists are using the Internet, including social media, to develop worldwide networks based on personal relationships rather than traditional chain-of-command hierarchies. In many cases, it's impossible for law enforcement officials to draw a leadership diagram or come up with a geographical frame of reference for a terrorist organization, said Peter Neumann, director of the International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence and a senior lecturer at King's College in London.
Terrorists of today are also trying to kill more people with their attacks and create widespread fear by targeting civilians. Often their aims are less negotiable, Neumann said, in contrast with groups such as the IRA that had clear political goals.
The panelists assembled in New York listed myriad types of current threats, from suicide bombing to nuclear weapons and cyberterrorism. One security expert described how an attack using the radioactive material from an X-ray machine in a veterinary clinic could shut down Times Square for months. Another said there is growing concern that terrorists will hack into medical devices or records. One especially chilling scenario: A terror network hacks into a large hospital database and changes patient drug prescription data.
The growing number of weak and failed states around the world provide an expanding breeding ground for terror, and Somalia is at or near the top of the list.
That should not be shocking to Minnesotans, who have read news reports of as many as 20 young Somali-American men from the state being recruited by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab in the past two years to return to fight in Somalia's civil war. Five of them have died, including one who killed others in a suicide attack. A sixth man, a Muslim convert from Minneapolis, also is believed to have been killed in Somalia.
Neumann said the apparent radicalization of the 20 men while still in the United States has drawn the attention of a concerned Department of Homeland Security. And federal officials told the Star Tribune last year that the threat of homegrown attacks in the United States -- such as the failed May 1 Times Square plot -- is increasing.
The United States and its allies appear to have weakened Al-Qaida, but other affiliated and independent networks such as Al-Shabaab are growing more active and dangerous, according to several of the expert panelists.
For Minnesotans, especially those in the local Somali community and law enforcement officials throughout the state and federal government, that's a chilling reminder that the lessons learned on 9/11 must not be forgotten as we grapple with a new set of threats today.
BREEDING GROUND
"I can guarantee you that we will soon be talking about Somalia as much as Yemen.''
PETER NEUMANN, director of the International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence and a senior lecturer at King's College in London, speaking at a May 17-19 conference, "Reporting on International Security and Terrorism,'' in New York. The conference was organized by the
Thomson Reuters Foundation, the Stanley Foundation and Gerda Henkel Stiftung.

Load-Date: June 3, 2010


End of Document