Terror Attacks Often Covered By Insurance, A Report Says 
The New York Times
October 3, 2006 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 743 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER
Body


Insurance coverage for a terrorist attack like the one in New York on 9/11 has expanded significantly in the last five years as a result of a government program that pays for the bulk of the damage, a Bush administration report said yesterday. 
  But the report said there was virtually no coverage available for most of the damage that would come from a nuclear attack or one carried out with chemical or biological weapons.
The report, issued in Washington by the Treasury Department on behalf of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, said that 58 percent of American companies now had terrorism coverage, up from 27 percent in 2003 and almost none immediately after the 9/11 attacks. The cost of coverage, the report said, has also dropped sharply. 
  Under the program, created by Congress in 2002, the government would now pay most of the cost of losses from an attack, up to $100 billion. The insurers would be required to pay the first $25 billion from a nonnuclear attack or attacks in 2006 and 10 percent of additional losses up to $100 billion. That is up from $5 billion and 10 percent of additional losses when the program began. 
  Insurers are required to provide coverage for most terrorist attacks. They are not required to provide coverage for nuclear and biological attacks, except for policies covering injury or death to workers, and for fires that occur after an attack. They say the potential for loss from a nuclear attack is unfathomable. 
  The report, which had been ordered by Congress when it renewed the program in 2005, did not draw any formal conclusions and not did indicate whether the Bush administration favored extending the program or permitting it to expire at the end of 2007. That was in contrast to a Treasury Department report in June 2005 that led to a sharp increase in the share to be paid by insurers in 2006. The amount has been rising since the program began. 
  In a letter to Congress, Henry M. Paulson Jr., the secretary of the Treasury and chairman of the President's Working Group, said that the industry was in ''a better position now'' than immediately after the World Trade Center attacks to provide terrorism insurance. 
  The program was aimed at stabilizing the private insurance market for terrorism coverage, and Mr. Paulson said it had been successful. 
  After the World Trade Center attack, all but a handful of insurers refused to sell coverage for terrorist attacks. Those willing to provide coverage sold limited amounts at extremely high prices. 
  Mr. Paulson noted that the government program was not intended to be permanent, but he did not suggest, as the insurance industry had feared, that the program be ended.
  The report ''is not as harsh or ideological as we thought it might be,'' said Joel Wood, a lobbyist for the Council of Insurance Agents and Brokers.
  Robert P. Hartwig, the chief economist of the Insurance Information Institute, said the industry was still unable to go it alone without government backing.
  ''Too much about an attack remains uncertain,'' Mr. Hartwig said. ''And that makes the long-term involvement of the government in terrorism insurance absolutely essential.''
  On the issue of a nuclear or chemical attack, the report said that because of the enormous scale of possible loss, there was ''little potential for future market development'' by private insurers. No insurance structure or process exists for dealing with most nuclear or chemical attacks, government officials and industry experts said. The insurers say damage in a nuclear attack could be hundreds of billions of dollars. 
  State regulators require insurers to provide coverage in any circumstances -- including a nuclear attack -- for policies covering personal injury or worker deaths, and for fires that occur after an attack. By some estimates, that represents about 25 percent to 30 percent of the coverage the insurers provide.That is why the insurers say they must have government backing. The cost of covering just a portion of the possible losses from a terrorist attack, they say, could bankrupt them. 
  The insurers and the government say there is no plan providing a structure or process to pay for the bulk of possible losses from a nuclear or chemical attack. 
  The insurers refuse to provide the coverage. ''The government has to step in to provide this coverage,'' said Leigh Ann Pusey, the chief operating officer of the American Insurance Association in Washington. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 3, 2006


End of Document