Terror task forces ill-prepared for job, report says
USA TODAY
May 14, 2003, Wednesday,
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 628 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Critical aspects of the nation's anti-terrorism strategy lack necessary resources, and law enforcement officials believe the centerpiece of the effort -- a network of 66 federally managed anti-terrorism units -- is "inadequate" to investigate threats, a new report concludes.
The 102-page report from the Justice Department and the Police Executive Research Forum found that the government's joint terrorism task forces are understaffed and need important analytical expertise to conduct terrorism investigations.
State and local law enforcement officials also raised long-standing concerns that they still were not being fully briefed by federal authorities about terrorist threats.
"We are more than a year past the terrorist attacks, and I'm not alone when I say that local law enforcement executives do not feel like they are in the game," said Massachusetts Public Safety Secretary Edward Flynn, one of six co-authors of the report now being circulated among law enforcement authorities.
Flynn, a former police executive in Arlington, Va., said in the report that local law enforcement "often presumes that federal agencies are withholding detailed, relevant and important information. We need to work on issues of mutual trust so that we can share what information there is, while retaining necessary security and integrity."
Officials first raised the communications problems with the FBI immediately after the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Police executives said at the time that the FBI was not sharing information about threats and intelligence gathered in their jurisdictions.
The FBI responded by hiring a police chief to address local law enforcement concerns. Within a year after the attacks, the bureau also had established the 66 task forces to investigate regional terrorist threats.
The task forces are managed by FBI field office directors. They draw their members from local police agencies, state law enforcement and federal offices.
FBI Director Robert Mueller has described the task forces as "the heart" of the government's war on terrorism. In a speech last week, he said the collaboration shows how the bureau was working with local authorities "as never before."
But the report concluded that often too few local police officers are assigned to the investigative units because municipal executives believe they will get "little back from their investment."
"The task forces are the best thing we have going," said Chris Smecker, the FBI's top agent in North Carolina. "There is a need for more participation at the local level. But there should be a way for police departments to be compensated for the officers who are assigned" to the terrorism units.
Smecker's task force includes 23 members from 16 agencies. Nearly half are FBI agents. He said lingering communications problems are often due to the logistics of establishing contacts with large numbers of local agencies within reach of regional FBI offices.
In North Carolina, for example, there are at least 450 police and sheriff's departments.
The report also said the sharing of intelligence is complicated by widespread confusion about how sensitive information should be distributed to police executives who may not have the security clearances required by the federal government.
At least some of the communications concerns were expected to be addressed in elaborate government-sponsored terrorism exercises staged this week in Seattle and Chicago. In those cities, authorities are testing the emergency responses to radiological and biological attacks.
Carl Peed, director of the Justice Department's Community Oriented Policing Services office, said the report sets the tone for how law enforcement should operate in the aftermath of Sept. 11.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, AP; We are more prepared than a year past the terrorist attacks, and I'm not alone when I say that local law enforcement executives do not feel like they are in the game." -- Massachusetts Public Safety Secretary Edward Flynn

Load-Date: May 14, 2003


End of Document