TERRORISM STRIKES HOME AUTHORITIES SCRUTINIZE WHITE SUPREMACISTS
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 21, 1995, Friday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. B1
Length: 431 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


OKLAHOMA CITY (AP)-Violent elements of the white supremacist movement are coming under scrutiny as investigators look for suspects in the devastating bombing here.
"You've got people who know how to make these bombs and they hate the federal government," said Danny Welch, a longtime hate group investigator for the monitoring network Klanwatch, based in Montgomery, Ala.
A Mississippi lawyer, meanwhile, said today that one of the two men in the FBI's composite sketches resembles a supremacist he knows. A Florida segregationist agrees. But both cautioned that does not prove the bomber's identity.
Previously, drug traders have been among those suggested as suspects because the Alfred Murrah Federal Building housed a Drug Enforcement Administration office. Also, officials have received calls from people claiming responsibility on behalf of various Muslim groups.
The FBI has not identified any group as a suspect in the case.
And President Clinton cautioned Thursday, "We should not stereotype anybody," while adding that the bombing was "an attack on the United States, our way of life, everything we believe in."
A subtheme of some in the white supremacist movement for years has been violent distrust of and resistance to the federal government, notably agencies such as the Internal Revenue Service and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, both of which had offices in the building.
Federal agents and heavily armed separatists have shot each other in gunfights in Washington state in 1984, Idaho in 1992 and other places.
Welch noted that the ATF has been involved in the arrests of hate group extremists on weapons charges in Michigan, Montana and elsewhere. He knew of no bombings attributed to such groups.
Other factors, too, lead to suspicion, Welch said.
An Oklahoma white supremacist, Richard Wayne Snell, who was executed in Arkansas on Wednesday night hours after the bombing threatened the governor in a final statement, saying, "look over your shoulder, death is on the way."
The day of the bombing was also the second anniversary of the raid by federal agents on the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas.
Two white supremacists said today that an FBI sketch of a square-faced, brown-haired man in one FBI sketch resembles a fellow supremacist.
"It does," said Richard Barrett, a lawyer in Learned, Miss., and head of a group that advocates segregation.
Still, he noted the "almost generic-looking" appearances of both suspects in the sketches and said federal agents were involved in "an excursion into fantasy land."
He said he last saw the man about two years ago.

Graphic

 
Graphic composite- "Bombing Suspects" - AP / Wm J. Castello, R. Kowlessar

Load-Date: April 21, 1995


End of Document