Terrorism won't be sole security focus
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 10, 2000, Sunday


Copyright 2000 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL;
Length: 774 words
Byline: By Derek JensenDeseret News staff writer
Body


Eleven Israelis, five guerrillas and one police officer were killed during a siege at the 1972 Olympics in Munich.
Two people were killed when a bomb exploded in Centennial Park during the 1996 Games in Atlanta.
In March, a plot to bomb a nuclear reactor 14 miles southwest of Sydney, Australia, was discovered and rumors continue to circulate that Saudi militant Osama bin Laden and his supporters might target this year's Summer Games there.
But despite some of the Olympic terrorism talk, the focus isn't hostages or hand grenades among top brass in the Utah Olympic Public Safety Command who will be heading to Sydney over the next couple of weeks.
"You think Olympics -- terrorism and so on -- but it's Olympics: having meals, finding parking places," said command executive director Christopher Bellavita.
Bellavita and more than 30 other members of the command are headed to Sydney to work with and observe the city's Olympic security efforts.
In an interview with the Deseret News, Bellavita and David Tubbs, who is overseeing Olympic security for the Department of Public Safety, declined to discuss specific anti-terrorism plans for Sydney or Salt Lake City. Utah Department of Public Safety Director Craig Dearden has said in the past the nuclear and military facilities that surround Olympic venues in Utah could be logical targets for terrorists.
"Our objective is to stop things from happening," said Tubbs, who worked with the FBI during the bombing at the 1996 Summer Games. "We're trying to address anything that might come up."
In the Albert, New Zealand, home where a possible plot to attack a Sydney nuclear reactor was discovered, authorities found copies of security tactics and chains of command typically used at large sporting events.
Bellavita said that incident "underscores the importance of keeping public safety plans quiet."
New South Wales Police Commissioner Peter Ryan, who oversees all security for the 2000 Summer Games, recently told reporters, "There are no major threats of a security type against the Olympic Games at this time."
"Daily, we reassess that information and hourly we issue a threat assessment to our internal staff dealing with the security of the Olympic Games," Ryan added. "As far as we're aware, there is nothing that we can see of a serious nature that's going to bring the current threat level above low, as we see it at the moment."
Terrorism will be 2 percent of the security focus in 2002, Tubbs and Bellavita said. The other 98 percent will center around more mundane, everyday issues like traffic flow or supplying food and clothing to the 3,500 sworn officers providing Olympic security.
The 2000 Summer Games, from Sept. 15 to Oct. 1, will provide the final crash course for the Utah command. After Sydney, less than 500 days will remain until opening ceremonies for the 2002 Winter Games.
Bellavita compared Utah's preparation for the Olympics to a whirlpool -- the closer in you get, the faster things go.
"When we come back from Sydney we'll see the whirlpool," Bellavita said.
Venue commanders will fine tune their security plans according to their experiences in Sydney, and the command will be hustling to find the remaining resources needed for their current security arrangements.
Bellavita said the command has 60 percent of its needed resources, "with a really positive outlook for another 30 percent."
"We could do the Olympics tomorrow if we had to," Bellavita said, "but we don't want to get overconfident, so I want to look at where we're behind."
The trick during the Olympics will be making the venues safe while maintaining the resources to respond to routine police and fire calls.
Then there's the media. In past Olympics, international and national journalists arrived six months before the Games.
"We figure around August of 2001 they're going to start coming in," said public safety spokesman Chris Kramer.
Finding stories to justify large expense accounts to editors back home will likely have reporters from all over the world sniffing out stories typically connected to Utah, such as polygamy, Kramer said.
"My counterparts in Georgia said they fought the Civil War all over again every day for six months, because that's what they were known for," Kramer said.
Salt Lake City Police Chief Rick Dinse witnessed the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics firsthand and said he believes apprehension over the Olympics in Salt Lake City will fade away once the Games begin.
"You will find that the public is going to react very positively to it," Dinse said. "When the time came, it was probably one of the most enjoyable experiences Angelenos had had up to that time."
E-mail: djensen@desnews.com  

Load-Date: September 10, 2000


End of Document