TERRORISM SUSPECTS MAY BE CONNECTED 9900100864:
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
December 30, 1999, Thursday


Copyright 1999 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Front Page; Pg. a1
Length: 513 words
Byline: WILSON RING, Associated Press writer
Body


BURLINGTON, Vt. -- A Canadian woman and an Algerian man arrested at border entries in Vermont and Washington state are members of the same cell of an Algerian terrorist organization, federal prosecutors said today.
The prosecutors made the link before asking a magistrate to continue to deny bail for Lucia Garofalo until her trial.
"This is a defendant who is working to assist terrorist organizations," Assistant U.S. Attorney Tristram Coffin said in court.
In court documents, prosecutors said Garofalo and Ahmed Ressam were in the same cell of the GIA. GIA is the French abbreviation for the Armed Islamic Group, the fundamentalist faction held responsible for some of the bloodiest attacks in Algeria's nearly eight-year civil war. It has also been blamed for bombings in France in 1995 and 1996.
Ressam faces charges of trying to smuggle explosives and timing devices into Washington from Canada on Dec. 14.
Garofalo was arrested five days later at a Vermont border crossing with an Algerian man. She was linked before today to what prosecutors described as a terrorist group operating in Europe and Algeria, but not to Ressam.
Deputy U.S. Attorney David Kirby made no direct links between Garofalo and Ressam other than their alleged membership in the same terrorist cell.
The prosecutor said the information he used in his court filing came from a foreign government, which he did not identify.
The document says that Garofalo's husband is Yamin Rachek, an Algerian national who was expelled from Canada after presenting a false passport.
Rachek, who now lives in Italy, was arrested in London in 1996 for allegedly using an altered Greek passport. He also faces an outstanding arrest warrant in Germany for theft, authorities said.
Garofalo has sought unsuccessfully to persuade Canada to allow Rachek back into the country. In 1997, she allegedly arranged with a man named Said Atmani to buy her an airline ticket to travel to Germany and to hire a lawyer for her husband, Kirby said.
"The foreign government reports that Atmani is a documents forger for the GIA, a violent Algerian terrorist organization," Kirby wrote. "The foreign government also reports that at one time Atmani and Ahmed Ressam, the man recently arrested in the Seattle area, were roommates."
Kirby said that government reported that in 1997 it monitored a conversation between GIA members who spoke of a man living at the time in Germany whose Italian wife lived in Canada.
"The foreign government reports that these two members of the GIA are in the same cell of that organization as Ahmed Ressam, the man recently arrested" in Washington state, Kirby said in his court filing. The documents did not elaborate on how big the cell was.
Garofalo faces minor immigration charges. She and another man, Bouabide Chamchi, were arrested Dec. 19 at the remote border crossing at Beecher Falls.
Chamchi, an Algerian national, already has been ordered held without bail until his trail.
The arrests of Garofalo, 35, and Chamchi, 20, combined with the arrest a week earlier of Ressam have stirred fears of terrorist attacks.

Load-Date: December 30, 1999


End of Document