TERRORISM, AMERICAN STYLE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 22, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6B; EDITORIAL
Length: 347 words
Body


The alleged terrorist plot by a neo-Nazi group on the West Coast suggests how far right-wing extremists are willing to go to stir up racial problems in this country. The Federal Bureau of Investigation says it foiled plans by the Fourth Reich Skinheads to bomb a black church in Los Angeles and kill several people. The targets included a rabbi and black figures, ranging from those prominent in the civil rights movement to Rodney King, the black motorist whose beating at the hands of Los Angeles police eventually touched off one of the most deadly and destructive urban riots in this century.  The FBI said it had to make the arrests immediately because some members of the group were getting ready to carry out its first killing. However, by moving in and making the arrests, the FBI says it might have exposed the identities of informers who uncovered the plot and who also have infiltrated other hate groups the agency is investigating.  The decision to act right away was wise. The agency would have come under heavy public criticism had it knowingly allowed a heinous bombing to occur.  Several people were arrested, and the agency says it seized a large arsenal of guns and pipe bombs.  The motive behind this bizarre plot was just as bizarre. The FBI says the group had hoped to "start a race war" by attacking and destroying a prominent black church in South Central Los Angeles in addition to killing prominent black figures.
This isn't the first time that hate groups have targeted minorities. But the scope of this plot should be a big concern for law enforcement officials.  The hope was that hate-crime legislation would put an end to this kind of lawlessness, but such laws probably have little impact on diseased minds.  Many Americans like to think of terrorism as a faraway problem, an instrument of left-wing foreigners. The plot uncovered by the FBI contradicts that assumption. Americans must speak out against this right-wing, U.S.-bred terrorism in the same way they frequently assail the left-wing violence that foreigners aim at this country and its interests.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document