Terror vs. the Third World
The New York Times
May 11, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 21, Column 4; Editorial Desk; Op-ed
Length: 703 words
Byline: By Pranay Gupte; Pranay Gupte is completing a book on political and economic development in the third world.
Body


In the fight against terrorism, there can be no such thing as nonalignment. Terrorism is a cancer that has afflicted developing countries as much as it has hurt the West.
Even as the leaders of the industrial democracies were meeting in Tokyo last week to discuss terrorism, bombs went off in Sri Lanka, killing some 15 people in Colombo. The authorities blamed Tamil separatists -Marxist-led terrorists who have long been financed by Libya. Terrorist violence cropped up again last week in India's strategic Punjab state, where Sikh separatists - also reportedly helped by Libya and others - want their own nation. In virtually every region of the third world, there is evidence of meddling by Libya or by the other major patrons of terrorism, Syria and Iran, who particularly target governments that do not subscribe to their brand of radicalism or who are sympathetic to democracy and Washington.
It is time for the leading industrial nations most concerned with terrorism to join hands with like-minded governments in the third world. The fight against terrorism has to be a global fight, not merely one designed to protect Western interests. The consensus on terrorism reached in Tokyo may tacitly encourage some third world states to stiffen their own approach against terrorism, but it will need a fresh infusion of resources from the West to encourage hesitant governments to accelerate their own domestic efforts against foreign-supported terrorism.
Westerners are often puzzled as to why third world governments do not speak out more forcefully against international terrorism. In the aftermath of the American bombing of Libya, for instance, third world leaders predictably rallied behind Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and excoriated the United States. Their rhetoric reflected the third world's obsession with two shibboleths - solidarity and nationalism. The rhetoric was also partly explained by the fear that Colonel Qaddafi evokes and by the wish not to be seen as siding with the Reagan Administration.
Yet third world leaders now must choose. They can remain victims of their own timorousness, or they can band together against the kind of revolutionary terrorism that Colonel Qaddafi and others have foisted on the world's poor countries.
The consequences of Libyan, Syrian and Iranian interference in third world states go beyond the violence that it generates. Such support of terrorist groups forces many third world governments to be more authoritarian with their populations. In Sri Lanka, for example, the freely elected, pro-Western Government has had to assume stern emergency powers to counter Tamil terrorism.
Moreover, fighting terrorism requires stepped-up expenditures for military and paramilitary forces -monies that most poor third world countries can ill afford. And because combating terrorism requires increased reliance on military measures, the center of political gravity often moves toward the armed forces.
It may be unrealistic to assume that the third world's leaders will suddenly isolate Colonel Qaddafi and other sponsors of terrorism, but that is exactly what they must attempt to do if they are to protect themselves and the fragile stability of their nations. A strong stand against terrorism need not imply jettisoning the notions of third world solidarity and nationalism. These leaders must remember that their backyards will continue to be the bloodstained battle zone for terrorist activities, even if those activities are largely aimed at Western interests. Moreover, third world countries that do not cooperate more forthrightly in the fight against international terrorism may well find that the much-needed capital and technology they get from the West will shrink as a result.
The nonaligned movement, whose leaders will soon hold a summit meeting in Zimbabwe, can lead the way in issuing an unqualified call against terrorism. The industrialized countries should encourage this effort, with more money, better exchanges of intelligence and stronger political support. But in the end, it is up to the nonaligned leaders to mobilize third world support for international law-enforcement agencies cracking down on terrorist networks that find havens in their own backyards.


End of Document