Terrorism bill gets teeth
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 1, 1996, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 502 words
Byline: Compiled from Tribune wires
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Administration and congressional officials Wednesday night announced they had reached agreement on the outlines of legislation that would give police broader wiretapping authority, tighten airport security and authorize other new tools to fight terrorism.
The details of the legislation have yet to be worked out, but White House Chief of Staff Leon E. Panetta and key Republicans were optimistic that an agreement could be nailed down and passed before Congress begins a monthlong recess at week's end.
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., said the measure could come to a vote in the Senate today or Friday.
Wage deal reached
WASHINGTON - House and Senate negotiators struck a tentative agreement Wednesday clearing the way for final congressional approval of legislation raising the minimum wage and cutting taxes on businesses.
The deal, which House negotiators have approved, would include a $ 5,000 credit to defray adoption expenses, said House Ways and Means Chairman Bill Archer, R-Texas.
Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., said Democrats would reluctantly accept an Oct. 1 effective date for an increase in the minimum wage. Kennedy had been pushing for Labor Day, Sept. 2.
The wage would increase, initially, from $ 4.25 per hour to $ 4.75 and, on July 1, 1997, to $ 5.15.  Saudis to split costs
WASHINGTON - The United States and Saudi Arabia will split the $ 200 million cost of relocating 4,000 U.S. troops to prevent further terrorist attacks, the Pentagon announced on Wednesday.
Some 4,000 men and women involved in the air operations near Dhahran will be moved to the isolated Prince Sultan Air Base located near Al Kharj, about 50 miles southeast of Riyadh, a Pentagon spokesman said.  Tuition key to alien bill
WASHINGTON - Republicans at odds over an immigration bill are waiting to hear whether a key colleague - Sen. Arlen Specter - will agree to a compromise that would allow states to charge tuition to illegal immigrant children in public schools.
Under the compromise, school districts would send bills that could amount to $ 5,000 or more to the families of new enrollees who cannot prove they are in the United States legally, congressional aides said.  Water bill moves forward
WASHINGTON - Lawmakers worked out an agreement Wednesday to provide tens of millions of dollars to upgrade municipal water systems and, for the first time, require that citizens be told what contaminants are in their tap water.
Both chambers were expected to move quickly to approve the legislation, perhaps as early as today, and send it to the White House. President Clinton has indicated he will sign it.  Buchanan's price
WASHINGTON - Pat Buchanan laid down three conditions Wednesday before he would endorse Bob Dole for president: The Republican party platform, Dole's vice presidential running mate and the tone of the convention orators must meet his approval.
Buchanan - the only Republican primary contestant who hasn't endorsed Dole - also vowed to carry his fight over the abortion issue to the convention.

Notes

IN BRIEF NEWS OF WASHINGTON

Load-Date: August 3, 1996


End of Document