Terror's cost arrives in inflated premiums
The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD)
July 10, 2003 Thursday


Copyright 2003 Dolan Media Newswires
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 485 words
Byline: Ezra Fieser
Body


In an effort to keep the rising cost of insurance from trickling down to tourists and businesses, Baltimore officials said they are carefully managing policies that do not require terrorism insurance.
In the first batch of policies to be renewed since the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks, Baltimore is experiencing double-digit premium increases due to the inclusion of terrorism insurance.
The city Board of Estimates yesterday approved five policy renewals. Three of the policies' premiums rose by 10 percent or more.
Premiums for the three policies -- which insure fine art, marine vessels and machinery -- total $440,919, an increase of roughly $70,000 from previous policy rates. The majority of the cost increases are from the inclusion of terrorism insurance and a general "hardening" of the insurance market, said city Risk Management Officer Ron Hartman.
"Unfortunately, there is no formula for terrorism insurance. … At this point in time, most insureds are at the mercy of the insurer," he said.
It's a slightly better scenario, however, than last year. In late fall, when the city renewed its property insurance policy, terrorism insurance was so costly the city could not include it. The $2.3 million bill represented a 311 percent increase from the previous policy.
But with Congress approving a terrorism insurance bill, the federal government now acts as a backstop for claims, allowing carriers to reduce premiums. The renewed policies are proof the market has not flattened yet.
For instance, the last time Baltimore took out a 3-year policy to insure its fine art holdings, including those at the Baltimore Museum of Art and Walters Art Museum, it paid about $150,000. The renewed $300 million policy will cost the city $174,654 -- a 15 percent hike.
And the cost of insuring the city's marine vessels is up 13 percent, mainly because the tourist attraction Constellation is considered a potential target for terrorists.
"Any type of venture that has a large number of people in one given area creates a tremendous risk and could be a possible target," Hartman said.
Government officials and insurance analysts have said that costly terrorism insurance premiums are typically passed on to consumers or business owners. Former Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill told Congress "increased premiums … will be passed on to consumers in the form of higher product prices, transportation costs, energy costs and reduced production."
But Hartman said it is unlikely that consumers will be paying more to visit the Walters or climb aboard the Constellation.
"This is the city's cost to do business," he said. "What we will try to do is reduce wherever possible our expenditures in claims by managing them much better. That way we don't pass it on to consumers."
Hartman said the city has hired third-party administrators to handle medical and general liability claims. He said money can be saved on auto liability as well.

Load-Date: July 10, 2003


End of Document