TERRORISM IN U.S. LOW AS ATTACKS ABROAD RISE
The New York Times
December 6, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 1815 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4
Body


Even as terrorist attacks on Americans abroad increase, Federal law-enforcement officials say the incidence of such violence in the United States has remained low.
American society is ill-protected, and the vulnerabilities of its public buildings, military bases, power stations, water supplies and other facilities worry some counterterrorism specialists. But so far, they observe, the political conflicts that have fostered attacks elsewhere, including numerous assaults on Americans overseas, have rarely intruded into this country, nor have most domestic political and ethnic clashes generated highly organized terrorism.
''There is always the possibility of a spectacular or two,'' said Brian Jenkins, a specialist on terrorism for the Rand Corporation. ''But I don't think we are likely to see a sustained campaign. Nor are we going to see a level of international terrorism like what France experiences.''
Concern about domestic terrorism has risen most recently because of three arson and bombing attacks this year on offices of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, including a fire in its Washington office last weekend. But the overall problem remains relatively small. The Record for U.S.: Good In Recent Years In 1984 one person was killed in the United States and none were injured in 15 incidents classified by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as terrorism. An additional 25 bombing and arson attacks were aimed at abortion clinics, resulting in extensive property damage but no deaths. So far in 1985 there have been 15 incidents of terrorism that have killed two people and injured four, official figures show. Seven of the 15 have been attacks on abortion clinics, which have caused no injuries, according to the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
Officials say most of the terrorism in recent years has come from four kinds of organizations: Puerto Rican separatists, Jewish militants, left-wing radicals and right-wing survivalists or neo-Nazis. Some of these groups have been infiltrated and placed under close surveillance by the F.B.I. and local police departments, which report having thwarted more attacks than have been carried out.
''The untold story is not the number of incidents but the number of preventions,'' said Oliver Revell, the bureau's executive assistant director for investigations. Plots have been uncovered to bomb the Old Executive Office Building adjacent to the White House, the Naval Academy and various corporation headquarters, he said.
Last May the bureau arrested a group of Sikhs who were charged with planning to assassinate Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India on a visit to the United States. Two of the Sikhs had reportedly been trained at a privately run weapons camp in Alabama, one of numerous camps that operate legally across the country.
Mr. Revell said that Iranian groups in the United States, clustered around four different factions, had also been prevented from carrying out violence against political enemies. ''They have an infrastructure designed to collect intelligence on adversaries to the Ayatollah Khomeini,'' he said, and to obtain military technology clandestinely from this country.
Two groups planned to plant a bomb in a Seattle movie theater, according to a Congressional source. The bureau foiled this and other plots by a method other than arrest, Mr. Revell said, but he declined to provide details. 'U.S. Is Probably The Most Vulnerable' ''The U.S. is probably the most vulnerable to terrorism of any country in the world,'' the F.B.I. official continued. ''Our borders are open. Once they are in the country, there are no identity checks. They can travel freely. They can enroll in colleges, and the Government can pay their way. The U.S. is a country that is virtually impossible to police.''
On the other hand, Mr. Revell added: ''I think we're making the United States a very hard target. We have penetrated and prosecuted virtually every terrorist group that has operated in the U.S., using the law. That has given rise to the concern that the United States is not such an easy target.''
Stephen S. Trott, Assistant Attorney General for the criminal division of the Justice Department, cited the suppression of Armenian terrorism as a victory for the F.B.I. Others give some of the credit to the Los Angeles Police Department. In any event, since a series of attacks on Turkish diplomats in 1981-82, arrests have ended the incidents, and none were recorded in 1983-84, Mr. Trott said. ''They have stopped the Armenian terrorists cold,'' he declared.
Similarly, the F.B.I. said that Croatian terrorism, by advocates of an independent Croatian state, had been mostly ended after a spate of violence against Yugoslav Airlines and other facilities in the late 1970's and early 1980's. No incidents have been recorded since 1982.
Vigorous moves have also been made against right-wing extremists who arm themselves with automatic weapons and preach white supremacy and anti-Semitism. One such group, called the Order, has been accused of assassinating Alan Berg, a Jewish talk show host in Denver, in 1984 and of plotting to overthrow the Government.
''These are smaller groups and much more violence-prone'' than the Ku Klux Klan or the American Nazis, said Mr. Jenkins of Rand. ''They're dangerous. They'll kill. They have a lot of weapons.'' He said that some members of the Aryan Nations, the Sword and Covenant of the Lord and other groups are former convicts who formed their organizations in prison.
About a year ago, for example. the Treasury Department said, four members of a group calling itself the Posse Comitatus were arrested in Minnesota and sentenced to terms ranging from 5 to 26 years for the manufacture and possession of machine guns, silencers, hand grenades and other weapons and for making threats against Internal Revenue Service officers. Less Success With Jewish Groups There has been less success against Jewish groups, which have come under suspicion in five terrorist attacks this year that have caused two deaths and four injuries. Several groups. the Jewish Defense League, Jewish Defense Action and the Jewish Defense Organization, have reportedly been investigated in attacks on former Nazis and Arab-American groups.
On Aug. 15, Tschirin Soobzokov, purportedly a former Nazi who lived in Patterson, N.J., was killed when he opened the door of his house. A passerby was injured. An F.B.I. spokesman said that Mr. Soobzokov had been harassed since 1977 by the Jewish Defense League.
On Sept. 6, Elmars Sprogis of Brentwood, N.Y., who had been cleared in court of charges that he had been a police official responsible for guarding Jews in Nazi-occupied Latvia, escaped injury when a bomb attached to his door went off. A passerby was hurt. A message was sent to Newsday saying: ''J.D.L. Nazi War Criminal. Never Again.''
The American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee, which combats stereotypes of Arabs in the news and entertainment media, has come under numerous threats and three attacks. An attempted bombing injured two police bomb squad members in Boston last summer, and a bombing in Santa Ana, Calif., after the hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro last October killed the committee's regional director, Alex Odeh.
At a news conference today, James Abourezk, the former Democratic Senator from South Dakota who is national chairman of the committee, declared his group's determination to stay in business and its decision to hire a private security agency to conduct an investigation. He said that he would meet Friday with the F.B.I. Director, William H. Webster, to discuss evidence that he had presented.
Mr. Abourezk handed reporters photocopies of telegrams sent to the committee after last weekend's fire in Washington. Although they were signed with names of leaders of the Jewish Defense League, he said that he doubted they were authentic. One, sent from Brooklyn, read: ''Sorry we missed you. Hope to be more precise next time.'' Another from Moorestown, N.J., said, ''We have Bassam Shaka's legs.'' Bassam Shaka, a former Mayor of the West Bank city of Nablus, lost both legs in a 1980 car bombing by Israeli Jews who are now serving prison terms.
At his news conference, Mr. Abourezk also urged American leaders to denounce the terrorists.
''We believe they should be stopped for many reasons,'' he said. ''not only because of the loss of life and property which has already taken place, but because we do not want to see the United States turned into another Ulster, or Beirut, where violence only begets more violence.''
Legislative and investigative steps to combat terrorism have frequently provoked debate over civil liberties violations and political bias in law enforcement, with some Americans accusing the F.B.I. of playing politics by declining to exercise jurisdiction over a certain case and others worrying about excessive surveillance if it does. Civil Liberties And Terrorism Mr. Revell of the F.B.I. said he was sensitive to the civil liberties issue. ''We can't allow terrorism to become a mechanism to diminish our democratic process,'' he asserted. Whatever steps are taken ''must be done very carefully and with consideration of constitutional guarantees,'' he said. Of its 9,000 agents, the bureau now devotes the equivalent of 500 agents a year to fighting terrorism, Mr. Revell said.
The Reagan Administration proposed legislation last year that would have made it a crime to provide support to certain foreign governments and organizations listed by the Secretary of State. The bill, widely assailed as a violation of rights to free association and expression, died in Congress. But its introduction heightened the wariness among civil libertarians.
When abortion clinics were being bombed and calls were heard for the F.B.I. to investigate, the American Civil Liberties Union supported the bureau's decision to stay out of the cases.
''Opening up a domestic terrorism investigation in the abortion clinic area would have said, 'Go out and investigate and establish all the contacts and persons who may be in some relationship with whoever you're investigating,' '' said Jerry Berman, chief legislative counsel of the A.C.L.U. ''Instead of trying to focus on a specific individual and a specific crime, you would have been saying, 'Let's target the anti-abortion movement and try to infiltrate it.' ''
The investigations were done by the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Firearms and Tobacco, which is widely regarded as having some of the best explosives and arson laboratories and technicians in the country. The F.B.I. stayed out because the attacks appeared to have been carried out by clusters of unrelated individuals who were not part of any organization. Twelve people have been arrested and convicted and 23 of the 37 cases have been solved, according to a Bureau of Alcohol spokesman.


End of Document