Terrorism trial promises to be eye-opener UI student faces charges of providing material support to terrorists by operating Web sites
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 12, 2004 Monday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2004 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 1832 words
Byline: Betsy Z. Russell, Staff writer
Dateline: BOISE
Body


From international terrorism to freedom of speech to the new realities of
 the Internet age, the trial of Sami Omar Al-Hussayen that begins Tuesday will
 bring big issues to a Boise courtroom.
 The 34-year-old University of Idaho graduate student is charged with
 providing material support to terrorism by operating Internet sites for
 Islamic groups that advocated jihad, or holy war, in Israel, Chechnya and
 other places. He is also accused of transferring hundreds of thousands of
 dollars through six bank accounts to a suspect charity.
 Al-Hussayen, a Saudi citizen, maintains his innocence, and his attorneys
 argue that he's being targeted for expressing his religious and political
 beliefs.
 ''I think that the theory of this prosecution is new," said Scott McKay,
 one of Al-Hussayen's attorneys. ''I don't think that someone has ever been
 charged with providing material support to terrorism on the basis of their
 association with Web sites."
Tom Moss, U.S. attorney for Idaho, said, ''As these kinds of cases go, it
 has some unique characteristics -  unique in that this case involves services
 probably somewhat different from the other cases where the same charges have
 been brought, in that we're dealing with the use of computers, the use of Web
 sites, all those sorts of things."
 Al-Hussayen faces charges of providing and concealing material support and
 resources to terrorists through his Internet and financial activities;
 conspiracy related to those activities; conspiring to help raise funds for
 Hamas, the Palestinian terrorist organization, through links on two Internet
 sites he operated, and seven counts of visa fraud and four of false
 statements.
 The charges each carry maximum sentences ranging from five to 25 years in
 prison, and fines that could total millions of dollars.
 Moss said he thought the fact that the Saudi government is paying for
 Al-Hussayen's defense also was unique. Al-Hussayen was studying in the United
 States on a Saudi government scholarship. The Saudi Embassy, in a press
 release last spring, said it would do the same for any of its citizens who
 were detained, and that its officials were ''astonished" that anyone would
 question that.
 David Nevin, Al-Hussayen's lead attorney, said the six-week trial will be
 an eye-opener for Idahoans.
 ''We of course are going to have the opportunity to learn something about
 another culture, and to learn something about world politics and about the
 religion of Islam," Nevin said. ''And I think we're going to have an
 opportunity to explore our prejudices and our fears, and to see whether we can
 sort out the illusions from the realities."
 The case, he said, also deals with freedom of expression. ''So we're going
 to learn a lot about what it means to be an American on a number of scores."
 The government maintains that it's not prosecuting Al-Hussayen for speech,
 it's prosecuting him for criminal conduct. The Web sites he set up and
 operated helped recruit people to participate in terrorism, prosecutors said
 in court documents, so he was providing personnel, communications equipment,
 financial support and services, and expert advice and assistance to
 terrorists.
 ''The evidence at trial will include the testimony of the personnel whom
 Mr. Al-Hussayen provided: young Muslim men who responded to Mr. Al-Hussayen's
 recruitment campaign by traveling to foreign lands to take up arms and engage
 in violent operations against the non-Muslims living there," the government
 stated in a court filing last month.
 It added, ''It is irrelevant how Mr. Al-Hussayen procured individuals to
 support the piracy. Mr. Al-Hussayen would have violated the statute by
 providing such personnel regardless of whether he paid them as mercenaries,
 persuaded them with rhetoric, or induced them with the promise of eternal
 salvation."
 The defense said in its court documents that there's been no suggestion
 that Al-Hussayen paid mercenaries. Instead, defense attorneys suggested that
 the ''criminal conduct" the government is alleging, with regard to setting up
 and maintaining Web sites and an e-mail group, is what allowed Al-Hussayen to
 express himself through free speech.
 They drew an analogy: The First Amendment right to free speech would
 protect someone who stood on a street corner holding a sign supporting Muslims
 fighting in Chechnya or Palestine. But if the government could prosecute that
 person not for their message, but for purchasing the materials for the sign,
 putting it together, and holding it up, their right to protest and proclaim
 their message would be meaningless.
 ''Let us not forget, advocacy, even of illegal action, is protected by the
 First Amendment," the defense attorneys wrote.
 Moss said First Amendment issues are up to the judge, not the jury. ''The
 jury deals with the facts," he said.
 Moss said ''some very interesting people" will testify at the trial. Some
 information about those who will testify has been sealed, as have significant
 portions of the record in the case.
 Some of the evidence in the case includes classified information, which
 even the defense attorneys can't see unless they have security clearances.
 Even then, they can view it only in a specially secured room in the Boise
 federal courthouse known as a ''secure classified information facility."
 That's caused some problems in this case because huge volumes of evidence
 are in Arabic, and the defense's translator, after months of waiting, still
 hasn't received security clearance. Last month, U.S. District Judge Edward
 Lodge urged the government to declassify the evidence so the defense can
 review it before the trial, but as of Friday, that still hadn't happened.
 Susan Dente Ross, a Washington State University communications professor
 who wrote an article on secrecy in terrorism trials in the current issue of
 the Idaho Law Review, said this case, like other terrorism cases in recent
 years, raises some troubling questions. Extensive secrecy can have an impact
 on the right to fair trials and on other constitutional rights, she said.
 ''Without getting overly legalistic about it, the fact is we don't know
 what material support of terrorism is, and it's a factual determination in
 each case," Ross said. ''We don't know where the lines are, and when you
 don't know where the lines are, a prudent person backs away."
 That means free speech is chilled, she said.
 The U.S. Supreme Court has given some indication that ''speech on the
 Internet is every bit as much speech as the content of a newspaper," Ross
 said.
 ''I guess I wish I had greater optimism that the trial and its outcome will
 renew my faith in the American justice system, and I guess I'm just not very
 optimistic about that," she said. ''I see both the procedural safeguards in
 the law and the public opinion that protect the right of the outlier in
 American society … falling away, and I don't see a huge wellspring of
 concern, saying, 'Wait, we cannot do this to Sami Al-Hussayen or we're doing
 it to ourselves."'
 The defense also has argued that Al-Hussayen is being prosecuted
 selectively because of his religion and national origin. They argue that the
 operators of Web sites supporting the Irish Republican Army and Jewish Defense
 League are engaged in similar speech, but aren't being prosecuted.
 Thus far, Judge Lodge has rejected all motions to dismiss the charges
 before the trial based on those and other objections, but many of the issues
 will come up again during the trial.
 Al-Hussayen has been jailed since his arrest in February 2003, though a
 federal magistrate earlier ordered him released with a series of conditions.
 He then was jailed on a separate immigration hold because immigration
 authorities started deportation proceedings against him after his arrest.
 Al-Hussayen's wife, Maha, and young children returned to Saudi Arabia
 voluntarily after being threatened with deportation.
 The trial will begin with the selection of a jury.
 This sidebar appeared with the story:
 AL-HUSSAYEN TRIAL
 Key players:
 The defendant
 Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, 34, was a graduate student in computer science at
 the University of Idaho in Moscow when he was arrested last February and
 charged with visa fraud. Since then, additional charges of providing support
 to terrorism, operating Internet sites for Muslim groups and transferring
 funds have been added. Al-Hussayen, former president of the UI's Muslim
 Students Association, is a Saudi citizen who was nearing completion of his
 doctorate when he was arrested. He is married with three young sons.
 The judge
 U.S. District Judge Edward Lodge has been a judge in Idaho for 37 years and
 was appointed to the U.S. District Court bench in 1989. He presided over the
 Ruby Ridge trial and the Claude Dallas trial and is the judge for the Coeur
 d'Alene Basin natural resource damage case, the largest Superfund case ever to
 go to trial.
 Attorneys for the prosecution
 Kim R. Lindquist, assistant U.S. attorney for the District of Idaho,
 handled large-scale drug and violent crime cases before being assigned to
 international and domestic terrorism. His past cases include the Ruby Ridge
 prosecution.
 David B. Deitch, trial attorney with the counterterrorism section of the
 U.S. Department of Justice in Washington, D.C., is a former assistant U.S.
 attorney in the District of Columbia, a former associate in the Office of
 Independent Counsel, and a former assistant district attorney in New York
 City.
 Todd M. Hinnen, trial attorney with the computer crimes and intellectual
 property section of the U.S. Department of Justice in Washington, D.C.,
 formerly practiced with Davis Wright Tremaine in Seattle and clerked for the
 Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. An adjunct professor of law at American
 University, he has written on terrorists' use of the Internet to raise and
 move funds.
 Terry L. Derden, assistant U.S. attorney for the District of Idaho and
 chief of the criminal division, is a former assistant U.S. attorney and
 special assistant U.S. attorney in several districts and was assigned to the
 Office of the Deputy Attorney General to respond to the 1995 U.S. Senate
 hearings on Ruby Ridge.
 Attorneys for the defense
 David Nevin, senior partner at Nevin, Benjamin and McKay in Boise, is a
 prominent Idaho criminal defense lawyer whose past cases included defending
 Kevin Harris in the Ruby Ridge case. Harris was acquitted of all charges.
 Charles Peterson is an Idaho criminal defense lawyer who practices in
 association with the Spence Law Firm in Jackson, Wyo. His past cases include,
 with Gerry Spence, representing Randy Weaver in the Ruby Ridge case.   His law
 degree is from Gonzaga University.
 Scott McKay, partner in Nevin, Benjamin and McKay, is a criminal defense
 lawyer who has worked with Nevin on a number of high-profile cases. His law
 degree is also from Gonzaga.
 Joshua Dratel is a criminal defense lawyer from New York whose past cases
 included the first World Trade Center bombing. He also is currently
 representing an Australian citizen who is being held at Guantanamo Bay.

Notes

Betsy Z. Russell can be reached toll-free at (866) 336-2854, or by e-mail at bzrussell@Rmci.net.  

Graphic

 
Color photo; Al-Hussayen

Load-Date: April 17, 2004


End of Document