TERRORISM READINESS TESTED
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
October 27, 1999, Wednesday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1999 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: AREA/STATE,
Length: 536 words
Byline: Peter Bacque; Times-Dispatch Staff Writer
Body


Virginia is a "target-rich environment" for terrorism, the head of the state police told top Virginia government agency officials Monday.
While the state police have no reason to believe Virginia will be the target of an imminent terrorist attack, "we are not immune," Superintendent M. Wayne Huggins of the Virginia State Police told the governor's Domestic Preparedness Leadership Symposium at Fort Lee.
The Pentagon and the CIA headquarters in Northern Virginia, historic sites, such as Colonial Williamsburg, and military installations, such as the huge Norfolk Naval Base, clearly are potential targets, officials said.
But so are private industries, such as America Online in Dulles, and public facilities, such as the vital Woodrow Wilson Bridge across the Potomac River, Huggins said.
And objectives for terrorists, who may come from abroad or from around the corner, are not always so obvious.
When Sam Gonzales became the police chief in Oklahoma City, it was a quiet heartland community, he said.
Then on April 19, 1995, Timothy McVeigh blew up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building.
In the rush of an explosion, Oklahoma City became the scene of the largest criminal terrorist act in America, with 168 dead and 490 injured and damage costs reaching $ 650 million, said Gonzales, who now works with the FBI on terrorism preparedness.
The three-day gathering at Fort Lee is designed to give all state agencies a common understanding of terrorism's threat to Virginia and the resources the state has to combat it and to recover from an attack, said George Foresman, the deputy director of the state's Department of Emergency Services.
Through table-top exercises, officials from more than 20 state agencies also will work through some of the crises that might confront government and the public during a major terrorist act, officials said.
Lessons learned from the scenarios will be incorporated in the state's terrorism response plan.
"We're talking about planning and preparation that equates to deterrence," Deputy Secretary of Public Safety Bruce C. Morris told about 110 officials at the meeting.
Terrorism preparedness is a priority matter for Gov. Jim Gilmore, who is chairman of a congressional advisory panel assessing the nation's readiness to deal with attacks using nuclear, biological and chemical "weapons of mass destruction."
Increasingly, officials are adding computers to the list of mass-effect weapons.
Cyberterrorism allows the perpetrators to act with personal safety while potentially wreaking great destruction, Huggins said.
Because America is so highly wired into cyberspace, it is automatically more vulnerable to "information warfare" than any other country, officials said.
"Suppose somebody goes after the telephone company," said Paul D. Hoppes with the state's Department of Information Technology. "What happens if those go out?
"It could suddenly just happen. All state agencies have to be able to react to this immediately."
Happily, much of the state's preparation for other problems - in Hoppes' agency's case, the Y2K issue and for the health department, improvements in its medical reporting network, for example - also can help government respond to terrorist incidents, officials said.

Load-Date: October 29, 1999


End of Document