Terror attacks down 23% in 2017
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
September 22, 2018 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 453 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


The report says 8,584 terrorist attacks took place around the world in 2017, down 23 percent from the previous year.
"Commenting on the report's findings, the department's coordinator of counterterroism, Nathan A. Sales, stated, "[Iran] is responsible for intensifying multiple conflicts and undermining US interests in Syria, in Yemen, in Iraq, in Bahrain, in Afghanistan, and in Lebanon, using a number of proxies and other instruments such as Lebanese Hezbollah and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corp's Quds Force".
"We've seen operational activity not just in Lebanon by Hezbollah, but by Iran-backed terrorists in the heart of Europe", said head of the State Department's Counterterrorism Bureau and Ambassador-at-Large Nathan Sales.
Hoping to protect their interests, the Europeans have proposed hammering out a supplementary deal with Tehran covering its ballistic missile program as well as its interventions in countries such as Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Yemen.
In Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the number of deaths caused by terrorist attacks declined 89 percent since 2013, commensurate with decreasing numbers of attacks, the report revealed.
"We worked with allies and partners around the world to expand information sharing, improve aviation security, enhance law enforcement and rule of law capacities, and to counter terrorist radicalisation with a focus on preventing recruitment and recidivism", Mr Sales said.
Liverpool's Mohamed Salah 'fine' despite lack of goals - Jurgen Klopp
He was substituted two minutes after Mbappe made it 2-2 and watched Roberto Firmino's injury-time victor from the dugout. Nobody remembers that, so it's really no problem. "But we don't", Klopp told a news conference.
"Despite our successes, the terrorist landscape grew more complex in 2017", the report said.
He said foreign terrorists were heading home from the war zones in Iraq and Syria or travelling to third countries to join ISIS' terror outfits there.
The United States has once again named Iran as the world's leading state sponsor of terrorism, accusing it of fueling conflicts and undermining governments throughout the Middle East.
The State Department's annual survey of global terrorism accused Iran of intensifying numerous conflicts and trying to disrupt governments in the Middle East and elsewhere.
The report amid the Trump administration's sanctions-based push against Iran's support of "malign activity" worldwide following the United States quitting the Iran nuclear agreement in 2015.
"They have largely remained out of the headlines in recent years", Sales said Wednesday, "but we shouldn't confuse a period of relative quiet with al-Qaida's abandonment of its capabilities or its intentions to strike us or our allies".

Load-Date: September 22, 2018


End of Document