Terrorism - past, present, and future
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
June 20, 1985, Thursday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Pg. 16
Length: 704 words
Byline: JOSEPH C. HARSCH
Body


WHENEVER something like the hijacking of TWA flight 847 occurs a lot of normally sensible people say a lot of stupid things about terrorism. The news fills with nonsense about stamping it out. The President denounces it and Walter Cronkite anchors a CBS symposium about it.
There are two kinds of terrorism. The first is made up of acts of violence committed by persons either temporarily or chronically out of their senses. The second is acts of violence committed for a political purpose.
The practical measures to protect society from the first kind consist of detection and isolation of individuals likely to commit such acts. Beyond that, it is up to the individual or local community to protect itself as best it can. There is no total or sure protection against a person who suddenly goes berserk and starts shooting for little or no reason.
Political terrorism is another matter. Political terrorists act consciously, deliberately, often shrewdly, and sometimes successfully (at least in terms of publicity for their cause).
Political terrorists are people who use violence to achieve a political end. Such use of violence for political purpose is as old as organized human society. There will continue to be violence for political ends so long as there are unsatisfied political grievances.
The best protection is to be aware of the grievances and then either remove the cause of the particular grievance or do whatever is possible to contain those who feel the grievance.
Flight 847 was hijacked for a political reason. The Shiite community in Lebanon is at war with its natural local enemies. It has been fighting to gain a political and economic position in Lebanon proportionate to its numbers.
In one battle in that war it found its progress being opposed and for a time frustrated by United States armed forces. American bombs and shells delayed the advance of the Shiite militia toward its goals, which at that time were control of the Beirut airport and of west Beirut. America became for a time an actual enemy. American weapons killed Shiites.
Since then there have been a series of battles between Shiite Muslims in Lebanon and the Israeli armed forces. During that fighting the Israelis took many Shiite prisoners who were then held captive in Israeli prison camps. The Shiites, understandably, have wanted to obtain release of their fellow clansmen.
One purpose of this hijacking has been to obtain release of fellow Shiites imprisoned in Israel. It might have been achieved by taking Israeli prisoners. Since the US supports Israel, the capture of an American aircraft loaded with Americans was a viable alternative. In spite of denials in Washington, it was obvious from the start that the US government was discussing with Israeli officials the possibility of an exchange of Shiites in Israel for the TWA hostages.
It's all very well for both Israeli and US officials to talk boldly about principles and assert that they will not submit to coercion of this type. The fact is that in most wars prisoners are exchanged. Since the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the Shiite Muslims have been at war with Israel and the US.
Terrorism has been a continuing feature of the Arab-Israel wars. When Israel was a political dream struggling for existence it used terrorism. The Irgun and Stern ''gangs'' were illegal military formations making guerrilla warfare on the British authorities under the old Palestine mandate.
Those ''gangs'' bombed the King David Hotel in Jerusalem as part of an often violent campaign to induce the British to abandon the mandate. It worked. The British abandoned the mandate.
The Irgun massacred the Arab inhabitants of the village of Deir Yassin in its efforts to induce the flight of Arabs from territories wanted for the future state of Israel. It worked. For this and other reasons a million Arabs fled - and have been homeless ever since.
The Arabs are still at war with Israel. The US backs Israel. In Arab eyes this makes the US an enemy. Acts of Arab terrorism against Americans and American institutions are likely to continue unless or until either Israel makes peace with the Arabs, or the US modifies its support for Israel against the Arabs. Neither event is on the immediate horizon.


End of Document