TERRORISTS' WEAKNESSC;
by Sandro Pertini;
Following are excerpts from remarks of the President of Italy, on a visit to the United States, made when he addressed students at The Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies. They are translated from the Italian by Mario Alfano.
The New York Times
April 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 767 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Italian terrorism has not been defeated yet, notwithstanding the serious defeats which Italian terrorism is suffering. The terrorist hideouts which have been discovered are very important, as are the weapons which have been found. But for me, the indication that Italian terrorism is about to be defeated is another. The reason is this: The terrorists are talking. Before, they didn't.
Terrorists are now talking. From what I have been told, over 300 jailed terrorists are talking. If these terrorists are talking, it means first of all that they are not guided by any true political belief. Second, it indicates that they are feeling the ground eroded out from under their feet. I shall explain.
Excerpts from Italian President Pertini's address on terrorism at The John Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies.
Why do I say that they are not guided by a true political belief?  It is for this reason. I have had an experience, one which I would not wish on any of you, but one that has nonetheless been very beneficial for me. That is, I was in jail under Fascism. Not because I stole (let's get that straight, my dear friends!) but for my political beliefs - I fought against Fascism -that is, against the Fascist dictatorship.
Between imprisonment and exile, I lost 15 years of my youth, and such a loss always leaves a bitter taste in my mouth whenever I think of it. (And that's nothing to laugh about, my dear friend; 15 years, like that, burned, not lived - it's always bitter for a man ...)
Anyway, in jail, we who fought against Fascism were, however, always men of faith. We were there because of our democratic beliefs, our love of liberty, and our convictions against the Fascist tyranny and dictatorship.
Look, in jail the majority of the prisoners were Communists; there were a few Socialists and members of the Action Party, but for the most part, the majority were Communists.
I spent time in many prisons. The prison of Saint Stephen, the worst prison that has ever existed in Italy -so bad that it has been abolished. Then I was in the Tower of Bari prison, where I was interned with Antonio Gramsci, whom you have certainly heard mentioned. Then at Pianosa.
Anyway, at these three prisons I knew of only one person who requested a pardon. And he only did this because he was implored by his mother to petition for a pardon. And after he did this, not one person would look him in the face ever again. No one would speak to him anymore. He was banished. Thus, under Fascism, none of us talked.
That's because we were all volunteers in the struggle against Fascism. At the special tribunal very severe sentences were handed down. These 15-to-20-year sentences were no light matter.
The prisoners responded to these sentences with shouts of their faith. The Communists reacted to their sentences with the cry, ''Long live the Communist International!'' In 1929, I was the first Socialist to appear before the special tribunal. And I said to myself before going before the court: ''You are a volunteer of the struggle against Fascism. Thus, try to make the presence of the Socialists felt before the court; try to fulfill your duty.'' And so, when the president of the tribunal pronounced the sentence of 11 years of incarceration, I accepted that sentence with the cry: ''Long live Socialism! Down with Fascism!'' Mussolini, hearing of my outburst, compensated me accordingly by sending me to the prison of Saint Stephen to serve my sentence.
These were men of great faith. They believed in something. You might say that I didn't share their convictions - that is, those of the Communists - but that's an entirely different matter! They had a belief! I respect all beliefs, because I am faithful to the teachings of Voltaire, who said: ''I say to my adversary, 'You do not share my belief. And I do not share yours. But I am willing to fight to the death for your right to express your belief freely.' '' This is my way of thinking and this is the principle which has guided me throughout my life.
These were men of faith. And if today's terrorists are confessing (they tell me that there are 350 of them who have done so) that means that they are not men of faith. They are not fighting for some higher and noble cause. Because otherwise, they wouldn't be talking!
If they are talking, it's because they are all puppets! They are in the hands of some puppeteer who would want to blow up this democratic bridge which is Italy! He is not yet defeated, but we're on the right road.
Terrorism is suffering blow after blow and I believe that we will succeed in defeating it in the end.


End of Document