Terrorism insurance gap looms for USA
USA TODAY
July 13, 2005, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: MONEY;
Length: 846 words
Byline: Elliot Blair Smith
Body

A $100 billion insurance safety net that makes up the losses of American workers and businesses caused by a terror attack is set to disappear at year's end amid growing concerns that no replacement is in the offing.
Insurance analysts fear that an attack on the USA could badly disrupt the economy, displace thousands of workers and bankrupt dozens of insurers if Congress does not renew or overhaul the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, which temporarily makes the federal government shoulder most terror losses.
But the Treasury Department recently signaled that private insurers and the capital markets should now step in to price terrorism risk and provide coverage against losses. Last week's terrorist bombings in London lent urgency to the debate. Several European governments are wrestling with how to protect their economies from what many deem an unquantifiable risk.
"If terrorism is a national security issue, then planning how to recover from a terrorism attack should also be a national security issue," says Erwann Michel-Kerjan, a terrorism researcher at the Center for Risk Management and Decision Processes at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School.
Just two days before the London bombings, the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development in Paris published a 289-page report that highlighted the pending terrorism insurance gap in the USA and Europe and the lack of enthusiasm by insurers and investors to risk their own capital.
Two examples: Chicago's O'Hare airport had $750million of terrorism insurance at an annual premium of $125,000 prior to the 9/11 attacks; afterward, it paid $6.9 million for $150 million in coverage. San Francisco's Golden Gate Park was unable to obtain any terrorism coverage after 9/11, and its non-terrorism coverage was reduced by 80% to $25 million, for which its premium doubled to $1.1 million.
The OECD report said "a large-scale terrorist attack could be more damaging today than before 2001." That is because fewer than half of all U.S. companies and only 3% of eligible German companies are believed to have sought terrorism-related coverage.
OECD researchers also found that although investors have displayed some appetite for what are known as catastrophe bonds -- high-yielding securities underwritten to provide a financial cushion against such natural disasters as earthquakes and hurricanes -- they have almost no interest in terror bonds.
"The private market capacity is inadequate," says Peter Ulrich, managing director of Risk Management Solutions, which designs catastrophic risk models.
Last fall, former Bush administration economic adviser Glenn Hubbard published his own analysis concluding that private markets were not ready to assume the government's burden of providing affordable terrorism insurance. Hubbard predicted the economy and jobs would grow more slowly and property values might decline without affordable terrorism insurance.
Such concerns contradict a Treasury report published June30 that found the insurance industry and capital markets "increasingly able to provide" terrorism-related coverage. The Treasury report said the expiration of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act "should encourage the development of the private reinsurance market and other risk-transfer mechanisms."
Under the U.S. terrorism insurance program, the government pays about 90% of an insurer's post-deductible losses, capped at $100 billion a year.
The Insurance Information Institute reported last year that insured losses from the 9/11 attacks approached $32.5 billion. That was 30 times more costly to the insurance industry than any prior terrorist attack and nearly 11/2 times more expensive than the $21 billion cost of Hurricane Andrew in 1992, the USA's most expensive natural disaster. The insurance industry's 9/11 losses did not stop there. OECD researchers found that claims payouts combined with downturns in the stock and bond markets, in which insurers are heavily invested, cost them about $200billion in capital.
Going forward, the 2006 World Cup soccer championship in Germany serves as one model of how the capital markets might eventually complement private insurers in covering terrorism risks. To provide a financial guarantee for the World Cup host, Wall Street investment bank Credit Suisse sold $260million in securities that provide a backstop against the tournament's cancellation.
Underwritten in 2003, the World Cup bonds were hailed as a breakthrough in spreading the financial risk against terrorism. The soccer bonds pay investors a handsome yield while subjecting them to the risk of losing up to 75% of their capital. But the financial markets have been slow to find investor appetite for terrorism-related securities in other venues.
For now, Congress is likely to look at whether insurers should be given tax and accounting incentives to become more active in terrorism insurance. But the Government Accountability Office says such incentives would reduce tax revenue and "may not bring about a meaningful increase in the insurance industry's ability to pay claims."

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Joni Alexander, USA TODAY, Source: Insurance Information Institute (BAR GRAPH); GRAPHIC, B/W, Source: Swiss Re (CHART); PHOTO, B/W, 2001 AP photo; PHOTO, B/W, 1995 AP photo

Load-Date: July 13, 2005


End of Document