TERRORISM: A NEW VIEW
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 25, 2002 Wednesday
WEST EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: METRO,; GOOD MORNING
Length: 492 words
Body


The Center for Documentary Production and Study at Robert Morris University will premiere its first film, "Beyond Our Shadow: An International Perspective on America's Role in Fighting Terrorism," at 7 p.m. tomorrow in the Massey Hall Theatre on campus, Narrows Run Road, Moon.
 The premiere is open to the public free of charge.
 The 33-minute documentary portrays how citizens of Ireland and England reacted to America's response to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. It was filmed in London, and Dublin in early March by communications majors Kristin Brown of Oakmont, Bart McClelland of Bedford, Bedford County, and Ronald Norton of Apollo, all of whom were graduated in May.
The film features interviews with residents of the two cities, as well as with the chief inspector of the City of London Police.
 The students recorded more than 12 hours of interviews and spent more than 40 days editing the documentary.
 Buckle up time
 Moon and the state Department of Transportation will hold a "Kids and Family Safety Day" from noon to 4 p.m. Saturday in Moon Park.
 The day will include demonstrations for school bus and child passenger safety. A roller blading safety demonstration will be preformed by Team Mercury.
 A driving simulator will be available for teens to try. Moon police and PennDOT will raffle off bike helmets and the Allegheny County Health Department will raffle a car seat and booster seat.
 Call the Parks and Recreation department at 412-262-1703.
 Curtain's up
 Western Allegheny Arts Connection, a cultural arts partnership between the Western Allegheny Community Library and the West Allegheny School District, will kick off its fourth year of the Curtain Call West series this Sunday.
 The first in the four-part series will begin at 1:30 p.m. at the West Allegheny High School auditorium with an afternoon of music called "Just Plain Fun Comedy Show." It will feature The Spoon Man who will entertain using two ordinary tablespoons.
 The Spoon Man employs sing-a-longs, impressions and clean entertainment to delight his audience, pointing out that "he never uses dirty silverware."
 More shows will follow in the next three months. All productions will be in the high school auditorium. Tickets may be purchased at the library, 8042 Steubenville Pike in North Fayette, for $3 each or at the door for $4.
 Free concert
 Jazz and classic rock will be on the entertainment bill Sunday at a free concert in Lincoln Park, Midland.
 The Dale Fielder Group/Force will be featured performer. Fielder is a jazz composer and saxophonist. A Midland native, he currently resides in Los Angeles.
 Opening act will be the Jimmy lay Band, a six-piece ensemble, playing classic rock.
 The concert begins at 2 p.m. Those planning to attend are asked to bring blankets and chairs.
 The show is the first in a planned series of cultural events sponsored by the Lincoln Park Performing Arts Center, a group dedicated to building a performing arts facility in Midland.

Load-Date: September 28, 2002


End of Document