Terrorism charge dropped for man cops say threatened to 'light up' courthouse
Lake County News-Sun, Gurnee, Ill.
August 19, 2015 Wednesday


Copyright 2015 
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 366 words
Byline: Frank S. Abderholden, Lake County News-Sun, Gurnee, Ill.
Body


Aug. 19--A California man who authorities said threatened to "light up" the Lake County Courthouse and Gurnee Police Department has pleaded guilty to felony disorderly conduct after initially being charged with making a terrorist threat.
Daniel Pederson, 33, accepted a plea bargain this week that calls for 180 days in jail, 18 months probation in his home state and 35 hours of public service. The deal was approved by Lake County Circuit Court Judge Victoria Rossetti.
Pederson, who had already served 328 days in Lake County Jail since his arrest last year, was released from custody Tuesday based on time served, said Cynthia Vargas, spokeswoman for the Lake County State's Attorney's Office. She added that Pederson had a flight home to California on Tuesday night and his case was transferred to California, where his probation and public service will be served.
A former resident of Lake County, Pederson was accused of making a threatening call on Sept. 12, 2014, according to authorities, who reported that he said he was going to "kill people" and "light up" the two public safety facilities. Security was heightened at the downtown Waukegan courthouse the following day.
Pederson was arrested Sept. 25 after authorities said they traced the call back to him. Before the plea deal, he faced 20 to 60 years in prison on two counts of making a terrorist threat. He also had two outstanding warrants in Lake County at the time, a 2011 failure-to-appear warrant for a criminal damage to property charge and a 2013 warrant for allegedly violating an order of protection, according to court records.
When he was indicted on the terrorist threat charges he was also indicted for allegedly violating an order of protection in Vernon Hills in 2013, and five counts of telephone harassment involving a threat to kill in 2012 in Round Lake, police and prosecutors said. He was additionally indicted on electronic harassment charges, according to Chicago Tribune archives.
fabderholden@tribpub.com
___ (c)2015 the Lake County News-Sun (Lake County, Ill.) Visit the Lake County News-Sun (Lake County, Ill.) at www.chicagotribune.com/suburbs/lake-county-news-sun Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: August 19, 2015


End of Document