TERRORISM PROBE RESULTS EXPECTED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 14, 2011 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5
Length: 943 words
Body


WASHINGTON -- Democrats on the Senate Intelligence Committee expect to release findings this summer from an 18-month investigation into the CIA's interrogation of terrorism suspects, a review that could provide some clarity on whether harsh techniques -- or even torture -- played a role in helping the CIA find Osama bin Laden.
After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the CIA carried out interrogations at a network of now-closed secret prisons.
Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., who chairs the intelligence committee, said Thursday that the detainee who gave the CIA its best understanding of the courier who ultimately led to bin Laden -- a detainee identified by U.S. officials as Hassan Ghul -- did so before he was subject to unspecified harsh techniques at a CIA site in Poland.
Ms. Feinstein knows this, she explained, because her staff has examined records documenting the CIA interrogations -- records that few others have been able to examine.
Her assertion contradicts several former officials from President George W. Bush's administration who have suggested that Mr. Ghul gave help only after rough treatment. Those claims have fueled the belief that so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques," which President Barack Obama banned after he took office, were instrumental in finding bin Laden.
Gaps in nuclear safety
WASHINGTON -- Gaps in safety regulations have left U.S. nuclear power plants vulnerable to accidents when they lose power to their cooling systems, a prominent nuclear watchdog group told a congressional hearing Friday.
If U.S. nuclear power plants should lose primary and backup power -- as happened in March at the Fukushima Daiichi facility in Japan -- batteries are designed to kick in and prevent nuclear fuel from melting. But some plants keep just four hours of battery power.
David Lochbaum of the Union of Concerned Scientists recommended to members of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology that plants extend battery capacity to 16 hours, giving workers more time to restore cooling power.
U.S. sued over laptop seizure
WASHINGTON -- The co-founder of a group advocating for an Army private accused of leaking classified material to the antisecrecy website WikiLeaks is suing the U.S. government for unlawfully seizing his computer and copying its contents to aid a criminal investigation of the site.
Computer scientist David House's laptop was taken in November at an international airport by two Department of Homeland Security agents without a hint that it contained evidence of wrongdoing, but rather because Mr. House was a vocal supporter of Pfc. Bradley Manning, the accused leaker, the American Civil Liberties Union alleged in a complaint Friday in U.S. District Court in Boston.
Flood insurance overhaul
WASHINGTON -- As waters rose on the Mississippi River, a House committee approved legislation Friday intended to save a government flood insurance program that is nearly $18 billion in debt.
The bill, which includes provisions that could make it more difficult to develop in flood-prone areas, has bipartisan support, and sponsors said they hope to have it on President Barack Obama's desk before the current program expires Sept. 30. The legislation would extend the program for five years, reduce subsidies and phase in insurance premium increases.
Wisconsin senator will retire
WASHINGTON -- Sen. Herb Kohl, D-Wis., announced his retirement Friday, a decision that sets up a competitive open-seat contest in a state that has already drawn considerable national attention this year.
"Even though I continue to love this job, I have decided that the time has come to give someone else the opportunity to serve," Mr. Kohl, who is in his fourth term and 76 years old, said in a midday speech in Milwaukee.
He is the sixth Democratic-aligned senator to step aside in advance of the 2012 election. Two Republicans aren't running for re-election next year.
Va. boat capsizes; 1 dead
NORFOLK, Va. -- A sailboat carrying 10 people affiliated with NASA's Langley Research Center capsized during a late night cruise on the James River in Virginia, leaving one man dead and another missing while the other eight survived after clinging for hours to floating debris in frigid waters.
Virginia Marine Resources spokesman John Bull said 23-year-old Tyler Lorenzi died Friday. Mr. Lorenzi and the others aboard the boat -- all in their 20s -- were at a party in Newport News on Thursday night when they decided to board the 22-foot-sailboat, Mr. Bull said.
Hepatitis C drug approved
WASHINGTON -- Merck won U.S. approval for the first hepatitis C drug in almost a decade Friday after studies showed it cured more patients than existing treatments.
The Food and Drug Administration cleared boceprevir to treat people with chronic hepatitis C in combination with interferon-based therapy, the agency said in a statement. The drug will be sold under the name Victrelis.
Merck is competing with Vertex Pharmaceuticals to become the first company since 2002 to market a new medicine for the liver disease.
70 Calif. parks may close
SAN JOSE, Calif. -- Seventy of California's 278 state parks will be closed under a plan announced Friday by Gov. Jerry Brown's administration, a historic blow to the state's storied natural heritage that may actually get worse as lawmakers scramble to fix the budget crisis.
Although state parks officials initially said Friday the padlocks would go up starting in September, they revised that later in the day, saying instead none would close until July 1, 2012.
Natural Resources Secretary John Laird made clear that even more parks could be closed in an effort to balance the state's $15.4 billion deficit.

Load-Date: May 17, 2011


End of Document