Terror victims' due denied
Daily News (New York)
April 21, 2016 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 26
Length: 441 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


President Obama landed in Saudi Arabia Wednesday fresh off a vow to veto legislation allowing the families of Americans killed on Sept. 11 to sue that country's government for its purported involvement in the attacks.
Obama would bar the loved ones of terrorism victims fair access to the courthouse doors in order to avoid further diplomatic discomfort, having already forged an Iranian nuclear deal deeply objectionable to the rival Saudis.
It is difficult to imagine a President's priorities being more profoundly out of order.
The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act Obama would veto, co-sponsored by New York Sen. Chuck Schumer, would allow for civil lawsuits in American courts against governments whose officials aid terrorism plots on U.S. soil.
Presently, only nations on the State Department's officially designated list of state sponsors of terrorism - Iran, Syria and Sudan, at the moment - can be sued for abetting terrorist attacks. All others are granted immunity, no matter what they may have done.
Why? Well, because.
"Well, because" is not a good enough answer for families that, in the wake of a steady stream of revelations about 9/11 see in the Saudis a possible accessory to mass murder. A trail of signs suggest to them efforts to aid in the complex and costly plot to put 19 hijackers aboard U.S. planes.
It starts with 28 classified pages of a congressional intelligence comittee's 9/11 report, described by those who've seen them as damning to the Saudis.
Less credible but impossible to ignore is a claim by the imprisoned so-called 20th hijacker, Zacarias Moussaoui, that among those involved in scheming terror attacks were an official with the Saudi Embassy and prominent members of the kingdom's royal family.
Whatever the facts, 9/11 families should be free to pursue them in the courts - to secure financial compensation for harm done and perhaps secure further revelations.
Yet the law now laughs in their direction.
As if to highlight the glaring double standard, the Supreme Court on Wednesday cleared the way for relatives of Iranian-sponosored terrorism to recoup nearly $2 billion from Iran's central bank. The family of ISIS execution victim Steven Sotloff meanwhile filed suit against the Syrian government of Bashar Assad.
Yet other government officials the world over may sponsor terror attacks without legal liability.
Schumer's bill must pass the Congress, and Obama must face public pressure over his veto threat. Some things are more important than diplomatic relations, even with strategically crucial allies in the world's most volatile region.
Such as the possibility of justice for 3,000 murdered Americans.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: April 21, 2016


End of Document