Terrorism trial delayed for second mental exam
Chicago Daily Herald
June 25, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11
Length: 327 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


A federal judge ordered a new mental exam for a 21-year-old Hillside man accused of trying to set off a bomb in Chicago after the suspect told the court he would plead guilty if authorities admit they arrested him because of his Muslim faith.
U.S. District Judge Sharon Johnson Coleman on Tuesday pushed Adel Daoud's trial on terrorism charges to Sept. 30 to allow time for a second mental health evaluation.
The decision came after Daoud told Coleman he would plead guilty to the charges as long as "you all admit ... you arrested me because I'm Muslim."
His attorney, Thomas Anthony Durkin, had previously asked for a delay to the scheduled July 27 trial. An undisclosed incident last month involving Daoud and another inmate at the Metropolitan Correctional Center raised concerns about his mental competency, Durkin said.
"We need to make sure he's OK," Durkin said of Daoud after the hearing. "He's been under considerable pressure. I think the comments speak for themselves."
Daoud has denied that in 2012 he accepted a phony car bomb from an undercover FBI agent, parked it by a downtown Chicago bar and pressed a trigger. He's also accused of trying to have that FBI agent killed after his arrest.
Federal authorities started investigating Daoud a year earlier after he posted messages online about killing Americans. Daoud told an undercover agent that he wanted to maximize the carnage so he would feel like he "accomplished something," the charges state.
"If it's only like five, 10 people, I'm not gonna feel that good," the charges quote Daoud as saying. "I wanted something that's ... massive. I want something that's gonna make it in the news like tonight."
Daoud also told Coleman that he's "charged with a lot of things" he doesn't agree with and that he believes "there are plots to kill Muslims in this county."
After the judge warned Daoud to stop talking, his attorney said he doesn't think Daoud "understands the delicate position we're in right now."

Graphic

 
Adel Daoud Adel Daoud Adel Daoud 
 , of Hillside, is charged with terrorism for allegedly trying to set off what he thought was a car bomb Sept. 14, 2012, near a downtown Chicago bar. A federal judge in the case has undone a key ruling saying the government needn't divulge whether its investigation relied on expanded phone and Internet surveillance programs. Adel Daoud Adel Daoud of Hillside Adel Daoud

Load-Date: June 29, 2015


End of Document