Terrorism Costs Have Mayors Pleading
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
January 24, 2002, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2002 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 611 words
Byline: GIL KLEIN, Media General News Service
Body


RIDGE PLEDGES FUNDS BUT GIVES NO DETAILS
WASHINGTON - Worried about the cost of fighting terrorism, the nation's mayors asked Homeland Security chief Tom Ridge on Wednesday for help paying their bills.
Ridge pledged the federal government's support but said details will have to come later from the president.
The National Conference of Mayors estimated cities are likely to spend an extra $2.6 billion through 2002 on antiterrorism programs.
"Tightening security in the aftermath of Sept. 11 threatens to break the bank for many city budgets," said New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial, president of the conference, which attracted 300 mayors to its Washington meeting.
Ridge told the mayors he wants to create a "seamless national strategy" among federal, state and local governments to fight terrorism.
"This unprecedented support isn't a one-year and out initiative," he said. "This is a major investment. We want to empower cities and states to build upon their first-response capability."
President Bush is expected to meet with the mayors today to tell them what he is planning to propose in his State of the Union message next week.

Greco Says Confusion Reigns
"I'm learning that the whole world is groping for answers, including the people talking to us," said Tampa Mayor Dick Greco, who said he was cutting $9 million from other city services to pay for increased security needs.
"Everyone is talking to everyone else to see what federal legislation is needed, but I don't think the direction is set yet," Greco said.
For Joe S. Frank, mayor of Newport News, Va., the terrorist targets in his city appear limitless: shipyards, naval bases, an Air Force base, container ports, even a nuclear power plant.
He's looking for $6 million to purchase equipment to protect against terrorists, including trucks to clean up hazardous material spills. Add another $2 million a year in operating costs.
He's also planning for an aviation world's fair in 2003 that could attract about 2 million people and cost another $7 million for security, he said.
"I'm here to find out what's available from the federal government and how to go about getting it."

Tampa's Troubling Experience
Cities that have a hard time imagining themselves as targets for terrorism also wanted to take precautions.
"Certainly the risk for us is low, but there are copycat attacks like they had in Tampa," said Mayor Allen Joines, of Winston-Salem, N.C., referring to the 15-year-old boy who flew an airplane into a skyscraper.
"If there's so much security in the rest of the country, terrorists might look for soft areas," he said.
Some mayors questioned whether anyone had a grip on what steps should be taken to defend the country.
Ridge said some special events, such as the Super Bowl in New Orleans and the Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, are such tempting targets that they have been declared "national special security events." That means the Secret Service will be in charge of security, he said. But when Mayor David L. Armstrong of Louisville asked that the Kentucky Derby also be declared a national security event, Ridge declined.
"We can't designate every major event as a national special security event," he said. The mayors told Ridge federal antiterrorism support to the cities should come as block grants with no strings attached, bypassing state bureaucracies.
But White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said the president would target the money to specific projects and funnel it through the states.
"The president believes one of the best ways is to get the money into the hands of the legislators and the governors," he said. "They can make decisions as they pass the money down to their local entities."

Graphic

 
PHOTO
Tom Ridge told the nation's mayors he wants to create a "seamless national strategy" to fight terrorism.

Load-Date: January 25, 2002


End of Document