Terror fight gone wild
Daily News (New York)
February 24, 2012 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 20
Length: 636 words
Byline: BY JUAN GONZALEZ
Body


THE ASSOCIATED Press' startling revelation this week that Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly dispatched his detectives to surveil every Muslim-owned business and community center in Newark is the clearest sign yet that the NYPD's fight against terrorism has gone terribly awry.
This is religious profiling on steroids, say civil liberties advocates.
The Newark surveillance program even compiled information on Al-Hidaayah Academy, a private school of African-American first- to fourth-graders, and Al Muslimaat Academy, a black, all-girls private school in that city.
What did they think they were doing, fishing for 8-year-old suicide bombers?
The program also collected information on a Dunkin' Donuts owned by a Bangaldeshi, a Utah Fried Chicken owned by an Egyptian, a West Indian grocery owned by a Guayanese, and, of course, every mosque and Muslim gathering place in New Jersey's largest city.
The only non-Muslim business targeted was a Hispanic-owned money-transfer store, which aroused NYPD suspicion for operating a three-computer Internet cafe and only charging customers in cash to surf the Web.
Two glaring contradictions emerge from the department's own secret 2007 summary of this surveillance program.
The 60-page report, a copy of which The AP obtained, states on its cover page that the NYPD Intelligence Division's Demographics Unit compiled the information.
When first asked about the unit in August, Kelly's spokesman, Deputy Commissioner Paul Browne, flatly denied its existence.
He told The AP then, "We do not employ undercovers or confidential informants unless there is information indicating the possibility of unlawful activity."
Despite the claim, the Demographics Unit surveilled dozens of Newark places where there was no hint of improper activity.
At one restaurant owned by a "Chinese Muslim," the report says: "During visit, 3 African Muslim males and an Egyptian male customer were observed dining within. Engaged the Egyptian male customer about the Mosque located above."
Browne defended the NYPD's surveillance program on Thursday.
"Everything we're doing is done constitutionally," he said.
Browne is one the most capable and likeable NYPD spokesman in decades. But he has been caught making so many false statements lately about the department's anti-terrorism program that his credibility has been irreparably damaged.
The report also says the Newark program was a "joint operation" with the Newark Police Department.
But Newark officials deny that. They say a Newark detective, at the NYPD's request, spent a single day showing New York detectives around the city, but Newark was not informed of a systematic surveillance operation.
Newark Mayor Corey Booker has called for his state's attorney general to investigate the NYPD program.
"I strongly believe that we must be vigilant in protecting our citizens from crime and terrorism," Booker said, "but to put large segments of a religious community under surveillance with no legitimate cause or provocation clearly crosses a line."
All of this comes on the heels of another AP story last week that the NYPD gathered information on and infiltrated Muslim student groups at a dozen colleges throughout the northeast. One undercover informant in that operation even reported on an innocent whitewater rafting trip by Muslim students at City College.
AND OF course, there is the disturbing incident of the "The Third Jihad," a wildly anti-Muslim film funded by a right-wing foundation. The NYPD inexplicably used it as a training film in late 2010 for 1,500 cops.
The filmmakers even interviewed Kelly, though he later apologized following an uproar among New York's Muslim leaders.
Booker's call for an investigation is on target. No one should be subject to surveillance as an NYPD "person of interest" just for being Muslim.
jgonzalez@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: February 24, 2012


End of Document