Terrorism reflected in 'Splinter Cell Blacklist'
Wartburg Trumpet: Wartburg College
September 29, 2013 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 526 words
Body


Terrorism, since 9/11, has taken center stage as the most prominently discussed threat to the global community.
Its global specter which manifests itself as both tangible, as in violence against civilians, and intangible, as in cyber terrorism, has afforded it the means to haunt nations and their intelligence networks on multiple fronts.
The threat then appears simultaneously as ideological, psychological, physical and cyber.
As consumers and interrogators of culture and its products, we have observed terror become a substantial thematic thread in the media. In video games, the incursion of more honest and multi-faceted portrayals of the effects of terrorism on intelligence agencies, such as Tom Clancy's "Splinter Cell: Blacklist," contrast sharply to the reductionist military triumphalism of the "Call of Duty" franchise.
"Blacklist's" protagonist, Sam Fisher, is an agent of a secret high-level U.S. government agency known as Fourth Echelon. Throughout the single-player campaign, his objectives mostly involve deterring threats from a terrorist group known as The Engineers on both U.S. and foreign soil.
Blacklist stands out in its willingness to embrace the new terrain of cyber-warfare and on depicting modern warfare's shift from the use of human assets to deploying technological means, like drones, when combating terror. The Engineers, possessing the same virtual omniscience that enables government agencies to collect and access private citizen data, deploy those techniques used against them to their benefit; leveling the playing field.
The global anxieties that "Blacklist" highlights as plot-points are real-world fears; that the enemy possesses better technology, is more efficient and organized, has double-agents within government agencies or will gain access to biological and/or nuclear weapons.
While terror used to be localized and thus able to pin-point, providing certitude of completely deterring a threat, global terror in our age is an opaque constellation of impending danger. There may be a face like a Bin Laden or a Saddam Hussein, but their elimination does not bring an end to Al Qaeda much less, to terrorism.
In fact, the campaign to eliminate global terror has become much more difficult. Who or what exactly is the terror?, is the perennial question - as the threat is both within and without, exacerbating the paranoiac urge of intelligence agencies to place whole citizen populations under surveillance.
The modern quandary, which "Blacklist" grapples with, is how government agencies must combat terrorists that by virtue of possessing a connection to the Internet, can access and potentially devastate whole intelligence networks. Also, what should the U.S.' role be in a world increasingly more agitated by American imperialism? Who else but the U.S. could mount a singular campaign of this magnitude?
"Blacklist" favors the deployment of clandestine global missions outside of the arm of law and potentially in the back-yard of U.S. allies without international backing.
Sadly, it speaks more truth to the current situation which is likely to cause more dissent than to unite the global political establishment.

Load-Date: September 30, 2013


End of Document