Terrorism feared in '85 crash
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 2, 1989, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A
Length: 1390 words
Byline: DAVID BALLINGRUD
Body


CRASH    Crash    Drug use cited in crash, 3-A   
 
    Three members of the Canadian agency that investigated the    catastrophic 1985 crash of a chartered jet bringing 248 U.S. soldiers    home for Christmas now believe the plane was destroyed by terrorists.
 
     The three, members of the Canadian Aviation Safety Board, were    joined by a fourth board member in charging that the government's    investigation into the Gander, Newfoundland, crash was botched. One    called it "a hoax."
 
     There is strong evidence of an explosion or fire aboard the    aircraft, they said Wednesday, and there is reason to think it was the    work of terrorists. The Canadian Parliament, scheduled to meet in    March, should order a full judicial inquiry, they said.
    "Since I became familiar with the facts of Pam Am Flight 103    (which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, Dec. 21), I have come to    believe something very similar happened here," board member L. T.    Filotas said.
 
     "The flights were similar in a number of ways. In both instances    witnesses saw the glow of fires. Both departed from West Germany. Both    carried U.S. military personnel just before Christmas, and in both    cases there was a terrorist claim of responsibility.
 
     "This is circumstantial. We have no hard evidence. But we all    share this feeling," Filotas said. "There is ample reason to reopen    the investigation."
 
     Last December, three years after the incident, a five-member    majority of the nine-member board blamed the crash on ice formed on the    plane's wings. Icing, which disrupts an aircraft's aerodynamics, was    the "most probable" cause, the board said.
 
     The plane, a DC-8 chartered from Arrow Air Inc. of Miami, was en    route to Fort Campbell in Kentucky from Cairo, with stops in Cologne,    West Germany, and in Gander. Eight crew members and 248 members of the    101st Airborne were aboard. The troops had just completed a    peacekeeping mission in the Sinai. Many carried Christmas gifts for    loved ones awaiting them in the United States.
 
     After spending an hour and 11 minutes on the ground in Gander, the    DC-8 attempted a takeoff on the last leg of its journey. Witnesses said    the plane climbed only slightly, banked to the right, then crashed into    trees about 3,000 feet beyond the end of the runway. There were no    survivors.
 
     Among the dead were several soldiers from the Suncoast. Sgt. James    Douglas Phillips Jr., whose father and stepmother live in St.    Petersburg, was one.
 
     Dr. J. D. Phillips said the loss of his son brings pain almost    daily. He said the call to reopen the investigation is "great news.
 
 Unless you know the true cause of a tragedy, there's no hope of    preventing a recurrence. I thought from day one it was a terrorist act.
 
 I changed my mind when the Canadian government said it wasn't sabotage,    but after hearing from Filotas (about the evidence of explosion), I    became more and more convinced that terrorism was involved."
 
     Because of Dr. Phillips' concerns, the Times contacted the authors    of the minority report.
 
     The four board members who scoffed at the conclusion that icing    caused the crash issued a report in December. There was no evidence of    ice, they said, and there was no reason to think it would have formed    on the wings.
 
     Their report concludes "an in-flight fire that may have resulted    from detonations of undetermined origin brought about catastrophic    system failures."
 
     In interviews Wednesday, three of the four said they now have    concluded that the "detonations" were the work of terrorists. The    fourth, David Mussallem of Vancouver, would say only "it's a    possibility."
 
     "The icing theory is a hoax, a deliberate hoax," said board    member Ross Stevenson, a former Air Canada pilot. "Four other aircraft    landing and taking off at the same time reported they had no trouble    with icing."
 
     Furthermore, people saw flames, he said.
 
     "Two sleeping truckers woke up to see fire on the right side of    the aircraft, around the juncture of the wing and fuselage," Stevenson    said, "and that's where the B cargo compartment is. Another witness    who saw the left side of the plane reports seeing a glow coming from    the right side.
 
     "There were other witnesses who should have been called to    testify, but were not. We believe these witnesses," Stevenson said.    "We think they saw an airplane explosion. We have concluded that it    was caused by terrorists because the Islamic Jihad (a terrorist    organization) claimed responsibility, and because of the parallels to    the Scotland crash (Pan Am Flight 103)."
 
     Efforts to reach a spokesman for the majority was unsuccessful.
 
     The majority report acknowledges "speculation" of sabotage, but    claims no evidence was found to support it. "All damage to the    aircraft was considered to be the result of impact with terrain and the    post-crash fire," the report says.
 
     As for reports of fire: "In the absence of corroborating physical    evidence, the board was unable to determine the source of the    illumination described by these witnesses."
 
     But at least one source outside the board sides with the dissenters    about the possibility of explosion.
 
     Irving Pinkel, a San Diego private investigator, examined the crash    evidence for an attorney hired by a group of insurance carriers. "I    came about four months after the accident, and looked at the pieces    arranged in a hangar as they were found at the site," he said    Wednesday. "I found one piece of the fuselage blown outward, as though    by passage of something at a high rate of speed."
 
     Pinkel concludes that the hole was caused by "something set in    motion by a blast."
 
     The nine members of Canada's Aviation Safety Board are political    appointees, but the four dissenters are not necessarily like-minded    politically. Two were nominated by members of the Progressive    Conservative Party of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
 
     Each of the four dissenters claims the Aviation Safety Board staff    - the men and women who actually performed the investigative work on    the crash - ignored or resisted their requests for information.
 
     "That's the reason the investigation took so long," Stevenson    said. "It took us until August of 1987, for example, to get them to do    simulator studies in actual simulators, not computers.
 
     "We believe the criminal investigations division of the U.S. Army    would have done an investigation of an incident like this, but we were    never able to get information on it. We think (U.S.) Federal Aviation    Administration files should have been made available to us, but they    weren't. We think much was withheld from us by our staff."
 
     The staff was "openly defiant," Stevenson said. "The refused us    access to files. We couldn't quiz investigators, couldn't read    confidential reports, couldn't visit labs. They wanted us to be a    rubber stamp for their findings."
 
     The staff was able to get away with such behavior, the four    dissenters said, because it had the support of the five-member    majority.
 
     The majority, according to Stevenson, was trying to "cover up the    fact that the accident was caused by something other than icing."
 
 
 Why would they do that?
 
     "Good question," Stevenson said. "I'm beginning to believe now              that we will never get to the truth of this."
 
     "I don't have the answer," said Norman Bobbit, aeronautical    engineer and another of the four dissenters. "I just know that the    official investigation did not look for the things which would have    told them if there had been an explosion. That's why we favor a    judicial inquiry, a fresh start. Let's look not only at the crash, but    at what went wrong with the board's investigation."
 
     "We just never could get to the bottom of it," Filotas said.    "It's like quicksand. It just doesn't make any sense. Why would    otherwise competent people overlook so much evidence? It troubles me.
 
 It troubles me that we have to leave this uncertainty for the next of    kin. And the really haunting thought is that proper investigation of    this crash may have prevented the explosion aboard Pam Am Flight 103."
 
    

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document