Terrorism in today's world
East Carolinian: East Carolina University
March 20, 2014 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2014 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 413 words
Body


By ReAnn Melaga
March 20, 2014.
For the last few weeks, discussion of missing Malaysian Airlines flight 370 has flooded news outlets across the world. The flight was first presumed to have disappeared on Saturday, March 8, and the investigations and searches have not stopped since. The most recent development of the situation recently came from Malaysia's Prime Minister who is claiming the plane was deliberately steered off course. While examination of this event is still underway, news of a potential hijacking brings back memories of other acts of terror that have occurred in the last 20 years.
The fact that I can personally recall multiple attacks on our country during my lifetime both frightens and appalls me. What is even worse is that countless acts of terror occur in other parts of the world almost daily and it has gotten to the point where it is no longer surprising when they take place.
The series of tragic events that occurred on September 11, 2001, could be considered one of the most horrendous terrorist attacks that have ever occurred on American soil. Thousands of lives were lost that day and even more were changed forever, including my own. Despite my young age at the time, I still knew that the damage done to our country and its people that day would not be healed for many years to come.
Since the disaster that shook America in 2001, numerous acts of terror have plagued our nation. Contrary to the belief of some, these acts do not always involve people who are known terrorists from foreign countries across the globe. An act of terror can be any senseless act of violence that poses as a threat to the American people. Incidents such as the Sandy Hook Massacre, the theatre shooting in Aurora, Colo., and the Boston Marathon bombings all can be examples of acts of terror. Each of these disasters unsettled the American people and shattered our sense of security while leaving room for other disasters to follow.
It is incredibly disturbing that we live in a world where mass shootings of students and plane hijackings have become reality instead of something audiences would only see in movies or read about in books. Sadly, I believe that many of us have grown up in a time where news involving such horrors is far more common than news regarding positivity. Before too long, I fear that we will become completely immune to the terrors that surround us. Our generation is said to be one of change, and that is something we should start to act on.

Load-Date: March 20, 2014


End of Document