Terror rate analysis drawing criticism
Business Insurance
January 20, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 1061 words
Byline: MEG FLETCHER
Body


Regulators in the District of Columbia and New York are blasting a terrorism risk analysis that advises commercial insurers to charge policyholders in a handful of jurisdictions more for terrorism coverage than elsewhere.
The analysis, which was drawn up by the Insurance Services Office Inc. from a model created by its Boston-based AIR Worldwide Corp. subsidiary, is being used as part of terrorism insurance rate filings that ISO is making on behalf of commercial property/casualty insurers.
Jersey City, N.J.-based ISO's analysis organized geographic areas into three tiers based on modeling their potential for future terrorism losses. In addition to the District of Columbia and all New York City boroughs, ISO said other tier-one, or ''high hazard,'' risks were Cook County, Ill., which includes Chicago; and San Francisco County, Calif.
ISO identifies tier-two, or ''moderate hazard,'' areas as: Harris County, Texas, which includes Houston; King County, Wash., which includes Seattle; Los Angeles County, Calif.; Philadelphia; and Suffolk County, Mass., which includes Boston. The rest of the United States was found to be tier-three, or ''low hazard,'' areas for terrorism risks.
District of Columbia Insurance Commissioner Larry Mirel said ISO told him that terrorism premium charges for a high-hazard area could increase policyholders' terrorism insurance premiums for most commercial property/casualty risks by 50% to 150% for the first year.
New York Insurance Superintendent Gregory Serio said he understood that the potential terrorism premium increase for commercial property risks in New York City could be 150%, which he called ''outrageous.''
The outcry comes at a time when insurers in nearly every state are working to quantify the risk of terrorist threats and notify businesses of the premium they would charge to insure the risk. Policyholders would then have the option to buy or refuse the terrorism coverage.
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 was designed to encourage insurers to write terrorism coverage for businesses by creating a federal backstop, in which the government will cover 90% of damages in excess of $10 billion, up to $100 billion. Because the law did not create a pooling mechanism, the law relies on free-market forces to set rates.
According to Mr. Mirel, ISO's near-complete filing advises insurers on what they should charge for terrorism coverage of commercial property and liability risks in the first year:
* In tier-one areas, 14 cents per $100 of insured value.
* In tier-two areas, 7 cents per $100.
* And in tier-three areas, 0.16 cents per $100.
Based on that preliminary filing, for each $1 million of terrorism coverage, a policyholder would pay a premium of $1,400 in tier one, $700 in tier two and $160 in tier three.
''I understand that insurers have to charge more for terrorism risks and they are looking to rating agencies to tell them how much. But the rating advice has to be reasonable, logical and defensible and, to me, ISO's assumptions are off the wall,'' Mr. Mirel said.
For example, he said, the analysis considers the District of Columbia alone and not as part of a larger metropolitan area. Consequently, neighboring Arlington, Va.-where terrorists flew a plane into the Pentagon-is considered part of a ''low hazard'' third-tier area, despite incurring actual terrorism losses, he said.
A spokesman for AIR said that it was asked to model its data on a county-by-county basis, which resulted in the District of Columbia being considered as a separate entity.
Mr. Mirel also questions the model's terrorism threat assumptions. For example, he said he was told that ISO's catastrophe consultants are anticipating that there will be one terrorist attack each year for the next 20 years.
Meanwhile, New York's Mr. Serio said, ''We are extremely curious to see how they can rationalize an increase'' without more historical data.
Both regulators say they will carefully scrutinize ISO's final terrorism filings for their tier-one jurisdictions, once they receive it.
Mr. Mirel said that if the District of Columbia filing resembles the preliminary data he saw, he would reject it.
Depending upon a jurisdiction's law, ISO could appeal any such rejection or let the filing stand, though an insurer using it to justify rates could itself face regulatory scrutiny and possible sanctions.
ISO expects to have a final filing for tier-one areas ''in coming weeks,'' after it finishes evaluating modeling data related to nuclear, biological and chemical terrorism risks, according to Stephen Noceti, vp-government relations for ISO.
The ratemaking organization already made similar filings in the tier-two and tier-three areas, ''though this is not a static, one-time thing...because of the developing science and information base,'' he said.
ISO defended the terrorism risk analysis. In developing its model, AIR employed a team of counterterrorism specialists from the CIA, FBI and the Defense Department. It also created a comprehensive database of more than 300,000 national landmarks, said S. Ming Lee, an AIR senior vp.
While the terrorism model reflects a general assumption that landmarks and potential targets would enhance their security efforts to foil terrorists, AIR is looking into providing an individualized program that would help companies to design security plans, he added.
While it is understandable that regulators and policyholders may be concerned about ISO's efforts to determine a price for terrorism protection, ''federal law does not provide any mechanism for spreading the cost of coverage,'' said Carole J. Banfield, ISO executive vp.
The stakes are high, though. ISO's terrorism risk assessment could determine a community's economic viability, because some property owners may flee expensive, high-risk areas for inexpensive, lower-risk ones.
Risk managers so far have little to say about the impact of the process on their organizations. Many have not yet received the premium notices from their insurers.
''The marketplace is currently dictating the cost of coverage, which affects the appetite of the potential policyholder,'' said Lance J. Ewing, executive director of risk management at Park Place Entertainment in Las Vegas. He is also first vp and chief risk officer for the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.
''The marketplace can be vicious, at times,'' he said.

Load-Date: January 24, 2003


End of Document