Terrorism spotlight again shines on Columbia, Mo.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 17, 2004 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: METRO; Pg. D01
Length: 1328 words
Byline: JEREMY KOHLER AND PETER SHINKLE Of the Post-Dispatch The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Body


For the third time in five years, the national hunt for terrorists is focused on an unlikely site: a nondescript office in Columbia, Mo., downstairs from a bridal shop and next door to a Walgreens.
The Islamic American Relief Agency has been situated near the University of Missouri flagship campus for 19 years, ostensibly to raise money for children in poor and war-torn countries. It did so for 14 years without appearing to raise an eyebrow. That changed when the U.S. State Department in 1999 revoked contracts worth $4.2 million to the group, saying they were contrary to U.S. defense and foreign-policy interests.
Then it was learned that a satellite phone bought by an associate of the group was used by Osama bin Laden to plan bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998.
The disclosure caused some to worry in Columbia immediately after the 9/11 attacks. Residents pleaded for stepped-up FBI surveillance. Police, fearing reprisals against the city's Muslims, increased patrols around the Islamic Center of Central Missouri.
The United States finally took action last week, accusing the group of funneling money to terrorists -- notably bin Laden. The U.S. Treasury Department froze the group's assets and made it a crime to contribute to the group.
Federal agents searched the group's offices, storage lockers and the home of one of its directors, seizing documents and computers. It also raided the home of a Muslim leader in Wolcott, Conn., with ties to the group.
No one was arrested. No individual was accused of actually being a terrorist. And, it appeared, there was no threat to Columbia. Afterward, questions abounded:
- If the Columbia office sponsors terrorism, then why wasn't anyone indicted?
- What prompted the raids now?
- Did the government know of a specific threat?
Answers were sparse. Neither the FBI nor the Treasury Department would detail reasons behind the raids or the accusations of the Columbia organization's links to bin Laden.
U.S. Rep. Kenny Hulshof, R-Columbia, said he was briefed Friday by the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence in the Treasury Department.
"Most importantly, they have once again assured me that Columbia is under no immediate threat of danger," Hulshof said in a statement. "They stressed that actions taken Wednesday were not taken to thwart any impending event."
Hulshof said that Treasury and FBI officials now have "the arduous task" of combing through all the seized documents. "It is my assumption this will take several weeks to complete," he said.
Meanwhile, principal members of the relief agency in Columbia were staying out of the spotlight. None responded to phone messages or notes left on doorsteps last week.
In the Columbia Tribune, agency board member Ali Bagegni was quoted as saying about his group's operations, "There are no illegal things."
Fatten Elkomy, whom the Tribune said had worked as a programmer for the agency since 1999, told the newspaper the group has no terrorist ties.
"I've been working there serving orphans and children with at least one deceased parent, and it breaks my heart they're not going to get any help," she was quoted as saying.
In an interview with the Post-Dispatch, Rashed Nizam, president of the Islamic Center of Central Missouri in Columbia, said he was unaware of any terrorist links involving the local charity.
"To our knowledge, this organization is helping the poor and orphans around the world," he said. He added, though, that the government says it has information it cannot reveal at this time.
"I hope the truth shall prevail," he said.
St. Louis connection St. Louis activist Eric Vickers incorporated the Columbia group in 1985, he said, on behalf of Sudanese college students who wanted to form a chapter of the worldwide group Islamic African Relief Agency, which is based in Khartoum, Sudan.
Columbia's chapter was initially formed as Islamic African Relief Agency United States Affiliate. It changed its name to Islamic American Relief Agency in 2000, its public filings show.
Vickers was listed as recently as August as the group's registered agent. He said Friday that he has not been involved since the mid-1990s and said he only learned about the raids in the newspaper.
The goal of the founding members, whom Vickers said have long since returned to Sudan, was to send money to hospitals and needy people in Africa.
"I'm proud of my work with them," he said. He said the group was not involved with terrorism.
Vickers, a former lawyer, is well known in St. Louis for organizing street protests, such as one last year to win more contracts for minority companies by shutting down MetroLink.
For a time, he headed the American Muslim Council in Washington. He resigned in March 2003 after the council complained that Vickers had written an e-mail to an online discussion group suggesting that the Columbia shuttle crash, with the first Israeli astronaut aboard, might have been a message from God.
Vickers said his e-mail was misinterpreted. His real meaning, he said, was that "this is a sign to America that in going to war -- as great as our technology is -- it can still fail."
Vickers said there was no relationship -- aside from him -- between the Islamic American Relief Agency in Columbia and the American Muslim Council.
But the American Muslim Council, too, has come under scrutiny.
In Alexandria, Va., on Friday, its founder was sentenced to 23 years in prison for illegal financial dealings with Libya and for his role in a Libyan plot to assassinate Saudi Arabia's de facto leader. Abdurahman Alamoudi, 52, had pleaded guilty in July to accepting hundreds of thousands of dollars from high-ranking Libyan officials while serving as a go-between for them and Saudi dissidents.
"Contrary" to U.S. interests In 1998, the U.S. Agency for International Development awarded two contracts, worth a total of $4.2 million, to the Columbia-based charity for development projects in Mali. One project called for the agency to improve education, water supplies and "income-generating activities," and the other was for children's health.
In December 1999, Thomas Pickering, undersecretary of state for political affairs, demanded the cancellation of the contracts because they were "contrary to the national defense and foreign policy interests of the United States," the State Department has said.
While the projects were canceled, roughly $1 million had been disbursed to the group, State Department spokesman Edgar Vasquez said Friday.
He said he could not discuss the exact reasons for Pickering's actions because Pickering's letter canceling the contracts was classified.
Last week, the Treasury Department said the Sudan-based charity has 40 offices around the world and uses them as part of its efforts to support bin Laden, al-Qaida and other groups designated as terrorist, including the Palestinian group Hamas.
The Islamic African Relief Agency network provided assistance to Taliban fighters, and a charity leader in Afghanistan raised $5 million for the Taliban during a fund-raising trip in Sudan and in the Middle East in 2000, the department said.
One bin Laden lieutenant served as the director of the network's operations in Afghanistan and also was an expert in terrorism, bomb planning and guerrilla operations, the department said.
The department also extended its ban to five foreign nationals involved with the charity as terrorism supporters, including a Libyan who represents the charity in Ireland. The man, Ibrahim Buisir, directed a cell for al-Qaida that provided support to the terrorist network's operations in Europe, the department said.
John W. Snow, the Treasury secretary, said last week's action "highlights the important role of designations in the war on terrorist finance -- freezing assets that might otherwise have been used to support terrorists; preventing future funds from flowing through tainted channels; and making clear to the public and our international partners the conduits being used to fuel terrorism."

Graphic

 
photo

Load-Date: October 18, 2004


End of Document