Terrorism drill to test health agencies Mock attacks,disasters planned throughout Chicago area this week
Chicago Daily Herald
May 11, 2003, Sunday All


Copyright 2003 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 676 words
Byline: Shamus Toomey and Madhu Krishnamurthy Daily Herald Staff;Writers
Body


Hospitals and health agencies around the suburbs will get a chance to shine or flounder amid disaster this week as Homeland Security officials launch a massive $16 million terrorism drill that will play out in emergency rooms.  
With a goal of preparing emergency crews for terrorist attacks, officials will fake a pneumonic plague attack in the Chicago area, a plane crash at Midway Airport and a radioactive "dirty bomb" blast in Seattle.  
But with the exception of a flood of actors coming into emergency rooms beginning Tuesday and several antibiotic clinics being set up in the suburbs, most folks shouldn't notice the drill, officials said.  
It won't involve on-duty police officers, firefighters, ambulances or squad cars, so real emergencies won't be shortchanged, officials said.  
What will happen is hospitals and health departments will get a chance to see how their terror reaction plans work under simulated conditions. Communication systems, disease reporting plans and large-scale antibiotic distribution will be among the things tested during the weeklong drill.  
"The attack is not real. It is simply a simulation," said Edward Buikema, a regional director for the Federal Emergency Management Agency. "But the response will be as realistic as possible."  
The script for the Chicago disasters calls for the terrorist strike to secretly hit Saturday night. A terror group released airborne pneumonic plague at the United Center Saturday. By Tuesday, "victims" will be flooding into local hospital complaining of mysterious flu-like symptoms.  
Among the actors will be 20 seventh-graders from a life sciences class in Rondout Elementary Disrict 72 in Green Oaks. They will be taken to Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center in Chicago to be treated for their mystery illnesses.  
"I think it will help both us and the doctors 'cause if we were injured, we wouldn't know what we should do," said Ashley Koziol, 12. "And it will help the doctors practice and make sure they know what they're doing."  
Hospital workers might actually rip students' clothing during treatment. The situation will be unpredictable, but students anticipate they will learn from it.  
"We'll get to see how we're able to react in a crisis," said Jeremy Brick, 13.  
The drill calls for a presumptive diagnosis of the plague by Tuesday afternoon, a confirmation Wednesday and the establishment of a series of antibiotic distribution clinics by Thursday, said Kitty Loewy, spokeswoman for Cook County's public health department.  
"The challenge for all of us is to try to collaborate and coordinate all of these services so we can respond quickly and effectively," she said. "That's what this drill is testing. It's a matter of forming all these new partnerships and relationships so we know how to work together."  
Officials in Lake County will set up a clinic in Lake Bluff to dispense the prophylaxis antibiotic. Clinic will also be set up at the DuPage County Fairgrounds in Wheaton, at the Illinois Math and Science Academy in Aurora, at a center in Bridgeview and at two Chicago locations.  
"Our department has been preparing for this exercise for the past year," Lake County epidemiologist Victor Plotkin said.  
On Thursday, the script calls for a simulated plane crash at Midway Airport. Officials plan to use smoke on the site. Other disasters that will be faked locally include a building collapse, a hazardous material incident and some surprises.  
The week will end with law enforcement officials raiding a secret biological lab in Chicago and apprehending those responsible for the attacks.  
"What we learn from next week's exercise will help us in every city and state in the country," said Mike Chamness, chairman of the state's Terrorism Task Force.  
Homeland Security officials also will be conducting a terrorism drill in Seattle this week. In it, a mock bomb will be set off by a fake terrorist group called "GLODO."  
Similar emergency preparedness drills were conducted in the Denver area in 2000.  
- Daily Herald news services contributed to this report.

Load-Date: May 19, 2003


End of Document