TERRORISM EXPLORED ON 13
The New York Times
January 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk; Review
Length: 583 words
Byline: By JOHN CORRY
Body


THE panelists, all distinguished, ponder a question:
How should government and news media respond to a hijacking by terrorists? Some of the panelists may leave you uneasy; at the same time, you can't accuse them of not being provocative. Their discussion, shown on ''In the Face of Terrorism,'' a four-part series, begins on Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight.
The format is by now almost a public-television tradition. A moderator - tonight it is Arthur R. Miller of the Harvard Law School - posits hypothetical situations; the panelists discuss them. On tonight's program, filmed in the Caucus Room of the Senate, the principal hypothesis is this: Terrorists have hijacked a plane from ''Tiberius'' and diverted it to ''Cedarnon''; American passengers are aboard.
Why call the countries Tiberius and Cedarnon, and not Italy and Lebanon? Presumably, it is to allow Mr. Miller and his colleagues room to maneuver. If real countries aren't identified, international feelings won't be offended. Tiberius and Cedarnon are a mistake, however; names like that allow archness to creep into the discussion. Distinguished or not, the moderator and panelists sometimes seem to be playing for laughs.
Thus an exchange between Jody Powell, once press secretary to President Carter, and Jack Nelson, Washington bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times: What do you do, Mr. Miller asks Mr. Nelson, when you're checking out reports of a hijacking?
Mr. Nelson says he'd call the White House and ask questions, but would expect the White House to lie. Mr. Powell says that yes, as press secretary he would lie, and that the important thing would be to sound convincing. Chuckles among the panelists then; it all sounds charming and sophisticated.
In real life, though, smart Washington officials don't lie; they just don't always tell all the truth. The panelists are being cynical without purpose. If you feel a little uncomfortable about this, you should.
Meanwhile, Mr. Miller asks questions about television. How will it cover the hijacking? Some of these answers should make you uncomfortable, too. Lesley Stahl of CBS suggests that you just let the cameras roll, filming everything in sight. The public, she says, has a right to know what's happening.
Well, yes; but should television be a platform for terrorists? Peter Jennings of ABC and Burton Benjamin, a former vice president of CBS News, now a fellow of the Gannett Center for Media Studies, at least have reservations. Television, they say thoughtfully, should not turn itself over blindly to terrorists; producers should edit the film. This seems like a sensible position.
''In the Face of Terrorism,'' produced by the Columbia University Seminars on Media and Society, in association with WNET in New York and WETA in Washington, was filmed last September. News of the arms sale to Iran was disclosed in November. In a way, it makes the program more germane.
The discussion, after all, isn't about what is done in the face of terrorism; it's about what should be done. All the panelists - among them William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence; Edward Heath, once Prime Minister of Britain; James R. Schlesinger, former Secretary of Defense, and Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli Ambassador to the United Nations -agree on standing firm against terrorists.
Viewers may get a sense of wonderment about this; since November, news stories have indicated that the United States has lacked a firm policy on terrorism. ''In the Face of Terrorism'' does have its irony.

Graphic

 
Photo of members of panel


End of Document