Terrorism experts to take questions; Panel discussion at UD on Friday will promote PBS documentary series exploring the war on terror.
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 12, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL; Pg. A9
Length: 283 words
Byline: By Stephanie Irwin Staff Writer
Body


DAYTON - Three terrorism experts will speak and take questions from area residents at the University of Dayton on Friday night as part of the PBS series "America at a Crossroads," which airs next week.
PBS affiliates are hosting town hall-style public discussions in cities across the U.S. to create a national dialogue over the televised series' topics.
The 11 independently produced documentaries on the war on terror will premiere on Sunday and will run nightly through April 20.
The series explores the challenges facing a post-Sept. 11 world, according to the series' Web site.
Mark Ensalaco, associate political science professor at UD, teaches classes on political violence and terrorism and will discuss why the U.S. should adhere to the laws of war, he said.
Ensalaco has investigated torture tactics and U.S. terrorism policy, specifically the legality of U.S. interrogation practices of detainees suspected to be members of al-Qaida.
"There's pretty compelling evidence that the U.S. government abandoned, ignored or redefined its international commitments" to humanitarian law during the war on terror, he said.
Donna Schlagheck, professor and chair of political science at Wright State University, will talk about the Patriot Act.
A third speaker, Martha Crenshaw, is a top academic and investigator into why the United States is a target of terrorism. She will discuss President Bush's war strategy.
The event is free, and an hour is allotted for open questions and debate, Ensalaco said.
How to go What: National Terrorism Panel for PBS series "America at a Crossroads" When: 7 to 9 p.m. Friday Where: University of Dayton Boll Theatre, in the Kennedy Student Union Information: (937) 229-3391

Load-Date: April 16, 2007


End of Document