TERRORISM SPURS BOOK SALES BOOST
Daily News (New York)
September 19, 2001, Wednesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
Section: BUSINESS;
Length: 351 words
Byline: By PAUL D. COLFORD DAILY NEWS BUSINESS WRITER
Body

On the day terrorists struck, sales at Barnes & Noble's superstores plunged to half the level of a year earlier.
By last weekend, they had shown a remarkable recovery - a 4.5% increase.
The numbers from the country's largest bookstore chain suggested the industry might be resilient this fall - though still much different from what publishers hoped.
Three of the top five sellers yesterday at the online store Amazon.com deal with subjects in the news: "Germs" (germ warfare), "The New Jackals" (terrorists) and "Twin Towers."
Another hot title is "Holy War Inc.: Inside the Secret World of Osama Bin Laden" by Peter Bergen, CNN's on-air terrorism expert. Simon & Schuster said yesterday that its Free Press imprint will release the book in November, instead of next spring, and Vanity Fair will excerpt it.
Big orders for Ahmed Rashid's "Taliban" since last Tuesday sent Yale University Press back to press twice, for a total of 50,000 additional copies.
"It's been weird, a different atmosphere," said Frank Alicea, a supervisor at Barnes & Noble's store on Fifth Avenue at 48th Street. Surveying the aisles yesterday morning, he explained that traffic was steady the past few days, but fewer customers than usual were browsing.
Instead, many headed straight to such sections as Mideast History. As a result, the store sold out its stock of books about Bin Laden, plus those dealing with the dark prophecies of the 16th-century figure Nostradamus.
Author appearances have been cancelled, including yesterday's visit by self-empowerment guru Dan Pallotta, whose book may have the most unfortunate title of the past week: "When Your Moment Comes."
Claudia Kennedy also won't visit to sign copies of "Generally Speaking," and author interviews done by ABC's Barbara Walters and Diane Sawyer probably won't air this week. Still, the Army's former intelligence chief has been on TV to discuss terrorism.
Jack Welch's "Jack: Straight From the Gut" went on sale the day the twin towers fell, halting a promotional marathon. But Warner's big fall title is No. 2 on Amazon and the publisher said he'll go on the road Oct. 15.

Graphic

 
On shelves for months, "Taliban" book is now hot item with printing of 50,000 more copies.

Load-Date: September 19, 2001


End of Document