Terrorism's challenge for TV
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 28, 1987, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; Columns; Pg. 16A; COLUMN
Length: 726 words
Byline: ANDREW ROSENTHAL
Dateline: ST. PETERSBURG
Body


ST. PETERSBURG - Next week an airplane will be hijacked and the    passengers, many of them American, will be taken hostage. If not next    week, it will happen the week after or next month or the month after    that. But it will happen, for two reasons.
 
     Terrorism, old in warfare, has been developed by nationalist and    carefully nurtured religious fanaticism, to the point where it is a    weapon, not simply of local resistance but of world importance.
 
     Nothing gets them more attention and blackmail power than the    horror of an airplane hijacking.
 
     And most of the victim nations have shown they will crack when    hostages are taken. The United States cracked to Soviet hostage taking    by trading a Soviet spy for an American newsman and then delivered    blackmail arms to Iran.
 
     Israel cracked by turning over 1,150 prisoners for three Israelis.
 
 The Italians let a hunted terrorist escape, the French dealt almost    x x openly in trading with terrorists for their hostages.
 
     Anybody who says this contemptuously is a fool. We all know that    were one of our family taken hostage we would want only one thing of    our government - rescue. But the surrenders do lead, bitterly, to more    hostage taking and more pain for more families.
 
     Once again the frightened faces of the victims will appear on TV    screens the world over. And once again the captors will orchestrate    their own performance on the TV stage. Once more disgusted viewers and    harassed governments will say that the press, particularly TV, is    terrorism's tool and endangering the lives of the hostages. Louder than    ever will come demands for some form of regulation - outright    censorship, barring reporters and cameras from the scene, or sweeping    press self-restriction.
 
     TV producers and correspondents and newspaper people talked it all    over at a meeting here organized by the Poynter Institute for Media    Studies, which owns the St. Petersburg Times, one of the country's    good newspapers.
 
     The question on our minds was whether the long, wearing hijacking    coverage in Beirut in 1985 had endangered the lives of the hostages or    made freeing the captives more difficult. To his own professional    credit, Parker Borg, a State Department anti-terrorism expert at the    time, said the answer was no.        But during next week's or next month's hostage taking, the debate    will start all over again. TV does not enjoy all the First Amendment    protections - I believe it should - and the pressure will be heavy.
 
     There are things that can be done that would not damage the right    of TV to present the news fully and would help prevent it from becoming    the most important hostage of all.
 
     Occasionally the gunmen get control of TV by being broadcast live,    from the scene of the crime right into the living room, spouting    whatever they wish. This is exactly as if gunmen marched into a    newspaper office and dictated to reporters and editors every word that    was to appear in print. Pausing to see and edit tapes in advance is no    more an act of censorship than a newspaper editor taking a look at a    story before it is printed and using something called judgment.
 
     Terrorists feed on chaos, and press-TV mob scenes create the    hysteria they seek. TV could help by using correspondents but just one    or two camera crews, sharing film but not the reporting or commentary.
 
     Almost all TV anchormen and producers are skilled, experienced and    serious and could hold down top jobs on newspapers; greater praise hath    no editor. But sometimes the job of interviewing captors is turned over    to TV personalities who are simply entertainers and treat the captors    as statesmen: "Do you have a message for President Reagan?"
 
     These steps will counter some of the intricately planned    manipulation by the terrorists. But TV and press bashing will continue;
 
 it won't kill us.
 
     Neither will it change the fact that the agonizingly drawn-out pain    of captives and family has come not from TV cameras and anchorpeople or    newspaper reporters but from the faltering will of governments and the    men you see waving their rifles and sneering at the world, next week or    next month.
 
  - A.M. Rosenthal is the associate editor of the New York Times. -
 
    

Load-Date: November 18, 1992


End of Document