TERROR THRILLER IS ALL EYES
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 21, 2008 Thursday


Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WEEKEND; Pg. 6W
Length: 525 words
Byline: STEVE PERSALL, Times Film Critic
Highlight: Eyewitness accounts vary, but all agree: Vantage Point needs to build up more suspense.
Body


Vantage Point shows a terrorist attack from eight points of view, with maybe four that are necessary. The others simply pad Pete Travis' movie to a respectable running time.
Clocking in at 90 minutes (counting end credits), Vantage Point feels like an episode of 24 with a rewinding clock. There is admirable tension, as any film these days including graphic terrorism can provide. There's even a slam-bang, old-school car chase to quicken the pulse.
What Vantage Point doesn't have is a consistent accumulation of suspense. The first time through the attack is gripping: A summit of world leaders in Spain to decry terrorism is bombed, right after the U.S. president (William Hurt) is shot by a sniper. We see it happen through the helpless perspective of a TV news director (Sigourney Weaver) covering the summit.
Travis rewinds to 23 minutes before the attack, and now we're alongside Secret Service agent Thomas Barnes (Dennis Quaid) as he prepares to escort the president. The TV director recognized him and now we understand why: Barnes took a couple of bullets for the president before and suffered a nervous breakdown. When the summit explodes, Barnes may not be prepared to handle the situation.
Rewind again to a tourist (Forest Whitaker) accidentally doing the Zapruder thing with a video recorder. Then go back to the Spanish police officer (Eduardo Noriega) who rushed the stage and was tackled by Barnes. Then backward once again to the policeman's lover (Ayelet Zurer) who has something to do with the bombing, and a flashback of her own. There are other rewinds that shouldn't be spoiled, even if the movie sours with them.
The gimmick works in Vantage Point while essential questions of character are being answered. It continues beyond that, bunching together previous chance meetings and fleeting glimpses with groaning coincidences.
How miraculous that the camera-toting tourist should meet a cute child (while he's fretting about his family life) whom he will find later in the midst of all this carnage and panic. That he always has his lens pointed in the right direction can be chalked up as the Cloverfield effect. Barnes happens to be in the TV control truck to see something on a monitor that cracks the case, but we wait an hour for what it is. By then it is appallingly wrong to consider Vantage Point as a smart thriller.
Quaid does the Harrison Ford thing to nice effect, all grimaces and terse line readings. Hurt steps away from his more interesting recent tact of hamming up material needing it. Whitaker hadn't earned his Oscar yet when Vantage Point was filmed in 2006, so the role and his portrayal aren't worthy of his current stature. I'll bet he'd like to hit the rewind button on this project.
Steve Persall can be reached at (727) 893-8365 or persall@sptimes.com Read his blog at blogs.tampabay.com/movies.
Review
Vantage Point
Grade: C
Director: Pete Travis
Cast: Dennis Quaid, Forest Whitaker, William Hurt, Sigourney Weaver, Matthew Fox, Bruce McGill, Eduardo Noriega, Edgar Ramirez, Ayelet Zurer, Said Taghmaoui
Screenplay: Barry Levy
Rating: PG-13; violence, terrorism, disturbing images, profanity
Running time: 90 min.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Columbia Pictures: Secret Service agents played by Richard T. Jones, left, and Dennis Quaid assist a fellow agent in Vantage Point, directed by Pete Travis.

Load-Date: February 21, 2008


End of Document