TERRORISM IN GREECE;
BRITISH OFFICIAL'S ASSASSINATION LINKED TO GROUP
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 9, 2000, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 473 words
Byline: BRIAN MURPHY, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: ATHENS, Greece
Body


A British defense attache was assassinated yesterday and police found evidence pointing to the terrorist group November 17, whose members have eluded capture despite a 25-year legacy of bloodshed.
Greek officials are under enormous pressure to show results after what appears to be the group's 22nd slaying: a .45-caliber barrage into the chest and stomach of Brig. Stephen Saunders, the defense attache in the British Embassy, while he drove to a meeting to discuss possible tank sales to Greece.
Another failure to make an arrest would be an embarrassing blow for a nation desperately trying to shed its image as an unstable corner of Western Europe. Greece is expected to receive approval to join the EU's single currency group later this month in Portugal.
"Greece is unable to face the phenomenon of terrorism," complained parliament member Dora Bakoyannis, whose politician husband, Pavlos, was killed by November 17 in 1989. "We must not have taboos to take the steps needed."
Such demands are also coming from Washington. Among the November 17 victims are four American officials and one U.S. Embassy employee.
A report last week by a Congressional commission proposed sanctions on Greece and Pakistan for "not cooperating fully" in the battle against terrorism. Hearings are scheduled next week. The State Department has described Greece as "one of the weakest links" in anti-terrorism efforts in Europe.
The spotlight is also on Greece to develop a security plan for the 2004 Olympics. Saunders, 52, was shot near the main stadium for the games.
But there have never been widespread demands for major anti-terrorist sweeps from average Greeks, who generally feel untouched by November 17 violence because it limits attacks to foreigners and prominent Greeks. Some critics allege the governing Socialists lack the will to crack down on domestic terrorism -- possibly fearing political upheaval.
In an interview published yesterday in the Greek weekly Pondiki, former CIA director James Woolsey suggested the Greek government was "not serious in its pursuit of November 17."
There was no immediate claim of responsibility. But all signs pointed to November 17, which takes its name from the 1973 student-led uprising against the military junta that ruled Greece from 1967-74.
A police ballistics test indicated the .45 caliber pistol used to killed Saunders was the same gun fired in past killings claimed by the group. The site and method of the killing was almost identical to two other November 17 slayings.
Two gunmen riding a motorcycle pulled up to the passenger side of Saunders' car, which he was driving alone on a roadway clogged with morning commuters. The gunmen fired through the window and fled. Saunders died later in a hospital.
November 17 claims to follow a mix of ideologies: Marxist, ultra-nationalist and anti-militaristic.

Load-Date: June 10, 2000


End of Document