TERRORISM ALERT STAYS AT YELLOW DESPITE WARNING
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 31, 2003 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 287 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Federal officials say they have no plans to raise the nation's terrorism alert level despite warnings that five-man al-Qaida teams may be planning to hijack and crash more airplanes, similar to the Sept. 11 attacks.
"The hijackers may try to calm passengers and make them believe they were on a hostage, not suicide, mission," a warning distributed over the weekend to airlines and law enforcement agencies said.
"The hijackers may attempt to use common items carried by travelers, such as cameras, modifie d as weapons."
Officials said the credibility of the threat was still being evaluated. But they noted that there was no precise information on when or where such an attack could take place.
A copy of the warning from the Homeland Security Department, obtained by The Associated Press, suggests an attack could take place by the end of the summer. The warning said terrorists may use five-man teams to take over airplanes just after takeoff or before landing and crash them into buildings.
It suggested cities on the East Coast of the United States, in the United Kingdom, Italy and Australia as possible targets.
"No equipment or operatives are known to have been deployed to conduct the operations," the warning said.
The national terrorist threat level remained at yellow, signifying an elevated risk of attacks. The five-level, color-coded system was last raised to orange, or high risk, for 11 days in May. Officials said they did not plan to raise it to reflect the possibility of suicide hijackings.
The warning was based on information gleaned from interviews of at least one al-Qaida prisoner as well as intercepted communications, one intelligence official said. The information was developed in the past several weeks.

Load-Date: July 31, 2003


End of Document