Terrorism reinsurance availability seen as improving; Inland Marine Underwriters Assn. 72nd Annual Conference
Business Insurance
June 17, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 20
Length: 774 words
Byline: RODD ZOLKOS
Body


OAK BROOK, Ill.-Although reinsurance markets that were already firming prior to Sept. 11 have grown even harder, the market for terrorism reinsurance has become more favorable to buyers since Jan. 1 renewals, one reinsurance brokerage executive says.
Discussing the state of reinsurance markets at the annual conference of the Inland Marine Underwriters Assn. earlier this month in Oak Brook, Ill., Vincent D. Liotta, managing director at Guy Carpenter & Co. Inc., said prices are ''dramatically dropping'' for terrorism reinsurance.
Mr. Liotta, who is head of the marine and aviation department at the New York-based reinsurance brokerage, said capacity is readily available for terrorism reinsurance, with coverage available on an excess-of-loss and pro rata basis, as well as on an annual aggregate-of-liability basis.
The principal markets for terrorism reinsurance are Bermuda and London, Mr. Liotta said, and available coverage includes reinsurance for biological and chemical attacks.
Terrorism reinsurance activity has been particularly noteworthy in the Bermuda market, he said.
''Bermuda's always been known as a property cat market, but since Sept. 11 the opportunity has been to make money any way they can,'' Mr. Liotta said.
''How did Bermuda react to terrorism? In a frenzy,'' Mr. Liotta said. ''They were writing the hell out of it. They saw an opportunity to make money.''
The Bermuda reinsurers are large writers of marine and aviation war coverages and terrorism-specific coverages, he said. Terrorism reinsurance rates have come down since the Jan. 1 renewal cycle in Bermuda, and large amounts of terrorism capacity remain available.
In terms of general reactions by the reinsurance market to Sept. 11 and to last year's other losses, Mr. Liotta said that on property per-risk coverages, reinsurers are pushing for clarity in terms of risk definitions, assessments of risk accumulations and large-risk participation. ''The more information you can give, the better it is,'' he said.
In addition, he noted that property reinsurers are imposing exclusions for terrorism, Internet-related risks and toxic mold, and that pricing is being driven by both exposure and experience.
Likewise, property catastrophe reinsurance coverages routinely include terrorism, Internet and mold exclusions, Mr. Liotta said.
In the marine market, the cost of capital has risen, and reinsurers are writing business selectively, the Guy Carpenter executive said. Rates are generally up by 35% to 100%, and clients are buying less reinsurance.
In the retrocessional market, reinsurers experienced significant losses in 2001 in addition to those of Sept. 11, Mr. Liotta said. As a result, price increases this year have been ''astronomical,'' with coverages now containing absolute terrorism exclusions and information technology hazards clauses.
The harder retrocessional market is one reason insurers now are facing a difficult reinsurance market, he said.
In the United States, another effect of reinsurers' recent losses is that most companies are ''reflecting on the past and contemplating the value of going forward,'' Mr. Liotta said. ''There have been reinsurance companies in the United States that have been very public about their intentions to sell their operations,'' he said.
Among the developments in the London market, Mr. Liotta cited the continuing addition of corporate capital into Lloyd's of London, a move Mr. Liotta said might serve Lloyd's well in the long term, ''because these big boys know what they're getting into.''
''There will be more to come, no doubt,'' he said.
In general, the impact of Sept. 11 on the relationship between reinsurers and insurers has been ''quite critical,'' said another panelist, Paul Walther, chief executive officer and principal consultant at Reinsurance Directions Inc. in Heathrow, Fla.
''The market has changed. There were things that have been done in the past that can't be done today,'' Mr. Walther said.
''Everybody's going to have to change, at least for the short term, until reinsurers are back to a profitable level,'' Mr. Liotta said.
Another change developing in the property reinsurance market is a move away from surplus-share coverage, said George M. Gottheimer, president and CEO of consultant Kernan Associates Inc. in Berkeley Heights, N.J. In a surplus-share treaty, similar to a quota-share contract, an insurer cedes a stipulated amount of risk in excess of its retention.
''Much of property reinsurance has been done on a surplus-share basis. We're seeing some change to risk excess,'' Mr. Gottheimer said. ''What the reinsurer suffers on a surplus-share basis is a very erratic experience.''

Load-Date: June 21, 2002


End of Document