Terrorism is no excuse for deficit spending
Air Force Times
March 10, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 50
Length: 670 words
Byline: Robert F. Dorr
Body


What would happen if you wrote checks every day for money you don't have? It's a safe bet you would be in trouble with your bank. You might even get in trouble with your commander.
But the federal government does this every day.
Some argue the government needs to spend money it doesn't have as a necessary response to the war on terrorism. But in my view, bankrupting future generations of Americans won't make the nation stronger or more secure.
Moreover, American troops are shortchanged when the government spends money it hasn't taken in. Deficit spending leads to bad decisions on pay, benefits, equipment, training and tactics.
The Bush administration, which once pledged fiscal responsibility, now acknowledges that each year in the short-term future it plans to spend $300 billion more than it will take in. The real figure is likely to be higher.
Two days after giving Congress a $379.9 billion defense budget request for 2004, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told Capitol Hill he would ask for more, in part to cover the Pentagon's share of the $1.6 billion-a-month cost of the war on terrorism.
No one argues that we shouldn't spend whatever it takes to fight terrorism, defend the nation and provide a decent life for military people.
But our leaders are going way beyond that.
While giving lip service to "transformation" of the military, they are spending billions on a new Department of Homeland Security that is too big, too bureaucratic and too intrusive.
The Transportation Security Administration, which oversees passenger screening at airports and is part of the new department, now wants 75,000 employees instead of the 35,000 Congress envisioned.
"The TSA is out of control," said Bob Cadwalader, a columnist for the aviation trade newspaper Atlantic Flyer. "We gave absolute power to this agency. Now, they're at the nation's airports establishing a new bureaucracy at each, with an employment office, an administrative section and so on."
According to a report by William Matthews in another trade journal, Defense News, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge's new department will receive $36.2 billion if the administration's budget request passes Congress, while other agencies will get $5.1 billion for homeland security.
The problem is, much of this spending is going to create new bureaucracies that generate paperwork but don't make us safer.
The administration also plans to spend $7 billion next year on missile defense - in my opinion, an unworkable idea that amounts to little more than corporate welfare.
Not one cent of the money so far requested or appropriated will pay for a war with Iraq. That money will have to be raised in a "supplemental," a special bill by Congress to increase spending still further.
When government can't handle its affairs, all of us become losers. No one loses more than the men and women of the armed forces.
Retired Air Force Col. Randy Larsen, homeland security director for the Arlington, Va., think tank Anser, frequently points out that runaway deficit spending is as much a danger as any terrorist bomb.
"There is a tendency to try to solve a problem by throwing money at it," said Larsen. "What needs to happen is, spending needs to be smart and responsible."
It is not too late to pare down Ridge's bloated department. We should resist the urge to create new federal agencies. We need to genuinely transform the institutions we already possess, rather than creating new inefficiencies.
We need to scrap security precautions that are merely cosmetic and don't make us more secure. We need to cancel weapons that were designed to defeat the Soviet Union in the Cold War era. We need to make all of government, the armed forces included, lean and efficient.
No politician would say this, but I will. If necessary, we'll also need to raise taxes.
If we're going to defend America, we want our grandchildren to inherit a nation that is strong and secure. To achieve that goal, as citizens, we need to require our leaders in Washington to balance the nation's checkbook.

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document