TERRORISM FALLOUT;
 CLARKE IS BITTER, PARTISAN, CREDIBLE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
April 11, 2004 Sunday
TWO STAR EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT,
Length: 606 words
Byline: ROBERT SCHLESINGER
Body


By reputation in Washington, Richard A. Clarke, for almost 10 years the nation's top counter-terrorism official, was a master bureaucratic infighter with a keen knowledge of how to work the levers of power out of the public eye.
 With the publicity bombshell brought by his new book, "Against All Enemies: Inside America's War on Terror" (Free Press; $27), critics have tried to add a new label -- bitter partisan with a vendetta against the Bush administration.
 Is Clarke bitter? Judging from his book, he surely is -- although not without good reason.
Is he a partisan? In his memoir, his sympathies certainly lie with a Clinton administration that, in his eyes, "got it" on terror during eight years of mostly secret warring rather than a Bush administration that never did "get it," even after Sept. 11.
 But do the individual criticisms discredit the book? No. Clarke gives a valuable insight into the secret wars of the 1990s that erupted into the public view on Sept. 11, 2001, and to the attitudes that shape U.S. policy today.
 To be sure, his book has its flaws, the most glaring being its Clarke-eye perspective, in which the narrator emerges as a hero of many accomplishments.
 In 304 pages, Clarke manages, among other feats, to turn the tide against the Soviets in Afghanistan, create the first United Nations inspection regime in Iraq and remove Boutros Boutros-Ghali as secretary general of the United Nations and install the U.S.-friendlier Kofi Annan.
 Potentially more damaging for Clarke is his habit of recounting conversations, some from the late 1970s, verbatim. Perhaps he has a photographic memory or kept detailed journals for 25 years, but he likely would have been better served finding another way to recount the gist of the scenes.
 Nevertheless, his book is a worthwhile read for a number of reasons. Despite the publicity Clarke received for criticizing the second Bush administration, most of the book traces the evolution of radical Islamic terrorist groups and the U.S. responses to them since the 1980s.
 The history is particularly fascinating in filling in details and background to larger public events throughout the 1990s, a string that almost amounts to a secret war against terror.
 At times, his peculiar terror focus colors Clarke's view too much: He describes the successful U.S. intervention in Bosnia as a victory against al-Qaida. And while he makes a convincing case, it was a happy side effect, not the reason for intervention.
 The crux of the book, however, comes in his distinctions between the Clinton and Bush administrations. Clinton and his senior officials came into office oblivious to the threat of terrorism but soon came round to Clarke's view.
 Members of the second Bush administration, however, came into office with the mind-set that they were the adults who understood foreign policy far better than their undisciplined, weak-kneed Clinton counterparts.
 While it is too facile to say they ignored terrorism, certainly it was a minor issue that, in their view, the Clintonites spent too much time on at the expense of larger problems.
 The problem was compounded by the sense of corporate structure that the Bushies imposed on the White House after eight years of the freewheeling Clinton seminar style.
 Clarke's recounting of the administration's Iraq obsession has been much discussed, but he is persuasive in his argument that last year's war was a detour from, rather than a logical progression of, the war against al-Qaida.
 It remains a powerful statement of the extent to which the administration failed sufficiently to adjust its world-view, if not its rhetoric, after Sept. 11.

Notes

Schlesinger, a former Pentagon correspondent, can be reached at rschles@hotmail.com  

Graphic

 
DRAWING: Illustration by Ted Crow/Post-Gazette

Load-Date: April 13, 2004


End of Document