TERRORISM: A DEADLY YEAR
The New York Times
December 28, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk; STATISTICS
Length: 361 words
Body


The attacks on the Rome and Vienna airports yesterday were among a total of about 690 terrorist attacks so far this year, according to State Department figures. Here are some of the major terrorist attacks this year: March 8 - Car bomb explodes outside an apartment building in Beirut, killing 80 people. Reports in Washington say later that the bombing was the work of people who had been hired by a Lebanese counterterrorist team that had been working with the C.I.A. June 14 - Trans World Airlines Flight 847, carrying 145 passengers and 8 crew members, is commandeered by Shiite Moslem hijackers after it takes off from Athens. It is forced to fly to Beirut after several flights across the Mediterranean. One passenger, an American Navy diver, is slain. The rest of the captives are released in stages, with the last group, all Americans, freed June 30.
June 19 - Gunmen attack a cafe in San
Salvador, killing 13 people, including 4 United States marines and 2 United States businessmen. Aug. 17 - A car packed with dynamite explodes outside a crowded supermarket in a Christian suburb of East Beirut, killing at least 50 people and wounding 100. Sept. 16 - Thirty-nine people are wounded in a grenade attack at a cafe on Via Veneto in Rome. A Palestinian from Lebanon is charged in connection with the atack. Sept. 30 - Gunmen seize three Soviet diplomats and a Soviet Embassy doctor in Beirut. One of the diplomats is found dead three days later. Oct. 7 - Gunmen seize the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro and shoot Leon Klinghoffer, a tourist from New York City. After the gunmen give up the ship and leave Egypt by air, their plane is intercepted over the Mediterranean by United States Navy fighters. The plane carrying the gunmen is forced to land in Italy. Nov. 6 - Rebels seize a Federal Court building in Bogota, Colombia. Their siege ends after 28 hours and an army assault. The Justice Ministry says 95 people died, including 11 Supreme Court justices. Nov. 23 - An Egyptair plane is hijacked on a flight from Athens to Malta. Egyptian commandos storm the plane the next day; a total of 60 people are killed during the hijacking and storming of the plane.


End of Document