Terrorism alert level scaled back
USA TODAY
April 17, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1102 words
Byline: Mimi Hall
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Stepped-up security measures put in place nationwide two days before bombs started falling on Baghdad on March 19 will be scaled back under a lowered terrorism threat level announced Wednesday.
Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said he reduced the level from orange, or a "high" threat of attack, to yellow, representing an "elevated" risk, based on several factors, including the winding down of hostilities in Iraq, intelligence indicating the threat has diminished and the costs of heightened security.
The lower level means that elements of Operation Liberty Shield, a security plan tied to the start of the war, will be scaled back in undisclosed ways. The plan called for increased Coast Guard patrols of ports and waterways, tightened security at airports and along rail lines, more police at government buildings, flight restrictions over New York City and Washington, D.C., and increased disease surveillance by public health officials.
In New York City, officials said the threat level will remain at orange, and people entering the city through tunnels and over bridges will continue to pass through checkpoints. "We are maintaining the current status because New York remains under a greater risk of terrorism than other parts of the country," police spokesman Michael O'Looney said.
Ridge stressed that although the level is being reduced everywhere else, "extensive protective measures remain in place throughout our nation." We must be vigilant and alert to the possibility that al-Qaeda and those sympathetic to their cause, as well as former Iraqi-regime state agents and affiliated organizations, may attempt to conduct attacks against the U.S. or our interests abroad."
In an interview, Ridge said "it's tough to tell" whether the increased security level of the past month staved off any attacks. "We cannot say today that there was a specific incident that was thwarted," he said. But "enhanced security adds a complicating factor to any calculation that these terrorists make."
Federal law enforcement officials cited an extensive program aimed at identifying and interviewing thousands of Iraqi immigrants in the United States. FBI officials say the campaign may have helped neutralize attempts at retaliation after the war began.
Attorney General John Ashcroft is expected today to tout the administration's successes at home in keeping tabs on Iraqis. A senior Justice Department official said Ashcroft plans to reveal the number of Iraqis in the United States who were interviewed by the FBI and those who were detained or deported during the war. "It's going to be, 'We've done a good job keeping the Iraqis from blowing us up here,' " the official said.
Authorities say the capture March 1 of al-Qaeda operations chief Khalid Shaikh Mohammed may have helped disrupt attacks planned in the USA and against U.S. interests abroad. Mohammed has been giving authorities information about al-Qaeda tactics, targets and potential terrorist operatives, some of whom are believed to be in the USA.
"I don't think we'll ever feel relaxed," one senior law enforcement official said. "But the captures have made people feel a little better that our plan appears to be working."
When the alert level was raised March 17 to the second-highest level on a five-color scale, Ridge and law enforcement officials expressed concern about retaliatory attacks such as suicide bombings. The only higher level is red, indicating that an attack is imminent or underway.
The threat level had been raised to orange twice before since the alert system was launched in March 2002. The first such alert came in September around the one-year anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks and the second in February during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan. That was when department officials encouraged people to stock up on emergency supplies, including duct tape and plastic sheeting, and to identify a room in their homes to gather in after an attack. The threat level was dropped for 21/2 weeks before being raised again amid war planning and Osama bin Laden's call for new strikes.
Now that the threat level is being lowered again and no attacks have occurred, some experts worry that the public -- and even state and local officials -- will grow complacent. The terrorists responsible for Sept. 11, for example, plotted the attacks for years.
"Complacency is really one of our big threats because we're action-oriented people," said Jerry Humble, director of homeland security in Tennessee. "But with some of the terrorist organizations, patience is their virtue. So we're not out of the woods with respect to terrorism."
But Boston Mayor Thomas Menino, head of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, said he's not worried about citizens or officials letting their guard down.
"Life changed for everyone on 9/11," he said. "Homeland security always has to be on your mind."
Ridge said decisions to raise and lower terrorism alerts are "still as much art as science."
And the economic impact is a factor.
A recent study by the mayors' group found that cities were spending an additional $ 70 million a week on increased security during the war, on top of what they had been spending on homeland defense.
"It's not breaking the bank, but it hurts," Menino said.
Ridge said that with President Bush's signing of a spending bill Wednesday, the government soon will begin distributing $ 2.2 billion to help local and state governments pay for extra protection.
He also suggested that the money spent so far is a solid down payment for the future. The level of protection under a yellow alert, he said, is far greater than a year ago.
"A year ago, we were just beginning this process," he said. "A year later, more people have bought into it, and a year from now, yellow will be even stronger and better."
Ridge said the alert level ultimately could drop to blue, or a "general" risk.
"That's the aspiration," Ridge said. "That's the rationale behind everything we do."
***
Contributing: Kevin Johnson and Toni Locy
Security funding
A bill that President Bush signed Wednesday to pay for the war in Iraq contains $ 6.7 billion for homeland security.
Key components:
* $ 2.4 billion: To the aviation industry for better security on airliners.
* $ 2.2 billion: To states and cities for domestic preparedness.
* $ 665 million: To airports for better security and passenger screening.
* $ 628 million: To the Coast Guard for increased patrols of major ports and waterways.
* $ 333 million: To the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection for better security at borders and ports, including radiation-detection technology.
Source: Homeland Security Department

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Josh Reynolds, AP; On the lookout: A U.S. Coast Guard boat armed with M-60 machine guns patrols Boston Harbor near the financial district Tuesday as part of increased security since the war in Iraq began.

Load-Date: April 17, 2003


End of Document