Terror and its toll; Violent acts have rocked the country from the beginning, as a new exhibit shows. Page XX
The Philadelphia Inquirer
March 18, 2011 Friday
ADVANCE Edition


Copyright 2011 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES WEEKEND; P-com Ent. Entertainment; Pg. W20
Length: 834 words
Byline: By Joseph A. Slobodzian

Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


The explosion shook the Brooklyn Bridge, sent tremors through Philadelphia and Boston, and ignited a fever of citizen outrage and retaliation against the ethnic group responsible.
It had nothing to do with 9/11 or Islamic extremists.
It was the July 30, 1916, bombing that destroyed a massive U.S. munitions depot on Black Tom Island - an act of German saboteurs aided by German American U.S. citizens sympathetic to Kaiser and Fatherland.
The Black Tom Island incident - one of about 40 U.S. factories hit by German saboteurs during World War I - is part of "Spies, Traitors & Saboteurs: Fear and Freedom in America," the new exhibit running through May 30 at the National Constitution Center on Independence Mall.
For those whose only frame of reference for domestic terrorism is the present, the exhibit created by the International Spy Museum in Washington, D.C., makes clear that terrorism and sabotage - foreign-hatched and homegrown - have always been part of U.S. history.
If for some, nothing compares to the scope of the televised destruction of the World Trade Center towers a decade ago, consider that the explosion on Black Tom Island, off Jersey City, destroyed $20 million worth of munitions (about $400 million in 2011 dollars), showered Manhattan with shrapnel, and caused the equivalent of about $2 million in damage to the Statue of Liberty. The massive blast crater left in the island was flooded by New York Harbor. Immigrants were evacuated from Ellis Island.
The public reaction is also familiar. There were increased calls for America to join the war against Germany, passage of the 1917 Espionage Act, jingoistic renaming of German foods (sauerkraut became "liberty cabbage"), and vigilante groups formed like the American Protective League, which tried to infiltrate German American neighborhoods for the U.S. Justice Department.
"History has a way of repeating itself," says Peter Earnest, a founder and executive director of the International Spy Museum.
Though a Cold Warrior and CIA veteran of 36 years, including 25 years running spies in Europe and the Middle East, Earnest says the exhibit is less about spies than how Americans react to espionage and terrorism.
"This is very much an exhibit . . . about what effect those things have on the American people and how we responded, whether we responded by new laws like the espionage laws or [during World War II] when we put 120,000 Japanese in prison."
So there's nothing about Revolutionary-era spy Nathan Hale or turncoat Benedict Arnold. There are, however, Loyalists who in 1814 greeted the invading British and helped soldiers set fire to the White House.
Also included are sections dealing with homegrown terrorists from the Ku Klux Klan - Klan calling cards ("You have been patronized by the KKK" and "You're next. Knights of the Ku Klux Klan" left for the unlucky recipient) and a chilling trio of hooded robes for Klan father, mother, and toddler - to Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh and the modern militia movement.
Earnest said he finds it troubling that a recent survey by the Southern Poverty Law Center cataloged more than a thousand right-wing militia active today.
"This [exhibit] is an obvious connection with the Constitution," said David Eisner, the constitution center's president and CEO. "The Constitution is about providing for the common defense and it is also about protecting our individual liberties, and there's very little explicitly about what to do when those two things come into conflict with each other. It's been a point of law and contention and politics for as long as we've been a nation and, especially today, it's even more worthwhile for us to wrestle with this."
And wrestle with the issues is something the exhibit asks of visitors. Spaced throughout are computer terminals that ask the visitor to respond to such questions as: "Should the United States ban hate groups such as the Ku Klux Klan?" The visitor can then compare his or her answer to those of fellow visitors and Americans who responded to the same question in earlier Gallup Polls.
With the U.S. Supreme Court this month validating the free-speech rights of an antigay fundamentalist Christian congregation to picket military funerals, and a New York congressman holding hearings on the "radicalization" of American Muslims, the exhibit seems timely.
"These issues will be with us till the end of the Republic," added Earnest. "And they are issues that people around the world are grappling with."
 If You Go
"Spies, Traitors & Saboteurs: Fear and Freedom in America," now through May 30 at the National Constitution Center, 525 Arch St. Admission to this exhibit is $15, $14 for seniors 65 or older and students and $11 for children 4 to 12. Active military personnel and children 3 and younger admitted free. Information: 215-409-6600.
For a video tour of this exhibit narrated by center president David Eisner, go to www.philly.com/spies.
Contact staff writer Joseph A. Slobodzian at 215-854-2985 or jslobodzian@phillynews.com.

Graphic

 
Photograph by: Esther Lee

Load-Date: March 18, 2011


End of Document