Terrorism task force member to speak at awards breakfast
Chicago Daily Herald
March 4, 2009 Wednesday
F3 Edition


Copyright 2009 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBOR; Pg. 4
Length: 381 words
Body


Donald Kauerauf, deputy chair of the Illinois Terrorism Task Force, will be the featured speaker at the seventh annual Hometown Heroes Awards Breakfast on Friday, March 13, at Eagle Brook Country Club in Geneva.
Kauerauf is replacing Congressman Bill Foster (D-14th District) who must remain in Washington, D.C. that day.
In his position with the task force, Kauerauf is responsible for providing strategic policy and support recommendation for statewide homeland security preparedness, prevention, protection, response and recovery capabilities to the Governor's Homeland Security Advisor and Chair of the Illinois Terrorism Task Force. He is also responsible for the management and administrative oversight of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security grant program received by the state. Additionally, he wrote Illinois' Federal Fiscal Year 2006, 2007 and 2008 applications to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security for state homeland security grant funding.
"We couldn't have asked for a more knowledgeable person to address the issues we're concerned about," said Kay Catlin, development director for the Fox River Chapter of the American Red Cross.
"Last November, the Trust for America's Health and Robert Wood Johnson Foundation released a report which concluded the United States is still unprepared for a major disaster such as a biological attack or pandemic and the current economic crisis could potentially make things significantly worse. We wanted someone to address these issues with authority. Deputy Chief Kauerauf is that person."
Before joining the Terrorism Task Force, Kauerauf served as chief of the Division of Emergency Preparedness and Response for the Illinois Department of Public Health. Before that, he was the assistant to the Chief of Operations with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. He holds a bachelor of science degree in occupational safety and health from Illinois State University in Normal.
"As important as the awards breakfast is in recognizing local heroes, we like to use each event to enrich the public as well. Given the timeliness of these topics, we think the program will be especially informative this year," Catlin said.
There are still a limited number of tickets available for the free breakfast. For reservations, call (630) 443-8844.

Load-Date: March 4, 2009


End of Document