Terrorism's 'appeal'
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
May 6, 1985, Monday


Copyright 1985 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Pg. 24
Length: 672 words
Byline: By Spencer DiScala; Spencer DiScala, associate professor of history at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, is the author of ''Dilemmas of Italian Socialism.''
Body


THE brutal Red Brigades murder of Ezio Tarantelli, a former MIT professor, March 27 illustrates how modern terrorism challenges Western societies. It seeks to strike at its most delicate links - in the case of Mr. Tarantelli, an academic who wished to improve society.
Western ideological terrorism has arisen in socially advanced and politically progressive liberal democracies such as West Germany and Italy, where serious problems admittedly exist, but they could hardly be said to justify a terrorist response.
Contributing to creation of a terrorist mentality seems to be the shift of major leftist political organizations toward the political center.
Radicals feel betrayed, concluding that ''bourgeois'' political systems corrupt leftist parties. The upshot: The dissidents turn to violent destruction of existing institutions.
This pattern holds in Germany and Italy, homelands of modern terrorism. German Social Democratic leader Willy Brandt joined Christian Democrat Kurt Kiesinger in the government in 1967, alienating Ulrike Meinhof from the German political process. Later she led Germany's most notorious terrorist gang. In Italy, the Italian Communist Party's shelving of its revolutionary image and its gradual shift toward the center infuriated leftist militants. ''The fact that the beginning of Italy's current troubles can be dated back to 1969 is no coincidence,'' one of them wrote.
Before he died attempting to blow up a power station outside Milan on March 15, 1972, the millionaire publisher Giangiacomo Feltrinelli financed not only Italian terrorists but extended his aid to German units. Close links between Italian and German terrorists still exist.
Products of the 1968 Italian student revolutions and concerned with updating Lenin, the adherents of Potere Operaio (Worker Power) contended that the Italian strikes of the late 1960s had blocked the country's orderly capitalist development and had thrown the state into crisis in the '70s. Converting this crisis into a revolutionary one now became the primary concern, because the class struggle had entered the phase of fighting the state for power. This new development dictated organized concentration of violence into an ''armed party.''
As a consequence, the terrorists employed violence against anyone, such as Tarantelli, who wished to undertake steps to improve economic conditions. Why? Because improving economic conditions would strengthen the state - a process unacceptable to terrorists. They also struck ''at the heart of the state,'' killing and maiming its ''servants.'' These included not only high-level politicians such as Aldo Moro, but judges, prosecutors, ordinary policemen, prison guards, and plant foremen.
Furthermore, they linked up with the most oppressed sectors of society, such as convicts. In Italy, the NAP, ''Armed Proletarian Nuclei,'' emerged in the prisons.
Convinced that the capitalist world is ruled by a central international authority, the ''Imperialist Multinational State'' (IMS), the Red Brigades kidnapped Aldo Moro, its supposed Italian representative, to uncover ''how the contacts with the CIA come about, how orders are received from the Pentagon, how it is connected to the Trilateral Commission.''
The concept of the IMS explains why terrorists prefer targets linked to international business and to the United States military and diplomatic establishments.
The Italian and German experiences suggest that morally questionable means, such as infiltrating subversive groups and encouraging informants by promising lighter sentences, are effective against terrorists. Most alarming, however, is that both countries have curtailed civil rights. In Italy, preventive detention may last for up to 10 years and 8 months.
What about the United States?  President Reagan's impressive political victories have already pushed many Democratic Party liberals toward the political center. If radical elements feel they have no other way to go, could the terrorist problem occur in the United States, too, as it has in Europe?


End of Document