TERRORIST THREATS NOW A PART OF AMERICAN LIFE / SECURITY EFFORTS HAVE INCREASED. MILLIONS ARE BEING SPENT. YET CRIMINALS ARE BECOMING MORE WILY, TOO.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 31, 1997 Monday SF EDITION


Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A01
Length: 1182 words
Byline: Angie Cannon, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The once unthinkable is becoming all too common:
* An Ohio white supremacist illegally orders three vials of the bacterium that causes bubonic plague.
* Terrorists tamper with a railroad track in Arizona, derailing a 12-car Amtrak train, killing one crew member and injuring more than 100 passengers.
* A plastic drum with 100 pounds of ammonium nitrate and fuel oil is left in the IRS parking lot in Reno, Nev.
* Bombs explode in Atlanta three times in about seven months.
As the trial begins in Denver today for Timothy McVeigh, accused of killing 168 people in the 1995 bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City, the threat of domestic terrorism has become an inescapable part of American life.
"We are walking on eggshells domestically," said a former FBI agent, Clint Van Zandt. "There are tinderboxes out there that could blow up in a second or two."
Federal law enforcement, armed with millions more dollars, has stepped up its antiterrorism efforts. Hundreds more FBI agents are at work. Security has been increased at government buildings, with vehicles banned from Pennsylvania Avenue in front of the White House.
Officers are boning up on hate crimes, stressing techniques to preserve clues at crime scenes. Police, firefighters and paramedics are reviewing procedures for the possibility of delayed, second bombs. Threats of bomb violence now bring public warnings.
Law enforcement officials say their efforts have paid off in several instances. But terrorists are getting better, too. A new FBI report on terrorism notes that the bombs being used are deadlier, and unconventional weapons - including biological ones - are being sought. Terrorists are better at collecting information, raising money and issuing rhetoric.
"The FBI is devoting tremendous resources to both domestic and foreign terrorism," said Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.), a former chairman of the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on terrorism. "They are trying to deal with the threat. The reality is, there is no easy answer to it."
The FBI turned down an official request for an interview for this story. But Weldon Kennedy, the recently retired deputy FBI director who oversaw the Oklahoma City bombing investigation, said: "There is a real, increased level of threats to government buildings. To say we can prevent them from ever happening is naive."
The federal response is a mix of several factors: new laws, more money, political muscle, and a willingness by law enforcement to try new strategies.
President Clinton sent antiterrorism legislation to Congress, which ultimately enacted a law last year that banned certain suspected terrorist groups from raising money in the United States and granted new authority to exclude or deport suspected foreign terrorists.
In this and other measures, some critics believe that the fear of domestic terrorism has driven Americans to give up some basic liberties.
"Did the government shoot wide when it went after terrorism?" asked Gregory Nojeim, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union. "The evidence is still coming in, but it suggests that many of the measures that were proposed or put in place have done nothing to make us safer and end up making us less free."
Money to fight terrorism was made available, even in a time of budget restraint. The spending bill Congress passed last year included more than $1 billion to fight terrorism by hiring more than 530 new FBI agents and improving safety at federal buildings and U.S. diplomatic missions, among other actions.
"You can sell anything so long as it is for terrorism," said Neil C. Livingstone, author of several books on the subject. "It has become a gravy train. We frighten the public in the name of terrorism, and everyone gets their bucks."
After last summer's crash of TWA Flight 800, a White House commission recommended steps aimed at terrorists, even though no cause for the crash has been determined. The commission asked for better screening of aviation workers, airport security plans, enhanced explosive-detection systems, and more bomb-sniffing dogs in airports.
The commission also recommended profiling airline passengers to determine which ones were more likely to pose risks. But it said race, religion and national origin of U.S. citizens should not be considered in drawing up the profiles.
Still, the ACLU said it worried that profiles would target certain groups and that airport searches would become intrusive. "The FAA is funding the development of technologies that would take a picture of a person's naked body under their clothing," Nojeim cautioned.
Besides new resources in the fight against terrorism, changes are apparent in the mindset at the FBI. Van Zandt, the former FBI agent, said he believed the bureau had made strides in resolving potentially explosive situations through peaceful negotiations instead of shooting at will. He cited the 81-day Freeman standoff in Montana last year as an example.
In February, the bureau issued a highly unusual "terrorist threat advisory" after receiving reports that two men were seen in a small Texas town with a rental truck containing what appeared to be thousands of pounds of fertilizer and 30 gallons of diesel fuel. It turned out that the episode was a misunderstanding and that the cargo was legitimate.
A few weeks ago, in another unusual step, the FBI warned minority communities and other "historic victims of violence and hate crimes" in the Atlanta area that the person who may have bombed an abortion clinic and a nightclub probably would strike again.
The new FBI report found that agents are up against several trends in working to fight terrorism.
Advanced technology allows terrorists to communicate efficiently and securely. Some public computer databases are filled with inflammatory rhetoric that can influence extremists. Some databases contain recipes for bombs, hold information on unconventional weapons, or offer computer viruses for downloading.
Bombs are deadlier, and recipes for explosives capable of causing large-scale damage are available to any extremist willing to research them.
In addition, extremists have proved to be interested in experimenting with unconventional weapons. In addition to the bubonic-plague incident, in February 1995 a Minneapolis jury convicted four members of an extremist group who manufactured the highly toxic biological agent ricin in a plot to kill law enforcement officers.
Ironically, the FBI report warns that success in fighting terrorism may cause its own problems: the threat of terrorist reprisals. In 1995, numerous foreign and domestic terrorists were apprehended or sentenced to prison. Several known terrorist groups have threatened to retaliate, the report says.
"On the bright side, there is a limited reservoir of potential adherents to this kind of ideology," said Brian Levin, director of the Center on Hate and Extremism in Pomona, N.J. "Sometimes, we have unrealistic expectations from law enforcement. You can't prevent every single ideological thug from attacking innocent people in a free country, but you can try to make it more difficult for them."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Timothy McVeigh's bombing trial is set to begin today in Denver. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document