Terrorism experts cite smallpox risk
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 18, 2001, Tuesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; AMERICA RESPONDS; Pg. 9A
Length: 955 words
Byline: MARY JACOBY
Body


It has been 29 years since the last American civilian was vaccinated for smallpox, 21 years since the World Health Organization declared that the highly contagious, often deadly disease had been eradicated worldwide.
But what if, as some terrorism experts fear, a terrorist group or rogue state has a batch of the virus and turns it loose in this country?
The results could be grim.
"I think the chance is about 80 percent of terrorists obtaining smallpox," said Marvin Cetron, president of Forecasting International Ltd., a political forecasting company that consults with the Defense Department and FBI.
SMALLPOX18
Anthrax, botulism and contagious diseases like cholera and yellow fever could become biological weapons that terrorists try to spread, government planners say.
The Czech Republic said Monday that it is investigating a British terrorism expert's claim that representatives of Osama bin Laden purchased from a Czech lab samples of the bacteria that cause anthrax and botulism. Czech Prime Minister Milos Zeman called the report "extremely improbable."
Smallpox is especially devastating because it is so easily transmitted among humans. Once introduced into a population, it spreads in airborne droplets produced when infected people talk or cough.
"It's probably the one we have the greatest concern about because of the communicability," said Jordan Lewis, director of environmental health and epidemiology at the Hillsborough County Health Department.
Kevin Keane, a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services spokesman, said Monday the government has been preparing for the possibility of bioterrorism, including smallpox. When asked if the government had fresh doses of vaccine on hand, he said, "Sure, we do," but declined to say how many.
Keane said vaccinations "as a precautionary measure" are not necessary because they can be effective if administered shortly after a person has contracted the disease.
For centuries, smallpox was a scourge of civilization, the gruesome end to royalty and commoner alike, a toppler of empires.
The highly contagious disease brings high fever and painful blisters, or pustules, that cover the face and body and split the skin. One in three people die. Many survivors go blind.
The disease killed an an estimated 300-million people in the 20th century before mass production of a vaccine - first developed late in the 18th century - began taking effect. The last documented case occurred in Somalia in 1977. It was declared eradicated in 1980 after an intensive worldwide vaccination program.
In the United States, military and certain laboratory personnel are still fully vaccinated. But the last civilian vaccinations came in 1972, and there has been no vaccine produced for civilian use since 1983.
Moreover, the smallpox vaccinations that Americans 29 and older received as children are probably no longer effective, Lewis said. Without a 10-year booster shot, "it does wear off," he said.
At the end of the Cold War, only two countries were known to have laboratory stockpiles of the virus: the United States and the Russian Federation.
The U.S. stockpile is controlled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. But the fate of the Russian samples is unclear, and some analysts fear some of the virus may have fallen into the hands of terrorists.
What is known is that during the Cold War, the Soviet Union developed weapons of mass destruction using smallpox. The information comes from Ken Alibek, a former deputy director of the Soviet biological warfare program who has testified about the program before Congress and written a book about it.
The key to combating smallpox, said Hillsborough Country's Lewis, is detection. "Our biggest problem is getting an active surveillance system in place," he said.
Hillsborough County did a test run of a surveillance system over an 18-day period in Tampa in January. County health personnel surveyed patients admitted to emergency rooms during that period, charted their symptoms in order to detect any patterns and asked who had been at the Super Bowl.
The idea was to detect whether people who attended the Super Bowl were exhibiting similar symptoms, which could suggest they had been exposed to the same infectious agent.
The test revealed no patterns, Lewis said.
Smallpox
at a glance
NAME: The virus is known as variola. Variola minor is a weaker form that people usually survive. Variola major is fatal in about one out of three cases.
TRANSMISSION: It travels by air in droplets released from the mouth. It can be spread by talking and is highly contagious. Transmission occurs only after the rash has appeared, so early detection of an outbreak is important.
SYMPTOMS: Ten to 14 days after infection, a smallpox victim develops a high fever. Several days later, a rash develops on the face and spreads to the extremities. The rash turns into blisters, called pustules, that cause great pain and can lead to death.
HISTORY: It killed 300-million people worldwide in the 20th century, with the last known case in Somalia in 1977. In 1980, the World Health Organization declared that it had been eradicated.
VACCINE: The last U.S. civilian vaccinations came in 1972. Since no civilians since then have received the recommended 10-year booster shot, the vaccinations are thought to have lost their effectiveness for many. Today, only military and certain laboratory personnel are fully vaccinated.
FUTURE: Acknowledging the possibility of terrorism, the Centers for Disease Control has contracted with private companies to produce a reported 40-million doses of the vaccine. A U.S. Department of Health and Human Services spokesman declined to comment on reports that the first batches will not be ready
until 2004.
- Times research

Load-Date: September 19, 2001


End of Document