Terrorism expert explains killers' tactics at Ball State U.
University Wire
September 12, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Daily News via U-Wire
Length: 297 words
Byline: By Leah Snyder, Daily News
Dateline: Muncie, Ind.
Body


The Criminal Justice Department brought a speaker to Ball State University's Student Center to provide history and understanding of terrorism to more than 400 people Thursday on the anniversary of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The Executive Director of the Homeland Defense Initiative at Grand Valley State University, Jonathan White, shared his speech, "Terrorism: Homeland Security Since 9/11."
Ball State U.
White told students about the history of terrorism and the set path and ideas that most terrorists follow.
"Learning the tactics they use can help us catch them," White said.
White even directed students towards the al-Qaida handbook that can be found on the FBI Web site.
"Be friendly with everyone and friends with other terrorists," White said the handbook informed al-Qaida members to do.
White believes that the United States is going to see more religious terrorism in the future.
Religious terrorism focuses on maximum death, White said.
"Death is a sacramental event for a religious terrorist," he said.
Criminal Justice major Kyle Wentz said he agreed with White's insight on the future of terrorism.
"It's definitely something we need to look at closer," Wentz said.
White believes there is the possibility of seeing a terrorist attack as flashy as Sept. 11, 2001.
"9/11 was the worst event we have had since Pearl Harbor," White said. "We are safer today because we are more aware, but are we safe? No."
Speaking specifically to the Criminal Justice majors in the audience, White expressed his desire to get terrorists in jail.
"When you lock terrorists in jail, terrorism goes down," White said.
White said terrorists aren't acceptable.
"We need to expose [terrorists] as the radicals that they are," White said.
(C) 2002 Daily News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 12, 2003


End of Document