TERRORISM COUNTS MAY BE UPGRADED;
11 MUSLIM MEN CHARGED IN CASE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
August 4, 2003 Monday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-2
Length: 288 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: ALEXANDRIA
Body


The federal government is considering upgrading the charges against 11 Muslim men accused of conspiring to join a Muslim terror group after one of the 11 said Americans may have been a target, a prosecutor said in court last week.
One of the defendants told investigators that the men's ultimate goal was "to fight American soldiers" and not just support a Pakistan-based militant group fighting India, assistant U.S. Attorney Gordon D. Kromberg told a federal judge.
Kromberg told U.S. District Judge Leonie M. Brinkema he hopes a new indictment is coming.
The 11 men are charged with supporting the Pakistani group Lashkar-e-Taiba, which opposes Indian control of the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir. The group was designated a terrorist organization by the State Department in December 2001.
The men are accused under a seldom-enforced law known as the Neutrality Act, which forbids Americans to fight countries with which the United States is at peace, but Kromberg said Friday the prosecution "is not going to be a Neutrality Act case."
All 11 - nine of them U.S. citizens - have pleaded not guilty.
An attorney for one of the defendants, Randall Royer, denied that the man intended to attack U.S. forces and said talk of a new indictment was a sign of the prosecution's desperation.
Also Friday, Brinkema agreed with prosecutors that Seifullah Chapman should be detained, citing his sale of several assault rifles, including one sold illegally, and discrepancies in the accounts of whether he had gone to a Lashkar camp in Pakistan.
In a separate hearing, she also rejected a bid by another of the defendants, Yong Ki Kwon, to be freed pending trial, scheduled for November.
So far, three of the defendants have been freed on bond.

Load-Date: August 7, 2003


End of Document