TERRORISM: Beheadings a means, not an end
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
June 27, 2004 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: @issue;
Length: 382 words
Byline: RICHARD HALICKS
Body


The terrorist beheadings in Iraq and Saudi Arabia mark a perverse convergence of medieval brutality and contemporary technology. Masked murderers take the lives of innocent men in the most barbaric fashion and then post the video of their deed on the Internet.
What they get is what they crave: instant global attention, their victims slain not for offenses they committed but for the headlines their deaths will generate.
AJC
Scholars and other analysts warn Americans not to misjudge these horrific events or the men who perpetrate them. The murders are not grounded in Islamic law, and the murderers are not religious men, these observers say.
"This isn't just a group of really, really bad guys," says David Forte, law professor at Cleveland State University. "They have a political agenda, which is to create an Islamic totalitarian regime. . . . They are ideologues, not religious people."
The banal truth of this latest incarnation of terrorism --- that the killings amount to little more than a publicity stunt --- seems particularly chilling.
"They could have negotiated with the Koreans," said Nimrod Raphaeli, senior researcher at the Middle East Media Research Institute in Washington, referring to the murder last week of South Korean worker Kim Sun-il. "They were not interested in money. They were not interested in compromises. They're interested in drama, big drama, big headlines. First item in Jazeera, first item in Arabiya, first item in New York Times. That's what they are seeking."
More than one expert draws a parallel between the beheadings and the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. New York City was decapitated, if you will, in a strike that cost the terrorists little but produced an enormous impact.
"These people --- you should not underplay them," warns Larry Taulbee, an associate professor of political science at Emory University who specializes in international relations, security and terrorism. "I think there's a tendency to think that, because we characterize them as fundamentalist, they are uneducated and somehow unaware of the world.
"I don't think that's true at all. Many of them are very well-educated. This is not a question of a couple of backwoods yahoos deciding to do this because this is the best that they came up with. I think these acts are very calculated."

Graphic

 
Photo: Victim Nick Berg; Photo: Victim Kim Sun-il; Photo: Victim Paul Johnson; Photo: Suspect Abu Musab al-Zarqawi

Load-Date: June 27, 2004


End of Document