Terrorism? What Terrorism? TV's Comforting Laugh Track 
 The New York Times
October 31, 2001 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section E; Column 4; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1390 words
Byline:  By BERNARD WEINRAUB 
Dateline: HOLLYWOOD, Oct. 30  
Body


How are the writers of successful television comedies set in New York dealing with the trauma of Sept. 11? They're ignoring it. And perhaps as a result, shows like "Friends" and "Everybody Loves Raymond" are doing better than ever.
     Creators of dramatic series like "N.Y.P.D. Blue" and "Law and Order" acknowledge that they are struggling to create realistic dramas by mentioning the terrorist attacks but not focusing on them. The creators of comedies, however, say they are insistently avoiding the current reality of New York life. 
 "There's something to be said for pure diversion, and that's one reason we have never mentioned current events and we never will," said Phil Rosenthal, creator of "Everybody Loves Raymond," the hugely successful comedy on CBS about a successful sportswriter and his bickering family.
"Why we're doing so well," Mr. Rosenthal continued, "is that there's a renewed sense of family in the country, we're realizing how fragile life is and we're not taking our families for granted -- whether they're conventional or unconventional families, whether they're a family of friends or co-workers."
Broaching the terrorism attacks in a sitcom would only trivialize them, said David Kohan, a creator with Max Mutchnick of NBC's "Will and Grace," about the friendship of gay men and straight women in New York. "We didn't know of a gracious or poignant or humorous way to deal with it, and we concluded the show was pure escapism and that's how we serve the audience." 
Surprisingly, what has lifted the ratings of many New York-based comedies, as well as other shows, is the growth in the numbers of television viewers since Sept. 11. Several executives said that audiences seemed eager to return to familiar characters in long-running comedies.
"Viewer levels are up compared to last year, and people are traveling less," said David Poltrack, executive vice president for research and planning at CBS. "We see an increase in not only the numbers of homes watching television, but the numbers of viewers watching television together. This is the old traditional family experience as opposed to fragmented viewing on multiple sets in the house.
This pattern would suggest that shows appealing to younger as well as older viewers would be especially comforting now -- shows like "Raymond," and "King of Queens" and "Friends," Mr. Poltrack said.
Similarly, Jeff Zucker, president of NBC Entertainment, said: "After Sept. 11 there was a rush to familiar faces and familiar friends, programs where you knew the characters and cared about them. That's why shows like 'Frasier' and 'Raymond' and 'Friends' have prospered."
One show that has not done well -- and seems to be in some trouble -- is ABC's "Spin City," about the staff members working for a New York mayor. Because the mayor is depicted as moronic -- rescued constantly by his smart workers -- several television executives said privately that the series may have been seriously damaged because it seemed bizarrely out of touch. Others believe that the series was reaching the end of the line anyway.
But Gary David Goldberg, a creator of "Spin City," defended his show, saying, "The problem we're having seems to be systemic at ABC, and has to do with our time periods." Mr. Goldberg said that in the last few weeks "Spin City" had been moved to too many different time periods on Tuesday night. "My wife said to me, 'When is your show on?' and I didn't know myself," he said.
"Our compact with the audience is to provide an alternative reality," Mr. Goldberg said. "I can't make that leap into what's really going on. No one knows what's right or wrong here. Everyone's traumatized. I feel we don't have the right to bring this into our comedy world."
Unlike the gritty dramas set in New York, the comedies are benign fantasies. In comedies like "Friends" and "Will and Grace," the characters live in spacious New York apartments and lead trouble-free lives.
" 'Friends' seems to be beaming in from outer space," said Robert Thompson, director of the Center for the Study of Popular Television at Syracuse University. 
But Mr. Thompson said that successful television comedies, are a safety valve for viewers left shaken by the daily news. "A show like that can have a real value -- it can be an anesthetic to the sad and horrible images we see. 
"Watching 'Friends' is like watching 'Gomer Pyle' during the Vietnam War," he continued. "It was terribly comforting to watch Marines not fight any battles. Just as it's terribly comforting to watch Ross and Rachel not mourn the loss of any friends." 
"Friends" and some other shows are being watched in almost record numbers. Now in its eighth year, "Friends" is the No. 1 show of the season, with an audience averaging 29.1 million viewers, up from an average of 23.6 million last year. "Friends" is experiencing its second-highest season for viewership.  This is unusual, given that "Friends" has early episodes in syndication across the country.
Kevin Bright, an executive producer and a director of "Friends," said the renewed popularity of the series was probably linked to the events on Sept. 11. "It's like going back to comfort food," Mr. Bright said. 
It is inappropriate for a comedy series like "Friends" to address real events, Mr. Bright said, but the series would subtly acknowledge reality -- characters would sometimes wear caps reading "N.Y.F.D." or "N.Y.P.D.," "I <heart> New York" stickers would appear and an American flag would occasionally be shown in the apartment.
"If we were a drama we'd deal with it in a more realistic way, but right now we think the best job we can do is to help people laugh," Mr. Bright said.
Other longtime comedies are also luring large audiences. "Everybody Loves Raymond," which began in 1996, has an average of about 22 million viewers, up from 21 million last year. And CBS's "Becker," which started in 1998, about a grumpy doctor in the Bronx played by Ted Danson, is averaging 17.6 million viewers, compared to 17.1 million last year.
Viewership for "Will and Grace" has dropped by nearly 6 percent, from an audience of about 20.2 million last year to 19 million now. But NBC executives said competition from the successful CBS drama "C.S.I.," about crime investigators in Las Vegas, was the central reason for the falloff.
"Spin City," however, has an average audience of about 10.2 million this year, compared with 12.4 million last year. (Its most recent broadcast, though, showed a slight increase.)
Perhaps one reason for the success of many older comedies is that the networks have been distracted by the tragedy and are welcoming familiar shows. No new television show has had a breakthrough success, although some shows seem, for the moment, resilient. These include WB's "Smallville" and "Reba," UPN's "Enterprise," NBC's "Scrubs," CBS's "Guardian," and ABC's "Alias" and "According to Jim."
"Promoting new shows has become wildly challenging for the networks," said Brad Grey, a prominent television producer, with shows like "The Sopranos." "We all find ourselves going to comfortable places, and that includes entertainment."
With the exception of NBC's "Third Watch," about rescue workers in New York, many dramatic series set in the city are barely referring to real-life terrorism. 
Bill Clark, an executive producer of "N.Y.P.D. Blue" and a former New York City detective, said, "If we were looking to pull in big numbers and promote a show about the World Trade Center, it would be taking advantage of the situation; it would be exploiting it." 
Peter F. Jankowski, president of Dick Wolf Films, and executive producer of "Law and Order," said that series had no plans to deal seriously with the disaster, although there would be some references to it. Mr. Jankowski said that, like some of the hit comedies, longtime shows like "Law and Order" offer a "safe haven for the viewer." 
NBC was planning a five-hour mini-series in May, using the casts of three Dick Wolf shows -- "Law and Order," "Law and Order: Special Victims Unit" and "Law and Order: Criminal Intent." One of the most expensive mini-series planned by the network, the show was to start filming last week, but was canceled shortly after the attacks. The mini-series dealt with an escalation of bombings in New York by terrorists from the Middle East, followed by a threatened attack of smallpox. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document