TERROR DOWN UNDER Sydney hostages hold jihad flag
Daily News (New York)
December 15, 2014 Monday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 6
Length: 574 words
Byline: BY RACHELLE BLIDNER NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Jason Molinet
Body


AT LEAST one gunman took several hostages in a Sydney chocolate shop early Monday - then forced two of them to hold up an ISIS-style flag in the window - before several prisoners escaped six hours into the ongoing standoff.
Police were called about 9:45 a.m. local time to the Lindt Chocolat Cafe in the city's financial center, where an undisclosed number of hostages was being held, New South Wales Police Commissioner Andrew Scipione.
A local TV station put the number of hostages at 13. A witness said she'd seen a man with a blue sports bag enter the cafe - and the bag contained a gun.
Other witnesses later reported hearing shots fired inside the cafe, according to ABC News Australia.
Area streets were sealed off for hours. But in the afternoon three male hostages, including one employee, sneaked away from their captors and into the waiting arms of heavily armed tactical officers.
About an hour later, at around 5 p.m., two women also escaped - an indication that the captors did not have full control of their hostages.
But hours earlier, when the crisis began, two hostages appeared to be crying as they were forced to hold a black flag with white Arabic writing in the window.
The flag appears to say, "There is no God but Allah; Muhammed is the Messenger of Allah," a statement of Islamic faith so common that it appears on the Saudi Arabian flag as well as the flag of the extremist group ISIS.
Authorities could not rule out terrorism as a motive.
"We're working to establish who this person is and what their motive is," Deputy Commissioner Catherine Burn said in a briefing on Monday afternoon, Australian time.
Police did not have direct contact with the hostage-taker as of a press conference at 2 p.m., Scipione said.
"We have not yet confirmed it is a terrorism-related event," Scipione said. "We're dealing with a hostage situation with an armed offender, and we are dealing with it accordingly. We're doing all we can to make sure there is a peaceful outcome."
Hundreds of New South Wales cops and Australian federal police responded to the standoff.
"I can think of almost nothing more distressing, more terrifying than to be caught up in such a situation," Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott said.
The prime minister was not certain of the motivations of the hostage-takers but noted there "are some indications" they could be political, he said. He urged Australians to go about their "business as usual," despite the "very disturbing incident."
The U.S. Consulate, about a 10-minute walk from the cafe, was evacuated, a spokeswoman told Reuters. Consulate officials issued an emergency warning to U.S. citizens in Australia to "maintain a high level of vigilance and take the appropriate steps to enhance your personal security."
Other nearby buildings were evacuated and the block was cordoned off. A wide swath of Sydney was declared a no-fly zone for aircraft to avoid the crush of police helicopters.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the world, an NYPD spokesman said Sunday that city police are "monitoring the situation in Sydney."
The siege at the cafe came just hours after Australian federal authorities arrested a man in northwestern Sydney for allegedly financing terrorism.
Federal cops said in a statement that the man was arrested "as part of continuing investigations into the planning of a terrorist attack on Australian soil and the facilitation of travel of Australian citizens to Syria to engage in armed combat."

Graphic

 
Two hostages run to safety after escaping captors during standoff. GETTY Tearful hostages are forced to display ISIS-style black flag Monday by gunman (left). Inset below, cop takes position near cafe in central Sydney. REUTERS

Load-Date: December 15, 2014


End of Document