TERRORISM IN BRIEF
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
November 16, 2001 Friday,
Metro Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;; Brief
Length: 548 words
Body


Hefty reward may smoke out bin Laden
The $25 million reward on fugitive Osama bin Laden's head may be the key to his capture, analysts said.
The State Department has offered the reward to anyone who leads U.S. forces to bin Laden and 13 of his lieutenants thought to be involved in attacks on Americans.
The reward program is one of several ways U.S. officials are trying to track down bin Laden, or information about his whereabouts. Intelligence operatives on the ground, spy satellites, communications intercepts and other clues are being used to give the military a pathway to his hideout.
AJC
Bin Laden and his lieutenants are among 22 terrorism suspects covered by the State Department's Rewards for Justice program.
U.S. intelligence sources said that some reputed Taliban defectors have already begun to offer tips about bin Laden's possible whereabouts, seeking partial payment of the reward money in advance.
 Pakistan beefs up border security
Pakistan has moved in tanks and additional soldiers to tighten security along its border with Afghanistan and to prevent Osama bin Laden or his fighters from coming in, officials said Thursday. Reports of fighting in southern Afghanistan have raised concerns that civilians as well as Taliban fighters may seek to escape by crossing the normally porous border with Pakistan.
 Groups declare Taliban solidarity
Jolted by the swift collapse of the Afghan Taliban militia, Pakistani Islamic groups said today would be a nationwide day of mourning and accused the military-led government of betraying the country's one-time ally. The Afghan Defense Council, an umbrella of 35 Islamic and militant groups, will hold rallies and demonstrations across the country to condemn the Northern Alliance's takeover of Kabul.
 
British name liaison to help govern
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw appointed a representative to Afghanistan on Thursday to assist in formation of a new government. Stephen Evans, 51, now head of the South Asian Department at the Foreign Office, is to take up residence at the British Ambassador's compound in Kabul in the next few days. He and a small team of officials are to assist non-Taliban forces in forming a broad-based government, help rebuild state institutions and make the best use of humanitarian aid coming into the country.
 
Aid organizations pour in supplies
With the defeat of the Taliban, international aid agencies are sending relief workers back into Afghanistan in hopes of beating the onset of winter --- even though they still face the threat of lawlessness and looting, aid officials said. The Taliban retreat may have reduced the risk of aid operations being hit by stray bombs or angry Afghan reprisals, but the security hazards remain high, officials said.
 
Stowaway's story raises suspicions
An Egyptian-Canadian stowaway who was arrested on terrorism charges after he was found with high-tech equipment in an Italian port was ordered freed from prison Thursday. Amir Farid Rizk, 43, was arrested Oct. 18, the first person to be charged in Italy under a new international anti-terrorism law. He was found in a shipping container equipped with a satellite phone, raising suspicions he was part of a terrorist network. Prosecutors said Rizk had worked at one time as an aircraft mechanic on commercial jets.

Load-Date: November 16, 2001


End of Document