Terror backstop clock is ticking
Business Insurance
August 21, 2006


Copyright 2006 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 8
Length: 500 words
Body


DEC. 31, 2007, may seem an incredibly long ways away, but for advocates of a federal backstop to help cover the losses of future terrorist attacks, it's already uncomfortably close.
That's one of the reasons we-and we certainly count ourselves among backstop supporters-were glad to see the American Insurance Assn. issue a paper outlining an approach to a long-term solution to the issue of providing terrorism insurance. The current federal terrorism insurance backstop expires on Dec. 31, 2007, and there's no guarantee that even a bare-bones program will replace it.
And it's a matter of national economic security that something is in place to replace the current system when it expires. Without some sort of federal backstop-particularly for truly uninsurable risks such as chemical, nuclear, biological and radiological terrorist attacks-terrorism coverage will be both scarce and expensive for businesses in areas considered to be at high risk for terrorist attack.
About the only thing that is certain about the federal backstop's future is that Congress is extremely unlikely to extend it in its present form. The current program is, of course, a considerably scaled back version of the original backstop created by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002. Only those with extremely short or selective memories have forgotten how close Congress came last year to simply letting the program die on its original Dec. 31, 2005, sunset.
But if the current program won't be extended, and there needs to be something to replace it, backstop supporters have to come up with something to present to Congress and the administration. That's where the AIA paper comes in-it outlines one approach to the long-term problem of terrorism insurance. As we report on page 1, the AIA is calling for the federal government to cover CNBR losses with the right to recoup losses through a policyholder assessment. It also calls for a form of the backstop to remain in place to respond to more conventional terrorist attacks.
The AIA approach is by no means the only approach. The Real Estate Roundtable advocates the creation of a terrorism insurance pool like the United Kingdom's Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd. The Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc. plans to issue a white paper on the subject, and no doubt other stakeholders will weigh in as well.
Right now, getting realistic proposals out into the marketplace of ideas strikes us as being more important than having every detail of the exact shape of a backstop's replacement spelled out. The sooner proposals become public, the sooner proponents can coalesce around a consensus proposal.
And the sooner that happens, the better. Ideally, a consensus proposal would be ready for the new Congress that convenes early next year. Every day that's lost increases the odds that Dec. 31, 2007, will come and go without a replacement for the current system in place, which would be a most uncomfortable situation for insurers and risk managers alike come Jan. 1, 2008.

Load-Date: August 25, 2006


End of Document