Terrorism bill advances in Senate
Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Kentucky)
February 24, 2017 Friday


Copyright 2017 Messenger-Inquirer
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 703 words
Byline: James Mayse, Messenger-Inquirer, Owensboro, Ky.
Body


Feb. 24--A bill that would allow people injured in terrorist attacks in Kentucky to sue for monetary damages, while making people convicted of terrorism eligible for the death penalty, passed a Senate committee Thursday morning.
Senate Bill 186 was filed by Sen. Max Wise, a Campbellsville Republican. The bill defines "terrorist" as a person who "commits an act of terror, including a person who acts as an accessory before or after the fact, aids or abets, solicits, or conspires to commit an act of terror or who lends material support."
The bill further defines "act of terror" as a violent act that is apparently intended to "intimidate or coerce a civilian population," or influence government by intimidation, "mass destruction, assassination or kidnapping."
Wise said the bill would allow a person injured by a terrorist attack to sue their attacker for up to three times the amount of their material loss, or $50,000, whichever was higher. The bill is called "Andy's Law" after William A. Long, 23, a soldier killed by a gunman outside a military recruiting office in Little Rock, Arkansas, in 2009.
Several states already have such laws, Wise said. A similar bill was considered in Florida prior to the June 2016 mass shooting at an Orlando nightclub, but did not pass.
"The families of those victims were not able to seek damages on the civil level," Wise told members of the Senate Judiciary Committee on Thursday morning.
The bill makes terrorism a capital offense and bars a person convicted of terrorism from being released on parole, probation or any other type of conditional release. A person would be guilty of terrorism if he or she committed a violent offense under certain sections of the state's the violent offender law, including Class A felonies, Class B felonies where a person was killed or seriously injured, or offenses where a law enforcement officer or firefighter was killed in the line of duty.
A person would also be guilty of terrorism for using a weapon of mass destruction. It would have to be proven that the person intended to intimidate the public or the government for a person to be found guilty of terrorism.
The law allows for "all real and personal property intended for use" in an act of terrorism to be forfeited to the state.
Rebecca Ballard DiLoreto, a public defender and legislative agent for the Kentucky Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, said the organization objected to the bill's death penalty provision.
"We should end the death penalty in Kentucky," DiLoreto said. "It's not a deterrent" to people who would commit terrorist acts, she said, and asked committee members to also consider the fiscal impact of adding another charge that would be eligible for the death penalty.
"What we know is every death penalty case tried can cost three times more" than a traditional criminal case where the death penalty is not sought, DiLoreto said. Kentucky currently is under a moratorium on executions.
Sen. Robin Webb, a Grayson Democrat, said, "the federal government is doing a pretty good job of stepping in" and prosecuting acts of terrorism. Webb also said the law includes "fairly broad language that could lead to unintended consequences."
"This has far-reaching tentacles" and could impact a variety of special interest or political groups, Webb said. "I would be more comfortable leaving this in the hands of the federal government."
Sen. Perry Clark, a Louisville Democrat, questioned how much the law would have benefited people affected by the Orlando shooting, if Florida had passed the measure.
"What assets did the Florida shooter have?" Clark asked. "... I would assume nothing, so you're not going to gain anything back" through a lawsuit, Clark said.
The bill passed with no senators voting no, and Clark not casting a vote.
"The intent of this bill is to take proactive action," Wise said. The idea, Wise said, was to "take the step now and get ahead of this."
The bill next goes to the full Senate for consideration.
James Mayse,270-691-7303, jmayse@messenger-inquirer.com, Twitter: @JamesMayse
___ (c)2017 the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) Visit the Messenger-Inquirer (Owensboro, Ky.) at www.messenger-inquirer.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: February 24, 2017


End of Document