Terrorist Hunter; in risky business
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
June 22, 2008, Sunday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P6A
Length: 585 words
Byline: Evan Goodenow, The News-Sentinel (Fort Wayne, Ind.)
Body


FORT WAYNE, Ind. - Rooting out Muslim terrorists and their sponsors is hard work for terrorist hunter Rita Katz. Finding the root causes of terrorism is easy.
Katz avoided answering the "Why do they hate us?" question during a speech at Congregation Achduth Vesholom, but addressed it after the speech: the Iraq war, U.S. support for dictatorships in Egypt and Saudi Arabia and Israel's treatment of the Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank.
"All of the above were great recruiting tools by al-Qaida and the jihadists," Katz said. "Every conflict between Muslims and non-Muslims is being hijacked by terrorist organizations as a recruitment tool." Katz's approximately 50-minute speech described her life and motivations for infiltrating Arab-American groups she accuses of supporting Mideastern terrorism. It was also a primer on unintended consequences in U.S. and Israeli policies and how they influenced Katz's life.
Katz, an Iraqi Jew, was born in 1963, the year the CIA backed the Baath Party coup that overthrew Iraqi dictator Gen. Abdel Karim Qasim and eventually led to the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein. Israel's launch of the Six-Day War in 1967 against Egypt and Syria - Israeli leaders said they were about to be attacked, which some Israeli historians dispute - led to a pogrom against Iraqi Jews and the eventual hanging of Katz's father, who was accused of being an Israeli spy.
Smuggled out of Iraq, Katz and her family settled in Israel and survived the Yom Kippur War in 1973, in which Israel repelled surprise attacks by Egypt and Syria. In response to U.S. support for Israel in the war, OPEC reduced oil production, quadrupling prices and empowering Saudi Arabia to spread Wahhabism, an extreme form of Islam espoused by al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden. Katz now analyzes al-Qaida Internet communications for SITE Intelligence Group, her for-profit counterterrorist organization, which sells information to spy agencies, think tankers and reporters.
Despite the deadly backlash that Israelis experienced for what has now become the longest military occupation in modern history, Katz said she didn't regret living in Israel and had no intention of moving to the United States when her husband, a doctor, got a job at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
However, in 1997, they and their three children moved to the United States and Katz got a job as an Arabic translator with the Investigative Project.
Katz said her translation of a charity brochure from an Arab group showed it was raising funds for Hamas, the Palestinian organization considered a terrorist group by the United States and Israel.
The brochure was a revelation for Katz.
"It so collapsed my feeling that I was moving to a country that had nothing to do with terrorism," Katz said. "I got so obsessed in trying to understand what is happening here."
Soon Katz was pretending to be Arab and attending functions by Arab-American organizations she contended were terrorist front groups for Hamas and The Muslim Brotherhood, an Egyptian-based group the United States supported in the 1950s to counteract Arab nationalism and Egyptian dictator Gamal Abdel Nasser. She documented her experiences in the book, "Terrorist Hunter: The Extraordinary Story of a Woman Who Went Undercover to Infiltrate Radical Islamic Groups Operating in America."
"You're scared, but your adrenaline works so highly that you really want to do it," Katz said. "It's kind of like, addicting. You don't want to be there, but you want to be there."

Load-Date: June 23, 2008


End of Document