Terrorism Alert
The New York Times
April 9, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 25; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Column 2;; Op-Ed
Length: 613 words
Byline: By Yigal Carmon;

Yigal Carmon advises Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir on countering terrorism.

By Yigal Carmon;  Yigal Carmon advises Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir on countering terrorism.
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


One surprise of the Persian Gulf war was the success of anti-terrorism measures taken by the U.S. and its allies. But there are no grounds for complacency today.
For several months before the war, Israel had monitored an Iraqi effort to prepare for an extensive terrorist campaign. There is now danger that the Iraqi debacle will trigger attacks on Western targets. After Israel's 1967 and 1973 victories, there was an upsurge in terrorism aimed partly at accomplishing what the wars had failed to do. Attacks on civilian targets at crucial moments and the assassination of political and military leaders, among other violent acts, can thwart peace efforts.
From Jan. 16, 1991, to March 16, 1991, only 172 attacks, mostly bombings against Western targets, occurred -- bad enough but far fewer than expected. Many (82) were directed at American institutions like cultural centers and banks in Arab and third world countries -- Lebanon, Brazil, Chile, Peru, India, the Philippines.
While the U.S. and other Western countries took exceptional defensive and offensive countermeasures to protect themselves, comparable precautions in third world countries were only half-hearted. The defensive measures included strict security at public activities (like the Super Bowl game) and sites and extensive examinations and investigations at airports and other transportation hubs.
Law-enforcement agencies also went on the offensive, investigating Arab nationals and restricting their movements. Most Iraqi diplomatic delegations, which had repeatedly abused their diplomatic status to support terrorist operations, were drastically limited and their remaining personnel put under surveillance.
Outside the Mideast, not all terrorist groups operate under state sponsorship. But in that region every such group has been sponsored by at least one Arab state. Iraq and Syria have used terrorism against each other and other regimes. Libya and Iran still sponsor terrorist groups. Jordan is host to the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, which has repeatedly threatened to attack American targets.
The best way to reduce Mideast terrorism is to stop the state support on which it depends, as has been proven by the allied pressure on Syria. Still, Syria, which dominates Lebanon, can force the freeing of hostages held there mainly by the Iranian-sponsored Hezbollah.
After the attacks had reached a record level in 1985, with 103 operations in which 131 people were killed and 620 injured, the West took decisive action against Syria and Libya. In 1986, diplomatic relations were severed, economic sanctions were imposed and Libya was bombed. The result was a dramatic decline in violence in 1987, to 41 attacks with 14 killed. Regrettably, Western countries soon became lax, and toward the end of 1987 all countermeasures were revoked. The predictable consequence was a resurgence of violence, which reached a record high in 1988, when 311 people were killed.
The lesson is that the West should expand measures taken against Iraqi diplomatic delegations during the war. These measures should be complemented by similar steps against the potential abuse of diplomatic immunity by countries that continue to support Iraq and those known to be longstanding supporters of terrorism.
U.S. corporations with overseas facilities were warned last week at a conference of the American Society for Industrial Security in Washington that it was too soon to relax their defenses anywhere. In view of this message, until there is a technological breakthrough in detecting explosives, the Federal Aviation Administration would do well to reconsider its relaxation of airport security measures to permit curbside check-ins.

Load-Date: April 9, 1991


End of Document