Terrorism's New (and Very Old) Face;
It's Not the Kind of War the West Fights Well
The New York Times
September 12, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk 
Section: Section D; ; Section D; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1348 words
Byline: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG 

By STEPHEN ENGELBERG 
Body


In some ways, Osama bin Laden is a thoroughly modern terrorist. He announces his intentions on CNN, directs his worldwide financial network by satellite telephone and sends messages to his supporters in Saudi Arabia via cassette tapes.
Asked last year by a Western reporter what operations were planned next in his jihad, or holy war, against the United States, Mr. bin Laden replied: "You'll see or hear about them in the media, God willing."
But terrorism experts say that Mr. bin Laden's aims place him firmly in the traditions of an earlier epoch, a time when terrorism was used to strike a blow against apostasy rather than achieve specific goals like national independence.
The distinction is more than a quibble for theoreticians in the growing field of terrorism studies. American leaders have declared war on Mr. bin Laden and his brand of terrorism, a rhetorical flourish that leaves unanswered how the West intends to combat a millennial movement that flouts the rules of conventional warfare and has no evident state sponsor.
For much of the 20th century, bombings and assassinations have been the tools of ethnic groups fighting for their own nation-states. The tactics were undeniably brutal, and the consequences global. One of the most notable terrorist attacks of the century, the 1914 assassination of an Austro-Hungarian Archduke by a nationalist Serb, ignited World War I.
The aims of these groups could be politically delineated. Bosnian Serbs, for instance, wanted to escape Austro-Hungarian rule and join Serbia, a desire that re-emerged after the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991. The Irish were striving for independence from Britain, as were the Jews living in what was then Palestine. Disputes about land and power were subject to political negotiation, and for most of these groups, terror ultimately helped them prevail. As Walter Laqueur, a historian, noted in his 1987 book "The Age of Terrorism," "To succeed, terrorist demands have to be 'realistic' (i.e. limited in character)."
Mr. bin Laden's loosely organized Al Qaeda movement pursues goals far harder to define or satisfy. Experts say it is part of a significant trend in which terrorist groups espouse millennial or religious ideologies that transcend politics or national borders.
In his rambling 1997 interview with CNN, Mr. bin Laden said his jihad against the United States would conclude only when Washington withdrew from Saudi Arabia and ended its "aggressive intervention against Muslims in the whole world." He invoked God and Islamic tradition, and reminded viewers that it was not permissible for non-Muslims to remain as protectors in Saudi Arabia. He makes clear that his targets include the Egyptian and Saudi Governments, deemed insufficiently devout.
"If you look at books written about terrorism 25 years ago, religion doesn't appear," Mr. Laqueur said. "Statistics today show that more than half of terrorist activities are committed for religious or pseudo-religious reasons."
Bruce Hoffman, director of the Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence at the University of St. Andrews in Fife, Scotland, said the ideology of Mr. bin Laden and other emerging Islamic groups harked backs to the earliest known forms of terrorism, when religion was the main justification for what another scholar has termed "holy terror."
From A.D. 66-73, a Jewish sect known as the Zealots took up arms against the Roman occupation, using daggers to slit the throats of Romans and of Jews who collaborated. Their rebellion had both religious and political overtones.
From 1090 to 1272, a Muslim Shia sect known as the Assassins fought to repel the Christian Crusaders with a campaign of murder intended to bring on a new millennium. The literal translation of "assassin," hashish eater, refers to the acts of "ritual intoxication" undertaken by the warriors before their missions, Mr. Hoffman writes in his new book, "Inside Terrorism" (Columbia University Press, 1998).
Although there were scattered instances of fundamentalist, Islamic-inspired violence in the early 20th century, the issue gained international prominence only after the Iranian revolution brought a Shiite regime to power in 1979.
Iran began financing and arming Shiite proxies in Lebanon, and when the United States backed the Lebanese Government in that country's civil war, the groups fought back, bombing the American Embassy and Marine barracks in Beirut and seizing hostages.
Mr. bin Laden's religiously justified program of violence echoes the public proclamations of those groups, with an important distinction: He is independently wealthy and operates from countries like Afghanistan or Albania, which have minimal governments at best. The Reagan Administration could negotiate with Iran; Mr. bin Laden answers to no government.
Mr. Hoffman noted that many of the major terrorist attacks of the 1990's were by groups without state sponsors and specific goals. These include the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center by Islamic radicals with ties to Mr. bin Laden and the 1995 attack on Tokyo's subways with nerve gas by a Japanese religious cult.
Mr. bin Laden proclaimed his holy war against the United States on Aug. 23, 1996, in a document titled "Message from Osama bin Laden to His Muslim Brothers in the Whole World and Especially the Arab Peninsula: Declaration of Jihad Against the Americans Occupying the Land of the Two Holy Mosques," a reference to the continued American military presence in Saudi Arabia.
The United States did not respond.
Two years later, after investigators tied Mr. bin Laden's group to bombings of American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania that killed more than 250 people, including 12 Americans, Clinton Administration officials launched a cruise missile attack on his camps in Afghanistan. "This is, unfortunately, the war of the future," Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said.
Terrorism experts applauded the military action as a necessary quick response. But they said the notion of announcing a war against someone like Mr. bin Laden posed problems.
"It's unfortunate that she used the term war, because it's very misleading. Americans like their wars to be short, with no casualties, and then we kick back and watch the Super Bowl," said David Long, a former State Department official. "Flu would be a better simile. Every year there's a new strain of flu, and every two or three years one is lethal. You manage it. You're not going to win the war on flu."
For theorists, the notion of a war on terrorism is inherently contradictory. Western nations fight wars under generally accepted conventions regarding legitimate targets, treatment of prisoners and types of weapons. Terrorists flout those rules to attract publicity and strike a blow against a more powerful opponent.
For example, terrorist groups assassinate political leaders. The United States has an executive order banning murder plots, though Presidents Reagan, Bush and Clinton have authorized bombing raids on the hideouts of adversaries like Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi President, and Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.
Western governments strive to avoid civilian casualties; terrorists seek to cause them. Terrorist take hostages, a move Western nations generally avoid in warfare and would not consider in the fight against groups like Mr. bin Laden's.
Western governments have used their legal systems to bring terror suspects to justice, but that means subjecting evidence to the scrutiny of a public trial.
Nor is it clear what weapons would work in such a "war." Terrorists have a minimal infrastructure. There are no big buildings to bomb or headquarters to destroy. The cruise missile attack on Afghanistan appears to have destroyed some rudimentary camps, which can quickly be rebuilt.
"War, in its accepted definition, is fighting of a specific duration on an identifiable battlefield against an enemy you know," Mr. Hoffman said. "I think Albright made a big mistake couching it in these terms. This war is not fought on any one battlefield. It's timeless. And you're not going to defeat your enemy."

Graphic

 
Photos: The American Embassy in Beirut on Aug. 18, 1983, the day it was bombed by Shiite fundamentalists in Lebanon's civil war. (United Press International); Osama bin Laden, interviewed in Afghanistan by Al Quds al Arabi, a newspaper. (Al Quds al Arabi, 1996)(pg. D15)

Load-Date: September 12, 1998


End of Document