TERRORISM SUSPECT POINTS TO CIA
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
December 15, 1997, Monday


Copyright 1997 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. 3
Length: 362 words
Byline: NICOLAS MARMIE ; Associated Press writer
Body


PARIS Carlos the Jackal insisted today that the CIA and Israels Mossad committed the killings for which he is being tried, and his lawyers quit in protest when the court refused to order a new investigation.
The court temporarily suspended the 2-day-old murder trial. When it resumed nearly an hour later, the defense table was empty and Carlos, whose real name is Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, was defending himself from the dock.
Presiding Judge Yves Corneloup ordered Ramirezs lawyers to stay, but they left anyway and could face disciplinary measures for breaking a French law requiring the presence of a lawyer during a criminal trial.
Earlier, the court rejected a motion by Ramirez to set him free because of the way he was captured by French intelligence agents in 1994, ending decades on the run by one of the most-wanted terrorist suspects of the Cold War.
The court is trying him in the 1975 killings of two French intelligence agents and a Lebanese colleague of Ramirez, allegedly killed because Ramirez suspected he was a police informant.
These policemen were sent to the slaughterhouse by Israeli agents, the Venezuelan-born Ramirez told the court loudly in Spanish-accented French, adding profanities.
Lawyer Isabelle Coutant-Peyre told the court she and two other attorneys were quitting because the court refused to rule right away on the defenses request to order a new investigation.
The court opened the trials second day by rejecting Ramirezs argument that he was arrested illegally when French agents spirited him out of the Sudan in 1994.
The court also put off a decision on Ramirezs request to remove a terrorists victims association, SOS-Attentats, from the trial. The group is a civil party to the case against Ramirez and as such can participate.
Ramirez denounced what he called the incestuous relations between the judges and SOS-Attentats.
Ramirez gained international notoriety as the alleged mastermind of deadly bombings, assassinations and hostage dramas.
He is accused of carrying out the 1975 seizure of OPEC oil ministers and was involved in the 1976 Palestinian hijacking of a French jetliner to Entebbe, Uganda, that ended with an Israeli commando raid.

Load-Date: December 17, 1997


End of Document