Terrorism expert running for Gov.
Silver State Post (Deer Lodge, Montana)
February 15, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 Silver State Post


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 689 words
Byline: Silver State Post staff
Body


Neil Livingstone thinks he's got what it takes to help the State of Montana. And he definitely thinks it needs help.
The Republican gubernatorial candidate, one of nine seeking that party nomination, thinks the state could use education reform, health care reform and business reform.
"Right now we are one of the least friendly states for business," he told the Silver State Post in a recent interview.
Livingstone and his running mate state Sen. Ryan Zinke of Whitefish are running a distant third in the race, according to a December poll from Public Policy Polling. The poll had former congressman Rick Hill leading the field, followed by state Sen. Ken Miller of Laurel.
The poll also said that only five percent of Montana voters having a favorable opinion of Livingstone, though that could be because 74 percent were undecided or did not know who he was.
That doesn't have Livingstone or Zinke worried.
When they pulled up to the Silver State Post in their bus, their faces displayed prominently along the sides, they said they were ready to win the race. The how comes down to the amount of travel they are putting into their campaign, they said.
"Rick [Hill] has name recognition, but Miller really isn't known around the state," Livingstone said. But he thought the real decider would be that he and Zinke are the only successful businessmen.
"Other candidates don't have that kind of public sector experience that we have," he said.
Livingstone has been derided by both Miller and Hill over the course of the election cycle as being a "car-petbagger"-an outsider sliding in to the race because he saw a chance for office. He denies it.
"Look. I'm pretty typical Montana. When I finished college I had to leave the state to find the opportunity to work the way I wanted to," he said. "I've owned the same house on the west side of Helena that I have for years."
Livingstone is currently a consultant for an internal security and intelligence firm. Zinke oversees an international technology consulting corporation.
He said his campaign hasn't been distracted by other candidates. He doesn't think about them much. He focuses more on issues such as where Montana ranks in gross domestic product per state (47th). He blames the current state leadership as far as Governor Brian Schweitzer and Sens. Max Baucus and Jon Tester. He did not include Rep. Dennis Rehberg on the list of poor leaders.
"Our senators don't care about the working man living in Montana," Livingstone said. "We're running on an economic platform because we know when people have enough money in their pockets we see drops in domestic violence, we see that students do better. When people are doing good we see that everything gets better."
Both Livingstone and Zinke said they are proposing a "co-governorship." Livingstone explained it as giving Zinke an equal seat at the table as he has when it comes to deciding on policies and how to help guide the state of Montana. He said, for instance, that on education he would turn decisions over to Zinke, because Zinke has more experience on that issue.
Zinke is a former Navy SEAL commander who worked with Team 6, the team responsible for deeply covert missions like the one that raided Osama bin Lad-en's compound in Pakistan. He sees education solutions from that military past.
"You can't give a teacher a promotion bonus for exceptional service," Zinke said. He advocates for a system that works more like the military, having a standard base pay for teachers that would allow for more salary if a teacher were to have special training, qualifications or were teaching in an area that is difficult to recruit for.
"I also think school choice come up. There is a performance problem in our schools, and while it's not just a situation about choice, I think we need to look at that as an option," Zinke said. He wants there to be more vocational schools for skilled labor.
Mostly however, the issue is getting Montana to move forward.
"Montana seems stuck in this past world of Anaconda versus Butte; the business versus the state. We have to put that past behind us and get ready to move forward in the world," Zinke said.

Load-Date: April 11, 2013


End of Document