Terrorism and Free Speech
The New York Times
February 23, 2010 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26; EDITORIAL
Length: 678 words
Body


Congress has made it illegal to provide ''material support'' to foreign terrorist groups -- a sensible means of combating terrorism but one that carries the risk of being applied in ways that infringe on Americans' freedom of expression. The Supreme Court has a chance to draw the line where it should be between banning aid to terrorists and undermining civil liberties.
  On Tuesday, the court hears arguments in Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project. The Humanitarian Law Project and its president, Ralph Fertig, a retired United States administrative law judge, want to provide training in peaceful dispute resolution to the Kurdistan Workers' Party, which has waged a separatist guerrilla campaign against the Turkish government, and to advise the group on how to petition the United Nations and other international organizations for relief. 
  Other plaintiffs want to engage in similar kinds of efforts in support of the L.T.T.E.,  short for the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, which waged a secessionist campaign in the name of the Tamil minority in Sri Lanka. It evolved into one of the longest-running armed conflicts.
  The Kurdish group, sometimes called the P.K.K., and the L.T.T.E. are designated as foreign terrorist organizations by the United States, and the plaintiffs fear they could be prosecuted under the federal material support law and sentenced to as much as 15 years in prison.
  The law prohibits giving not only weapons and money, but also less concrete support, like advice and ''service.'' The plaintiffs argue that these prohibitions go too far, infringing on their rights to free speech and association. Supporters of the law argue that it reasonably seeks to put groups like Al Qaeda and Hamas off-limits and to prohibit people from working with them.
  The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, rejected the broadest challenges to the law but ruled that some of its provisions -- making it illegal to provide ''training,'' ''expert advice or assistance'' or ''service'' -- are unconstitutionally vague. That ruling improved the law, but there is room for improvement. Lawyers for the plaintiffs argue that it is still so broad that it could encompass anything from publishing an opinion piece written by a spokesman for a terrorist group to filing a friend-of-the-court brief in support of L.T.T.E. in this lawsuit.
  There needs to be strong protection for a core area of protected speech and advocacy. Americans should be able to make arguments to a court on the behalf of terrorist groups. That is crucial for the legal system to work and for the constitutionality of laws of this kind to be tested. They should be able to print the views of these groups for journalistic purposes, either to report the news or to convey a range of opinions. People also need to be free to speak independently about these groups. 
  These rights need to be made clear in advance. It is not enough for the government simply to say it will not prosecute in these cases. As long as people fear being sentenced to 15 years in prison, they are likely to avoid engaging even in protected speech.
  At the same time, Congress has a right to ban people from directly assisting these groups, even if that assistance is delivered in the form of spoken words. Many crimes -- from blackmail to leaking insider stock information -- are committed through words. There is no right to act as a spokesman for a terrorist group or serve as its adviser. Giving advice to a terrorist group, even if it is not about violent activities, is not the same as getting on a soapbox and speaking about politics. It is not necessarily innocent.
  The Supreme Court should go modestly further than the Ninth Circuit in fine-tuning the statute. It should affirm that Congress has broad leeway in limiting assistance to terrorist groups, and in making these groups anathema, while at the same time ensuring that the most fundamental speech rights are protected, including advocacy in court, journalism, and speech that is truly independent of these groups. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 23, 2010


End of Document