TERRORISM MUCH MORE COMPLICATED THAN MOST AMERICANS LED TO BELIEVE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
May 21, 1995, SUNDAY,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Dayton Daily News
Section: OPED,; CAROLINE BREWER
Length: 1367 words
Body


''As a general rule, it can be said that terrorism succeeds or fails only in terms of our reaction to it.''
- Terrorism expert
''Lots of people are lied to by state apparatuses, but nowhere do people seem to want it so bad. What makes it so easy to lie to the American people? Why are Americans so hungry for lies about themselves?''
- Unnamed audience member attending a 1992 symposium titled ''Case Studies in Terrorism''
''We don't have a viable democracy in any meaningful sense without an enlightened citizenry. If Ronald Reagan can become president, so can Vanna White. There is no easy answer to your question. We are quite massively a stupid population.''
- Randall Robinson, head of TransAfrica, responding to the above question
* * *
If Americans really want to get a handle on the threat of terrorism, then they must begin considering its history, its contradictions and the involvement of their government in sponsoring and promoting it.
Importantly, too, they must get a better handle on what terrorism is, who's really a terrorist, and who's just a wannabe. This, most of all, will not be easy. Experts and government officials do not agree.
Days after the Oklahoma City bombing, I had a conversation with Chris Cruden, a Beavercreek psychologist and management consultant, who had mentioned that he sometimes gives speeches about countering terrorism.
Cruden's intimate experiences with terrorism qualified him to speak on the matter. As a youth growing up in England, Cruden was forced to contend with the fact that picking up stray toys was dangerous, because a certain terrorist group was known for booby-trapping toys with explosives.
One day, as Cruden and a 13-year-old friend were biking, the friend spotted a soccer ball and got off his bike to fetch it. Cruden discouraged his playmate, but the boy approached the ball anyway and kicked it.
A loud crack shook Cruden from his bike and knocked his friend to the ground. Cruden's friend landed, and complained that he was missing a shoe. Cruden found the shoe a few yards away, and, as he reached to pick it up, he realized his friend had lost not only his shoe but a major part of his foot.
As frightening as that experience was, it wasn't to be Cruden's lone experience with terrorism. As a young adult, he trained with the British Special Air Services, regarded, then and now, as a leading authority on counterterrorism. The Mau-Mau of Kenya, the Jewish Stern Gang, and the Irish Republican Army were some of the groups Cruden was trained to counter. Cruden also worked as part of a three-man security unit for the Duke of Edinburgh.
Two of Cruden's most significant comments were that the Oklahoma bombers were not ''real terrorists;'' in fact, he said they were ''an insult to terrorists.'' The other was, ''Politicians cause terrorism. They support it, and they encourage it.''
I'd had my doubts about the accuracy of labeling the Oklahoma bombers terrorists. The fact that the miscreants are home-grown certainly heightened the intensity of the terror many Americans felt in response to the incident. And, home-grown or not, the shocking destruction and massive loss of life they cause enhanced the idea that they should wear the terrorist label.
As for politicians provoking terrorism at some times and at others supporting it, just a cursory remembrance of the U.S. government's involvement in places such as Iran, Guatemala and decades back in the Philippines easily puts that statement in perspective.
Cruden, however, does not believe the U.S. government did either in the case of the Oklahoma bombing, and doesn't feel that it qualifies as real terrorism. To Cruden, the Oklahoma bombers don't fit a rudimentary definition of terrorists because, for one thing, they lack standing. They are ''amateurs who have a perverted view of reality. They haven't established the kind of historical justification for their behavior that most other groups have who've resorted to terrorism,'' he concluded.
The key word here is ''resort.'' If Timothy McVeigh and his wayward buddies are guilty of bombing the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, then a vicious criminal act seems to have been their first resort in settling their grievances with the government.
It's not that resorting to bombing later would have justified it; Cruden stresses, and I agree, that terrorism on any scale is abhorrent. The point is that the timing and history of the bombers' activities helps distinguish them and helps put them in a context that can be used to develop an appropriate response.
Moreover, when you consider the grievances of McVeigh and company and compare them with those of some terrorists who have operated across the world, you find the grievances of the Oklahoma bombers underpinned by exaggerations, paranoia and delusions. Simply put, these boys are nuts.
Most experts and government officials, however, do agree that most terrorists are not nuts. Contrary to mass-media implications and much political rhetoric, terrorists, generally, are intelligent people. Most wage their campaigns from an intellectual perspective. To be more effective at countering them, Cruden and others argue that governments should build their countering tactics from an intellectual perspective.
Instead, though, characterizing terrorist as lunatics has been useful particularly to Western and U.S. government aims to engineer the consent of the masses. If politicians say a certain terrorist group is led by a madman, then the public will consent to just about any response to retaliate against the so-called madman, or at least the public won't raise a stink about it.
Many Americans might not care whether the Oklahoma bombers are considered real terrorists . What the bombers did was atrocious and unconscionable. They deserve to be severely punished, Americans would argue. I couldn't agree more.
But consider what President Bill Clinton and many members of Congress want to do to thwart the terrorist threat. They want to massively expand the spying powers of this nation's most secretive and powerful agencies, the FBI and the CIA. That could be dangerous.
If the Oklahoma bombers are not conventional terrorists, then we need no such expansion of powers, under the guise of thwarting terrorism, to deal with them. Current laws should be sufficient.
Moreover, in this emotional rush to give any means necessary to agencies such as the FBI and the CIA, we forget how abusive these agencies have been toward American citizens. We forget that they have been a part of what's called state-sponsored terrorism. We forget how the CIA today remains involved in covert operations that have gotten Americans, and people of other nations, killed.
One other crucial point about terrorism: Many experts consider the mass media an accomplice to acts of terrorism. One author defined terrorism as ''drama.'' He said if the terrorist doesn't get extensive publicity, then he fails a major portion of his mission.
The other problem with media coverage of terrorist attacks is the media's failure to probe government officials about the issues that led to the attacks, about the government's possible culpability in provoking the attacks, about the history of the nations and groups involved in the attacks.
What the mass media also have not done, and many books don't do so well either, is make it clear that terrorism is not, and has never been, exclusive to the Middle East. An honest review of history would result in a sketch of a terrorist looking as European as former American presidents, as African as Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya, as Middle Eastern as former Nobel Peace Prize winner Menachem Begin, as Latin as Carlos (Ilyich Ramirez Sanchez).
These are hard, complex and scary truths. But think of the Ebola virus in Zaire. If you lived near a village where an outbreak of the virus occurred, it would be scary and discomforting knowing it was so near. But knowing it exists, how it spreads and how deadly it is would put you in a better position to protect yourself and your interests than not knowing. So it is with this prickly matter of terrorism.
************************************************************************
CAROLINE BREWER is an editorial writer for the Dayton Daily News.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: NED LEVINE LOS ANGELES TIMES SYNDICATE

Load-Date: May 22, 1995


End of Document