Terrorism defenders eye border controls
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 31, 1996, Sunday


Copyright 1996 Telegraph Herald
Section: National/World, Pg. c 12
Length: 295 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON (AP)
Body


Twenty-seven nations and Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority are recommending tighter border controls and restrictions on fund-raising as part of a worldwide defense against terrorism.
The recommendations, adopted by diplomats and technical experts at a two- day conference at the State Department, will be taken up by Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the nations' foreign ministers in April.
Arranged to help bolster Israel against Hamas and other militant groups, the conference escalated into a broader study of terrorism. "All of these nations, in various ways, have sufferd and are looking for ways to improve their defenses," a senior Clinton administration official said at the windup Friday.
The conference followed the Peacemakers Summit in Egypt in which four suicide bombings in Israel by militant Palestinians were condemned by the 27 nations and the Palestinian Authority. But in the discussions in Washington, there were rumblings of discontent with the tough measures Israel has adopted to guard its security, especially the closing of crossings from Gaza and the West Bank.
This has kept Palestinians from jobs in Israel, intensifying their economic hardships, and prompted Norway to call a special meeting of donor nations. It will be held in Brussels, Belgium, April 12. Norway has played a mediation role in Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking.
Much of the $1.86 billion pledged to the Palestinian Authority has not been delivered, disappointing the Clinton administration, which has promised $500 million over five years. "At the donors' conference there will be naming of names," a U.S. official said.
In the meantime, Saeb Erakat, a senior Authority official, said the Palestinians needed an additional $100 million "to help them avoid starvation. "

Load-Date: December 9, 1996


End of Document