Terrorism in Nicaragua
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 30, 1987, Thursday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 488 words
Body


Benjamin Linder, an idealist by nature and engineer by profession,    is dead in Nicaragua, the first American volunteer slain by those    so-called "freedom fighters" President Reagan loves so dearly. It is    unclear from early reports and may never be known whether the Contras    deliberately went after Lindner to make an example of him or whether he    just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. What does it    matter? When an armed force attacks civilians under any circumstances,    it is not war. It is terrorism.
       It is also a strange way to try to win the hearts and minds of    the people. If the people of Nicaragua saw the Contras in the same    light Mr. Reagan does, as a democratic alternative to the Sandinista    dictatorship, would it make any sense for the Contras to go about    persistently killing civilians? For now, it appears that the people    would rather put up with the Sandinistas than with the remnants of    Anastasio Somoza's right-wing dictatorship, which is what most of the    Contras represent. The United States has no business taking sides    between them.
 
     Mr. Reagan's perception of the Sandinistas as a threat to their    neighbors does not satisfy international law, which requires an overt    act of aggression as the justification for military force. The    administration has failed to prove any such act. Its support of the    Contras and their terrorist tactics is as unlawful as the CIA's earlier    mining of Nicaraguan harbors, which would have incurred the World    Court's condemnation by now but for Mr. Reagan's embarrassing decision    to repudiate the court's jurisdiction.
 
        If the United States had a legitimate basis for war against the    present government of Nicaragua, it would also have cause to break off    diplomatic relations and forbid American citizens from going to    Nicaragua. That it has done neither is significant. Linder, whose    friends say he strongly opposed U.S. policy, had every right to be    there. Perhaps he saw the Sandinistas through rose-colored glasses, but    that is beside the point. In helping to bring water and electricity to    an impoverished rural area of an underdeveloped country, he was doing    precisely what the United States has recruited and paid Peace Corps    members to do in similar countries throughout the world, including some    that are governed by worse people than the Sandinistas.
 
        The White House cannot disclaim responsibility for Linder's    death by saying, as spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said Wednesday, that he    put himself "in harm's way," because the Contras who killed him were    in effect agents of the United States. Neither can the Contras dignify    it as a "combat action," as they sought to do Wednesday. From all    reports, armed guerrillas attacked a civilian work party that was    engaged in a civilian project. That is not combat. It is murder.
 

Load-Date: November 19, 1992


End of Document