TERRORISM BILL LOSES SUPPORT;
   BILL BANS HUNTING, REPUBLICAN LAWMAKERS SAY
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
January 24, 2002 Thursday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. B3
Length: 457 words
Byline: Tom Sheehan State government reporter
Body


Thirteen Republican legislators have pulled support from Attorney General Jim Doyle's proposed anti-terrorism plan because they say it would ban hunting.
Doyle's plan, introduced in the state Senate by Sen. James Baumgart, D-Sheboygan, would make it a crime to use many guns for hunting, self-defense or target practice, said Sen. Dave Zien, R-Eau Claire, who never supported the plan.
Baumgart said he will have language changed to address Zien's claim that the bill could ban bullets used for hunting because they include gunpowder and a detonator.
Some of the legislators who withdrew their names from co-sponsorship said Wednesday they were "duped" by a Baumgart memo explaining the proposal; others said they were caught up in anti-terrorism fervor and didn't study the bill carefully.
"Maybe we were a bit too jittery and a bit too quick to act," said Rep. Carol Owens, R-Oshkosh. Owens said that she did not thoroughly read the bill before signing on and that she will now try to block it from a possible vote in the Assembly.
"This bill is dead, and it's so sick it can't be fixed," Owens said.
Baumgart, an active hunter who has proposed an amendment to the state constitution to ensure hunting rights, said the criticism is political. Doyle, a Democrat, is running for governor and Baumgart will be up for re-election in November, Baumgart said.
Doyle spokesman Randy Romanski said the attorney general had specifically asked bill drafters to exempt firearms from the bill, but the language was not included. The language can easily be changed, he said. "This amounts to putting political posturing above public safety," Romanski said of the Republican uprising against the bill.
Critics have targeted just one item in a bill that addresses a broad range of anti-terrorism topics, ranging from money laundering to electronic surveillance, Romanski said. The bill needs clarification but would never inhibit the right of people to hunt, Baumgart said.
"If you use a detonator to make a bomb in your tennis shoe, that would be illegal. If you use a detonator to reload your shotgun shells, that's not illegal," Baumgart said.
Doyle's plan would expand the definition of terrorism and enhance penalties against a variety of terrorism-related crimes and threats, including those involving explosives and weapons of mass destruction.
The bill also would stiffen penalties to fight bank fraud and violent crimes against public officials and jurors. Police also would have easier access to identity and financial information of terrorist suspects, under Doyle's proposal.
Zien has introduced a competing anti-terrorism bill that would, among other things, overturn a 148-year-old ban on the death penalty in Wisconsin for terrorism that results in death.

Load-Date: January 25, 2002


End of Document