Terror Charges as London Olympics Near
The New York Times
July 20, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 675 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- British police officials said Thursday that they had charged five people with terrorism offenses but insisted the accusations were not related to the Olympic Games, which open here next Friday amid a shortage of civilian security personnel that has forced an expanded military deployment.
The counterterrorism command at Scotland Yard said three men from London were charged late Wednesday with offenses that involved travel to Pakistan for what was described as terrorism training between July 2010 and this month. A woman and another man were charged with having material likely to be useful in terrorism.
The three men from London included Richard Dart, who had appeared in a British television documentary program relating to his conversion to Islam.
At a court appearance on Thursday, Mr. Dart and the other two men, Imran Mahmood, 21, and Jahangir Alom, 26, a former police support officer in London, were ordered held until another hearing on July 31. The woman, Ruksana Begum, 22, and the other man, Javed Baqa, 47, were being held until a court hearing next Friday.
Police officials said that Ms. Begum and Mr. Baqa were carrying copies of Al Qaeda's English-language magazine Inspire when they were arrested, and that Mr. Baqa had several compact discs containing the work ''39 Ways to Support and Participate in Jihad.''
The development followed a rash of security alarms this month during which the police arrested 13 people in a 24-hour period in London and the English Midlands farther north.
At the time, the unusually high number of detentions reflected concerns that when the Games open in London, the event could become the highest-profile target since the 2001 attacks in New York and Washington. Three of the people arrested were seized in east London, close to the location of the Olympic stadium and village.
Despite official assurances that the arrests were not related to the security of the Games, preparations for the event have been tarnished by the failure of G4S, a huge global security company, to recruit all of the 10,400 personnel it promised to deploy.
The chief executive of the company, Nick Buckles, acknowledged before a parliamentary panel on Tuesday that the shortfall represented a ''humiliating shambles'' for the company.
The army promised an additional 3,500 soldiers, some just back from Afghanistan, to patrol during the Games, bringing the total military commitment to 17,000.
Margaret Hodge, a member of Parliament and the chairwoman of the Public Accounts Committee, an oversight panel, referred on Thursday to ''chaos'' over the G4S contract and said it ''undermines confidence in those responsible for managing the Games.''
''There is now a last-minute scramble to make sure there will be enough security personnel on the ground,'' she said, questioning a twelvefold increase in management costs related to the security contract to almost $200 million.
''We have faced considerable difficulty in pinning down just how much the Games is costing the taxpayer and how much risk there is,'' Ms. Hodge said.
But Jeremy Hunt, the government minister overseeing the Games, rejected Ms. Hodge's criticisms, saying, ''We have moved quickly to activate our contingency plans, and we will continue to do whatever it takes to provide a safe and secure Games.'' He said an additional 1,200 troops had been put on standby.
For all the assurances, another potential disruption emerged on Thursday, with plans by thousands of staff members at the Home Office, including airport immigration workers, to strike to press demands for better working conditions.
At a news conference during a visit to Kabul, Afghanistan, on Thursday, Prime Minister David Cameron said he did not approve of the strike plan.
''I do not believe it will be right, I do not believe it will be justified,'' Mr. Cameron said, according to the Press Association news agency.
Labor union leaders planned to meet on Thursday to decide how to proceed after a vote by union members in favor of action to protest threatened layoffs and limits on pay increases.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prime Minister David Cameron, in Afghanistan on Thursday, opposed a union strike that could disrupt the Olympic Games. (PHOTOGRAPH BY S. SABAWOON/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)        

Load-Date: July 20, 2012


End of Document