Terrorism threats renew focus on U.S. sanctions on Libya
University Wire
October 17, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Orange via U-Wire
Length: 1024 words
Byline: By John Arweiler, Daily Orange
Dateline: Syracuse, N.Y.
Body


In its hunt for members of Osama bin Laden's worldwide network of terrorists, the United States has sought assistance from a man it once reviled.
Musa Kusa, the suspected mastermind of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988, has met with the U.S. State Department three times since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. Kusa, who ran intelligence operations in Libya for several years, revealed the names of bin Laden supporters in Libya to U.S. officials.
Kusa and Libyan ambassador to the United Nations Abuzed Dorza also discussed the lifting of U.S. and U.N. sanctions against Libya, said Bob Monetti, president of a Pan Am family support group. Monetti said he has been in recent contact with William Stanton, a State Department official on the Libya desk in the counterterrorism office, who attended the meetings. The State Department keeps the families of victims of Pan Am Flight 103 informed of relations with Libya.
Syracuse U.
On Dec. 21, 1988, Flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, killing the 259 people on board and 11 people on the ground. Thirty-five of the victims were enrolled in the Syracuse University Division of International Programs Abroad and were returning home after a semester in London.
But these meetings do not signal a change in U.S. policy toward Libya, said Melvyn Levitsky, a professor of political science at SU.
"Given Libya's record over the years, the U.S. does not have any interests in improved relations with the country," Levistky said. "They're not someone we're going to bring into the coalition against Afghanistan."
Even though Libya has not been linked to recent terrorism, they are still on the U.S. list of countries that support terrorism, Levitsky said. The United States does not have an embassy in Libya, and he said he expects the two countries to continue their "stand-offish" relationship.
But one of the stipulations of lifting the economic embargo against Libya -- which has banned U.S. companies from trading with it since 1996 -- was handing over the two men suspected of carrying out the terrorist attack on the Pan Am flight, Abdel Basset Al Megrahi and Lamen Khalifa Fhimah.
A Scottish court found Megrahi guilty and Fhimah not guilty in January.
Megrahi's appeals case begins Jan. 23, 2002. Though it took some time, Libya complied with this demand. The victims' families now seek an apology and compensation, said Melissa Dios, a junior in the School of Management whose aunt died in the bombing. If the families win the civil case filed against the two suspected terrorists and the Libyan government, they could receive as much as $ 20 billion.
The United States might be meeting with Kusa to ensure its diplomatic messages to Moammar Gadhafi, the Libyan dictator, are getting through to him, Monetti said. Libya is ruled by seven tribes. The U.N. ambassador Dorda is from Megrahi's tribe, and might be trying to protect him. He might not tell Gadhafi, who is from another tribe, about U.S. negotiations regarding lifting the sanctions when they come to the Pan Am trial. Kusa would provide a more objective Libyan representative in the meetings.
Gadhafi offered his condolences to the United States after the Sept. 11 attacks. But families of victims of Gadhafi's past terrorist support do not believe the leader is sincere.
"He's not to be trusted," said Joseph Tobin, whose son Mark died in the bombing. "I can't believe his word is his bond. I wouldn't put any confidence into what he says."
On Sept. 2, Gadhafi threatened to sell U.S. oil companies' rights in Libya to foreign firms if they did not return to the country within a year.
The U.S. House of Representatives Committee on International Relations voted to extend sanctions against Libya another five years. President George W. Bush advised Congress to extend the sanctions for just two years. The law enforcing the sanctions expires this year, and the issue must still go to a vote in both houses of Congress.
But despite the two countries' hostile relationship toward each other, Libya and the United States might have a common interest following the Sept. 11 attacks, Monetti said. Libya is predominantly Muslim, but the society is more secular -- it is not an Islamic state. That could make Libya a possible target of fanatical Islamic terrorists such as members of bin Laden's al Qaeda, he added.
Families of the victims are concerned the attacks on Afghanistan will bring more terrorist actions against the United States. But still many agree Bush is following the right course of action.
"Unfortunately, violence begets violence," said Joan Dater, whose daughter Gretchen died in the bombing. "But I'm glad we're doing what we're doing. The time for action is now. It's almost as if they're begging for it."
But by attacking Afghanistan, Bush is risking American lives and bioterrorist attacks, Dios said. She said Bush is acting rashly and should continue diplomatic efforts.
Helen Tobin, Joseph's wife, said the United States might be prone to terrorist attacks in the future no matter what it does.
"I don't think we have to provoke it," she said. "I think we're up to our necks in it."
If you follow the logic that American foreign policy in the Middle East has brought terrorism on the Unites States, Monetti said, it proves that Libya is responsible for bombing Pan Am Flight 103.
"If anybody says U.S. policy caused Pan Am 103, they're proving that Libya was responsible for the bombing," he said.
Monetti said he believed the Pan Am bombing could have been in retaliation for U.S. attacks on Libya during the Reagan administration after the country allegedly bombed a nightclub in Germany. Gadhafi's daughter died in the attacks.
"The mistake is we didn't finish the job," he said. "Bush is responding to murder by bombing the Taliban and Osama bin Laden. He should learn a lesson from Reagan."
Joseph Tobin said although it might currently be in the United States' interests to associate with Gadhafi and Libya, the government must not lose sight of the terror he unleashed in the past.
"I wouldn't want to be in bed with him," he said.
(C) 2001 Daily Orange via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document