TERROR ATTACKS RISE IN PAKISTAN, AFGHANISTAN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 1, 2008 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; Pg. A-4
Length: 412 words
Byline: WARREN P. STROBEL, MCCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Terror attacks in Pakistan doubled last year, and casualties from terrorism quadrupled, as extremists reasserted their hold in tribal areas and attempted to extend their reach deep into the country, the State Department said in its annual report yesterday.
There was also a 16 percent increase in terrorist attacks in neighboring Afghanistan in 2007, the report on global terrorism trends said.
It said that al-Qaida has proved "adaptable and resilient" and used a cease-fire agreement along the Afghan-Pakistan frontier to reconstitute its capabilities.
Taken together, the findings appear to confirm that the struggle against terrorism in the troubled Afghanistan-Pakistan border region, which many specialists consider the central battleground in the fight against al-Qaida and its affiliates, was set back last year.
"Challenges remain," said Dell Dailey, the State Department's counterterrorism coordinator. Instability and the cease-fire agreement in Pakistan "provided al-Qaida leadership with the ability to conduct training and operational planning" for targets in the United States and Western Europe, he said.
Specifically, the report found that attacks in Pakistan rose from 375 to 887 between 2006 and 2007, and the number of fatalities jumped by almost 300 percent from 335 to 1,335.
In Afghanistan, the number of attacks rose 16 percent, to 1,127 incidents last year, killing 1,966 people, 55 percent more than the 1,257 who died in 2006, it said.
More than 22,000 people were killed by terrorists around the world in 2007, 8 percent more than in 2006, although the overall number of attacks fell, the report said.
The grim news in South Asia was tempered by blows against al-Qaida in Iraq, and a steep drop in terrorist attacks and fatalities in Iraq in the second half of 2007, the report said. The White House has attributed that drop to the troop buildup that President Bush ordered last year, a claim some analysts have challenged.
Mr. Dailey also cited successes in breaking up terror plots in Western Europe and progress against terrorist groups in Southeast Asia, Colombia and elsewhere.
While the U.S. government reports such numbers each year, government counterterrorism analysts say they're a poor yardstick for measuring progress against terrorism.
Pakistan, a U.S. ally, was struck by several large-casualty terrorist attacks in its major cities in 2007. And on Dec. 27, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto was killed in a suicide bombing in Rawalpindi.

Notes

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Load-Date: May 1, 2008


End of Document