TERRORISM TOLL HITS RECORD HIGH IN '98
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
May 1, 1999, Saturday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 665 words
Byline: BARRY SCHWEID, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorism took a record toll last year, with 741 people killed and 5,952 injured. Most of the casualties were the result of bombings of two U.S. embassies in Africa.
The attacks in Kenya and Tanzania and then the indictment of Usama bin Laden, a longtime sponsor with ties to groups in several countries, reflect the changing face of terrorism.
While state-sponsored terrorism remains a grave problem, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said yesterday, "direct government involvement in committing such acts continues to decline."
"Unfortunately, this progress has been countered by the rise of terrorist groups that are less directly dependent on states," she said in a statement.
"Some have broad geographical reach and have found ways to support themselves through criminal enterprises, such as drug smuggling, kidnapping and extortion," she said.
About 40 percent of the attacks worldwide last year - 111 of them - were aimed at U.S. targets. Seventy-seven were bombings of multinational oil pipelines in Colombia in which 71 people, including 28 children, were killed.
Colombian terrorists kidnapped seven American citizens and the group FARC has not accounted for three missionaries it kidnapped in 1993, the State Department said in its annual report to Congress.
The department made no changes in listing seven countries - Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Sudan and Syria - as sponsors of terrorism.
This makes the seven ineligible for U.S. support in seeking assistance from international financial institutions.
The United States maintains active diplomatic relations only with Syria among the seven and has tried for years to engage Syria in American peacemaking efforts in the Middle East. President Clinton has met with President Hafez Assad to encourage him to negotiate peace terms with Israel.
Also on the diplomatic front, the Clinton administration is in the midst of talks with North Korea designed to bring a formal end to the Korean conflict.
The United States also is seeking to keep a cap on North Korea's nuclear weapons program. Huge shipments of food have been sent to economically beset Pyongyang.
On the other hand, the United States keeps an icy distance from Iraq and maintains sanctions against Libya even after Tripoli decided to turn over two suspects for trial in The Netherlands in the bombing of a Pan Am jetliner in 1988.
Cuba remains on the list even though the report said Fidel Castro's government no longer actively supports armed struggle in Latin America or elsewhere.
Cuba also has dramatically reduced its support to leftist revolutionaries since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the report said.
However, Cuba continues to maintain close ties to other state sponsors of terrorism and to leftist insurrectionist groups in Latin America, including Colombia's two main groups, the department said.
The bombings at the U.S. Embassy in Kenya last August killed 291 people, including 12 U.S. citizens, and wounded about 5,000 people. The bombing in Tanzania killed 10 people and wounded 77.
Worldwide, there were 273 terrorist attacks last year, a decline from 304 in 1997 and the lowest total since 1971, the department said. There were no acts of terrorism on U.S. territory.
Bin Laden, a Saudi who founded the group al-Qaida while in Afghanistan in the U.S.-backed resistance against the invasion by Soviet troops in 1979, his military commander, Muhammad Atef, and four others were indicted in a U.S. court in New York last November in connection with the bombings at the embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
The United States last August struck a purported terrorist training camp in Afghanistan with missiles and also destroyed a pharmaceutical factory in Sudan that was said to be connected to terrorist activities.
But Afghanistan is not listed as a sponsor.
 
Taliban, which controls most of the territory, was host to bin Laden and his group, the report said. But it has not formed a government recognized by the United Nations or the United States.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, PHOTO: Reuters: Emergency medical workers treat victims of a bomb; blast outside a central London pub yesterday evening. Authorities believe the; bomb in the Admiral Duncan, a gay pub in the heart of Soho, is linked to two; other attacks on minorities earlier in April.

Load-Date: May 4, 1999


End of Document