TERRORISM BATTLE River patrol Conservation officers better equipped to battle terrorism along rivers

Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 26, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 926 words
Byline: JOHN McCOY
Body


DAILY MAIL OUTDOORS EDITOR
WINFIELD - Long accustomed to handing out tickets to game poachers and drunken boaters, West Virginia's conservation officers have been enlisted to battle terrorism.
Since al-Qaida's Sept. 11, 2001, attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Division of Natural Resources law enforcement officers have been patrolling the state's major rivers and keeping an eye on likely terrorism targets.
They received the assignment because no one else was equipped to handle it.
"We're the only law enforcement agency in the state with the boats and the training," said Sgt. Jerry Payne, leader of the DNR's Kanawha River boat patrol squadron. "The State Police don't have the boats, and there aren't enough Coast Guard boats or personnel."
During a typical Kanawha River patrol, Payne and his fellow officers cruise the river between the Marmet and Winfield navigation locks, keeping an eye on all the bridges, chemical plants, petroleum facilities and water plants along the way.
Most of the patrols are routine. Others come when citizens see activity they believe to be suspicious and call the police.
"We got called out one time because some people were videotaping the John Amos power plant," Payne said. "It turned out to be nothing. We've been called out because someone received a radio message from 'a boater that sounded Middle Eastern.' Regardless how innocent they these reports turn out to be, we have to check them all out."
Though the DNR runs regular patrols on the Kanawha and Ohio rivers during the summer pleasure-boating season, the homeland security duties have demanded winter patrols as well.
"Problem is, we aren't really equipped for cold-weather patrols. Only two of our boats have enclosed cabins, and they're both very small," Payne said.
The federal Office of Homeland Security addressed some of the agency's equipment deficiencies earlier this month with the approval of a $ 759,800 grant to the DNR.
The grant will purchase five radar-equipped, 24-foot enclosed-cabin boats, six replacement 225-horsepower outboard motors, navigation gear, radios, survival gear and night-vision equipment.
The equipment will help to meet needs the DNR's Law Enforcement Section has had since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
"We started doing the patrols immediately after 9/11," Payne said. "Everyone was concerned about possible follow-up attacks."
When the state Office of Emergency Services began implementing its own homeland security plan, dubbed "Ready Mountaineer," the DNR's boat patrols were formally assigned to continue the job they already were doing.
In addition, conservation officers were required to increase the law-enforcement presence on state highways and to provide personnel to the state's emergency operations center any time the nationwide terrorist threat level increased.
"Right now, the threat level is down so our patrols aren't as frequent," DNR Cpl. Gary Amick said. "But at first, it seemed as if we were out on the river all the time. We're happy to contribute to the cause of homeland security, but it has been a strain on our personnel and equipment."
And their money.
So far, the DNR has absorbed the personnel costs associated with the expanded duties. Both state and federal law, however, prohibit that from continuing.
The DNR gets its funding from hunting- and fishing-license sales and from federal excise taxes paid on hunting and fishing equipment. Current laws prohibit those funds from being used for any purpose other than fish or wildlife conservation work.
To date, DNR law enforcement officers have piled up $ 231,369 in personnel costs associated with homeland security duties. The recent Office of Homeland Security grant earmarked $ 50,000 to reimburse a portion of those costs.
DNR Director Ed Hamrick said the agency needs to be reimbursed for the balance, and future personnel costs will need to be addressed when they accumulate.
"We're concerned that if we're not reimbursed, we might be found to be in diversion (of our license revenue and federal excise tax money)," Hamrick said. "We've communicated with all the parties concerned regarding that issue."
Hamrick has gone so far as to request an exemption from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the federal agency that oversees how state fish and wildlife agencies spend their money.
The request was denied. In an Oct. 29, 2002 letter, Fish and Wildlife Service Acting Assistant Regional Director Robert Sousa replied, "While we are truly sympathetic to this need, the acts that govern our program are narrow in scope.
"As you know, license revenues are protected from diversion to uses not eligible under the provisions of the Wildlife Restoration Act.  As such, we have no authority to consider exemption of Law Enforcement's involvement with the Ready Mountaineer Program."
One possible salvation in the DNR's predicament might have come in the form of the recent Office of Homeland Security grant. While only $ 50,000 of the grant was specifically earmarked for personnel costs, there is a chance that the entire $ 759,800 could be considered an "in-kind" payment to the agency for anti-terrorism work.
"We're going to have to get an opinion on that," said Col. James Fields, chief of the DNR's Law Enforcement Section.
Until then, Fields said his officers will continue to patrol the rivers as they have since Sept. 11, 2001.
"You can't not do homeland security," he said. "If it created difficulties for us, we're just going to have to accept them and deal with them."
Contact writer John McCoy at johnmccoy@dailymail.com or 348-1231.  

Load-Date: July 28, 2004


End of Document