Terrorism task force hunting for members of Idaho militia cell One area man pleads guilty to pipe bomb, land mine charges;

Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
June 7, 2003 Saturday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2003 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: REGION; Pg.B3
Length: 749 words
Byline: Bill Morlin, Staff writer
Dateline: COEUR D'ALENE<
Body


A terrorism task force is still looking for members of a ''highly
 dangerous" North Idaho militia cell, a prosecutor said after a surprise
 guilty plea Friday.
 Larry E. Raugust pleaded guilty to 15 counts of making, possessing and
 transporting pipe bombs and landmine-style devices.
 Raugust confessed to making the homemade bombs as part of a plan to kill
 law enforcement officials if they attempted to evict his friend from a North
 Idaho home that was being foreclosed on.
 Raugust, a 54-year-old Vietnam veteran, described his deadly creations as
 ''parameter defense mechanisms."
''This is domestic terrorism," Assistant U.S. Attorney Kim Lindquist said
 after Raugust's guilty plea.
 ''These groups frighten me because they go beyond expressing beliefs and
 build these devices for the purpose of taking human life," Lindquist said.
 When Raugust was arrested last Oct. 3, he had a loaded M-1 Grand, a World
 War II-era rifle in a specially made gun rack above the driver's head in his
 pickup, Lindquist said.
 The militia leader had 10 loaded clips of ammunition - 80 rounds - in a
 bandolier in his truck, and a loaded .44 Magnum revolver on the seat next to
 him, the prosecutor said.
 Agents also found a two-shot loaded derringer hidden in Raugust's boot.
 Members of the Inland Northwest Joint Terrorism Task Force said Raugust and
 other members of the militia cell communicated in encrypted e-mails. They also
 used scramblers on marine-band radios for communication.
 ''He was in a position and frame of mind to kill a cop if he'd been
 stopped," Lindquist said of Raugust's anti-government hatred. ''This is scary
 stuff."
 ''He was a walking disaster."
 When Raugust built and placed four pipe bombs and three Claymore-style
 anti-personnel mines, he was staying with Michael Cain at his foreclosed home
 in Idaho County.
 Raugust later removed the explosive devices and put them in a storage
 facility in Weippe, Idaho, before moving them again to the Clearwater County
 home of Claude Umphenour, authorities said.
 Cain left a survivalist community near Orofino, Idaho shortly before
 Raugust's arrest, and his current whereabouts aren't known, Lindquist said.
 The prosecutor wouldn't identify other individuals being sought by the task
 force.
 ''We continue to look at all members of that group in light of their
 activities," the federal prosecutor said.
 After learning of the militia group's existence in 1997, investigators used
 a confidential informant to infiltrate the cell.
 The informant later introduced an undercover Spokane County sheriff's
 detective to the militia cell.
 Raugust gave one of his homemade anti-personnel bombs to the undercover
 detective, who's assigned to the joint terrorism task force.
 A Spokane police detective, also assigned to the terrorism task force,
 assisted in the investigation.
 Lindquist praised the work of investigators who successfully made the
 arrest.
 The investigation, Lindquist said, is a ''prime example" of why
 authorities formed the joint task force involving federal, state and local
 agencies in Eastern Washington and North Idaho.
 ''Not only did Mr. Raugust make these dangerous devices himself, he was
 attempting to help other like-minded individuals build them," Lindquist said.
 Raugust's guilty plea came just minutes before he was to stand trial before
 a jury in U.S. District Court.
 A day earlier, visiting Judge Robert Whaley of Spokane denied a defense
 request to suppress a statement Raugust gave to arresting agents.  Raugust not
 only confessed to making the bombs, he also drew agents a map of where to find
 them at a rural home near the Bo Gritz survivalist community known as Almost
 Heaven.
 Lindquist said he believes all the illegal bombs were recovered.
 Raugust and his militia associates called themselves the Idaho Mountain
 Boys, later changing their name to the Idaho-Clearwater County Posse. Before
 moving to Idaho, Raugust was active in two antigovernment groups, Posse
 Comitatus and the Jural Society, in the Columbia Basin.
 Whaley, whose court is in Spokane, was assigned the case because it
 involved alleged death threats against an Idaho federal judge.  The militia
 group also discussed killing a police officer, authorities say.
 Another associate of the cell was convicted of a 1999 plot to blow up a
 propane tank facility near Sacramento, Calif.
 After accepting Raugust's guilty plea, the judge ordered him held in jail
 without bond until sentencing, set for Sept. 18.
 He faces a sentencing range of 78 to 97 months in federal prison.

Notes

Bill Morlin can be reached at (509) 459-5444 or billm@spokesman.com  

Load-Date: June 10, 2003


End of Document