Terrorism top topic in U.S. Senate race
The Dominion Post (Morgantown, West Virginia)
October 19, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 The Dominion Post
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 907 words
Byline: Eric Bowen, The Dominion Post, Morgantown, W.Va.
Body


Oct. 19--THIS IS PART of an occasional series of stories on some of the issues fueling local political races. These stories are in addition to The Dominion Post's candidate profiles and reports on candidate meetings with the newspaper's editorial board.
In the battle for U.S. Senate, where Republican John Raese is challenging Democrat Sen. Robert C. Byrd, one issue has dominated the agenda: terrorism.
It shows up in the debate about the war in Iraq. It arises when the candidates talk about immigration. And when talking about gas prices, the candidates are concerned largely about our dependence on foreign oil.
Both candidates have said they want to make the country safer. And both have said they support U.S. troops overseas. But the two differ greatly when it comes to their approach to the war in Iraq and to homeland security.
Iraq
In 2002, Byrd was one of 23 senators to vote against authorizing force in Iraq, according to Senate roll call. In a recent e-mail interview, Byrd said he continues to believe the preemptive war in Iraq was the wrong idea for our country to pursue.
Now that the U.S. military has toppled Saddam Hussein's regime, Byrd said it's time for Iraqis to start taking control of security in the country. He said Iraq has "been a distraction from the real war on terrorism" and the country needs to shift focus away from Iraq and back to fighting the people who attacked the United States on Sept. 11.
"America faces a serious threat from terrorist activities, but the war in Iraq is not part of the war on terrorism," Byrd said. "The poorly planned occupation of Iraq and failed policies on the ground there have made America and other countries in the region less safe."
Raese said in an e-mail interview that Iraq has become "ground zero" in the war on terror. He said terrorists have come into Iraq from outside the country and are now attacking troops instead of civilians.
Raese said he does not favor giving a definite timeline for removing troops from Iraq, because that only gives the terrorists warning about when our country plans to leave. He said that the United States needs to "finish the job" there before moving out the troops.
"We are better off fighting terrorists in Iraq than waiting for them to attack us again here," Raese said. "Cutting and running will be perceived as weakness by the terrorists and weakness leaves us vulnerable to attack."
Troops
Both candidates have tried to position themselves as the bigger supporter of the men and women fighting in the military.
Raese has said that Byrd's opposition to the war undercuts the troops serving in Iraq.
And in an ad, he said Byrd has voted against body armor for troops. While it's true that Byrd voted against some measures that funded body armor, he also voted for the armor in other bills and amendments.
Raese said in an interview that he thinks the country needs to give the military every opportunity to win the war in Iraq.
He said Iraq is moving toward democracy, which is "unheard of" in the Middle East.
"We have good reasons to be in Iraq and we should stay there and finish the job, making sure our troops have everything they need to do so," Raese said. "We must ensure our troops have everything they need to finish the job, they must be fully funded."
Byrd said he has always supported the military in times of war. He said he has voted in favor of body armor for the troops, and better combat pay.
He also said he has worked to improve health care for National Guard troops and veterans.
"I have worked on those issues because our troops deserve every ounce of support this nation can give them for the outstanding service they perform," Byrd said. "I will stand behind no one in my support of the troops fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan."
Tribunals
Byrd has been a critic of a recent law to allow military tribunals for terrorist suspects held in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
He said he did not agree with the way the bill was altered by Republicans, and he hoped to add an amendment that would have required the bill to be reauthorized in five years.
Byrd said he supports the idea of trying terrorist suspects, but he wants to ensure they have a fair trial that meets American values.
"There is no question that we need military tribunals," Byrd said. "We must capture terrorists and bring them to justice. But we must do it in a way that passes Constitutional muster and upholds America's reputation as the beacon of justice and democracy in the world."
Raese said he has mixed feelings about the tribunal law.
He said he is against torture, but the United States needs to be realistic when it comes to fighting terrorists. The war on terror is not the same as a criminal prosecution, he said, and it must be fought and won in order to protect society.
"Al-Qaida never signed the Geneva convention, why should al-Qaida terrorists receive rights and privileges outlined in the Geneva Convention?" Raese said. "Many people feel we're being forced in some ways to fight the war on terror with one hand tied behind our back."
John Raese and David Raese coown the West Virginia Newspaper Publishing Co., publisher of The Dominion Post.
Copyright (c) 2006, The Dominion Post, Morgantown, W.Va. Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News. For reprints, email tmsreprints@permissionsgroup.com, call 800-374-7985 or 847-635-6550, send a fax to 847-635-6968, or write to The Permissions Group Inc., 1247 Milwaukee Ave., Suite 303, Glenview, IL 60025, USA.

Load-Date: October 19, 2006


End of Document