Terrorist attack in U.S.? Don't put military in charge
USA TODAY
September 30, 1999, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 869 words
Byline: Peter Schweizer
Body


Ever since the deadly 1993 showdown in Waco, Texas, there has
been controversy about how it was handled. But recent revelations
that members of the U.S. military's elite Delta Force were present
during the raid and that two flammable tear-gas canisters were
fired at the Branch Davidian compound the day it burned have raised
new questions, forcing Attorney General Janet Reno to appoint
former senator John Danforth to investigate.
We may never know exactly what happened in Texas on that fateful
day. But what is clear is that the U.S. military may become involved
in more domestic incidents in the future. Indeed, whether the
military should play a greater role inside the United States is
the center of the latest debate in military thinking. How this
debate is resolved could have profound implications for both our
form of government and the ability of our armed forces to wage
war.
On Feb. 1, the Department of Defense took its first step into
this controversial area when it announced plans to fund military
operations within the United States training National Guard teams
to respond to terrorist attacks. More recently, the federally
funded U.S. Commission on National Security/21st Century, headed
by former senators Gary Hart and Warren B. Rudman, released a
report Sept. 15 that declared the U.S. is unprepared to deal with
domestic terrorism, and seemed to imply that the military will
play an increasing role in law enforcement. (The commission will
make recommendations next year.)
The debate centers on whether to create a Homelands Defense Command,
a new structure that would oversee military operations in the
United States during a crisis. The idea was broached in December
by the National Defense Panel, which was chartered by Congress
to review Pentagon planning. The proposal is being pushed especially
hard by Deputy Secretary of Defense John Hamre. Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) director James Lee Witt, whose agency
has primary responsibility for "consequence management" after
a domestic terrorist attack, says he "philosophically" disagrees
that the military should be the institution with such responsibility.
This wouldn't be the first time the armed forces have been used
for domestic purposes. Both before and after the World War I era,
when military budgets dwindled, there was a push to involve the
armed forces in societal issues. When race riots tore apart Omaha
in 1919, Gen. Leonard Wood commanded 1,000 armed soldiers used
to restore order. More recently, in 1992, Marines and Army soldiers
were deployed following the riots in south-central Los Angeles.
Today, the U.S. military is being used in drug interdiction, air
reconnaissance and other anti-drug operations across the country.
Although it may seem to make good sense to involve the armed forces
in local law enforcement, such a path has dangerous consequences
for the military. Many officers worry that the new missions are
placing it on a slippery slope that will degrade its ability to
fight. The training required for domestic anti-terrorism operations
is radically different from those skills that would be of use
on the battlefield. And resources devoted to domestic terrorism
will degrade the military's ability to fight foreign enemies.
But even more importantly, there are serious political issues
at stake any time the armed forces are asked to intrude in domestic
affairs. It would be virtually impossible for the military to
avoid controversial and thorny domestic political issues.
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms was roundly criticized
for its handling of the showdown in Waco. And the handling by
federal agents of the standoff with extremists in Ruby Ridge,
Idaho, also caused heated debate. Do we really want the armed
forces to become immersed in such politically contentious domestic
conflicts?
If the U.S. armed forces were put in the position of firing on
Americans, it could tear apart military units. In one of the few
cases in which this sensitive subject has been raised, a Navy
lieutenant commander administrated a nonscientific "combat arms
survey" to 300 active-duty Marines in 1994. When asked whether
they would "fire upon U.S. citizens" who resisted a government
effort to confiscate banned firearms, more than 60% said they
would not, according to the Navy Times. The surveyor concluded
that "a complete unit breakdown would occur in a unit tasked
to execute this mission."
Of all the national government institutions, none enjoys more
popular support than the U.S. military. And this is precisely
because it is the one major government institution that does not
threaten the interests of any American. It has successfully remained
above politics.
The attention given to the threat of domestic terrorism and organized
violence is deserved. And there is a real need to develop an effective
structure to prevent and respond to these acts. But putting the
military in charge is not the answer.
The U.S. military has plenty of foreign threats to grapple with
and is already spread thin. To deal with domestic terrorism, we
need to empower other government agencies -- such as the FBI and
FEMA -- to deal more effectively with this threat. Domestic terrorism
is a security problem that is best left to law enforcement and
emergency management agencies.

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, b/w, Jerry Mosemak, USA TODAY(Illustration)

Load-Date: September 30, 1999


End of Document