TERRORISM SUSPECT REMAINS IN FEDERAL CUSTODY IN VIRGINIA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
January 9, 2018 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 474 words
Byline: Tracie Mauriello, Post-Gazette Washington Bureau
Body


ALEXANDRIA, Va. -A former Aspinwall man who may have been planning a terrorist attack remains in police custody in Virginia after he waived his detention and preliminary hearings Monday.
Sean Andrew Duncan, 21, is being held on a charge of obstruction of justice after the FBI said he attempted to destroy evidence when agents raided his Virginia home in late December.
"Given the severe nature of the charge and, obviously part of that has to do with your attempting to flee . there is no condition or combination of conditions" that make release reasonable, U.S. District Judge John F. Anderson told Mr. Duncan. Judge Anderson said he wasn't confident that the community would be safe or that Mr. Duncan would return to court.
Mr. Duncan did not speak during the brief hearing in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.
As U.S. marshals led him out of the courtroom, a man in the last row blew a kiss at him and a woman sitting next to that man gave Mr. Duncan a tight smile. They declined to identify themselves.
Mr. Duncan wore jail-issued clothes reading "Alexandria Inmate" on the back, a contrast to the "Herndon Police Department Supporter" T-shirt he wore for his initial court appearance last week.
Allegheny County Police provided key evidence that led to the FBI's raid of his home in Sterling, Va., according to court documents. County police collected the evidence in June after Mr. Duncan voluntarily handed over his cell phone after his infant son died of an undetermined cause.
Separately, a relative warned the FBI that Mr. Duncan had become radicalized and was interested in ISIS.
Later the FBI interviewed a "co-conspirator," who said Mr. Duncan wanted to attack the U.S. and that he sent her bomb-making instructions and asked her to move to Syria with him and become his second wife.
The investigation led to the December raid, during which Mr. Duncan ran from his home holding a plastic bag with pieces of a smashed thumb drive soaking in foaming liquid, according to the affidavit. Agents believe the thumb drive contained evidence of terrorist activity.
If convicted of obstruction of justice, Mr. Duncan faces up to 20 years in prison and $250,000 in fines. Other charges are possible, according to a Department of Justice spokesman.
Relatives told The Washington Post that Mr. Duncan grew up in Maryland and became interested in Islam after befriending Muslim students in high school.
His marriage two years ago to Zakiya Sadeq, a physician 15 years his senior who studied at the International Islamic University, raised questions for his family, a relative told the Post. During the marriage to Dr. Sadeq, who worked at UPMC last year, Mr. Duncan was also communicating online with the unnamed co-conspirator, the FBI said. She has not been charged.
Mr. Duncan and Dr. Sadeq lived in Aspinwall briefly last year.

Notes

Washington Bureau Chief Tracie Mauriello: tmauriello@post-gazette.com, 703-996-9292 or on Twitter @pgPoliTweets.

Load-Date: January 11, 2018


End of Document