Terror suspect arrives in U.S.
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 15, 2013 Tuesday


Copyright 2013 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATION & WORLD; NationWorld; Pg. 4
Length: 363 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Highlight: Libyan al-Qaida suspect arrives in US for trial after week of questioning aboard US warship
Body


Captured in Libya, he's been indicted for roles in 1998 bombings of American embassies in Africa
 - After a weeklong interrogation aboard a U.S. warship, a Libyan al-Qaida suspect is now in New York awaiting trial on terrorism charges, U.S. officials said Monday.
Abu Anas al-Libi was grabbed in a military raid in Libya on Oct. 5. He is to stand trial in Manhattan, where he has been under indictment for more than a decade on charges he helped plan and conduct surveillance for the bombings of U.S. embassies in Africa in 1998.
Preet Bharara, the U.S. attorney for the southern district of New York, confirmed that al-Libi was transferred to law enforcement custody over the weekend. Al-Libi was expected to be arraigned today, Bharara said.
President Barack Obama's administration took criticism years ago when it decided to prosecute admitted 9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in New York, rather than at the naval prison at Guantanamo Bay. After reversing course, however, the government has successfully prosecuted several terrorism cases in civilian courts.
A federal law enforcement official and two other U.S. officials said al-Libi arrived in New York on Saturday. The officials insisted on anonymity because they were not authorized to publicly discuss the matter.
Intelligence officials interrogated him for a week aboard the U.S.S. San Antonio in the Mediterranean. Interrogations at sea have replaced CIA black sites as the U.S. government's preferred method for holding suspected terrorists and questioning them without access to lawyers.
Al-Libi's al-Qaida ties date back to the terrorist group's early years, according to court documents. That would make him a valuable source of information about the group's history.
It's unclear whether he could offer fresh intelligence on the group, the core of which has been battered and fragmented.
Al-Libi has longstanding health issues and will get medical testing while in custody to determine whether he needs treatment, U.S. officials said. Where al-Libi is being held and where that testing will take place is unclear.
Al-Libi used to be on the FBI's list of most wanted terrorists. His family denies he was in al-Qaida.

Load-Date: October 15, 2013


End of Document