Terrorism war shouldn't extend to innocents
University Wire
October 11, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Capaha Arrow via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 377 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Capaha Arrow
Dateline: Cape Girardeau, Mo.
Body


It is vital that every American understand the importance of sending food to Afghanistan.
We are at war with terrorists. These terrorists are on a bloodthirsty mission: Kill America. Kill women, children, men and anybody else on American soil. They see our values, beliefs and government as a disease. These people feel that we are only fit to die. They are dying to kill us.
Southeast Missouri State U.
We see the terrorists as a disease in return, but a good physician does not gun down a suffering patient or blow up a hospital. A good physician finds a way to kill the disease without destroying healthy tissue.
America is removing a sickness from Afghanistan, attempting to spare as many civilians as possible. The Afghan people are not our targets. Their proximity to terrorist camps and enemy facilities does not merit their destruction. No doctor chops off a patient's foot to remove a wart.
Our country must show the keenly watching world it is distinguising good from evil. We must show surgical precision in our retaliation. We cannot afford mistakes.
Osama bin Laden accused the United States of attacking Islam instead of terrorism. He must not convince the Muslim world of that, and we cannot allow a stray U.S. missile or clumsy political remark to give him credit. If bin Laden's strategy works, the global battlefield will be divided into Muslims versus everyone else, and his pathetic little band of a few thousand misguided cowards will suddenly gain nearly a billion fervent supporters.
So far, our retaliatory measures focus on Afghanistan. Many people there are impoverished and hungry. Sending food and medical supplies is a message to the Afghan people and the world: America is fighting an infection - not Islam and not civilians.
Osama bin Laden will fail. He will fail because he expects millions of righteous, peaceful Muslims to pervert Islam from a wellspring of life to a reeking cauldron of venom. He is counting on a careless retaliation from the United States to be a catalyst for his hoped-for holy war. Though true believers of Islam will honor their peaceful faith regardless of our actions, America must deliver only justice, not vengeance, denying the terrorists even the slightest victory.
(C) 2001 The Capaha Arrow via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 11, 2001


End of Document