TERROR-WAR ILLS ALLEGED/ U.S. PROSECUTOR CHARGES EXAGGERATION, INTERFERENCE BY JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 18, 2004 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-2
Length: 468 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Justice Department has exaggerated its performance in the war on terrorism, interfered with a major terror prosecution and compromised a confidential informant, a federal prosecutor alleges.
The lawsuit filed by Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard Convertino against Attorney General John Ashcroft is the latest twist in the Bush administration's first major post-Sept. 11 terrorism prosecution, a Detroit case jeopardized over allegations of prosecutorial misconduct.
Convertino was the lead prosecutor on the case, in which the government did not provide defense attorneys a letter alleging that a prosecution witness lied until long after a trial had ended.
In his lawsuit, Convertino says the Justice Department is retaliating against him because he has complained frequently and publicly about "the lack of support and cooperation, lack of effective assistance, lack of resources and intradepartmental infighting" in terrorism cases.
"These concerns directly related to the ability of the United States to effectively utilize the criminal justice system as a component in the 'war on terrorism,'*" says his lawsuit filed in federal court.
According to the suit, a senior official in the Justice Department's terrorism and violent crimes section informed Convertino that news reports concerning the department's anti-terror efforts were not accurate and that the "press gives us more credit than we deserve." The lawsuit alleges "gross mismanagement" in the terrorism and violent crimes section.
Convertino says he complained repeatedly to the Justice Department in Washington that it placed "perception" over "reality" to the serious detriment of the war on terror.
Justice Department spokesman Mark Corallo declined to comment.
Convertino came under internal Justice Department investigation last fall after telling a Senate committee of his concerns.
Regarding the Detroit case that Convertino handled, the government late last year turned over a jail inmate's letter to defense lawyers. In it, the inmate alleged that prosecution witness Youssef Hmimssa had lied.
A lawyer for Convertino has said he believes his client made the right decision in not disclosing the evidence because it wouldn't have affected the trial's outcome.
Months before the government turned over the letter, a jury found two defendants guilty of document fraud and conspiracy to provide material support for terrorism. One other was found guilty of document fraud but acquitted of terror charges. A fourth was acquitted on all counts.
A defense attorney who faced Convertino in the Detroit case said one section of his lawsuit "seems completely unfounded."
Convertino alleges a lack of resources, but his resources "appeared to us to be completely unlimited," said James Gerometta, one of the court-appointed defense attorneys in the case.

Load-Date: February 19, 2004


End of Document