Terror threats big factor for Ohioans, poll shows; Issue among top concerns even though attacks here are rare.; SPECIAL REPORT YOUR VOTE OHIO
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
September 12, 2016 Monday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 904 words
Byline: By Robert Wang
Body


Law enforcement officials work near the crime scene at Pulse Nightclub in Orlando, Fla., where 49 people were killed and 53 wounded in a shooting on June 15.
People gather at a memorial in Nice, France, where a man drove a 19-ton truck through a crowd celebrating Bastille Day. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack, which killed 84 people and injured more than 200.
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump's tough talk on fighting terror threats seems to be a big factor that is driving his support.
Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton has said she would work with allies to continue the campaign against the Islamic State.
Ohioans are far more likely to die in a traffic accident than a terrorist attack, yet terrorism ranks among the top four concerns of residents while car crashes don't get even a mention, a new poll shows.
The poll, designed as part of a collaboration of Ohio news organizations called YourVoteOhio, shows terrorism is very much on the minds of voters this campaign season, even in a state like Ohio, which has had few deaths attributed to terrorist activities.
On average, since 1995, 153 people have died on U.S. soil each year due to terrorism, which is defined as criminal acts designed to sway or persuade opinion or actions. That includes the 2001 attacks that claimed nearly 3,000 in one day. Minus that one day, the average is about a dozen deaths a year over two decades.
In Ohio in the last 45 years combined, six people have been killed by terror attacks, and all of those were before 1986.
In contrast, 752 people died last year in Ohio alone as a result of traffic accidents. Far more people die of poisonings, falls and weather disasters than terrorism.
The poll, taken in August when the attacks in France and Orlando, Fla., were still fresh in the minds of Americans, shows the extent to which Ohioans' views of the candidates are being shaped by their foreign policy positions.
Economic issues still rank as the top worry for Ohioans, but terror threats are not far behind. In response to an open-ended question about the issue of greatest concern, about 4.9 percent listed terrorism or the Islamic State as their top problem - fourth among a long list of issues - and another 4.2 percent named national security/defense, ranking sixth. Poverty/economic inequality was the top problem among those polled, at 10.9 percent.
Another finding: Those most likely to be concerned a b ou t t e r ro r i sm we re women.
In the presidential race, Donald Trump's tough talk on fighting terror threats seems to be a big factor that is driving his support.
Those who like Trump are likely to name terrorism, national security and related immigration issues as a reason for their support. Not so for Hillary Clinton, whose issue-strengths are spread more across multiple topics.
Clinton, the Democratic nominee, said she would work with allies to continue the campaign against the Islamic State, which has inspired or claimed responsibility for many of the terrorist attacks, would seek to block suspected terrorists from buying guns in the U.S. and would support law enforcement's efforts to build relationships with American Muslim communities, according to the nonprofit organization the Jefferson Center.
Trump, the Republican nominee, had called for a temporary ban on Muslims entering this country. He since has revised that position to blocking visitors from countries with terrorist activity. He also proposes to "crush and destroy ISIS" with joint military operations.
John Mueller, a political science professor at Ohio State University who studies government policy in response to terrorism, says perspective is lacking when it comes to Americans' views on terrorism. Since 9/11, the number of Americans killed by Islamic terrorists has averaged about seven a year, he said, even counting the 49 a lone gunman killed in Orlando in June. Far more die in drug overdoses every week, he said.
The odds of being killed in a terrorist attack are roughly 1 in 40 million, he said. The odds of being killed in a car crash are about 1 in 8,000.
Mueller said the chances of being killed in a collision with a deer crossing a road, by lightning, by drowning in a bathtub or in an industrial accident are all greater than the chances of being killed by a terrorist attack in the United States. Politicians seek to attract support - and the media seek to attract an audience - by playing into people's fears of terrorism, according to Mueller.
"There are always dangers out there. You can't be completely safe," he said. "You want to worry the most about the things that are the most dangerous. ... Any death is regrettable, obviously, but you should also keep it in proportion."
Despite the rarity of terrorist attacks in Ohio, several of the 1,079 respondents in the August survey cited the presidential candidates' stance on terrorism in their support for a candidate. About 3.2 percent said they might change their view of Clinton if she pledged to strengthen the military and developed what they view as a better plan to combat terrorists.
Trump has attracted support due to statements he has made on terrorism. Of the respondents who said they felt positive about Trump's positions on the issues, 6.3 percent cited his pledges to fight to stop terrorists. Only 0.9 percent who felt negative about Trump's position on the issues cited his statements on terrorism as the reason.

Load-Date: September 12, 2016


End of Document