Terrorism leaves no place to hide COMMENTARY
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 19, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P4D
Length: 584 words
Byline: Peeks
Body


Nothing but nothing sells better than money for cash or credit, not even oil in Iraq, which seems worth a war to the Bush administration and a handful of allies who say Saddam Hussein must go because he's a bloody tyrant.
They point to his record of gassing his own people and killing them with germs, but hardly a word about his stand between the industrialized world and Iraqi oil fields, which are second only to the Arabian fields in the oil-rich Middle East.
In the 1991 war against Saddam, the question came from the White House to West Virginians and fellow Americans: "Do you want to pay $ 2 a gallon for gasoline?"
I don't hear that question now, which then linked the cost of crude oil to the price of gas at the pump, an end product of oil. Iraq was no longer just a place on the map to West Virginians and other Americans.
Nor was Kuwait, for that matter, invaded by Saddam to the horror and anger of neighboring nations and others in the world. He dared to draw a circle in blood around the oil fields in the region and make himself king of it all.
He was stopped cold in his tracks on his way to the throne of the oil kingdom. It came at the cost of American lives and the lives of allies in Desert Storm, as well as countless deaths on the other side. Some survivors all around are still paying for wounds suffered in the war.
West Virginia maintained its record in Desert Storm as in other wars with services and sacrifice beyond proportion to other states in the national population. Mountaineers truly bite the bullet with patriotic candor.
And today, no less than other Americans, they generally support the Bush administration's aim to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction and get rid of Saddam to boot, according to public opinion polls.
That is to be done by all means necessary, including war against Iraq. At the moment, though, Saddam faces the question of bowing to the latest resolution by the United Nations, or falling in armed wrath led by U.S. forces.
If it comes to another Persian Gulf War, very apparently the United States will lack the coalition assembled before. Germans and other Europeans recoil from armed conflict, at least, over the sticky issue of removing the leader of a sovereign state, even Saddam.
To them, it smacks of insufferable arrogance in general and headstrong bullyism in particular at a time in history that makes the destruction of nuclear war unthinkable. It's reasoned that if Iraq is attacked, Saddam will feel compelled to use every mass-destruction weapon in reach.
Equally unthinkable is a war fueled by religion with Arabs and Muslims on one side and Christians, Jews and the rest on the other side. The United States would be caught in the middle.
Sen. Robert C. Byrd seems better understood abroad than at home on the whole wide-ranging question of going to war for any reason. His counsel on declaring war under the Constitution mostly has fallen on deaf ears, from all indication.
Byrd, D-W.Va., also has seen voters in the state ignore his recommendation for candidates in the past midterm election, while they cuddled up to other candidates on the personal advice of President Bush, swelling the Republican ranks.
I think, however, most voters in the state and nation voted their fears of terrorism and not their faith in the future. And they voted their concern for a safe place, when really there's no place to hide at any price. Nor was it ever during any crisis in the life of the nation.
Peeks is a former Gazette business/labor editor.

Load-Date: November 19, 2002


End of Document