TERRORIST INCIDENTS AROUND WORLD FELL SHARPLY IN '92
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 1, 1993, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4B
Length: 423 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Terrorist incidents around the world hit a 17-year low last year, but the U.S. State Department said Friday that "ominous signs" exist that terrorism will escalate this year.  To support that prediction, the department cited the World Trade Center bombing, the killing of two CIA employees in a suburb of Washington and several airplane hijackings - all this year.  In its annual report on terrorism around the world, the department said terrorist incidents fell 35 percent last year, to 361 from 561 a year earlier.  Fewer U.S. casualties were attributed to terrorism last year than in any year since the United States began reporting statistics in 1968. U.S.  citizens and property remained the main target of international terrorists, but only two Americans were killed and one injured.  Latin America had more incidents than any other region last year, and the worst attack of 1992 was a truck bombing March 17 that destroyed the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The blast killed 29 people and wounded 242. The attack was blamed on the Islamic Jihad.  The report does not give specific figures for each previous year, but a graph shows that incidents in 1992 were the lowest since 1975, when they were between 350 and 360. They rose erratically for several years, exceeding 600 a year between 1985 and 1988 and have declined since then.  Six countries remain on the list of states considered sponsors of terrorism, which subjects them to trade restrictions: Iran, Iraq, Cuba, Libya, North Korea and Syria.
Officials have said Pakistan and Sudan are being watched closely for potential inclusion on the list.  The report calls Iran "the deadliest state sponsor" and says it has "achieved a worldwide reach." The report said the growth of international cooperation had been the main reason for the steady decline in terrorism.  (Following appeared in THREE STAR EDITION page 01B.) The report calls Iran "the deadliest state sponsor" and says it has "achieved a worldwide reach." Laurence E. Pope, acting coordinator for counterterrorism, said in an introduction to the report that the main reason for the steady decline in terrorism had been the growth of international cooperation.  "States have been increasingly willing to oppose terrorism and to assist in countering terrorist acts," he said.  Noting the deadly incidents this year, Pope said, "Terrorism is now back in the headlines, and we see ominous signs that the problem will escalate, compounded by the resurgence of regional and ethnic conflicts around the world."

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document