Terrorism, by the book
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
May 25, 2003, Sunday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Clark County/region; Pg. c12
Length: 626 words
Byline: JOHN K. WILEY, Associated Press Writer
Body


POST FALLS, Idaho -- You won't find classes on calculus, economics or English literature at North Idaho College's Fort Sherman Institute for Human Protection.
Unlike the undergrads seeking an associate's degree at this community college, students here are corporate executives, National Guard officers, or even missionaries seeking training in how to protect themselves against terrorists, survive a kidnapping or otherwise increase their security.
"We are dealing with persons who might find themselves in a hostage situation," Director David Dose said. "We teach avoidance … as well as ways to minimize their exploitability" after being taken hostage.
Other colleges have similar programs, but Dose said he believes the institute is the only one of its kind offered by a community college.
The institute is in a nondescript building with combination locks and tinted windows in an industrial park next to a dog-racing track, several miles from the main NIC campus.
Dose is reluctant to discuss the content of courses offered. He doesn't want to give potential terrorists his secrets. But he says such training has become a greater need since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks in New York and Washington, D.C.
The institute seeks to train people what to do once terrorism strikes.
"Once it's there, you're stuck with it," Dose said recently. "The more people understand about terrorism and how it works, the less effective it is."
Using state and federal grants, the 18-month-old institute already has trained thousands of government workers.
Part of NIC's Work Force Training Center, the institute has offered computer-based training to more than 15,000 Idaho emergency workers who would be the first to arrive at a terrorist incident.
Several churches, which Dose declined to identify, have sent missionaries to the institute's courses on how to survive or escape captivity while working in foreign countries.
Next month, the institute will begin training about 30 Idaho National Guard personnel in Boise.
Idaho National Guard Maj. Gen. Jack Kane, the state's homeland security director, called the training invaluable, particularly to Guardsmen being deployed throughout the world.
"For the military, anti-terrorism training has become more and more valuable in recent years," he said in a statement. "I think this is some of the best training of this sort to be found in the country, and it's located right here in Idaho."
The institute already was on the drawing board when terrorists attacked the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in 2001.
Dose a former county commissioner, cop, teacher and Department of Defense consultant had an office within a month of the attacks. Two months later, the institute was officially a part of the college.
Although affiliated with NIC, classes are not offered to the public.
"We don't teach Terrorism 101 at North Idaho College," said Randy Spivey, Dose's security adviser.
The courses, which last from 30 minutes to as many as five days, offer corporations and organizations "a cafeteria plan" tailored to their security needs and budgets, Dose said.
Courses are taught at the institute's office in a business park, or at the client's site and can involve as few as a dozen to more than 500 employees at a time.
For instance, a course in countersurveillance techniques includes a field trip to downtown Coeur d'Alene, where participants shop and try to detect if they are being followed by law enforcement agents hired by the institute, Dose said.
He won't say what the courses cost, but says they are "very affordable" when compared to what private security companies charge. The amount is dependent on the level of training sought, he said.
Dose said the program takes information from federal sources and literature on terrorism incidents.

Graphic

 
Gregory M. Morley, media production manager of Fort Sherman Institute, edits a classroom training video that includes a scene involving a simulated hostage situation, on right side of screen, at the institute in Post Falls, Idaho, on May 16. The Fort Sherman Institute offers training in how to deal with terrorism and being a hostage.

Load-Date: May 27, 2003


End of Document