TERRORISM COMES TO THE STATES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 30, 1993, WEDNESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B; EDITORIAL
Length: 316 words
Body


So this is what it feels like to have terrorists operating in the country: very frightening and very upsetting. These emotions can make people angry, which could lead to the wholesale smothering of civil liberties where suspected terrorists are concerned. That would be a shame for all Americans, who have an important stake in respect for due process. They do not want reckless wiretapping, preventive detention or branding of all Arabs as enemies.  New York City - and the United States - came precariously close to experiencing an attack of enormous proportions last week at the hands of a gang that allegedly was about to plant bombs in the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, among other places, and to assassinate political figures. The FBI and other authorities did a first-rate job in thwarting the alleged terrorist plot. Meanwhile, the Muslim cleric who is widely believed to provide inspiration for Arab extremists, Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, remains free because Attorney General Janet Reno concluded that he has broken no law - yet.  Ten years ago, a few of the sheik's apostles fought in the Afghan war on the side of Muslim rebels against the Soviet-installed regime. They may have been trained by the Central Intelligence Agency or other U.S. agencies - but now they are living in the United States and are willing to turn their frustrations and their skills against this country and its government, as well as the United Nations.  The alleged terrorist operation raises disturbing questions.
In addition to those concerning basic civil liberties for all citizens and residents, the possible involvement of the Iraqi government in planning, financing and training must be considered. If Iraq is found to have been behind a terrorist campaign, as well as the World Trade Center bombing last February, that poses serious policy issues for President Bill Clinton, Congress and the United Nations.

Load-Date: October 7, 1993


End of Document