TERRORISM SUMMIT'S AIMS DISPUTED; SYRIA ABSENT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 13, 1996, Wednesday, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 580 words
Dateline: SHARM EL-SHEIK, EGYPT
Body


A Syrian boycott and a dispute over goals overshadowed preparations Tuesday for a summit meeting that seeks to save Middle East peace from being derailed by bombings in Israel.
Foreign Minister Amr Moussa of Egypt, the host nation, said that he was sorry that Syria and its ally Lebanon would stay away from Sharm el-Sheik and that he hoped their absence would not detract from today's meeting. "It is a disappointment because we consider Syria one of the main parties to the peace process. . . . They have their own reasons," he said.
World leaders converged on this resort, built by Egypt's one-time Israeli enemies, for an anti-terrorism conference that President Bill Clinton said would find "ways to combat those who seek to kill peace with violence."
The one-day conference hopes to spark new momentum for peace in the region after suicide-bombings in Israel in the last 2 1/2 weeks left 62 people dead.
But already the so-called peacemakers' summit meeting has been partly overshadowed by differences among U.S., Israeli and Arab participants over the goals and emphasis of the meeting.
The United States and Israel are eager to find ways of curbing extremist violence while providing a badly needed political boost to Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres before he faces re-election May 29.
Arab nations want to prevent the session from becoming a U.S.-Israeli forum for pressing Palestinian President Yasser Arafat to take tougher steps against Muslim militants.
Instead, they hope to air broader concerns about the Middle East peace process, including what they see as Israel's reluctance to honor the terms of the 1993 Oslo accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. Arab leaders also are concerned that if the conference places too much emphasis on curbing terrorism, they will be discredited if further attacks take place, diplomatic sources say.
"Our priority is the peace issue because if it were only terrorism, then the summit would be somewhere else," Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said Tuesday. "We have to look into the reason" for the bombings, he added. "We have to work toward pushing the peace process forward."
Notwithstanding the absence of Syria, Western diplomats were generally upbeat about prospects for a gathering of Arabs and Israelis whose presence in the same room would have been unthinkable a few years ago. Besides Egypt, Arab countries scheduled to attend the conference are Jordan, Morocco, Algeria, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Oman.
Clinton said Tuesday before leaving the White House that, "The will of the people for peace is clearly greater than the forces of division. . . . This summit of the peacemakers can be an important step in the process for peace in the Middle East."
After the conference, Clinton said, he will travel to Israel "to stand with the people there in their time of grief."
Arafat urged Israel "to implement accurately what has been agreed upon" despite terrorism - a demand for Israel to pull out of the West Bank city of Hebron and move to the final stage of peace talks. Israel has said it will not do that until Arafat proves he is serious about peace and the PLO rescinds its vow to destroy Israel.
Arafat complained that Israel's closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, in effect since the first bombing in Israel on Feb. 25, would only make things worse. "Everyone has to understand that the closure and the collective punishment is not the solution," he said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo From AP - Workers carry a carpet in Sharm El-Sheik, Egypt, to prepare for today's anti-terrorism summit. President Bill Clinton and leaders from Russia, France, Britain and other nations will attend the one-day event.

Load-Date: March 14, 1996


End of Document