Terrorism comes with any skin color
University Wire
April 19, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Daily Collegian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 760 words
Byline: By Yousef Munayyer, Massachusetts Daily Collegian; SOURCE: U. Massachusetts
Dateline: AMHERST, Mass. 
Body


We can sit down for hours and attempt to define "terrorism." It is likely that we will not be able to come up with an acceptable definition. If different security organizations in this country cannot agree on one definition, then we are likely to give up before we can figure it out. However, there are certain things we can limit the definition to help clear up the picture.
Anyone who was following the news last week will have likely heard of Eric Rudolph. If you have not, here are the bare bones: Rudolph recently admitted responsibility for the bombings that killed two and injured 120 at the Olympics in Atlanta in 1996. What was his motivation? To show his disapproval and strike back against a government which condoned the killing of children or, as he saw it, abortion.
The media, both print and television, called him a "bomber." Headlines ran about the "Olympic bomber" and how he had confessed to the crime. Then something struck me. I remember being around the television in 1996 when the Olympic Games were dominating the sports world here in the United States. I remember watching the footage after the bombing on television, seeing police cars and police footage. And I also distinctly remember the cunning news anchors telling the world that this Terrorist act is likely the work of Arabs. They were wrong.
Just as they were wrong when the Alfred P. Murrah building in Oklahoma City exploded and the immediate reaction was to blame it on Arab Terrorists. Instead, we later found Timothy McVeigh responsible, a homegrown American, who only recently received a Bronze Star for fighting in the First Gulf War. Yet when the sketches came out and the hunt was on for McVeigh, the attack was called a bombing, "terrorism" was not part of the picture.
This was a crime by a white man that broke the law, it could not be terrorism. His motivation? Revenging against the Government for its stance on gun control. This hit McVeigh the hardest as he watched the Branch Davidian complex in Waco, Texas, burn. In his view, the attack that killed 168 and wounded up to 500 others was in defense of the constitution.
Ted Kaczynski sent explosives to people through the mail. Not only was he white, but he received a privileged education attending prestigious schools like Harvard, and eventually earning his PhD. Then one day he was tired of it all, bought some property in rural Montana and began his attacks, which, over a period of nearly two decades, killed several. His motive? Expressed in his 35,000-word manifesto, he hated the direction society was taking, he hated the role technology was playing and he hated leftists whom he claimed were a corrupt "psychological type" (look who's talking). He would later be called the "Unabomber."
So why is it that these criminals are spared the terrorist label? Were their crimes humane? Absolutely not. Did they not inspire terror? Of course they did. Did they not have some political objective? Yes. So why aren't they called terrorists and why are their acts not called terrorism?
The answer is rather simple. "Terrorist" is a label reserved for outsiders. It is not something an American can be. Terrorist is the opposite of American. This is the line that the media has been carrying. Eric Rudolph, Timothy McVeigh and Ted Kaczynski, along with many others, prove that "Terrorist" is a name given to those who are different, mainly people who are not American, or in most cases, not white.
When a few Puerto Ricans attacked congress in the 1950s, shooting and injuring innocent people, they were and are to this day labeled Terrorists. Not shooters or freedom fighters (the term many prefer). There are all kinds of other exceptions this black and white system cannot deal with. Because of this, we get cases like Jose Padilla, who has been labeled an enemy combatant, but has not been charged with any crime. We also get cases like Johnny Walker Lind, or the "American Taliban" who moved to Afghanistan before the war began. The system simply cannot deal with these exceptions because there is no real definition for terrorism.
Terrorism, as the media has us believe, is an act committed by evil outsiders, usually they will be bearded or wearing something resembling a towel on their head. If not, they may be in disguise, but you can surely spot them for their darker skin so keep your eyes peeled. If anything here in the U.S.A. blows up, some dark-skinned terrorist is probably responsible, unless we find out otherwise, then it's just a white-skinned bad apple.
(C) 2005 Massachusetts Daily Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 19, 2005


End of Document