Terrorist Attacks Declined in '94 but Death Toll Rose, U.S. Reports
The New York Times
April 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section 1;  ; Section 1;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk  ; Column 1;  
Length: 506 words
Byline: Reuters  
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 28
Body


The number of international terrorist attacks fell to a 23-year low last year but the number of casualties rose, the State Department reported today.
The department spotlighted an increase in attacks by militant Islamic groups, especially those opposed to the Middle East peace talks, and a decline in attacks by secular organizations.
The Congressionally-mandated annual report, "Patterns of Global Terrorism: 1994," said there had been 321 international terrorist attacks in 1994, down from 431 the previous year and the lowest number since 1971. The peak year was 1987, with 665.
Of the attacks last year, 66 were against the United States, compared with 88 in 1993. The report did not cover domestic attacks.
Despite the overall decline, Secretary of State Warren Christopher, in a letter to Congress accompanying the report, said the number of casualties from international terrorist acts had risen last year, to 314 dead and 663 wounded.
One attack accounted for almost one-third of the casualties: the car-bombing of a Jewish center in Buenos Aires in July. The report said the attack might have been carried out by the Iranian-backed Party of God, which is based in Lebanon.
The State Department Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Philip C. Wilcox, said 1994 reflected "a trend in recent years of a decline in attacks by secular terrorist groups and an increase in terrorist activities by radical Islamic groups."
"Extremists opposed to the Arab-Israeli peace process dramatically increased the scale and frequency of their attacks in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza," killing more than 100 civilians, he wrote in the introduction.
Mr. Wilcox said today at a news conference that this represented a "very dangerous and vicious rear-guard action" by the Palestinian Hamas and Islamic Holy War groups.
He said reasons for the decline in terrorism included the end of the Soviet Union, the transition to majority rule in South Africa and the beginnings of peace in Northern Ireland. But he also said more countries were starting to fight terrorism.
"There's less ambivalence in the world today that terrorism is simply a crime, whereas in the past there was often a tendency to tolerate terrorism, to look the other way, because of the political motivation of the terrorists," he said.
Mr. Wilcox warned, however, that domestic terrorism appeared to be on the rise. "So there's probably been a net increase in this kind of violence," he said, adding that the attackers were also tending to go after civilian targets.
In his letter to Congress, Mr. Christopher said international and domestic attacks "have brought home the ruthless persistence of evil, cowardice and intolerance in the world -- and the frightening ease with which terrorists can obtain destructive technology."
He said ending terrorism was a top priority of the Administration, noting that the President had sent Congress a counterterrorism act in February and that this week, prompted by the explosion in Oklahoma City, Mr. Clinton had asked for enhanced powers against terrorism.

Load-Date: April 30, 1995


End of Document