Terrorism warnings sharpened
USA TODAY
February 12, 2003, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 498 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson and John Diamond
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- Top intelligence officials gave Congress a sobering warning Tuesday of the al-Qaeda terrorist network's interest in using missiles and poisons to inflict mass casualties in the United States, adding grim new detail to previous accounts of looming terror attacks.
The warning came as a broadcast statement believed to have come from al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden pledged the terrorist group's support for Iraqis and called on followers to defeat a U.S.-led invasion.
Authorities say the statement attributed to bin Laden, which contained references to suicide attacks against Americans, appeared to be authentic.
Taken together, the statements from U.S. officials and the shadowy terrorist organization sharpened the sense that the United States faces its greatest threat of terrorist assault since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
And with the nation already at its highest state of alert since the first anniversary of those attacks, the Pentagon confirmed Tuesday that anti-aircraft defense units had been placed around Washington to guard against a possible assault. The Pentagon described the deployment as "part of the continuing war against terrorism" and said the action was "not connected" to a specific threat.
On Capitol Hill, CIA Director George Tenet and FBI Director Robert Mueller described al-Qaeda efforts to ready "new means of attack" involving surface-to-air missiles, poisons and underwater assaults aimed at ships and seaports.
In their first extensive comments since the national threat level was elevated last week to orange, its second-highest level, Tenet and Mueller told the Senate Intelligence Committee that al-Qaeda could attack as soon as this week. The timing, while not specific, coincides with the Muslim pilgrimage of the hajj and the Eid al-Adha holiday that follows, a five-day period that began Sunday.
"The intelligence is not idle chatter on the part of terrorists and their associates," Tenet told the committee. "It is the most specific we have seen.  . . .  The information we have points to plots aimed at targets on two fronts -- in the United States and on the Arabian peninsula."
Mueller called al-Qaeda "clearly the most urgent threat to U.S. interests" and said the FBI had identified "several hundred" militant Muslims in the United States who are suspected of having links to the group.
Tenet said intelligence reports pointed to possible use of a "dirty bomb," a device that uses conventional explosives to contaminate an area with radioactive material.
The chilling accounts provided by Tenet and Mueller were the latest in a series of warnings by the government, which earlier this week urged citizens to stock their homes with essential supplies, including water, in the event of an attack.
Late Tuesday, Washington-area stores were reporting runs on duct tape and plastic sheeting. The government has urged people to have those materials on hand to seal windows and doors in case of a chemical, biological or radiological attack.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, AP; Tenet: Reports point to dirty bomb."

Load-Date: February 12, 2003


End of Document