TERRORISM THREAT STRIKES HOME
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
July 30, 1994, Saturday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P 3A
Length: 434 words
Body


NEW YORK _ An armada of garbage trucks formed a fortress around
the Israeli Consulate, a grim reminder that terrorism has no borders
The armada, later replaced by concrete barriers, was assembled
in response to a terrorist bomb threat this week after two car
bombings in London.  The panic may have passed, but the fear that
terrorists will strike here and elsewhere in the country has not.
The State Department announced increased security at Israeli
consulates in Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New York, Philadelphia and San Francisco.
The Israeli Embassy in Washington, D.C., also has stepped up
security.
Israel has blamed terrorists for four bombings targeting Jews
since July 18: the London bombings that injured 19 people; the
bombing of a Jewish center in Buenos Aires, Argentina, that killed at
least 95 people; and an airplane bombing in Panama that killed 22
people, including 12 Jews.
Concern about follow-up attacks led an Israeli rabbi to announce
Friday that Jews living outside Israel may remove religious symbols
from their homes to prevent terrorists from targeting them.
In Los Angeles, people were evacuated from the Israeli Consulate
Wednesday night after authorities became suspicious of a car left
unattended.  No bomb was found.
The heightened security in New York came after the FBI relayed
an informant's warning that Israel's consulate and United Nations
mission might be bombed, a police source said.
The source, speaking on condition of anonymity, said extra
police protection was extended to about two dozen "sensitive
locations" throughout the city, including the offices of the
Anti-Defamation League, El Al Airlines, the Jordanian government and
several synagogues.
The Federal Aviation Administration has said it is keeping a
closer eye on U.S. airports, but would not provide any details.
On Thursday, FBI Director Louis Freeh briefed Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani in Washington, D.C., on the consulate bomb threat.
Top police officials and Giuliani aides also distributed a
booklet titled "Security Tactics and Response" to 150 Jewish
community leaders in a private meeting at City Hall.
The booklet, produced after last year's terrorist bombing of the
World Trade Center, offers "common sense tips in times of concern,"
said Police Commissioner William Bratton.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS PRECAUTIONS: New York City Department of
Sanitation salt spreaders _ filled with sand _ form a barrier in
front of the building that houses the Israeli consulate.  At right,
workers unload concrete barriers that will replace the trucks to
secure the building in the wake of terror bombings in London and
Argentina.

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document