TERROR HITS HOME;
FORTRESS AMERICA;
In the wake of the bombing in Oklahoma City, Americans grapple with the threat of terrorism. Can we ever be safe?
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 23, 1995, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: PERSPECTIVE,
Length: 1273 words
Byline: Bob Deans
Dateline: Washington
Body


Shielded by the mightiest army in history, distanced from foreign foes by the world's greatest oceans and watched over by an unblinking constellation of satellite sentries, Americans have good reason to rest easily at night.
All the more so for those in the cherished heartland, the geographic and ideological epicenter, symbolic of this nation's most bedrock values and beliefs.
None of that, though, prevented someone with a rented truck stuffed with fuel oil and fertilizer from blasting open the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building last week, killing scores of people (the final death toll may not be known for several days), and shaking in that single savage moment the premise of sanctity and security that has braced this country for half a century.
 
Suddenly, all terrorism is local.
For who could watch the panicked stampede of working men and women fleeing for their lives in central Oklahoma City without feeling that all of Middle America was somehow running with them?
Who could follow the steadily rising body count from within the crumbling federal edifice without asking whether the same fate could one day befall their own office, factory or church?
And who could look at that picture of a horror-stricken rescue worker cradling a tiny bomb-bloodied baby without wondering whose child might be next?
The Oklahoma City bombing is one of those rare events that can alter the direction and even the psyche of a nation, as indeed this tragedy appears certain to do.
By striking terror deep into the heart of the country and targeting even the smallest and most innocent of Americans, the Oklahoma City bombing may have raised forever the price this country is willing to pay for its own security.
A nation whose courthouses and capitols, its schools and its shopping malls were built to mirror, to accommodate and even to reinforce the principles of equal and open access so vital to American democracy, may now be forced to reassess.
A land that has always beckoned foreigners to its promising shores, both as guests and as new Americans, may now consider becoming far more selective in who it welcomes. If it wasn't international terrorism this time, it might be next time.
And a country that has long taught its children to see the world as a boundless trove of opportunity and wonder must now color that vision with
 
darker shades of warning and fear.
And yet, how far can this free and richly diverse nation go toward defending itself from the rage of madmen - from within or without - and yet avoid compromising the very ideals from which it once drew its birthright and still draws its strength?
That question frames a contentious debate reignited by this week's bombing, forcing leaders to seek a new balance between individual liberty and collective security.
"You can take additional steps to try to guard against terrorism without significantly closing down the extremely open nature of the society, but that might be hard," former National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft said in a telephone interview. "We've got to make sure that we don't change the character of our society in the effort to protect everybody."
For a decade now, Secret Service agents have been advising that Pennsylvania Avenue be closed to automobile traffic in front of the White House. Presidents haven't wanted to seal off a residence regarded as the domain of the American people, but the idea has gained currency in recent months as the White House has been fired on by a man wielding an assault rifle and crashed into by the pilot of a private airplane.
An administration recommendation on the matter is expected this week and could set the tone for a whole new calculus on security in a country whose very openness makes it appear a nation of targets to terrorists, whether domestic or foreign.
Two years ago, Islamic extremists bombed the World Trade Center in New York, killing six, injuring 1,000 more and shutting down, temporarily, the offices of some 50,000 workers.
That attack, though, was only the most visible and deadly of nearly 3,000 bombings that killed or injured 1,372 people that year, according to the FBI. There's no way to know how many other such incidents were averted through pre-emptory law enforcement efforts by the FBI and similar authorities.
Beefing up the capabilities of those authorities and the intelligence agencies that support them may be the best way to combat the modern threat of terrorism, experts say. While steps can be taken to reduce risks - restricting or monitoring access or erecting vehicle barriers, for instance - constructing offices impervious to car-bomb attacks simply isn't practical.
"It's an illusion in the United States if we think that we can somehow hermetically seal off any particular target, much less the country, to a terrorist threat," said Bruce Hoffman, director of the Center for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence at St. Andrews University in St. Andrews, Scotland. "Even if you could do that, the terrorists wouldn't give up. They'd just attack some even more vulnerable federal target, like the post office, so where would we be?"
Guarding presidents and financial centers have long posed stark security challenges, and metal detectors and video cameras are accepted fixtures at the entrances to our nation's halls of political and economic power.
What Oklahoma City showed is that guerrilla warriors and common criminals can take their terror to even the vast and politically disconnected center of this sprawling continent.
"This is frightening," said John Parachini, executive director for the Lawyers Alliance for World Security, a Washington-based advocacy group. "The raw nerve of terrorism has cut across all lives now. It's showing up everywhere."
Indeed, the United States has become an important center of international terrorism, a place where known terrorists have been able to raise money to fund their nefarious activities, and sometimes acquire citizenship under the protection of some of the most liberal immigration and naturalization laws anywhere in the world.
"International terrorist organizations have been able to create significant infrastructures and cells in the United States among aliens who are in this country either temporarily or as permanent resident aliens," states an anti-terrorist bill submitted to the House in February by Rep. Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.).
The first comprehensive effort to legislate against international terrorist activity in this country, Schumer's "Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995" would overhaul laws ranging from the handling and sale of plastic explosives to immigration procedures.
Proponents of immigration reform are already pointing to the terrorist threat as one reason to raise the drawbridge on immigrants - some 800,000 legal and perhaps 300,000 illegal each year - who once provided the strong backs and sinew that helped build this country.
Others counter, however, that it's both dangerous and, as the Oklahoma City bombing may ultimately show, self-defeating to make foreigners the scapegoats in the war on terrorism.
Though it aged a bit last week, this republic is still young enough to recall its constitutional beginnings as a place where democratic freedom and the "Blessings of Liberty" might be secured by one and all. The Founding Fathers, however, could not have foreseen car bombs and shattered buildings of concrete and glass any more than they might have predicted the day their fledgling nation would stand alone as the world's last superpower.
The debacle in Oklahoma City, it turns out, is the latest unholy part of the bargain.
 
Bob Deans is a Washington correspondent for Cox News Service.

Graphic

 
Photo: SOOTHING THE PAIN: Counselor Clark Gaines comforts Kimberly Thompson in the wake of the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. Chris Hoover holds 6-month-old Stephanie. / Associated Press Photo: TAKING A BREATHER: Wilderness extraction specialist Steve Gullett of Nixa, Mo., collects himself during a break in the search for victims of Wednesday's bombing / Associated Press Color photo: Tom Kight hugs his wife Thursday while awaiting word on his stepdaughter, one of many people still unaccounted for in Wednesday's bombing / Associated Press

Load-Date: June 27, 1995


End of Document