TERROR HAS HORROR, BUT IS LOSING POWER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 18, 1998, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION


Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL, Pg. B7, COMMENTARY COLUMN
Length: 959 words
Byline: Gwynne Dyer
Body


On Sunday, 24 Ukrainian coal-miners were killed by an underground explosion in the village of Beloye. Their deaths were as horrible, the grief of their relatives as real as in Omagh the previous day, when 28 people were killed by Northern Ireland's worst-ever terrorist bomb.
But Beloye did not get the same  media attention as Omagh - and it was as nothing compared to the saturation  coverage of the U.S. embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania. Why? Partly it  was because they were Ukrainians. In the pecking order of the world's media,  Western Europeans are more newsworthy than Eastern Europeans, and American  citizens most newsworthy of all. (Or do you imagine that a bomb in Nairobi  that killed 245 Kenyans but did NOT kill 12 Americans would still be a hot  international news topic almost two weeks later?)
More importantly, however,  it was because the Ukrainians died by accident. It happens to coal-miners all  the time, and we treat it with the same weary familiarity as traffic deaths.  Whereas deliberate mass murder still gets our horrified attention - which, of  course, is just what it is intended to do.
Thirteen years ago, former British  Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher bravely told the American Bar Association,  "We must try to find ways to starve the terrorist and the hijacker of the  oxygen of publicity on which they depend." But it was always a hopeless cause:  What gets our attention is precisely the cruelty and ruthlessness of the deed  - and to censor media coverage of such deeds would simply be to fall in with the terrorists' strategy.
So the politicians and the priests produce the obligatory empty phrases - Pope John Paul condemned the mindless violence of Omagh, and British Prime Minister Tony Blair mourned the senseless, brutal act of savagery - even though they must know that terrorism is usually neither mindless nor senseless.
Terrorism is traditionally a highly organized enterprise that fits into a clear political strategy. It has been filling the news for most of our lives, and will doubtless go on demanding the attention of our children and grandchildren as well. What's new is how rarely it achieves its goals these days.
There was a time, as British journalist Robert Fisk recently observed, when anyone labeled a 'terrorist' by the British press - Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya, Archbishop Makarios of Cyprus, Menachem Begin of Israel - was certain to show up at Buckingham Palace within a decade or so to have tea with the queen. Terrorism was almost always part of the strategy of an armed national liberation movement, and in the colonial context it usually worked in the end.
Terrorism even had a certain legitimacy in the hands of nationalists who did not control the resources of a state. Their foreign rulers didn't need car bombs because they had police forces and troops to impose their will - and tanks and fighter-bombers - so terrorism was a kind of equalizer.
The reason terrorism worked so well in anti-colonial struggles was that you didn't have to defeat the imperial power's superior military forces to win. They were a long way from home, and there was a limit to how many lives and how much money the imperial government would spend to hang onto its possessions. The limit was never clearly defined, but if the insurgents could just hang on long enough, using terrorist tactics to make life difficult for the occupiers, they would generally cut their losses in the end and go home. Independence was granted, and the former "terrorist" leader got to have tea with the queen or a reasonable facsimile thereof.
But the early, easy successes of terror tactics in the anti-imperial context left everybody with a greatly inflated notion of what the technique could achieve against an established national government with local roots. A few decades later, the answer is clear: virtually nothing. Governments and armies that cannot "go home" - because they are already at home - simply do not give in to terrorism. After six years and 80,000 deaths, the Islamic fundamentalists' terrorist war against Algeria's crypto-military regime is no closer to success than on Day One - and the likely lifespan of a young Algerian joining the insurgency is now down to about six months.
"International" terrorism, which is meant to make governments elsewhere do something the terrorists want, has had even fewer successes. In fact, it has notched up only one notable victory: the campaign to gain international recognition for the Palestinian cause, and redefine Palestinians as legitimate claimants to a state rather than just "refugees."
Terror can still be an effective spoiling strategy, as in the Hamas bombs in Israel in 1996 that wrecked the Israeli-Palestinian peace deal by ensuring the election of Benjamin Netanyahu. Similarly, the "Real IRA" bomb in Omagh on Saturday was planted by Catholic extremists who don't like the Northern Irish peace deal, in the hope of driving the Protestant paramilitaries into wrecking the peace there.
But that's about the limit of terrorism's effectiveness these days - and most "international" terror now lacks even that minimal logic. To imagine that you can force the U.S. government to do your will just by killing people at random, for example, is to part company entirely with reality.
A number of people in the world have succumbed to that sort of fantasy, from the Unabomber to Osama bin Laden, and they are capable of doing much harm. But they are not politically serious people, and many of them are not even sane. They will certainly never be having tea with the queen.
Terrorism, like cavalry charges, is a tactic that has become largely obsolete. But it took cavalry officers decades to accept that fact, and the terrorists will be with us for a while too.  

Load-Date: August 20, 1998


End of Document