Terror Victims Lobby Bush Over Lawsuits
The Forward
February 22, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A3
Length: 702 words
Body


Fearing a sudden change in  American policy, Jewish victims  of Palestinian terrorism are lobbying  the Bush administration and  Congress to ensure the enforcement  of lawsuits against the  Palestinian Authority that award  them compensation.
The intense lobbying effort comes  amid signs of a shift in the position  of the Bush administration, which  so far has not tried to block implementation  of civil lawsuits against  the Palestinians.
American policy is expected to  face a test February 29, a deadline  set by the court for filing statements  in the case of Leslye Knox,  the widow of Aharon Ellis, who  was killed in a terrorist attack in  Hadera in 2002. The State and  Justice Departments therefore  have until the end of the month to  decide whether to file a statement  of interest supporting attempts by  the Palestinian Authority and the  Palestine Liberation Organization  to overturn a judgment that granted  Knox and other family members  $174 million in compensation.
Such a statement, if filed, would  mark the first intervention by the  American government to block a  civil lawsuit against the Palestinian  Authority. Victims' advocates fear  it could hamper attempts to sue the  Palestinians in the future.
The victims' families, who spent  two days meeting with government  officials here last week, said  they were not satisfied with the  response they heard.
I came out of there with the  impression that I've never seen  a more evasive meeting in my  lifetime, said Katherine Baker of  Harrisburg, Pa.
Baker's son, Benjamin Blutstein,  was killed in a 2002 terrorist attack  on the campus of the Hebrew  University of Jerusalem. He was  about to return to America for a  family visit when a Palestinian  suicide bomber detonated himself  near a group of overseas students  at the Mount Scopus campus's  cafeteria. Baker, a professor  at Penn State, sued the Palestinian  Authority and the PLO in federal  court in New York and now fears  government intervention might set  a precedent for her case as well.
Every penny I can take from the  terrorists is a penny less they can  spend on bombs, she said following  her visit to Washington.
While no final decision has been  made by the Bush administration,  enforcing claims against the  Palestinian Authority and freezing  its assets in America are seen  by some government officials  as counter-productive at a time  when America is in the midst of a  concentrated effort to provide the  Palestinian Authority with financial  aid. This year Washington pledged  $550 million to the Palestinians.  Judgments in American courts  have already exceeded $100 million  per case.
State Department spokesman  Sean McCormack said that the  issue of filing a statement of interest  in the Knox case is still being  considered.
We are absolutely committed  to defending the rights of our  citizens, McCormack said at his  daily press briefing. We are also  fully committed to pursuing our  national interest and defending  our national interest.
The Palestinian Authority has  been trying to fend off such lawsuits  for years. Compensation  awarded in American courts to  families of terrorism victims have  led to a freeze on Palestinian  Authority assets, including those  of Palestinian retirement and  investment funds. While initially  excluding Palestinian diplomatic  missions, courts have later allowed  the freezing of bank accounts  belonging to the PLO's mission in  Washington.
Afif Safieh, head of the  Palestinian mission, said the lawsuits  have made him focus more  on acrobatics than on diplomacy.  Safieh said the American  government is rethinking its  position on these lawsuits, but  he had no indication whether  or not the administration would  intervene and seek to block the  compensation.
While finding little support from  the administration, families of  terrorism victims did get backing  from lawmakers on Capitol Hill.  Eight senators wrote a letter to  Secretary of State Condoleezza  Rice last week calling on her not  to file a statement in favor of the  Palestinian Authority.
Victims who bring forth claims  in good faith and win judgments  against terrorists should not be  thwarted in their efforts, the  senators wrote Rice.

Load-Date: February 24, 2008


End of Document