Terrorism cover still expensive, elusive
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
January 3, 2003 Friday


Copyright 2003 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Government activity
Length: 1052 words
Byline: Claude Solnik
Body


With the recent passage of federal legislation meant to stabilize rates for terrorism insurance, many commercial property owners can breathe a little easier in 2003. But others will continue to have a hard time even finding coverage.
Before 9/11, terrorism coverage was routinely included for a nominal cost in property casualty insurance policies. Now some businesses have seen the price of the coverage soar out of reach, while for others who can't meet stringent requirements from carriers, it's unavailable at any price.
The good news is that the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 is expected to slow the meteoric rise of terrorism insurance rates. The legislation, signed into law Nov. 26, prohibits regulated insurers from refusing to provide terrorism coverage in property and casualty policies, something already the case in New York State. It also provides a "backstop" through which the federal government will reimburse insurers for up to 90 percent of claims from terrorism exceeding $10 billion in 2003, $12.5 billion in 2004 and $15 billion in 2005. The federal safety net has a limit of $100 billion a year.
But rates are expected to remain high and the insurance could remain hard to get in many cases. The costs for terrorism coverage following the 9/11 attacks rose by tens of thousands of dollars on many policies and even by millions for trophy properties, experts said.
Insurers also have dropped ceilings on coverage, frequently providing businesses with a $1 million limit in terrorism coverage, "in stark contrast to the hundreds of millions of dollars of terrorism coverage that they received in previous years," said David Mair, president of the Risk and Insurance Management Society.
The new legislation, experts said, will let the insurance industry quantify and limit its risk following about $40 billion in claims related to the 9/11 attacks and could begin to stabilize runaway rates.
"I believe that because the terrorism bill has been passed, the rates will start leveling off and subside," said Ed Levine, regional director of CRC, an insurance wholesaler based in Jericho. "The astronomical pricing of terrorism insurance will come down substantially."
Others noted the new legislation limits coverage to a relatively high number -- deductibles begin at $10 billion. And it may be too early to tell just how much impact the law will have.
"The legislation is a beginning," said Stanley Morris, CEO of The Rampart Group, an insurance brokerage in Lake Success. "The problem with the legislation is it doesn't go far enough. It still puts the carriers at risk of a tremendous amount of dollars."
Many companies have difficulties obtaining terrorism coverage at any price, according to a survey of 500 companies by the Risk Insurance Management Society a year after the 9/11 attacks.
Twenty-one percent of companies said obtaining adequate terrorism coverage became impossible following the attacks, 50 percent called it very difficult and 19 percent said it was somewhat difficult, according to the survey. Only 5 percent said it was somewhat easy to obtain and 2 percent said it was very easy.
Simply forcing insurers to offer coverage, regardless of the price, could increase the industry's focus on this coverage, experts said.
"The new federal law increases the pressure on insurers to learn how to underwrite, price and manage terrorism risk," said Don Griffin, assistant vice president for business and personal lines at the National Association of Independent Insurers.
New York State Insurance Superintendent Gregory Serio said businesses nationwide that had been refused coverage at any price now will at least have a choice whether to pay for expensive coverage.
"The bill lets the business person make the decision themselves," Serio said.
"I think this will bring insurance companies back into this marketplace," he added. "Companies writing in New York said, 'We don't have the capacity to provide this because we think the risk of terrorism is so high in New York.'"
Builders also could benefit if coverage becomes easier and cheaper to obtain. Difficulties in obtaining terrorism coverage hampered new construction nationwide, since banks typically want the coverage as a condition for real estate loans, Levine said.
The new legislation, he said, could allow some construction to go forward that had been put on the back burner due to inability to obtain coverage.
But the big question that loomed before the legislation passed remains in place: What would happen in the event of another catastrophic attack? It's still not clear how the industry would react.
"Even with the federal backstop, some may suffer substantial terrorism," said John Kollar, vice president for consulting and research for the Insurance Services Office Inc.
Others noted the legislation wouldn't solve fundamental problems related to pricing terrorism coverage.
Griffin added that "there is almost no historical data for pricing terrorism coverage," making it difficult for underwriters and insurers to project losses or costs.
And still others insisted that the legislation could make those who lend money to insurers expect a higher return, which could hurt insurers.
"(The legislation) actually increases the risk-adjusted rate of return demanded by investors supplying capital to the insurance industry," said Kollar. "Mandating terrorism coverage makes the insurance business riskier, at least in the short term."
Even if the legislation may ease the pressure-cooker atmosphere on property and casualty coverage, the weak economy and poor performance of investments are likely to continue to keep rates high.
Levine said the terrorism insurance legislation "will start to reduce insurance costs. But insurance companies have been hurt by poor investments in addition to the catastrophic loss of the World Trade Center."
Ironically, the problems in obtaining terrorism coverage may have protected some real estate owners. Financial institutions whose loans required terrorism coverage may have been reluctant to take action against landlords or building owners who couldn't obtain it.
"Financial institutions cannot call in loans on commercial properties that are now unable to obtain adequate insurance coverage," said Mair, "because the banks do not want to absorb the entire risk of that uninsured property."

Load-Date: January 7, 2003


End of Document