Terrorism cover backup needed
Business Insurance
September 24, 2012


Copyright 2012 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 8; Vol. 46
Length: 348 words
Body


It's a fact the federal terrorism insurance backstop program doesn't expire until the end of 2014. And it's also a fact not everyone in Washington - and elsewhere - would like to see this crucial federal risk management program extended beyond its current expiration date.
That makes it all the more critical for supporters of the backstop, including us, to waste no time crafting an effective strategy for the program's extension.
As we reported last week, the House Financial Services Committee's Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity held a hearing on the program on Sept. 11. That, of course, was the 11th anniversary of the terrorist attacks that led Congress to approve the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002. Members of the panel heard industry representatives urge reauthorization of the program, which initially was extended for two years in 2005 and then for seven in 2007.
But one witness before the panel made the argument that the program, although needed in the aftermath of the 2001 attacks, no longer was necessary and in fact discourages the private insurance sector from providing coverage for terrorism.
We've heard the argument before, from the political left and right, and respectfully disagree with it. Private insurers exist to underwrite new risks and exposures all the time.
But only a small, stand-alone market for terrorism coverage exists, and it's far from big enough to meet all demands. Why? Because insurers simply can't predict, track or price the terrorism risk because critical underwriting information isn't public.
For the foreseeable future - and probably beyond - terrorism is likely to remain an exposure that defies underwriting. It's a public threat that requires a public response. Keeping the backstop in place is nothing less than a matter of national security.
The Sept. 11 hearing is simply the first in what should be a series of many before the issue of reauthorization is resolved. Proponents need to sharpen their arguments now in preparation for what could be a long and difficult battle for extension of the program.

Load-Date: September 27, 2012


End of Document