Terrorism threat to grow, panel warns; World Economic Forum focuses on the cost of risk
Business Insurance
May 27, 2002, Monday


Copyright 2002 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 2
Length: 561 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Terrorism will not vanish as a threat to U.S. interests and is likely to only get worse.
That was a theme stressed by a panel of experts who discussed the broad topic of the cost of risk during the World Economic Forum in Washington last week. The panelists also endorsed the idea that not only should public and private sectors share more information about terrorism and cooperate more in dealing with the problem, but also that the federal government should act as a backstop to private insurance to help pay for future terrorism-related losses.
Government ends up involved with the risk by default, said Grahame Chilton, chief executive of London-based Benfield Grieg Group P.L.C. He pointed out that Europeans have accepted a mixed government/private system for dealing with terrorism risks through such entities as the U.K.'s Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd. He also noted that the effort to create such a mechanism in the United States has been stalled in the Senate because of disputes over tort reform. He urged his audience to ''try and fight to get the right solution'' to the problem of terrorism insurance.
Andreas Beerli, CEO of the Americas division of Swiss Reinsurance Corp. in Armonk, N.Y., pointed out that many countries, including the United Kingdom and Spain, have had considerable experience with terrorism and that the insurance industry in those countries has adapted to it. But the new terrorism, exemplified by the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and the coordinated hijacking of four jets, represents a new, previously underestimated threat.
''We have to expect that the next'' terrorist act could happen anywhere in the world and perhaps involve simultaneous events at multiple locations, he warned.
And that action could be quite horrific, noted J.M. McConnell, a vp with Booz Allen Hamilton in McLean, Va., and former head of the National Security Agency. ''Information is the capital of this century,'' and it's vulnerable to attack, he said. ''It's a matter of time'' before terrorists figure out a way to combine a cyber attack with a chemical, biological or nuclear attack, predicted Mr. McConnell. He added that his greatest fear is that terrorists will detonate a so-called ''dirty'' nuclear device in Washington ''sooner rather than later.''
In an interview after his formal presentation, Mr. Chilton expressed concern about the bioterrorism threat, as well. ''I think bio's got to be the big risk'' because it could spread rapidly, he said.
During a question and answer period, the panel's other speaker predicted that property/casualty insurance prices will probably stabilize in a year or so.
But Roger Egan, president and chief executive officer of Marsh & McLennan's North American operations in New York, added that insurance prices would likely stabilize at a level higher than those of a year ago. He also said that certain lines of coverage, such as professional liability coverage for Big Five accounting firms and terrorism insurance, would remain problems.
William G. Little, president and CEO of Chicago-based Quam-Nichols Co., moderated the discussion, which took place at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Washington.
The Geneva, Switzerland-based World Economic Forum is an independent foundation with 1,000 member companies that provides a framework for discussion and action on global issues.

Load-Date: May 30, 2002


End of Document