Terrorism analysis center operational, but limited; 1 search through several federal computer networks cannot be done
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 16, 2004 Saturday


Copyright 2004 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: National/World; Pg. c5
Length: 432 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


If information is power, few in the U.S. government have more than John Brennan.
He sits at the nerve center of the country's 18-month-old terrorism analysis center, called the Terrorist Threat Integration Center, which can peer into 26 government computer networks to assess data on international terror threats.
But what Brennan still cannot do is a clear sign of how far the federal government has to go.
Under his desk at the center's headquarters, Brennan can press buttons to toggle between computer networks that were once off-limits to people who didn't work for those agencies - networks for the CIA, the FBI, the Defense Department, the National Security Agency and more.
"No one in the U.S. government has access to the networks I have access to," Brennan said in an interview in his office.
But Brennan still can't run one single search simultaneously through all federal counterterror computer networks to pull together all the information about a certain terrorist group or operative. He can't do it for someone as major as Osama bin Laden, and he can't do it for someone as lowly as a suspected extremist in Karachi.
That, he says, would be truly revolutionary.
"If you are able to touch that data all at one time, you can create new knowledge by pulling in things that have a relationship that you didn't know existed otherwise," said Brennan, a 23-year CIA veteran and Middle East expert.
Inquiries into the Sept. 11 attacks made clear the importance of sharing information. In one now-infamous July 2001 memo, an FBI officer in Arizona warned that bin Laden might be trying to coordinate efforts to send Islamic extremists to U.S. flight schools. Known as the "Phoenix memo," it got lost inside the FBI and wasn't acted upon.
In his 2003 State of the Union address, President Bush announced the formation of TTIC, (pronounced Tee-Tick), to bring together employees from the FBI, CIA, the Defense Department and elsewhere to "merge and analyze all threat information in a single location." Today, the center has several hundred employees.
But some in Congress wonder why the agency hasn't yet linked all the computer systems.
Brennan said the center is trying to bring disparate computer systems together.
"The bumper-sticker comments about we're not sharing information don't take into account the complexity of the issue," he said.
Brennan and his chief information officer, William Spalding, say each government agency has developed its own networks over more than two decades. Even internally, Brennan notes, the CIA today can't do a single search against all the computer networks it has.

Graphic

 
The new Terrorist Threat Integration Center at an undisclosed location in the northern Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C., has adopted the spy agency look. Each office is essentially a vault, with a coded lock to get in. The external windows are bullet- and blast-proof.
Mug - John Brennan

Load-Date: October 16, 2004


End of Document