TERRORISM INVOKED BY IRAQIS TURKEY AIDS U.S. JETS; JORDAN SUPPORTS IRAQ
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 19, 1991, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 1213 words
Body


RIYADH, Saudi Arabia - Ground forces of the U.S.-led coalition maneuvered close to Kuwait and Iraq on Friday, feinting an attack as missiles and warplanes pounded dug-in Iraqi infantry and tank positions.  The United States was said to have opened a new air front from Turkey, and Jordan's Parliament called on Arab and Islamic nations to strike out against the United States and its partners in the coalition.  Iraq also broadcast a call for terrorism, telling Muslims that they should attack Western interests worldwide.  U.S. forces, some operating from battleships in the northern Persian Gulf, kept up their massive air attacks early today.  Continual waves of Tomahawk missiles, fighter-bombers and ground attack aircraft were under way from carriers and bases in Saudi Arabia.  Three more U.S. planes were reported shot down, and the Iraqis were said to be planning to put captured American pilots on display.  In Washington, the Pentagon confirmed that the number of U.S. aircraft destroyed now totaled four: two A-6 Intruders and an F/A-18 Hornet, all Navy planes, and an Air Force F-15 Eagle. Seven airmen are listed as missing in action and one death has been confirmed.  m The coalition's ground forces moving along the borders were being repositioned ''for further action,'' Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the overall U.S. commander, said in Saudi Arabia.  He said also that more U.S. amphibious vessels, some presumably loaded with Marines preparing for an amphibious operation, were moving into the Persian Gulf.
The Navy was already in action in gulf waters, having sunk or disabled three Iraqi patrol boats, he said.  Except for a minor artillery exchange early Thursday, no ground hostilities had occurred, the general said.  And yet, the non-stop bombardment by U.S. and allied warplanes is expected to be only a prelude to a land assault by armor and infantry to drive Iraqi forces out of Kuwait, which Iraq has held for 5 1/2 months.  On Friday, an array of army units rumbled up to the flat, sandy frontier separating Saudi Arabia from the estimated half-million Iraqi soldiers dug in in Kuwait and southern Iraq. Some units feinted to confuse the Iraqis; others were deployed for attack.  An assault did not appear imminent.  Asked by a Saudi reporter how soon he would ''get rid of this trouble from the gulf,'' Schwarzkopf sounded as though he wanted many more air strikes before sending any of the more than 300,000 U.S. paratroopers, armored personnel and Marines against the dug-in Iraqis in Kuwait. ''We don't want to have to pay a terrible price just to get it over with quickly,'' he said.  As he spoke, U.S. bombers launched a new air strike against Iraq's elite Republican Guard, whose members are dug in with their tanks in southern Iraq, a U.S. wing commander said. Western military analysts say Iraqi hopes of stemming any ground attack into Kuwait rest heavily on the Republican Guard, whose Soviet-designed T-72 tanks led the conquest of the emirate on Aug. 2.  U.S. Col. Manfred Rietsch, commander of the Marine Aircraft Wing, Group Two, said more than 40 planes had been launched at the start of round-the-clock raids against Republican Guard troops entrenched in an arc across the desert northwest of Kuwait.  He said Operation Desert Storm had begun continuous raids to pound the Iraqi ground troops. He stressed that this was a ''continuation of the game plan.'' Rietsch said the U.S. planes would bombard the Iraqi ground troops with 500-pound cluster bombs and other weapons. ''We will destroy tanks, bunkers, go after their vehicles and whatever is of military value. And if we keep hitting them round-the-clock, it's bound to have a psychological impact.'' He said cluster bombs were particularly effective in piercing armor, adding that the Republican Guard had between 500 and 600 T-72 tanks in the area that was being bombed.  c Troops in northern Saudi Arabia seemed eager to get the ground assault over with. British Brig. Christopher Hammerback reflected the general mood.  ''The first round in Kuwait is on me!'' offered the British officer, who leads his unit in a Challenger tank called Nomad.  In a related development, The New York Times and other newspapers reported that U.S. planes were taking off from a North Atlantic Treaty Organization base in southern Turkey to bomb targets in northern Iraq. The Turkish Foreign Ministry said the planes were only on a training mission.  A U.S. spokesman at the Incirlik base, 440 miles west of the Iraqi border, said he could not give any information on operational matters.  The United States has deployed 48 planes - including F-16s, F-15s and F-111s - at the base. An unspecified number of Patriot anti-aircraft batteries have also been brought to Incirlik in the last few days.  The reported bombing raids came a day after Turkey's Parliament authorized the use of air bases in Turkey for attacks on Iraq by U.S. planes, raising the possibility of a second front in the Persian Gulf War.  In addition, 180,000 Turkish soldiers along Turkey's 150-mile border with Iraq are tying down 100,000 Iraqi soldiers.  In Amman, Jordan's Parliament strongly denounced allied attacks on Iraq and called on Arab and Islamic nations to strike out against the United States and its coalition partners.  Jordan had not formally endorsed either side, but has been leaning toward Iraq.  The Parliament voted unanimously Friday to adopt a resolution that branded the allied air assault on Iraq ''brutal aggression not only against the brotherly Iraqi people . . . but against all Arab and Muslim nations.'' Sixty-six of the chamber's 80 members were present for the emergency session. ''We call on all the Arab and the Islamic nations to strike at American interests and the interests of those nations participating in the aggression against Iraq,'' the resolution says.  tr There was no immediate comment from King Hussein, who has straddled the fence in the gulf conflict.  n A statement on Baghdad Radio urged Muslims to attack the ''interests, facilities, symbols and figures'' of the United States, Britain, France, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, the followers of the emir of Kuwait and their allies.  ''Let the aggressors' interests be set on fire and let them be hunted down wherever they may be in every corner of the world,'' said the radio, reading what it said was an appeal from the national command of the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party.  miat Da hc Iraq's information minister claimed that American pilots had been captured. He told reporters that they would be able to meet with the prisoners, Cable News Network's Peter Arnett reported from Baghdad.  Arnett offered no other details about the pilots in his report, which he said was being made under Iraqi censorship.  He said the Iraqis also claimed to have shot down 22 planes on Friday, and 94 since the war began. The alliance has admitted losing less than one-tenth that number.  Flight To Safety Iraq is attempting to fly 10 passenger aircraft out of the country to Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania to spare them from bombing raids, diplomats said Friday.  The Iraqi plans were disclosed by Tunisia, which told the Security Council's sanctions committee that Baghdad had asked it for overflight and landing rights.

Graphic

 
Photo Graphic; LOGO: ''GULF WAR'' PHOTO by Agence France-Presse … Pedestrians in Baghdad, Iraq, running to the Al-Rashid Hotel early Thursday to seek cover against an air attack by the allied forces. (NOTE: same photo & cutline ran with different versions of story in other editions)

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document