Terrorism and Ireland
The New York Times
February 22, 1996, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 610 words
Body


The renewed bombing campaign of the Irish Republican Army has already caused senseless deaths, injuries and property destruction in London. No matter how frustrated the I.R.A. became with the political process, its return to terrorism is inexcusable and self-defeating. The bombings have swiftly transformed the organization from one of the parties seeking peace in Northern Ireland to the peace spoiler.
The militarists of the I.R.A. lost patience with the political approach of Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein, who had succeeded for 17 months in coaxing their I.R.A. brethren away from violence. The cease-fire is over. But even at this depressing stage, it is essential not to abandon the effort to find a peaceful solution to Ireland's problems.
Fortunately, the Irish and British Governments seem to recognize this, and are working to find a formula that might allow all the parties to the conflict to begin cooperating again. President Clinton has dispatched former United States Senator George Mitchell to Dublin today to see if he can help break the stalemate, and the British and Irish Governments are working toward a meeting of the two Prime Ministers next week.
The I.R.A. declared a unilateral cease-fire in September 1994, hoping that the next step would be all-party talks to begin deciding the fate of Northern Ireland. The Protestant militias followed suit. But the Protestants and the British Government insisted that the I.R.A. begin handing over some of its weapons before such talks could begin.
A commission headed by Mr. Mitchell recommended last month that the British set aside their insistence on disarming before talking. Britain's Prime Minister, John Major, then offered an alternative suggestion, that elections be held to choose participants in all-party talks. Republicans saw this as a stalling tactic, and the I.R.A. lost patience, declaring an end to the cease-fire on Feb. 9. An hour later, a bomb went off in London.
The I.R.A.'s resumption of violence has only weakened its position. The bombings make Mr. Major's insistence on disarming look more reasonable. The renewed terrorism also leaves Gerry Adams in a diminished position. Regrettably, he has so far refused to repudiate the bombings, saying only that he will continue to work for peace. He may fear that if he does condemn the violence, he will deepen the rift between Sinn Fein and the I.R.A. and further compromise whatever leverage he still has with the militarists. The British and Irish Prime Ministers have insisted that he do so, however, before they will speak with him again.
One possible way to get discussions back on track are "proximity" talks, like the discussions last year at Dayton, Ohio, that led to the Bosnian peace accord. Various factions could talk at such a gathering or work through a trusted intermediary like Mr. Mitchell.
Some form of elections might also help. Here republican sensitivities are crucial. The Catholic minority in the North, which generally favors a united Ireland, fears being swamped in any electoral process by the Protestant majority, and would need to see some sort of mechanism to assure that this did not happen. Any election plans should be coupled with a firm, explicit timetable leading to the talks, which have been Sinn Fein's goal all along. It was in hopes for a place at the table with the Governments and the other parties that the I.R.A. laid down its weapons.
The men of the I.R.A. have temporarily won the argument with Sinn Fein's leaders who favor politics over the gun. The return to violence is deplorable, but others involved in trying to settle the conflict should not abandon their efforts.

Load-Date: February 22, 1996


End of Document