Terrorism suspect charged with entering U.S. illegally
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
May 20, 2005 Friday 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2005 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 14A; Newspaper
Length: 500 words
Byline: DAVID ADAMS
Dateline: MIAMI
Body


Luis Posada Carriles, accused of being a Cuban exile terrorist, was charged with illegal entry into the United States on Thursday, two days after his dramatic arrest by federal agents.
Immigration officials ordered that Posada, 77, remain in custody pending an immigration court hearing June 13 to decide his fate.
A lifelong anticommunist militant, Posada is accused by Cuba of masterminding the bombing of a Cuban state airliner that killed 73 people in 1976. Cuba also alleges he was behind a dozen small hotel and restaurant bombings in Havana in 1997 that killed an Italian tourist and wounded several other people.
Posada was arrested in Miami on Tuesday, almost two months after secretly entering the country and applying for political asylum. A former U.S. intelligence asset trained by the CIA, Posada has consistently denied any involvement in the airline bombing. He has hinted he played a role in the 1997 attacks, although he has refused to elaborate in press interviews.
Thursday's charges came as no surprise. While Cuban exiles enjoy special entry to the United States under the 1966 Cuban Adjustment Act, parole can be denied if they fail to present themselves to immigration authorities for inspection, or are found to have a criminal background.
Posada was charged Thursday with "entering the United States without inspection," according to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, a branch of the Department of Homeland Security. According to media interviews he granted before his arrest, Posada crossed into the United States near Brownsville, Texas, in March with the assistance of a migrant smuggler.
Posada did not file a petition for political asylum until almost a month later, instead choosing to remain in hiding with the assistance of Cuban exile supporters. In an interview with the Miami Herald he bragged how he avoided arrest by a Border Patrol agent during a bus ride from Houston to Miami.
"If he didn't make himself available for inspection, he is not eligible for parole," said Ira Kurzban, a prominent immigration attorney in Miami often critical of U.S. policy favoring treatment of Cubans.
After his arrest, Posada was quickly transferred to an immigration detention center in El Paso, Texas. Thursday's immigration charges are likely only the first step in what could be a long legal battle. Cuba and Venezuela want him extradited to stand trial on terrorism charges.
U.S. officials say that is unlikely because of poor relations with the two countries. Posada was already acquitted twice in Venezuela of the 1976 bombing and spent nine years in jail. He was convicted of plotting to assassinate Fidel Castro in Panama in 2000 but was released last year after receiving a controversial pardon.
His lawyer, Eduardo Soto, said Posada would "vigorously oppose" deportation, arguing that he is a legal U.S. resident dating back to 1962. Were he to be deported, Soto said, Posada faced political persecution because of his anti-Castro activities and collaboration with the CIA.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Luis Posada Carriles

Load-Date: May 20, 2005


End of Document