TERRORISM PROMPTS REVIEW OF AREA PLANS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 12, 2001 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: ST. CHARLES COUNTY POST; Pg. 1; PROFILE; TERRORIST ATTACK ON THE U.S.; WORLD TRADE CENTER; PENTAGON; SIDEBAR STORY
Length: 834 words
Byline: Valerie Schremp Of The St. Charles County Post Susan Weich Of The St. Charles County Post Contributed Information For This Story.
Body


When they got news of the terrorist disaster that rocked the nation Tuesday morning, emergency workers in St. Charles County and beyond did a double-take. Are workers' pagers and cell phone numbers current? What about medical supplies? Are the ambulances running? Do rescuers really know what to do in an emergency?
Of course, no agency can look into the future and say what it needs for any type of emergency, no matter what kind or how large. But they try to stay on their toes, said Ina Obenland, spokeswoman for the St. Charles County Emergency Management agency. She said that each police department, ambulance district and fire department in the St. Charles area had its own emergency plan in place to deal with disasters: floods, fire, earthquakes, terrorism, chemical disasters.
Obenland said that staffers at the Emergency Management Agency watched television closely Tuesday, reacting to the disasters on two different levels.
"We're looking at this from not only the human aspect, but also the potential for any situation like that occurring in the Metro area. We start thinking, 'What if?'" she said.
The St. Charles County Emergency Management Agency doesn't oversee city or municipal emergency departments but rather works with them in a matrix: Fire departments already know they can call on other fire departments for help, paramedics know they can call school bus companies if they need to send the "walking wounded" to hospitals.
The Emergency Management Agency makes sure that different agencies stay in contact with one another and helps them get the resources they need from state or federal agencies. And after Tuesday morning, at least one commercial business called the management agency asking for help in getting its own emergency management plan in place.
St. Charles Police Chief Paul Corbin and Fire Chief Frank Schaper were at a business people's prayer breakfast at The Columns Banquet and Conference Center Tuesday morning when they got the news, and they decided to get together afterward at Corbin's office with city officials to review their emergency operation plan.
They didn't go so far as to ask themselves, "What if somebody blows up the Arch?" - but they did monitor news reports and talked to state and federal officials about what they would need if help were needed. They have no plan to do anything until something would actually happen, he said.
Capt. Mike Grzyb said that a large, countywide exercise conducted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency had been scheduled for Sept. 29 but now was in flux because FEMA might still be busy responding to Tuesday's disasters.
"Training for something like this is difficult, at best, because you can never anticipate something like this happening," Grzyb said. "Unfortunately, where we learn most of our lessons and get our data comes from something like what happened today."
Soon after members of the St. Charles County Ambulance District heard the news, they held their own internal "mass casualty incident" drill, going down a list and checking on medical supplies, revving up ambulances, to triple-check that they would start. And asking for the numbers of those with personal cell phones or pagers, to make sure they could be reached at any time.
Hospital workers at St. Joseph Health Center in St. Charles held a special meeting Tuesday morning and went down an emergency preparedness list, ordering extra supplies in case a disaster should occur in the metro area and checking to see which patients could be discharged early, in case any new emergency patients should need care.
"We have a disaster plan in place 24-7, and have for years and years in some form since the hospital opened," spokeswoman Trudy Barthels said.
O'Fallon Fire Chief Michael Ballman said that members of his department watched television Tuesday morning and that his department, like other area departments, had attended different terrorist training exercises through the University of Missouri.
"But it's a very basic type of training," Ballman said. "It dealt mainly with bombings, nothing on this type of a scale."
He said terrorism had been a topic for fire departments ever since the bombing in Oklahoma City. He said that firefighters were taught that when dealing with terrorist activity, they should always look for a secondary hit, such as the second attack on the World Trade Center.
That way, terrorists could "take out the people who are trying to make the situation better," Ballman said. "They are adding to the chaos."
Cpl. Ron Bextermueller of the St. Charles Police Department said that beyond any talk among officials and any dusting-off of emergency plans, all officers - down through the ranks - were extra alert in their patrol cars Tuesday. The disaster simply hit home.
"Anything that we do, when you hear that an officer goes down, or there's a major tragedy like in the United States today, all of a sudden you realize, even as a law-enforcement officer, just how vulnerable you really are. It maybe increases your senses."

Notes

AMERICA UNDER ATTACK Reporter Valerie Schremp: E-mail: vschremp@post-dispatch.com Phone: 636-946-3903, ext. 233  

Load-Date: September 12, 2001


End of Document