Terrorism preparations continue in North Carolina
University Wire
September 29, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 The Chronicle via U-Wire
Length: 597 words
Byline: By Seyward Darby, The Chronicle
Dateline: Durham, N.C.
Body


Responding to terrorism is no longer only a national concern. Since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, it has become a major government priority at both the state and local levels in North Carolina, with the creation of the Governor's Terrorism Preparedness Task Force and the Office of Public Health and Preparedness and Response.
Gov. Mike Easley created the task force in Oct. 2001 to specifically address terrorist threats. The task force pools resources and leadership from various state agencies to generate programs and legislation that address public health and safety issues. Many of their efforts have set precedents for the rest of the nation.
Duke U.
"North Carolina has always been a progressive state in terms of emergency preparedness, and our programs are some of the most innovative in the country," said Bryan Beatty, secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety and head of the governor's task force, in a September 2003 press release.
New initiatives and legislation include a statute increasing penalties for the use of certain weapons of mass destruction, an anti-terrorism training program involving 35,000 local law enforcement officers and the creation of the Biological Agent Registry -- the first of its kind in the nation -- for the regulation of select viruses, bacteria and other toxins.
The state also created PHP&R under the auspices of the Department of Health and Human Services to supervise disease prevention and infrastructure revitalization. PHP&R oversees seven Public Health Regional Surveillance Teams that monitor possible threats.
"The state has done a great thing by pulling these teams together as rapidly as they have," said Heidi Swygard, director of the Region 4 team. "They put us at a regional level as a resource for both the counties and the state to use. We are available as extra hands in investigations of health threats."
Swygard, whose region includes Durham County, said that Durham and the surrounding area are not immune to threats.
"We have the Research Triangle Park and two large academic universities that bring people in and out of the country," Swygard said. "Because of this, there is certainly the potential for bioterrorism and public health crises to occur."
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Federal Aviation Association have given North Carolina federal grants targeted at bettering terrorism preparedness and response. Most recently, the Department of Homeland Security provided the state with $ 50 million for first responders and $ 35 million for hospitals and public health agencies. Counties will receive shares of the funds on the basis of population.
North Carolina officials have been generally pleased with the federal government's response to state's financial needs.
"You always want more money so that you can do more things, but there's been a wonderful influx of money not only for bioterrorism preparedness but also for bolstering public health infrastructure," said Bill Furney, communications coordinator for PHP&R.
The state has plans for further improvements. Developing stronger working relationships among responders and educating individual citizens about risks and preparedness are both crucial priorities, officials said.
"We are far better prepared than we were two years ago, but we still have a lot of work to do," Beatty said.
"Terrorism preparedness is not a task that is going to be finished anytime soon, if ever."
(C) 2002 The Chronicle via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 29, 2003


End of Document