TERRORISM, TERM-LIMIT BILLS STALLED ON HILL
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 30, 1995, Sunday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P4C
Length: 617 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) _ More than 100 days after the Oklahoma City
federal building was blown up, President Clinton's anti-terrorism
legislation is stalled in Congress as House Republicans debate the
proper federal role in fighting crime.
Legislation cleared the Senate in June by an overwhelming, 91-8
vote after occasionally difficult negotiations between the White
House and GOP leaders.
The $ 2 billion package includes provisions sought by the White
House to expand the government's wiretapping authority and allow use
of the military in emergencies involving chemical or biological
weapons.  It also contains limits on appeals by death row inmates
demanded by Republicans.
The House Judiciary Committee approved its own measure a few
days later, but that bill has yet to reach the floor.  It has drawn
opposition not only from some liberal Democrats but conservative
Republicans as well.
"It vastly expands the powers of the federal government," said
Rep. Bob Barr, a first-term Georgia Republican, involved in trying to
rewrite the measure.
He said the committee's bill would expand the definition of
terrorism too broadly.  "It federalizes virtually every crime of
violence in the country."
Barr is circulating an alternative that starts with an enhanced
death penalty, and proposes stiffer penalties for crimes of violence
that are designed to coerce or intimidate the federal government.
Other issues are in dispute as well.  The House committee
measure expands federal wiretap authority, for example, and gives the
Defense Department an expanded role in combatting weapons of mass
destruction.
Supporters of term limits for lawmakers held a news conference
last week to trumpet strong public support _ 74 percent in a poll
commissioned by the Term Limits Legal Institute, a group favoring the
concept.
But a proposed constitutional amendment to that end is in for a
drubbing when the Senate debates it, probably in September.
One head count shows only 43 senators in favor, with another
handful undecided.  That's less than a majority, and far less than
the two-thirds needed for approval.
Barr and other members of the 73-member freshman class met last
week with Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary
Committee, who said he was amenable to discussing changes.  "I'm
confident we can work this out," he said.
Action has been deferred until September, after lawmakers return
from their monthlong summer break.
____
"I'm glad on this one we don't have a secret ballot," said Sen
.Hank Brown, R-Colo., a leading sponsor.  He indicated that some
senators might vote for the proposal when the roll is called even
though they oppose it privately.
As the poll suggests, public support for term limits is strong
.  And even though they know they'll lose, backers want the issue
brought up to put senators on record before the next election.
"The test is whether it makes a difference" in the elections,
said Brown.
It's one test on which he won't be graded.  Brown is retiring
next year after five terms in the House and one in the Senate.
The measure that will be voted on provides for a six-term limit
in the House and two-term limit in the Senate.  The House rejected
the proposal last summer.
____
Congress' version of the all-star game is on tap for Tuesday
night when Democratic lawmakers meet their Republican counterparts on
the baseball diamond.
The Democrats had better hope that skill at football doesn't
translate to prowess at baseball.
The GOP roster is bolstered this season by the addition of two
rookies from Oklahoma, former NFL all-star receiver Steve Largent and
former University of Oklahoma quarterback J.C. Watts.
The event is organized by Roll Call, a Capitol Hill newspaper,
with proceeds going to area charities.
AP-DS-07-29-95 1041EDT

Load-Date: August 2, 1995


End of Document