Terrorism, warfare comparable
University Wire
April 12, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Daily Mississippian via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 755 words
Byline: By Blake Aued, Daily Mississippian
Dateline: Oxford, Miss.
Body


The situation in the Middle East may finally be beginning to stabilize. Over the past year and a half, over 300 Israelis and 1,200 Palestinians have been killed in the current manifestation of the Intifada. The violence had intensified last month to such an extent that something was suicide bombed almost every day. Although suicide bombers are not rare, we did see a first -- the first female bomber.
Like female serial killers, female suicide bombers are nearly nonexistent, and their emergence will force the West to re-evaluate our ideas about Islamic fanaticism.
U. Mississippi
Despite Israel's announced intention to withdraw from the West Bank, at the strong behest of Secretary of State Colin Powell, that fanaticism remains pointed toward the United States. Saddam Hussein announced that he will cut off oil exports until Israel fully withdraws. Meanwhile, protesters in Sudan, Iran and Libya called on Osama bin Laden to retaliate against the Israelis.
The Arab world has always viewed the United States as being too pro-Israel; in fact, that is usually the main grievance against our country. Often they are right, but not this time. President Bush is obviously making a concerted effort to take a more balanced approach. He has condemned both the Palestinian suicide bombings and the often-excessive Israeli retaliation (or is that vice-versa?). He's also stopped short of calling Yassir Arafat a terrorist.
Which leads to an interesting question: Is Arafat a terrorist? Or, is Ariel Sharon a war criminal? The case can be made for either.
Sharon was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of refugees in Lebanon when he arranged for Phalangist militiamen to enter the camps and slaughter innocent civilians. His administration, and those before him, deny Palestinians any sort of basic legal or civil rights, including the right to vote or to a fair trial. His army has been accused lately of blocking the paths of Palestinian ambulances and deliberately cutting power to Palestinian hospitals. Amnesty International has condemned him for what it calls massive human rights abuses.
Arafat claims to be a man of peace, but when officials raided his Ramallah compound, they discovered hundreds of antitank missiles and other illegal weapons. His specific branch of the PLO, Fatah, may be responsible for at least one of the recent suicide bombings. Arafat says he is unable to stop terrorism. If that is the case, he is a poor leader and should resign. If he can stop terrorism and does not, or if he orders it, he is a terrorist.
In short, neither of these men is very nice. The line between terrorism and warfare these days is a thin one, and really depends on who's doing the talking. The problem is not with terrorism as a method of warfare. The problem is when civilians are targeted, as the PLO does when it bombs grocery stores and Israel does when it razes entire city blocks. On both sides the majority of casualties have been civilians, and that is not right.
The time for violence in Israel has long since passed. The question now is, can a peaceful agreement be reached, and how?
A growing number of hard-line Israelis, 46 percent by a recent poll, now favor expelling all Palestinians from Israel. Besides being unfair, that would create great instability in the region. In the aftermath of 1967, thousands of Palestinian refugees helped thrust Lebanon into civil war and nearly toppled the Jordanian government. We cannot let that happen again.
The Saudi Arabian peace plan, currently in vogue, is almost identical to the failed Oslo Accords. The sticking point continues to be the right of return for exiled Palestinians. Israel is perfectly willing to create a new Palestine, but a right of return is out of the question. Arafat must accept that stipulation to have peace.
The danger remains that this conflict will reignite Arab extremist forces and interfere with our own war on terrorism, which had its first success recently with the capture of the third-ranking al Qaeda member. American plans to invade Iraq, reportedly in September, may have to be changed. The combination of bombing raids on Afghanistan, a ground war in Iraq and Intifada in Israel is highly combustible.
The United States must demand that all sides commit to a peaceful resolution, and provide a model through our actions in the region. Civilian casualties should be unacceptable to us or anyone else. Capture terrorists, yes, but not at the expense of wholesale destruction.
(C) 2002 Daily Mississippian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 12, 2002


End of Document