Terror's Long Shadow  April 17-23
The New York Times
April 24, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 2; THE WEEK
Length: 564 words
Body


TUESDAY

Memento Mori -- Reminders surfaced everywhere. Even as the world focused on Rome and the successor to a pope who, in the aftermath of 9/11, said that terrorism was ''often the outcome of that fanatic fundamentalism which springs from the conviction that one's own vision of the truth must be forced upon everyone else,'' terror's long shadow cast Americans back 10 years, 6 years, 4 years: There was the Oklahoma City bombing. There was the Colorado school shooting. There was, as ever, Sept. 11, 2001.

Tracking -- The State Department said Monday that it would stop publishing annual data on terrorism attacks worldwide. Last year, the department reported a decline in significant events, then issued a correction showing an increase. The supposed falloff had been used to bolster President Bush's claim of success against terrorism.

Honoring -- On Tuesday, Vice President Dick Cheney and former President Bill Clinton led a delegation marking the 10th anniversary of the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. The bombing, the work of Americans, killed 168 people. The site is now a place of pilgrimage that features 168 bronze chairs, their glass bottoms etched with the names of the dead. A week of remembrance included a reunion of relatives, survivors and rescuers.

WEDNESDAY

Grieving -- On Wednesday, Coloradans marked the sixth anniversary of the Columbine High School shootings, the April morning when two students killed 12 classmates, a teacher and themselves. There were no formal observances, but Columbine students were given the day off, and teachers gathered at the school for a remembrance.
 Plans for an elaborate memorial have stalled because less than half of the $2.5 million cost has been raised. The design calls for a grove of trees, and water falling over etched stone walls.

Suing -- Asmaa Elshinawy, above, was among five Muslim-American New Yorkers who sued the Department of Homeland Security on Wednesday, saying they were targets of racial profiling when they were detained by border agents after returning from a religious conference in Toronto in December.
 Addressing the reach of the government's efforts in fighting terrorism, Valerie Smith, a spokeswoman for the department, said, ''Terrorists only have to get it right once.''

Searching -- The State Department offered $5 million rewards for information leading to the capture of two men, born in Tunisia and now citizens of Canada, who it believes may be bent on suicide attacks.

FRIDAY

Pleading -- On Friday, Zacarias Moussaoui, above -- the only person charged in an American court in the 9/11 attacks -- pleaded guilty to helping Al Qaeda carry out the attacks. On the same day, 24 people went on trial in Madrid on terrorism charges; three are accused of helping plan the 9/11 attacks.

Quarreling -- New York City fire officials, citing firefighters' expertise, said they opposed a plan to give the police primacy at the scene of a biological or chemical attack. And in Portland, Ore., on Friday, the mayor cited philosophical differences with the F.B.I. in announcing that he was pulling Portland's police force out of the F.B.I.'s antiterrorism task force.

Screening -- Friday was also the day that the first of an expected flow of movies about the 9/11 attacks had its premiere, at the TriBeCa Film Festival in New York. The film is called ''The Great New Wonderful.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Bronze chairs pay tribute to each of the 168 people who died in Oklahoma City. (Photo by J. Pat Carter/Associated Press)
A temporary memorial at Columbine. (Photo by Rick Wilking/Reuters)
Fingerprinted, photographed, filing suit. (Photo by Bebeto Matthews/Associated Press)
 ''I expect no leniency.'' (Photo by Sherburne County Sheriff's Office)                         

Load-Date: April 24, 2005


End of Document