TERRORISM A HURDLE FOR DEMS AT POLLS Women vulnerable on national security
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
November 20, 2015 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2015 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 004
Length: 323 words
Byline: Emily Cahn Tribune News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


 WASHINGTON - As national security becomes a bigger issue in the wake of the attacks in Paris, some Democratic strategists worry the issue could cause troubles for their Senate candidates in 2016 - and women candidates in particular.
 Polling shows voters generally view Republicans stronger on national security issues than Democrats. But some Democratic strategists add the issue is especially challenging for women, who do better at the ballot box when the economy and social issues are at the top of voters' minds.
 "Voters do look at gender," said Celinda Lake, a prominent Democratic pollster. "Women do better when people are focused on domestic issues (rather) than foreign policy, on policies that require empathy and being in touch rather than toughness. So terrorism is tough for women and tough for Democrats."
 More than a half-dozen Democratic Senate candidates this cycle are women, some of whom are considered the top recruit in their  race. These female candidates' successes will be essential to whether Democrats can net the five seats  to take control of the Senate.
 "We've reached a point in time where partisanship trumps virtually everything else in terms of cuing voters as to how they should assess candidates," said Jennifer Lawless, a professor at American University who studies women in politics. "Whether you have a D or an R next to your name is more important than whether you have a Y chromosome."
 But following the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, research found female candidates at a disadvantage to male candidates when it came to defense, terrorism and toughness, according to the Barbara Lee Family Foundation.
 "Voters hold women to a higher standard in general, and women have to do more to prove their qualifications to voters," said Erin Souza-Rezendes, communications director for the foundation. "This includes showing expertise on nontraditional issues in order to establish credibility and qualifications."

Load-Date: November 24, 2015


End of Document