Terrorism now part of curriculum
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
September 12, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 1278 words
Byline: Jennifer Toomer-Cook Deseret Morning News
Body


   As they watched the Twin Towers crumble five years ago, teachers found little guidance other than instinct to teach students about the unfolding events.Now, they have a full curriculum.
Terrorism has been added to the state's high school social studies core curriculum. A Bingham High teacher is fleshing it out in a full-scale unit in a class called American Problems. Another educator finds the 9/11 attacks a jumping off point to discuss anything from the War of 1812 to Pearl Harbor. An elementary school teacher seizes student-inspired teaching moments surrounding that day. And the University of Utah's Middle East Center is receiving requests for information teachers never before considered using in their classrooms.
Some teachers say the event can't help but seep into lessons.
"I used to have to say to my students, and I've been teaching for 30 years now ..., 'You have never had a life-defining experience like we had when President Kennedy was shot,"' said Scott Crump, Bingham High
School's history department chairman and 2004 Utah Teacher of the Year.
But now, "when we talk in history, 9/11 might become such a defining moment, their generation might be called, instead of Generation Y ... the 9/11 Generation. Not because of what happened, but because of our response to 9/11 and what that has done to define and change their generation -- just like the World War II generation."
On Sept. 11, 2001, students pumped teachers with questions on how such horror could unfold on U.S. soil.
"Our sixth-graders were aware of it by the time they got to school," recalls Oakridge Elementary teacher Jan Rolan, who now teaches fifth grade. "The year it happened, we had to talk about it almost every day."
Many high school students watched the events unfold on classroom TVs. Schools summoned crisis counselors to reassure the distraught. Student patriotic activities and service, including collecting money and writing letters to victims, wearing red, white and blue ribbons, and creating human flags on football fields, became the impromptu fashion -- a response unprecedented, some said, since World War II.
But fears also set in for some, that dads would go to war, that moms wouldn't come home from work. Some schools reported a rise in discipline problems -- children acting out, some counselors said, because of event overload.
As the first anniversary approached, schools wondered how to mark the date without traumatizing children all over again. Some groups suggested they focus on character-building activities, community service or "21-balloon" salutes to police, fire and military men and women instead of reviving the devastation.
Five years later, some schools continue commemorations along those lines.
Oakridge Elementary hosts a Patriot Day celebration where children sing, write essays and choose a person to receive an Everyday Hero award, school music specialist Dianne Krehbiel said. This year's theme is Imagine Peace.
"I think it's a very unifying thing to start the school year," Krehbiel said. "Our music program has helped pull us together as a community, and we gather around song."
Indeed, the school's oldest children were kindergartners and first-graders when the terrorists attacked the World Trade Center and Pentagon, and teaching children details about that day can be tricky.
But that doesn't mean it doesn't happen. Some teachers wonder how it couldn't.
"One of the kids today already brought up 9/11," Rolan said just days after the school year started. "War is very real to these guys."
They don't have a lot of memory of 9/11, at least on the level adults might, Rolan said. But they know the basic event. They understand that airline security has changed. They understand concepts of freedom and citizenship. Those provide the context for Rolan to touch on the event.
Teachers of older children say they tap a similar, though more complete, mosaic of understanding.
"Sept. 11 is not something (about which) a history teacher has to say, 'Where's my unit?' It's just there," said Jenicee Jacobson, social studies teacher at Riverton High. "Everything with Iraq, with the way the government works now, with homeland security, current issues in general -- it's all woven into Sept. 11. ... It takes very little leading or prompting with questions for them to go back to that place."
Indeed, teachers are seizing on what they call "teaching moments," initiated by children and channeled into the day's lesson.
For instance, some of Jacobson's students mentioned 9/11 on the first day of school. Jacobson said it led to talk of the War of 1812, the last time the United States was attacked on its own soil, and Pearl Harbor, and whether that counted as U.S. soil, because Hawaii wasn't yet a state, though the American military was the target.
"What a great opportunity," Jacobson said. "We (talked) a little about World War II, the early 1800s and a current event. That's why you naturally go there."
The State Office of Education since 9/11 has changed the 11th-grade social studies core curriculum. Now it includes ways teachers can help students analyze the impact of international terrorism on the United States.
"We want to make sure teachers spend some time on that," said Robert Austin, social studies specialist for the State Office of Education. "What you hope you give them is the thinking skills they're going to need to confront the issues, whether it's terrorism or concerns about climate change or how we as a nation respond to disasters."
Some schools and districts are expanding on the state mandate.
Jordan School District is creating a teachers' seminar on how to teach terrorism in a way that fosters understanding about world events, district social studies specialist Pam Su'a said.
Crump teaches a two- to three-week terrorism unit in his American Problems class. Students examine its history from as far back as ancient Rome, through the French Revolution, and through 9/11. They learn about various terrorist groups, examine today's terrorist acts, solutions to terrorism, and debate American freedoms vs. security and whether terrorism is ever justified.
"We get some pretty heated discussion on that," Crump said.
Pop culture, particularly the recent release of the Oliver Stone film "World Trade Center," also has provided a jumping-off point for teachers, Bingham High social studies teacher Ali Bridge said.
"Now that they're older, (teens are) starting to understand what happened for themselves ... instead of reacting to the adults around them," she said.
But Bridge notes often students need help sorting opinion from fact.
"They see racial profiling going on and different things and think Middle Eastern or Muslim means you hate America and you're a terrorist," she said. "Especially now, we teach specific units on the Muslim religion, the Islamic faith."
The University of Utah's Middle East Center's outreach program attempts to create deeper understanding of that part of the world. Since 1987, it has offered schoolteachers yearlong seminars -- this year's topic is Iran and her neighbors -- in which 30 to 40 teachers enroll, program assistant Deborah Dilley-Murrell said. Other seminars spanning a day or two attract up to 70 teachers. The center also provides resources, including guest speakers.
"After Sept. 11, the center as a whole started receiving a lot more retention and a lot more requests," Dilley-Murrell said. "Kids have questions. They read the news, and they might not understand it ... but children need to learn about this to begin with. Children need to learn about the world around them.
"In my opinion, if we can get (information) to one person, that's all we need." E-mail: jtcook@desnews.com

Load-Date: April 18, 2007


End of Document