Terrorism on Two Continents;
In Europe, Kurds Injure Themselves
The New York Times
June 25, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Editorial
Length: 290 words
Body


Despair and anger contributed to the attacks yesterday by Kurdish militants against Turkish embassies and businesses in five European countries. But ignorance and zealotry were also at work in a wave of terrorism that tarnishes the Kurdish cause. The Kurds won no friends by threatening to kill some 20 hostages in Munich unless Chancellor Helmut Kohl ordered Ankara to cease attacking Kurdish villages in southeastern Turkey.
Mr. Kohl held his ground and the hostages were freed. Even so, such acts can hardly help Kurdish causes, including that of the Kurds seeking political asylum in Germany. Worse still is the moral irony: Kurds who attack Turks because they are Turks put themselves on the same level as Germany's racist skinheads who firebomb Turkish guest-workers because of their nationality.
This moral confusion bears the familiar mark of the Kurdish Workers Party, a fiery Marxist group known in Turkey as the P.K.K., whose excesses have provoked bloodier excesses by the Turkish armed forces. In March, a cease-fire seemed possible in a nine-year conflict. But the truce collapsed in May when P.K.K. guerrillas ambushed and killed 34 unarmed soldiers. That provoked mass reprisals that Kurdish hostage-takers wanted Germany to stop.
The Kurds, stateless people scattered in five countries, have been poorly treated almost everywhere. They have been butchered in Iraq and used as pawns by Syria, Britain, Russia and America. In Turkey, their very identity was denied until recently -- they were called "mountain Turks," and forbidden even to speak their own language.
But the P.K.K. prefers grievances and martyrs to a cease-fire. Taking hostages and assaulting Turkish diplomats in Europe won't shorten the agony of an ill-used people.

Load-Date: June 25, 1993


End of Document