Terrorism Renews Fears About Nuke Storage; Goshute facility would be obvious target, critics say
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
September 17, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. B2
Length: 638 words
Byline: JUDY FAHYS, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


While the world struggled last week to accept the unthinkable, a few people were hoping the terrorist attacks will force Utahns to think harder about storing nuclear waste at the Skull Valley Goshute Indian Reservation.
These storage-proposal critics say they have felt like "voices in the wilderness" when they warn the dump would be an attractive terrorist target -- just 45 miles from Utah's population center on the Wasatch Front and capable of making a huge area uninhabitable. Not only has the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board given short shrift to the possibility, they say, but many Utahns doubt the danger, too.
"People think I'm a wild-eyed radical trying to stir up a fear of terrorism," said Salt Lake City engineer Fred Payne, a onetime nuclear engineer and consultant to Utah's High-Level Nuclear Opposition.
"The concentration of nuclear waste 40 miles from our doorstep [on the Wasatch Front] -- and I consider it an invitation to terrorism -- is something that is very real facing us if this goes in as proposed," Payne said.
The storage is being proposed by a consortium of out-of-state utilities that have leased part of the Skull Valley reservation to store up to 96 million pounds of nuclear-power byproducts until it can be moved into permanent disposal site, perhaps at Yucca Mountain, Nev.
The consortium, Private Fuel Storage (PFS), insists its $ 3.1 billion facility presents virtually no health threat to Utahns or the environment.
PFS spokeswoman Sue Martin said a recent study of the steel and concrete storage containers by Sandia and Battelle National Laboratories showed no one would die immediately if they broke and just two added cancer deaths might be expected. She also disputed the idea the tiny Goshute facility would be an attractive terrorist target.
"They target places like New York and Washington, D.C., and not the middle of the desert, which would impact few, if any, people," she said.
But Payne and other critics contend the storage casks, stored like huge pop cans on the reservation just east of a vast U.S. Air Force test-bombing range, would be perilously vulnerable.
Having worked with atomic bomb development in Nevada and a reactor at what is now the Idaho National Energy and Environmental Laboratory, Payne has little confidence the above-ground storage casks would hold up to an aircraft crash or a bombing. Contrary to the consortium's claim the lethal contents would stay in the desert, he predicts it would disperse and contaminate Utah.
Aides to the Utah congressional delegation were briefed by Payne on Monday.  And state legislators who heard Payne's presentation last winter accused him of fear mongering and being "outrageous."
Terrorism concerns also have been raised by Martin Bushnell, a retired Air Force fighter pilot who works with the Utah opposition coalition.
"I don't think people [in Utah] recognize this is a plausible scenario," he said, suggesting a terrorism attack would be possible at the Goshute facility.
In June, Bushnell was worried enough about the scanty treatment of possible terrorism that he asked about raising that concern with the federal licensing board. He found out that the board already has decided the plans in place are adequate.
"Utah, the Wasatch Front, is in grave danger if they put that facility up as they describe," he added. "It will become a magnet for terrorism."
Dianne Nielson, director of the Utah Department of Environmental Quality, also disagrees the hazard risks have been addressed sufficiently. She noted the state can take up the question again once the licensing board's decision is reviewed by the full Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
"I'm sure those issues will get re-evaluated," she said. "We will make sure they do."
The licensing board plans a hearing on the possible impacts of accidental airplane crashes next spring.

Load-Date: September 20, 2001


End of Document