Terrorism Motive Eyed in Paris Police Stabbing Attack
The New York Times 
October 4, 2019 Friday 08:37 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; europe
Length: 785 words
Byline: Aurelien Breeden
Highlight: As antiterrorism prosecutors took over the inquiry, officials did not say whether the decision was guided by an interview with the attacker’s wife or analysis of his phone and computer.
Body


PARIS — French antiterrorism prosecutors on Friday took over the investigation into the killing of four people the day before at Paris Police Headquarters, suggesting investigators were considering a possible terrorism motive.
The exact reasons for the opening of a terrorism inquiry were unclear, but it was likely to raise questions about whether the attacker — who worked in the Paris police intelligence unit, a highly sensitive department — had been sufficiently vetted.
Prosecutors in Paris said only that “elements gathered at this stage by investigators” had led them to hand the case over to the national antiterrorism prosecutor’s office.
They did not say whether an interview with the suspect’s wife or analysis of his cellphone and computer had guided their decision. A spokesman for the antiterrorism prosecutor’s office could not be reached to comment.
Earlier on Friday, the French authorities had cautioned that investigators were not ruling out any motives in the stabbing rampage.
The killer, a 45-year-old computer specialist, was described by authorities as a 20-year veteran of the force with an uneventful record. He was born in the French overseas territory of Martinique, had a hearing disability and was a convert to Islam, according to police union officials.
But the timing of the man’s conversion was not entirely clear, and the authorities had previously been careful about characterizing its relevance.
Sibeth Ndiaye, a spokeswoman for the French government, told the broadcaster Franceinfo on Friday that “converting to Islam is not an automatic sign of radicalization” but that “the facts need to be examined with precision.”
The Paris prosecutor’s office said earlier on Friday that the man’s wife was being questioned by the police, but it declined to comment on reports that she had told investigators that he had been erratic and agitated the night before the attack and had said he was having visions and hearing voices.
The French authorities have not officially identified the man. But his neighbors in Gonesse, a suburb about seven miles northeast of Paris, described him as quiet and otherwise unremarkable, telling the French news media that he sometimes had attended a local mosque.
He was shot dead by an officer after a stabbing spree in the massive building adjacent to Notre-Dame Cathedral, in which three men and one woman were killed.
“The police prefecture was struck at its heart, like never before in the past,” Didier Lallement, the Paris police chief, said at a news conference in Paris. “This tragedy is all the more terrible for us that this attack occurred inside the Police Headquarters and was carried out by one of us.”
Mr. Lallement denied suggestions that security at the headquarters had been lax, adding that any visitors underwent strict checks, including with metal detectors, and that several areas of the building were restricted to holders of specific badges.
He acknowledged that the security setup had been designed mostly to prevent assailants from entering the building, not to foil attacks from within. Police officers and other employees, for example, are not systematically searched when entering.
Mr. Lallement also praised the officer who shot the suspect, saying he had recently finished training and had arrived at headquarters just days earlier.
Hundreds of police employees gathered on Friday to observe a minute of silence in the courtyard of the Police Headquarters, a 19th-century building in the center of Paris that sits across from Notre-Dame on the Île de la Cité, an island on the Seine.
The outburst of violence on Thursday occurred during a week of some of the largest protests by French police officers in nearly 20 years. The protesters expressed discontent about working conditions, a record number of suicides and tense relations with the French public.
Mr. Lallement sought to dispel the notion that the French police were at odds with the general population.
“In these moments I measure how ridiculous the slogan suggesting that ‘Everybody hates the police’ is,” he said, referring to chants sometimes hurled at the police during the Yellow Vest protests this year. “What I saw yesterday was the authorities and lawmakers, but also many citizens, who expressed their support for the police, their love of the police.”
Follow Aurelien Breeden on Twitter: @aurelienbrd. Elian Peltier contributed reporting. 
PHOTO: Military personnel blocking a bridge near the Paris Police Headquarters on Thursday, after a knife attack killed four. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Marc Piasecki/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
Knife Attack at Paris Police Headquarters Leaves 4 Dead
French Police Protest en Masse: ‘It’s About the Lack of Respect’

Load-Date: September 25, 2020


End of Document