Terrorism war not intruding on life in Atlanta
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 30, 2002 Thursday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Metro News;; Column
Length: 518 words
Byline: COLIN CAMPBELL
Body


Is this war real? Unless your job is war-related, or you have a relative on military duty, or you have ties with dangerous places, America's war on terrorism may seem quite unreal. Or at least that's a common impression here in Atlanta.
The war feels unreal even by the standards of other recent American wars, which were quick and electronic and didn't kill many Americans and didn't upset the economy. This one is strange even in that weird league.
AJC
It has killed thousands of people --- a toll up there with early Vietnam. It has permanently marked a presidency. It has shocked the world's strategists.
But where is the war, a distant citizen wants to know How much is it costing? Is it being competently waged? What are the stakes? Could it last many years? How can it be won? Did you think about it yesterday?
There's a disconnect between its gravity and a relatively airy public discourse.
You go to a Starbucks, say --- on Peachtree Street! --- and middle-aged strangers still are flirting vaguely over their coffee.
Newspapers lie scattered about. To be sure, they're replete with grim pictures of the president and articles about the latest terror warnings and maybe something about Afghanistan, not to mention the FBI's astonishing announcement that it will now fight terrorism.
The economy is still queasy, and people wonder about our leaders, but in Atlanta, anyway, folks have climbed down from the warlike focus of last fall. The talk is more like the weather, warm and summery and a little sticky. The kids are on vacation. The talk is of money, jobs, etc.
It's rarely about the Middle East and Islam and terrorism and something we've been told is war. Perhaps we're living in a dreamland.
There are no shortages, no special war taxes. There's no compulsory national service, and certainly no military draft.
There's no discussion of strategy, and little sustained talk about what it might mean if some American port, including Savannah, got nuked.
Even last fall's powerful identification with New York has waned.
We haven't even seized the chance to raise gasoline taxes and cut our sickening dependence on Mideast oil.
You have to hunt, in Atlanta, to find somebody who'll tell you with passion that Americans are nuts to maintain their addiction to $1.30 gas. In real money, though, gas costs less today than it did in the 1950s and '60s, when nobody in the Middle East could touch us. Gas costs much less today in real money than it did in the '70s and early '80s, when the threat was a mere oil cartel. Where's the discussion?
Where's the local interest in whether Israel occupies Arab lands or not? In whether Atlanta has a terror plan or not? In whether Washington has a strategy of national defense or not?
All this is especially frustrating in light of this city's sturdy tradition of wisdom and warnings (from Jimmy Carter, Sam Nunn and others) regarding oil dependence, the dangers of an unsettled Arab-Israeli conflict and the threat of free-lance mass killings in the post-Soviet era.
Maybe Atlanta needs another cup of coffee or something.
And we're probably not the only ones.
ccampbell@ajc.com  

Load-Date: May 30, 2002


End of Document