Terrorism expert knows the score
USA TODAY
October 11, 2001, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; BOOKS
Length: 661 words
Byline: Tara McKelvey
Body

People who are bent on mass destruction are usually not coy about their intentions. Hitler laid out his plans in Mein Kampf, which was published more than seven years before his rise to power in 1933.
And Jessica Stern, a Harvard University terrorism expert, says Osama bin Laden also made it clear what he planned to do before the Sept. 11 hijackings occurred.
"He said he would kill American civilians. He said a hundred Americans would die for every one who died in the U.S. attack on Afghanistan in August 1998. He also said if the U.S. government kills him, then 100 Osamas would take his place," says Stern, 43, a lecturer at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. She also is the author of The Ultimate Terrorists (Harvard University Press, 1999) and the upcoming Terror in the Name of God.
"It's important to try and stop him," Stern says of bin Laden. And she should know. She has gotten to know one of the leaders of a terrorist group that has pledged allegiance to bin Laden's al-Qa'eda organization and has seen how committed they are to their cause. In addition, she has spent the past four years interviewing terrorists in Israel, the Palestinian territories, Indonesia, Lebanon, India and the USA for her new book.
"It probably seemed like an eccentric way to spend one's life," she says. But Stern is a policy wonk with nerve. She also may be the only one ever to have been portrayed in a Hollywood movie by Nicole Kidman, who played a character based on Stern in the 1997 DreamWorks film The Peacemaker. After the film opened, Stern made a brief appearance on the national scene. She was profiled in Vogue and Newsweek, and appeared on CBS' 60 Minutes.
Stern has had to draw on her media savvy and on her own inner strength to get through the past month. It has not always been easy. She was on a live National Public Radio show, The Connection, in a studio in Boston when the World Trade Center collapsed.
"It was incredibly traumatic," she says. "They had the TV on with no sound while we were on the air. You had to sort of sound like a grown-up on the air."
Afterward, Stern returned to her office at Harvard to let her students -- especially the international ones -- know things would be OK for them on campus. It wasn't long before she was inundated with requests for TV and radio interviews. Luckily, Stern says, she was able to deliver a reassuring message.
Besides being well versed in extremist movements, Stern is an expert on "weapons of mass destruction." The Ultimate Terrorists is about the threat of terrorist attacks with biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, and she spoke about those dangers recently.
"I don't think people should stockpile gas masks," she says. "And the possibility of killing everyone in Washington, D.C., with anthrax is not likely. We learned something about al-Qa'eda's progress in developing unconventional weapons during the trials this spring in New York (for the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Africa).
"We know they were trying to buy uranium, and we know they had experimented with cyanide to kill a dog. But I've heard nothing that says they are capable of carrying out a doomsday scenario with an unconventional weapon.
"I think the more likely scenarios are low-tech," Stern says.
But, she adds, even low-tech efforts can result in massive destruction. As Stern points out, scientists have calculated that the explosive yield of the two jets that hit the World Trade Center was equal "to a one-half kiloton nuclear device."
The attack has galvanized those who are trying to ferret out intelligence on international terrorism. For her part, Stern is pulling together things she has learned for Terror in the Name of God, which will be published by Harvard University Press next year.
"I think it's important to read their manifestos," says Stern, describing her research on extremists. "It's worth listening to them."
These days, hardly anyone would consider that an eccentric way to spend one's days.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W; PHOTO, B/W, Margaret Lampert; Stern: Harvard lecturer's knowledge is not purely academic.

Load-Date: October 11, 2001


End of Document