TERRORISM ACT DRENCHED IN ORWELL'S NEWSPEAK
The Capital Times (Madison, Wisconsin)
January 4, 2008 Friday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A6; GUEST COLUMN
Length: 886 words
Byline: Robert Weitzel
Body


Political language has to consist largely of euphemisms ... and sheer cloudy vagueness."
- George Orwell
The Violent Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism Prevention Act of 2007 recently passed by the House - a companion bill is in the Senate - is barely one sentence old before its Orwellian moment: It begins, "An act - To prevent homegrown terrorism, and for other purposes."
Those whose pulse did not quicken at "other purposes" have probably not read George Orwell's essay, "Politics and the English Language," or they voted for the other George both times.
Orwell's jeremiad on the corruption of the English language and its corrosive effect on a democracy was written two years before his novel "1984" spelled out in chilling detail the danger of Newspeak, which renders citizens incapable of independent thought by depriving them of the words necessary to form ideas other than those promulgated by the state.
After its opening "tribute" to Orwell, the homegrown terrorism bill is strategically peppered with Newspeak regarding the establishment of a National Commission and university-based Centers of Excellence to "examine and report upon the fact and causes of violent radicalization, homegrown terrorism, and ideologically based violence in the United States" and to make legislative recommendations for combating it.
The "sheer cloudy vagueness" of the bill, as well as its terror factor, may account for its bipartisan 404-6 House vote. But how, in an era informed by the Bush/Cheney administration's egregious assault on the Bill of Rights, can the phrase "other purposes" fail to raise the "national terror alert" from its current threat level of "elevated" to "severe"?
Future "other purposes" will undoubtedly be justified by the act's use of the term "violent radicalization," which it defines as "the process of adopting or promoting an extremist belief system for the purpose of facilitating ideologically based violence " or by the folksy, Lake Wobegonesque "homegrown terrorism," defined as "the use, planned use, or threatened use, of force or violence by a group or individual born (or) raised ... within the United States ... to intimidate or coerce the United States, the civilian population ... or any segment thereof (italics added)."
In the service of some self-serving "other purposes," will "extremist beliefs" become any belief the temporary occupants of the White House consider antithetical and threatening to their political agenda?
Will "ideologically based violence" or the use of "force" become little more than the mayhem resulting after a peaceful protest, daring to move beyond the barbed wire of the free speech zone, is attacked by a truncheon-wielding riot squad armed with tear gas, German shepherd dogs and water cannons?
Will the unarmed, constitutionally protected dissenters who are fending off blows or dog bites in self-defense become "homegrown terrorists" and suffer draconian sentences for their attempt to "intimidate or coerce" the state with free thought and free speech?
A clue to future "other purposes" may lie in the act's parentage. The proud House "mother" of the Patriot Act's evil twin is Rep. Jane Harmon, D-Calif., chair of the Homeland Security Intelligence Subcommittee. Rep. Harmon has admitted to a long and productive relationship with the RAND Corp., a California-based think tank with close ties to the military-industrial-intelligence complex. RAND's 2005 study, "Trends in Terrorism," contains a chapter titled "Homegrown Terrorist Threats to the United States." Is this act a bastard child?
Keep in mind that the RAND Corp. was set up in 1946 by Army Air Force Gen. Henry "Hap" Arnold as "Project RAND" sponsored by the Douglas Aircraft Co. Keep in mind also that Donald Rumsfeld was its chairman from 1981 to 1986 and Lewis "Scooter" Libby, Dick Cheney's felonious former chief of staff, and Condoleezza Rice were trustees. Enough said!
RAND maintains that "homegrown terrorism" will not be the result of jihadist sleeper cells. Rather, it will result from anti-globalists and radical environmentalists who "challenge the intrinsic qualities of capitalism, charging that in the insatiable quest for growth and profit, the philosophy is serving to destroy the world's ecology, indigenous cultures, and individual welfare."
Further, RAND claims that anti-globalists and radical environmentalists "exist in much the same operational environment as al-Qaida" and pose "a clear threat to private sector corporate interests, especially large multinational business." Therein lies the real "other purposes."
Predictably then, the bill is not about protecting homegrown Americans. That protection is only incidental to its "other purposes" of protecting homegrown corporate interests. Any thought or speech or action - however protected it might be by the Bill of Rights - that threatens corporate hegemony and profit will no doubt suffer the consequences of the "other purposes" clause.
Anyone doubting the Orwellian nature of a "bastard child" that equates anti-globalists and environmentalists with al-Qaida terrorists will do well to read Orwell's "Politics and the English Language" and to acquaint themselves with the fate of Winston Smith in "1984."
Robert Weitzel of Middleton writes frequently for newspapers, magazines and Web sites. robertweitzel@mac.com

Load-Date: January 5, 2008


End of Document