Terrorism Trial for Figure In Zimbabwe Opposition
The New York Times
February 19, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 612 words
Byline: By CELIA W. DUGGER; A reporter in Mutare, Zimbabwe, contributed to this article.
Dateline: JOHANNESBURG 
Body


A magistrate in Zimbabwe on Wednesday ruled that Roy Bennett, the third-highest-ranking member of the political opposition, should be tried on terrorism charges and remain in prison for at least the next three weeks.
  Mr. Bennett, who was to be sworn in Wednesday as deputy agriculture minister in the new power-sharing government of the opposition and President Robert Mugabe's party, was taken back to a prison cell, clad in the white shorts and khaki shirt issued to inmates. He and his party have denied the charges against him.
  His case has become the highest-profile test of whether the opposition party and its leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, the new prime minister, will have the clout to insist on a return to democracy and the rule of law. Over the years, Zimbabwe's judicial system has been compromised by threats of violence against judges who went against Mr. Mugabe's wishes, and by gifts of land and other luxury goods to compliant judges. 
  Mr. Bennett, who after three years in exile returned only recently  to Zimbabwe because his party agreed to join the government, sadly shook his head, with his hand over his mouth, when the provincial magistrate, Livingstone Chipadze, announced that the state had sufficient grounds to hold him on charges of possessing unlicensed firearms with the intent to commit acts of terrorism and sabotage against the state.
  Mr. Bennett's lawyers said they would appeal the ruling.
  Even as his case took a discouraging turn for his party, another opposition official who had faced treason charges that were only recently withdrawn, Tendai Biti, the new finance minister, announced that the government would pay 130,000 soldiers, teachers and civil servants $100 a month in American dollars. Mr. Biti hopes it will get them back to work, but the move also seems intended to help win their loyalty to the new government. 
  Zimbabwe has one of the most astronomical rates of inflation in world history, and it has rendered the pay of public employees virtually worthless.
  The United States and Britain, which have been the largest donors of food and other humanitarian aid to Zimbabwe, have said they will wait and see whether Mr. Mugabe is genuinely willing to share power before committing large amounts of money to help rebuild the country's shattered economy.
  They have been closely watching the treatment of imprisoned human rights and opposition activists who have been held for weeks or months without bail, as well as Mr. Bennett's case. 
  Mr. Tsvangirai said over the weekend that the arrest of Mr. Bennett, the party's treasurer, was a political act engineered by elements of Mr. Mugabe's party, ZANU-PF, that are bent on undermining the political settlement. 
  Mr. Tsvangirai won more votes than Mr. Mugabe in March elections, but quit before a presidential runoff after more than 100 of his supporters were murdered and thousands beaten in state-sponsored attacks.
  Mr. Bennett is a white farmer who was elected earlier to Parliament by a rural, black constituency in the Manicaland Province, where he is now imprisoned. He  fled the country three years ago after he was linked to an arms cache the state alleged was to be used in acts of sabotage, and, before his recent return,  had lived  in exile in Johannesburg. 
  Hundreds of his supporters have kept a vigil outside the police station and court house since he was brought to Mutare on Friday after his arrest. They listened quietly Wednesday as the provincial opposition chairman, Senator Patrick Chitaka, told them the news about Mr. Bennett's case.
  ''We don't want you to cause any violence,'' he said. ''Let's show them we're the government now ruling.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 19, 2009


End of Document