Terrorism issues move from newsroom to classroom at U. Florida
University Wire
November 7, 2001


Copyright 2001 Independent Florida Alligator via U-Wire
Length: 690 words
Byline: By Funmi Olorunnipa, Independent Florida Alligator
Dateline: Gainesville, Fla.
Body


Terrorism has been on the minds of many Americans since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington.
Students now have an opportunity to study it thanks to the University of Florida's political science department. The department is offering several courses this spring that will include the study of the Sept. 11 events as a part of the curriculum.
One of the courses the department is offering is POS 4931, a special topic course "Terrorism." The course is just one example of how college students at UF and in other universities around the country are studying the issues that are currently occurring in society.
U. Florida
Incidentally, the department has been planning to offer the course since last February.
Adam Silverman, a graduate teaching assistant who will be the instructor for the course, brought the course's concept, which will be offered for the first time next semester, to the political science department.
Silverman, who has taught courses on politics and religion as well as Middle Eastern politics, said the course would look at terrorism in the context of academic study.
"The class will be a blend of politics, criminology, sociology and religion," he said.
The focus of the course is to study terrorism in theory and in practice. Students will examine the history of terrorism, acts of terrorism and the identity of terrorist groups.
"In order to understand terrorists, you have to understand the dynamics of their identity," he said.
Students who enroll in the class will look at individual case studies and use books on criminology and foreign policy to enhance their study of terrorism.
"One of the things that makes this class so interesting is that terrorism has not been thoroughly studied using a disciplinary approach, therefore students can truly explore various aspects of terrorism," he said.
Silverman said he anticipates that interest in the course will increase due to the Sept. 11 attacks, and as a result, the department has increased the number of seats in the course from 50 to 100. Silverman has been planning the course content for more than nine months and said it wouldn't necessarily change because of the attacks.
"We will talk about the recent terrorist attacks, but we are not going to spend the entire semester talking about Sept. 11," he said. "Because the course will be bigger, the course dynamic will change."
Silverman said he expected that unlike many other upper-division political science courses, students who take the course would come from departments other than political science because of the current interest in the subject.
"Before Sept. 11, the reality of terrorism had been off the radar screen because national security was not that big of an issue before," he said.
Another course, PUP 3002, is called "Current Controversies" and will be taught by graduate teaching assistant Brian Gridley. Gridley, who will be teaching the class for the first time, said the issue of terrorism would be included because it is a current controversy.
"I have been preparing for this course for four months now but since the Sept. 11 attacks, the content of the course has changed considerably and will probably continue to change," he said. "The very nature of this course is to change every time it is offered."
Gridley also said because the issue is so relevant now, the class is the perfect setting to discuss what has happened and what is happening.
"It's not that terrorism wasn't an issue before Sept. 11, it is that now it is more of a global issue," he said. "The scope of the threat has changed the dynamics of the issue."
With this in mind, Gridley said he hopes to spend time in the course discussing public policy relating to terrorism and getting students to participate in class discussions about the issue.
"Just like Pearl Harbor, the Vietnam War and the 1960s civil rights movement, the terrorist attacks that occurred on Sept. 11 are a generation-defining event," he said. "In a class like 'Current Controversies,' it would be a disservice to students to ignore the issue."
(C) 2001 Independent Florida Alligator via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 7, 2001


End of Document