Terrible cost 71 reporters killed world war media newspaper drug org crime terrorism death murder national national national
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
May 03, 2000, Wednesday wednesday wednesday


Copyright 2000 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A P4A P4A
Length: 525 words
Byline: Gzedit gzedit gzedit
Body


DAY after day, news pours in from every corner of the world. Americans want to know everything that's happening, everywhere. But they rarely realize the horrible cost of newsgathering.
Seventy-one news reporters and commentators were killed in 19 countries in 1999, according to the World Association of Newspapers. Most of them were murdered - assassinated after they wrote unflattering reports about fanatic groups or corrupt regimes. Others were caught in crossfire as they covered warfare. Some died in Yugoslavia when America mistakenly bombed the wrong targets during the Kosovo conflict.  conflict.  conflict.
In addition, 80 journalists are in prison in 18 nations, mostly because their writing offended government leaders. Altogether, it's a terrible price to pay for keeping people informed about events and issues.
Because today is World Press Freedom Day, the newspaper association listed all the 1999 victims. Here are a few:
- Burma - After the Kyemon newspaper called a local general a "world-famous crook," military intelligence officers seized two reporters for questioning - and their bodies later were found.
- Colombia - Seven news reporters and columnists were shot to death in different attacks in 1999 in the Latin nation plagued by narco-terrorism. Several of the victims were killed by gunmen on motorcycles.
- England - Jill Dando, who investigated unsolved cases for the "Crimewatch UK" television show, was shot to death outside her London home.
- Argentina - Ricardo Gangeme, editor of a weekly paper that exposed corrupt government officials, was shot in the head by an unknown assassin as he parked his car outside his apartment. His billfold wasn't touched, so the killing clearly was a hit by unknown enemies.
- Lebanon - Israeli reporter Ilan Roeh was killed along with three Israeli soldiers by a roadside bomb. The Shi'ite Muslim militia Hezbollah (Party of God) claimed credit.
- Yugoslavia - Three journalists in the Chinese Embassy at Belgrade and 15 workers in the Serbian radio-television station were killed mistakenly by U.S. missiles in the Kosovo war.
- India - A woman reporter for The Indian Express was strangled by wire and stabbed to death in her home, apparently by assailants looking for incriminating documents.
Luckily, there were no 1999 journalist murders in Algeria, where 60 news writers were killed earlier in the 1990s by Muslim militants seeking to create a theocracy, or by government-backed paramilitary groups.
Press groups say news coverage of conflicts is becoming more dangerous. During the Cold War, leftist rebels and right-wing military units sought to win public sympathy, so they tried to avoid killing unarmed observers. But today's combatants mostly are zealots who care little about public approval.
Former Gazette reporter John Bussey, now foreign editor of The Wall Street Journal says his staff often is in danger overseas. He was forced to seek State Department help to remove one reporter from the Congo after secret police began following him.
As you read or watch the daily news, remember that a high price is paid to keep you posted on the world's happenings.  happenings.  happenings.

Load-Date: May 3, 2000


End of Document