Terrorism And Tips On Travel
The New York Times
May 16, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 738 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 15
Body


In response to terrorist attacks against Americans overseas, more and more citizens are calling Federal agencies for advice on where and how to travel safety. But the Government seems reluctant to provide more than a minimum of information, saying solid facts are hard to come by.
As a result, the advice-seekers are turning to private security companies. And, by one estimate, at least a dozen new security concerns have started up in the Washington area.
''Government travel advisories are confusing to consumers,'' said Joseph H. Hallissey, chairman of the American Society of Travel Agents. ''People assume they mean danger, but it could only be a convention, an outbreak of measles or a politically motivated decision.''
The Commerce Department's Travel and Tourism Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration and the State Department have received hundreds of calls in recent weeks from citizens asking whether it is safe to travel abroad.
 
'You Never Really Know'
''There is no central place for people to come with their questions,'' said Vivian A. Deuschl, spokesman for the Travel and Tourism Administration. ''We talked about setting up a clearinghouse, but there is no money, and no Government agency wants the responsibility of telling people that it is safe, since you never really know.''
Most calls are referred to the State Department, which issues advisories recommending against travel to certain countries but gives no advice on precautions. The department currently lists Afghanistan, Iran, Lebanon, Libya and Uganda, but no European destinations, despite recent terrorist incidents in Paris, Rome, Vienna, Berlin and London.
''We advise people to use common sense, prudence and caution, but we leave questions of security to the experts,'' said John H. Adams, director of the Citizens Emergency Center in the State Department.
Mr. Hallissey's organization and five other groups have set up a coun-cil that plans to publish a booklet on safety tips for overseas travel. And some of the new security companies are providing seminars and pamphlets on planning safe travel routes, advice on what to wear and how to act when traveling, as well as how to cope if taken hostage or attacked.
Some typical tips, as provided by one of the concerns, Antone Security:
* Select a window seat, which provides protection from hijacker movements in the aisle.
* Avoid the front or rear of the plane because of proximity to the cockpit and rear entrance.
* Reduce signs of affluence or logos that identify American nationality.
* Place corporate and government identificaton cards in checked baggage. Do not carry business cards or wear religiously indicative jewelry.
Antone Security, which is headed by Jerry E. Hoffman, a retired lieutenant colonel in the Air Force and former adviser for the Department of Defense anti-terrorism program, was established last June to advise corporations whose employees travel abroad. But Colonel Hoffman has now expanded his business to include travel agents and tour operators.
''The public has no where to turn,'' he said.
It was Colonel Hoffman who said at least a dozen new security firms had started operating here. Their clients, he says, include travel agents and tour operators, as well as corporations with overseas subsidiaries.
Giuffrida International Associates, set up last fall by Louis O. Giuffrida, a retired major general in the Army and former director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, is an anti-terrorism consultant for Travel Trust International, one of the largest consortiums in the industry.
 
'The Industry Has to Do It'
''The travel industry cannot look to Government to convince the public it is safe to travel,'' General Giuffrida said. ''The industry has to do it.''
Other industries are getting into the anti-terrorism business. Phone Programs, a New York concern that specializes in sports scores, started a ''hot line'' for travelers, with hourly updates on international crises. Access America Inc., a subsidiary of Blue Cross/Blue Shield, has a new plan to insure travelers for financial loss if a trip is interrupted or canceled because of a terrorist incident within 30 days of scheduled arrival.
''Business is joining the Government in the fight against terrorism,'' said Edward S. Shulman, president of Access America. ''No one can control terrorist incidents, but at least we can give Americans financial protection and the freedom of choice to travel.''

Graphic

 
Drawing


End of Document