Terror insurance bill closer;
Senate OKs federal aid for terrorism-related claims
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
June 20, 2002, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 591 words
Byline: Dee DePass; Staff Writer
Body


After months of aggressive lobbying, insurance companies moved one step closer to getting a terrorism insurance law this week as the U.S. Senate passed a bill favoring federal assistance in the event of future terrorist attacks.
     The Senate action came seven months after the House crafted its own bill. A final version could be worked out in a conference committee in the next few weeks.
   "The insurance industry was almost begging Congress to look at the issue of acting as a reinsurer of last resort in the unlikely event of another attack. We certainly had the resources to pay for Sept. 11, but it depleted reserves," said Mark Kulda of the Insurance Federation of Minnesota.
     The St. Paul Cos. and other insurers favor parts of the Senate version, which promises that the federal government will pay terrorism claims in excess of $10 billion and up to $100 billion. The government would pay 90 percent of claims that rise above $10 billion. Insurers would share in the first $10 billion, paying a percentage equal to their national market share.
     In contrast, the House recommended the creation of a loan pool to assist insurers if the industry suffers catastrophic losses from which it cannot recover. The House bill also seeks to protect insurance companies from punitive damages in the event of lawsuits over terrorist-caused losses.
     "The House bill says we are providing the funding so [insurers] can stay afloat. You have to pay us back . . . but you are protected from lawsuits," said Andrew Parmentier, a Friedman Billings Ramsey policy analyst. "The Senate's bill is not a loan guarantee . . . So there is more of a benefit to the industry because the government is giving you money. But you are open to lawsuits."
     Sept. 11 brought the industry an estimated $40 billion in losses, half of which came from property damage. The attacks caused most reinsurers and some primary insurers to back away from covering terrorism altogether.
     The few players left in the field dramatically increased deductibles and premiums. That prompted lawsuits and the creation of the Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism. The group includes the National Football League, Hilton Hotels, Union Pacific Railroad, the Mall of America and other firms and groups. Three months ago, Mall of America co-owner the Simon Group sued GMAC Commercial Mortgage Corp. for forcing it to buy a terrorism policy that Simon deemed too costly. The lawsuit was settled when the Simon group obtained another, less costly policy.
     This month, GMAC threatened to call the mortgages of other properties that failed to obtain terrorism coverage.
     It was not alone.
     "The Bond Market Association wrote to lawmakers stating that $7 billion in commercial mortgage loans were delayed or canceled last quarter because borrowers lacked terrorism coverage," Parmentier said.
     Seven weeks ago, the St. Paul Cos. renewed its own reinsurance treaties with separate policies just for terrorism coverage. Premiums were increased 85 percent while coverage limits were slashed by 56 percent on a per-event basis.
     Gary Carr, spokesman for the American Insurance Association, praised St. Paul's current and former CEOs, Jay Fishman and Douglas Leatherdale, respectively, for pressing senators to act.
     "They were highly involved and played an important role," Carr said. Until a law is enacted, "There are lot of people pressing their noses against the window saying, 'Can I meet with you, Congressman?' "
.
    _ Dee DePass is at ddepass@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: June 20, 2002


End of Document