Terrorism, Homeland Security Focus of New House Panels
Federal Times
January 13, 2003 Monday


Copyright 2003 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: CONGRESSIONAL REPORT; Pg. 14
Length: 291 words
Byline: WILLIAM MATTHEWS And BRIDGETTE BLAIR, Jud McCrehin/Federal Times
Body


Homeland security issues will get focused attention on Capital Hill with the creation of two House panels.
The House Armed Services Committee plans to create a new subcommittee to focus on terrorism and unconventional threats, incoming committee Chairman Duncan Hunter, R-Calif., announced Jan. 9.
The new subcommittee on terrorism, unconventional threats and capabilities will be headed by Rep. Jim Saxton, R-N.J., who is third in seniority on the Armed Services Committee.
Saxton said the new subcommittee would concentrate on better preparing the military, particularly the Special Operations Command, to deal with terrorism and unconventional warfare. He said he has sought to create such a subcommittee since 1994.
In 2001, Saxton served as chairman of the Armed Services Committee's special oversight panel on terrorism. Before that he led an all-Republican House task force on terrorism and unconventional warfare.
During the 107th Congress, Saxton was chairman of the Armed Services military installations and facilities subcommittee.
Meanwhile, House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., selected Rep. Christopher Cox, R-Calif., Jan. 8 to lead the new Select Committee on Homeland Security.
Cox has chaired the House Policy Committee for the last eight years. He also served as vice chairman of the Government Reform Committee and held other leadership positions in the House. In 1998 and 1999, he headed a select House committee that investigated allegations that China had stolen U.S. military technology.
The new committee's mission is to coordinate counterterrorism efforts between the legislative and executive branches, according to Cox's office. The committee, approved Jan. 7, has jurisdiction over issues that relate to the Homeland Security Act.

Notes

2 PHOTOS

Load-Date: June 18, 2004


End of Document