Terrorism Comes To America
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 11, 2001, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: SPECIAL NATION/WORLD,
Length: 418 words
Byline: STEVE OTTO, sotto@tampatrib.com; Columnist Steve Otto can be reached at (813) 259-7809.  
Body


Live in front of millions of Americans watching on television this morning, an apparently coordinated terrorist attack ripped into both World Trade Center Towers in New York City, shutting down airports across the United States.
It was the kind of war long threatened, one without large armies or missiles, one with no visible enemy.
Americans in recent years have come to realize that the threat of terrorist attack is not limited to Third World countries, but can happen even in the greatest city in the Free World.
We are a country not used to military checkpoints. A society that demands access to government buildings, where openness is not just a law but a way of life.
We rage against government interference in the privacy of our lives and demand the right to go when and wherever we please.
Here in Tampa, there has been recent anger because of police surveillance cameras in Ybor City.
Now you wonder how the events of today will change our lives. Will the America of yesterday be the same six weeks or six months from now?
How will access to air travel change? Will our skyscrapers become armed fortresses? Will our lives become less our own?
As millions prepared to go to work and class this morning, television showed us what first appeared to be a tragic crash of an aircraft into one of the World Trade Center towers.
Minutes later, as cameras focused on the smoke pouring out of the damaged building, a 767 American Airlines commercial flight, apparently hijacked while on a flight from Boston to Los Angeles, was seen flying directly into the second tower, causing a horrific explosion.
Here in Florida, where President George Bush was appearing at a Sarasota school, emergency measures went into effect as operations at MacDill Air Force Base and other military facilities moved into alert stages.
Terrorism had come to the United States from outside and the feeling of helplessness was evident, as TV commentators appeared to lose some of their polish and watched with the same unbelieving awe as the rest of us.
Florida, with its ports and gateways to the Caribbean is as vulnerable to terrorism as anywhere. Here in Tampa, home of MacDill Air Force Base, which coordinates military operations in several global hot spots, you could feel the tension.
Hillsborough County emergency operations were standing by, maintaining contact with other law enforcement and emergency facilities but had not activated emergency operations. There was tightened security around all government buildings in the county.

Notes

STEVE OTTO

Load-Date: September 14, 2001


End of Document