Terror Trials and the Rule of Law
The New York Times
October 12, 2010 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30; LETTERS
Length: 697 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Don't Try Terrorists, Lock Them Up,'' by Jack Goldsmith (Op-Ed, Oct. 9):
Had anyone proposed after 9/11 that the perpetrators of that mass murder should not be brought to justice in a court of law, the suggestion would have been greeted with incredulity.
It is a measure of how far our nation has since strayed from its core values that Mr. Goldsmith, a respected national security expert, now proposes just that: that we simply hold terrorism suspects as military prisoners ''until the conflict with Al Qaeda ends'' -- in other words, forever.
Mr. Goldsmith's startling rationale is that criminal trials would be too difficult because their ''demanding standards'' reject evidence derived from ''aggressive interrogations.''
But let's dispense with the euphemisms. The Bush administration's disastrous choice to authorize torture means that federal prosecutors might have to work harder for convictions. But our federal courts' prohibition of evidence that was beaten out of prisoners -- and therefore cannot be trusted -- should be a point of pride, not concern.
Fair and legitimate criminal trials are the only way Americans will see justice done and the world will see that we still uphold the fundamental values we are fighting to defend.
Ben Wizner Litigation Director National Security Project American Civil Liberties Union New York, Oct. 10, 2010
To the Editor:
I can understand the temptation to follow Jack Goldsmith's advice. Terrorism is dangerous and a blight on the world. But his position would be reasonable only if we could be certain that every terrorist we take into custody is guilty, and guilty to the same degree. We cannot.
Do we apply the same punishment -- lock up a man and throw away the key -- for someone who planned and coordinated a heinous act and for someone who was employed as a driver or cook for a terrorist? These and other problems and subtleties can best be sorted out in the adversarial environment of a trial.
Though not perfect, trials provide for fairness and checks and balances. We don't want criminals on our streets, but no one advocates putting them in prison for an indefinite period of time without the benefit of trial, as would seem to be implied by the logical extension of Mr. Goldsmith's argument.
It can be argued that locking up one innocent person with 50 terrorists is worth the peace of mind and safety, but what if it turned out to be a less favorable ratio? Mr. Goldsmith does point out the very difficult problems of trying terrorists, but perhaps the struggle for a just and fair trial for terrorists warrants it.
Bruce S. Neben Portland, Ore., Oct. 9, 2010
To the Editor:
Jack Goldsmith advocates unlimited detention of terrorists ''until the conflict with Al Qaeda ends,'' while at the same time calling it an ''indefinite war.''
The so-called war on terrorism has been going on for well over a decade, and no terrorism expert believes that it will end with a signing ceremony on a battleship. Thus, he is advocating detention for life without any kind of judicial proceeding.
It gets down to the question of who decides someone is a ''terrorist'': a corporal? a captain? a general? or an assistant attorney general? This issue is central to our Constitution and the rule of law.
Gary Hart Kittredge, Colo., Oct. 9, 2010
The writer, a Democratic senator from Colorado from 1975 to 1987, is chairman of the Threat Reduction Advisory Council, Defense Department.
To the Editor:
Even a sympathetic reader of Jack Goldsmith's plea that the government detain indefinitely and not attempt to try ''high-level terrorists'' in court or before a military commission must wonder why he minces his words in describing Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani's treatment by the C.I.A.
The evidence strongly suggests that Mr. Ghailani was tortured, not merely subjected to ''aggressive'' interrogation, as Mr. Goldsmith euphemistically puts it. Whatever else it may accomplish, failure to provide a meaningful public hearing of criminal charges works to keep the most shameful aspects of the war invisible and the agents of abuse unaccountable.
Michael Meltsner Boston, Oct. 9, 2010
The writer is a professor at Northeastern University School of Law.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 12, 2010


End of Document