TERRORISM: FOE OF FREEDOM; ISRAELI PARTY LEADER EXPLAINS OPPOSITION TO PEACE PACT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 10, 1995, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE; Pg. 5D; REVIEW BOOK
Length: 406 words
Byline: Reviewed by Victor T. LeVine
Body


FIGHTING TERRORISM By Benjamin Netanyahu 151 pages, Farrar Strauss Giroux, $ 17
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU is the leader of Likud, Israel's principal opposition party, and editor of an earlier collection, "Terrorism: How the West Can Win." He poses the critical question of how liberal democracies can confront terrorism without also damaging the essential freedoms of their citizens.
He argues the United States, seen in the wake of the Oklahoma City and World Trade Center bombings, has too few effective weapons against terrorism, and he offers various vigorous, pro-active, pre-emptive measures which, he also admits, skirt close to the boundaries of permissible infringement on basic rights.
However, (with the exception of his useful discussion of the dangers of nuclear terrorism), his analysis of international terrorism is not so well nuanced, pinning the blame for Middle Eastern terrorism principally on Arafat and the PLO and its affiliates, and arguing that Palestinian Arab control of Gaza (and by implication, the West Bank) will only guarantee new, safe havens for even more virulent manifestations of Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism. This is straight Likud line, and much of the latter part of the book is simply an exposition of his party's views on these matters.
The book was written and published before Yitzhak Rabin's assassination. Since then, Nedtanyahu's position has become increasingly tenuous, particularly given the recent, demonstrated willingness of Jewish religious extremists - like Yigal Shamir this year and Baruch Goldstein last year - to kill for their beliefs.
Given his and his party's vehement opposition to the Arafat-Rabin agreements, it is not surprising that here Netanyahu turns a conspicuously blind eye to Jewish terrorism, which while less frequent than that committed by Arab extremists, is as much of a grave danger to the peace and security of the democratic society he seeks to preserve.
Though it is true that he joined in condemning Rabin's assassin, it has been difficult for him to deal with charges that he and his party condoned, if not helped to create, the climate of anti-Rabin hatred generated by some Jewish religious true believers in the country. At all events, this short book is well worth reading, and is likely to spark renewed debate about the central dilemma Netanyahu addresses, as well as about the effect of the author's hard-line views should his party attain power again.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo Headshot - Benjamin Netanyahu

Load-Date: December 11, 1995


End of Document