Terrorism groups are generating more than a body count
UNC Mirror: University of Northern Colorado
March 28, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 452 words
Byline: Sarah Methuselah
Body


Following the terror attacks unpredictably striking Brussels airport and transportation system on Tuesday March 22nd; I find the attacks would be easy to deem, by the public, as small victories for one major terror group, ISIS. The men and women associated with ISIS, have gone far and above to attack other areas of the world without hesitation--killing and injuring hundreds in their path.
Through the multiple attacks ISIS has proudly taken credit for, people all over the world have been shaken. The kind and peaceful world much of society liked to believe in was no longer so simple. Instead, the world has now been marked with violence, anger, and bloodshed, as terror groups such as ISIS attempt to translate their message to the public. Simply, the attacks ISIS is taking credit for would be easy to deem as this terror group's minor victories in the ongoing war on terrorism; however, I highly disagree.
Rather than stating ISIS is winning a war on terrorism, I believe the group is winning in a war on striking fear, apprehension and animosity in society.
For example, just look at the basis of some of the presidential campaigns for the candidates in the 2016 election in the United States. Some candidates have built their entire election campaign off the fear, apprehension and animosity terror groups like ISIS have created in society. Rather than creating fundamental and sound plans in order to fight the ongoing war on terrorism, certain campaigns are centered on targeting the instilled fear in society.
Additionally, when the public speaks about areas in the Middle East, there is tonal bias or intolerance of the area and the people residing there. Also, when society perceives people to be from the Middle East, noticeably there is a drastic change in public interactions with the person, whether it be shuffling farther away or avoiding eye contact. Based on the perception terror groups similar to ISIS have created, society has become fearful and hesitant of the people living in the Middle East.
With the present common knowledge of ISIS implanting many of their associates among the refugees and migrants fleeing from Syria, I understand the feeling of alarm many have taken on in European countries, including the mindset of closed borders. However, I feel ISIS is accomplishing the goal of creating and instilling terror in society by creating division among the world.
Personally, I don't feel ISIS is winning in the war on terrorism; rather the terror group is succeeding in creating a worldly environment in which society lives and acts in angst. 
- Sarah Methuselah is a freshman pre-journalism major and also an opinion columnist for The Mirror. She can be reached at editor@uncmirror.com

Load-Date: December 15, 2016


End of Document