TERRORISM MAY BRING NEW LIMITS ON FREEDOM IN U.S.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
April 21, 1995, Friday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1995 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 588 words
Byline: HEATHER DEWAR KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


An English suburbanite stays away from downtown London at Christmastime. Too many gaily wrapped parcels that could be bombs -- it isn't worth the risk.
A Parisian newswoman on the way home from a party encounters a counter-terrorism roadblock and a nervous gendarme with a gun pointed shakily at her abdomen.
A Tel Aviv, Israel, artist has had many close calls with terrorism, beginning with the bombing of his schoolyard when he was 8. He yearns for ''the kind of peaceful freedom that people in other countries have.''
In countries where terrorism is a fact of life, ordinary people limit their lives in ways still unfamiliar to most Americans. They teach bomb avoidance to preschoolers, accede to ''temporary'' laws permitting mass arrests and support politicians who deal with unsavory allies in exchange for peace in the streets.
In the wake of Wednesday's bombing of the federal office building in Oklahoma City, Americans are wrestling with choices that the citizens of some other countries have already made. Whatever the ultimate explanation for the Oklahoma City bombing, experts predict Americans will end up accepting new limits, as matters of individual choice and national policy.
''If there's a report of a bomb on a train, you really don't want to be involved if you can help it,'' said William Gutteridge, director of the London-based Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism. ''So most people in their own self-interest would accept some restrictions on their lives.''
Among the counter-terrorism measures that Gutteridge thinks Americans should accept:
A national identity card.
A law like Britain's that allows police to jail people for up to a week on ''suspicion of terrorism.''
A massive shift in public behavior, involving much higher awareness of potential threats, much greater tolerance for police anti-terrorism activities and dozens of seemingly minor changes in everyday behavior.
The changes are not much greater than those many Americans have already made to defend themselves against crime, ''and the distinction between violent crime and terrorism is growing less and less sharp,'' he said.
There's no foolproof defense against terrorism, warn Gutteridge and other experts. And attacks like Wednesday's, in which the perpetrators give no warning and claim no credit for the deed, are the rarest and the most difficult to defend against.
Until the recent truce with the Irish Republican Army brought calm to Britain, most incidents there involved a warning call to police.
''The goal was not large-scale killing but economic disruption, without the reputation for committing atrocities,'' Gutteridge said. ''In the Oklahoma City case, the likelihood is that it's an organization without specific objectives, but simply with a desire to attack… and that is much more difficult to defend against.''
The average Briton does not realize how common the bombs and threats were, Gutteridge said, because very few were reported in the press. ''The disruption is itself a form of success for the terrorists,'' he said, ''and silence is one of the ways we fight back.''
When Pamela Dahlgren, a Surrey homemaker, takes the Underground to London, she said, ''quite often the tube stations are closed because of a 'security incident,' and we're never quite sure what that means.''
In Israel and England, public places carry signs warning passers-by not to leave packages unattended and to report suspicious packages to police. Those reports, and the resulting evacuations of public places, have become routine.

Graphic

 
Associated Press
A search dog checks cars in line to enter Tinker Air Force Base, Okla. The base was put on alert following the bombing in Oklahoma City.

Load-Date: April 22, 1995


End of Document