Terrorism Suspect Held Without Bail in Colorado
The New York Times
September 22, 2009 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 952 words
Byline: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM and DAN FROSCH
Body


The Colorado man who prosecutors say received explosives training in Pakistan last year and drove to New York 12 days ago with bomb-making instructions on his laptop appeared in a Denver federal court on Monday and was ordered held without bail.
  The man, Najibullah Zazi, who was born in Afghanistan, raised in Pakistan and New York and moved to Denver early this year, looked wide-eyed and younger than his 24 years when he walked into Federal District Court, his hands cuffed in front of him.
  Mr. Zazi, who is at the center of what authorities have described as a widening investigation into a possible Qaeda bomb plot that stretched from Pakistan to Denver and New York, sat with his father, Mohammed Wali Zazi, 53, at the hearing before Magistrate Judge Craig B. Shaffer.
  The two men and a 37-year-old imam from Queens were arrested over the weekend on charges that they lied to federal authorities during a terrorism investigation. The young man and his father were arrested at their home in Colorado, the imam in Queens. 
  The charges stem from a long-running terrorism investigation that focused in some measure on Mr. Zazi, a Denver airport shuttle bus driver. Counterterrorism officials have said they were deeply concerned because of Mr. Zazi's explosives training and because his legal resident status and eight years in the United States enabled him to operate while attracting little attention.
  On Monday afternoon, the imam, Ahmad Wais Afzali, appeared in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, about an hour before the hearing in Denver. A slight man with a long beard, Mr. Afzali wore a flowing tan tunic and matching pants, and held his hands clasped behind his back. 
  He was held pending a bail hearing on Thursday. He waved to his wife, father and other relatives and friends as he entered and left the courtroom. One man blew him a kiss.
  Mr. Afzali, who has provided the New York police with information in the past, is accused of warning Mr. Zazi in New York that he was the target of investigators, an accusation Mr. Afzali's lawyer has denied.
  At the Denver proceeding, Judge Shaffer, in an arrangement approved by the prosecutor, Tim Neff, ordered the elder Mr. Zazi released on $50,000 bond, with home confinement. He will be held until monitoring equipment is installed. A bail hearing for his son, whom prosecutors have indicated they will seek to detain, is set for Thursday.
  A portly man, dressed in black sweat pants and a white T-shirt tucked in at the waist, he appeared weary and bewildered. A senior public defender, Warren Williamson, said that his office would represent the man and requested a Pashtun interpreter, saying his client's grasp of English was insufficient to understand what was going on.
  The charges of making false statements came days after the investigation was short-circuited by what officials said was Mr. Afzali's warning to the younger Mr. Zazi. Several law enforcement and counterterrorism officials said the disclosure of their investigation left them with few concrete details about any possible plot, and court papers indicate that the inquiry was focused on ''several individuals in the United States, Pakistan and elsewhere.'' 
  The apparent blind spots about the plot have left many officials concerned about what they do not know. As a result, with President Obama and other world leaders scheduled to attend the United NationsGeneral Assembly this week in New York, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the New York police have been working to identify Mr. Zazi's associates.
  Federal authorities on Friday warned security agencies around the country about attacks on mass transit. The alert followed one issued last week that warned about improvised explosives made with hydrogen peroxide, which federal authorities believed may have been part of the plot linked to Mr. Zazi.
  In interviews with reporters and through his lawyer, Arthur Folsom, Mr. Zazi denied in the days before his arrest any ties to Al Qaeda, involvement in a plot or wrongdoing of any kind. Mr. Folsom said little in court, and when mobbed by reporters afterward said he would make no comment.
  The Brooklyn prosecutors, Jeffrey Knox and Berit Berger, and Mr. Neff in Denver said they would use evidence obtained under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which allows electronic surveillance and covert searches in counterterrorism cases without evidence that a crime has been committed. The statute requires that the government show probable cause that the target is an agent of a foreign power or a terrorist group.
  In Brooklyn, Mr. Afzali's lawyer, the outspoken Ronald L. Kuby, who is a co-host of a radio show with Curtis Sliwa and was long known as the ponytailed junior partner of William M. Kunstler, the late civil liberties lawyer, took an approach markedly different from that of Mr. Folsom in Denver.
  He asked Magistrate Judge Cheryl L. Pollak to order the government to produce for his client's bail hearing a police detective who he said had long dealt with Mr. Afzali. Mr. Kuby said he wanted the detective to testify about Mr. Afzali's long-running assistance to the police.
  Outside the courthouse after the hearing, Mr. Kuby derided the F.B.I., saying his client never made the false statements attributed to him in court papers and thereby suggesting that the agents who interviewed Mr. Afzali had lied.
  Mr. Kuby also accused the F.B.I. of blaming his client for disclosing the investigation into Mr. Zazi when, as he put it, ''it was the F.B.I. itself, through its own conduct, that tipped off Najibullah Zazi that he was under investigation.''
  Mr. Kuby offered no evidence to support his allegation, and the F.B.I. declined to comment.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Najibullah Zazi in custody on Saturday. He is accused of lying to officials in a terrorism inquiry.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS SCHNEIDER/DENVER POST, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)                                       

Load-Date: September 22, 2009


End of Document