TERRORISM SEEMS A "WILD CARD" ;
 TREASURY OFFICIAL HINTS AT NEW PLAN TO FIGHT MONEY LAUNDERING
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 23, 2002 Thursday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C12
Length: 392 words
Byline: The Associated Press Bloomberg News Contributed To This Report.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


America's recovery from recession is gaining strength by the day, but the threat of another terrorist attack remains the big "economic wild card," a top Treasury official said Wednesday.
"We do believe the economy is strong and growing stronger," said Ken Dam, deputy Treasury secretary. Factories are boosting production, consumers are continuing to spend money and inflation is tame, he noted.
"Terrorism, however, remains an economic wild card," Dam said in remarks to the World Economic Forum at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "Unfortunately, we are almost certain to be attacked again."
Dam's remarks come after a string of recent warning by top officials from George W. Bush's administration.
A key component of Bush's war on terrorism is separating terrorists from their money. The effort is being overseen by the Treasury Department, which has ordered U.S. banks to freeze financial assets belonging to people, groups and businesses that the government believes support terrorist activities.
More than $115 million linked to terrorists has been blocked worldwide since the attacks Sept. 11, an amount that Dam recently called disappointing.
In a related matter, Dam said the Treasury Department will release a revamped strategy to fight money laundering in about a month. The report might address the problem of laundering dirty money through the sale of counterfeit merchandise, he said.
Use of contract workers grows after 16-month lull
Companies that supply contract workers added 136,000 jobs from February through April after 16 months of declines, Labor Department statistics show.
The economy expanded in the first quarter at the fastest pace in two years. As a result, health-care providers, real estate companies and small manufacturers have dipped into the pool of contract workers, a harbinger of permanent hiring to come.
That's good news for unemployed workers. The jobless rate rose last month to 6 percent, the highest in 7 1/2 years, as people entered the work force faster than companies created jobs.
The number of U.S. employers planning to add workers in the third quarter rose to the highest level in a year, according to Manpower Inc., the second-biggest supplier of temporary workers. Manpower's survey of 16,000 companies showed that 27 percent expect to increase payrolls, up from 21 percent that planned to hire in the second quarter.

Notes

THE ECONOMY: A look at major national and local companies issuing quarterly results as well as the overall environment in which they do business.

Load-Date: May 23, 2002


End of Document