Terrorism pool an idea worth a try
Business Insurance
August 8, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8
Length: 383 words
Body


Key members of congress have said they want to work on the problem of terrorism insurance during their August recess, and we certainly agree that would be time well spent.
In fact, doing so has more than a little urgency-the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act's current federal terrorism insurance backstop expires Dec. 31, and the Bush administration has already said it doesn't want the program extended in its current form. Unfortunately, there's nothing in place to provide any sort of backstop, and with Congress slated to adjourn in early October for the rest of 2005, having something in place quickly becomes imperative to avoid market dislocations.
But even if Congress comes up with a short-term solution, the question of how to deal with providing terrorism coverage on a long-term basis remains unanswered. One possible answer, outlined by Lawrence Mirel, the District of Columbia's insurance commissioner, at a congressional hearing late last month, deserves serious attention.
Mr. Mirel advocates creating a privately funded, government-backed pool to provide capacity for terrorism insurance. As the pool grew, the federal government's exposure would be reduced correspondingly-thereby answering TRIA critics who have complained that the current backstop shifts too much risk to taxpayers.
Mr. Mirel suggested that Congress approve the creation of such a pool and the government set rules and regulations for the pool's operation, and then let the insurance industry put it together.
Mr. Mirel pointed out that such public/private approaches to insuring the uninsurable risk presented by terrorism have worked elsewhere. There would, of course, be some unique challenges to adopting such a course in the United States. Not least would be how a federally chartered insurance entity would be treated under a state-based system of insurance regulation. There's also the question of how the tax system would treat interest earned on the pool's holdings as it built up capacity.
Those are questions for lawmakers to ponder. While we're not ready to take the plunge of endorsing a pool as the only long-term solution to the problem of assuring adequate affordable terrorism insurance, we do believe nothing can be lost-and possibly much gained-by testing the political waters regarding its viability now.

Graphic

 
Art Caption: Countrywide
Art Credit: Schillerstrom

Load-Date: August 12, 2005


End of Document