Terrorism fears remain despite end of Gulf War
Business Insurance
March 11, 1991


Copyright 1991 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: WAR IN THE GULF; Pg. 3
Length: 1907 words
Byline: By MICHAEL SCHACHNER and SARA J. HARTY, Associate Editor Meg Fletcher in Chicago also contributed to this story.
Body


The cease-fire in the Persian Gulf should not signal the end of heightened risk management measures, including restrictions on international travel, experts warn.
Terrorism against U.S. concerns worldwide still is very much a possibility, say risk management and security consultants.
Because of the high threat of terrorism, the U.S. State Department has not revoked the travel advisories it issued at the outbreak of the war (BI, Jan. 21).  Travel warnings are still in effect for much of the Middle East, North Africa and Pakistan, among other places.
Most companies say employees are still not free to travel at will.  But many add that tight restrictions are being loosened.
Airports, though, report that they are maintaining most of the beefed-up security measures they implemented as war loomed.
"The war may be over for the soldiers, but for innocent people it's by no means over," according to Susan Brown, a senior analyst with International Risk Forecast, a division of Wackenhut Corp., a Coral Gables, Fla.-based security firm.
Ms. Brown said companies should take no comfort from the fact that there had been no largescale terrorist acts on American interests either a home or abroad as of late last week.
A big terrorist act takes months to plan and pull off, so we're advising businesses to keep up security," she said.  Her firm recommends limiting travel to the Middle East and Europe to what is necessary.
In particular, Ms. Brown raised concerns about Palestinian-backed terrorism.
"The crushing defeat of Saddam (Hussein) will only inflame Palestinian frustration.  They just can't seem to pick a winner.  I think that we can expect some sort of terrorist response from them," Ms. Brown said.
"We're still telling our clients to make decisions on international travel based on absolute necessity," said Herb Clough, executive vp of Paul Chamberlain International, a security firm in Beverly Hills, Calif.
"In the past when Arabs have been humiliated, it has resulted in terrorism.  I anticipate severe crosscurrents and eddies as a result of the tidal wave of military success by the Allies," said Mr. Clough.
"There's no question that the threat remains, even though the motives may have changed," said Frank Johns, senior analyst with Business Risks International Inc. in Arlington, Va.
Iraqi sympathizers are no longer seen as the primary threat.  Groups with different agendas may attempt to launch terrorist attacks in hopes that security measures may have been relaxed following the cease-fire, according to Mr. Johns.
"The Middle East was not a place you wanted to go to during the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait.  But now, a lot more Americans will be going there as part of the reconstruction process.  Thus, there'll be a lot more targets, and that's a problem," he said.
Mr. Johns emphasized that travelers to war-ravaged Kuwait and other Middle East nations should exercise "extreme caution." He advises remaining constantly alert and taking direct flights to minimize the possibility of security breakdowns.
Other terrorism experts are more optimistic.  They emphasize that the threat from Iraqi-sponsored terrorist groups as well as Iraqi sympathizers may have been reduced with the overwhelming defeat of Saddam Hussein's army.
"I think we are seeing more and more Iraqi acceptance of the coalition's peace terms and it seems as though they wouldn't want to do anything to jeopardize the peace," said Philip Huntley, vp of Argen Inc. of New York, an anti-terrorism consultant.
Mr. Huntley said Americans probably can resume all travel but should keep a low profile and pick airlines known for security.
Blanket prohibitions on air travel were never really necessary, he added.
The Ackerman Group Inc. in Miami also never advised clients to completely eliminate air travel.  Instead, it recommended traveling to certain Middle Eastern nations only when absolutely necessary.
However, E. C. Ackerman, the consulting firm's managing director, acknowledged: "We're concerned about a possible vengeance campaign from the Palestinians."
Many U.S. companies are not abandoning travel restrictions, though some are relaxing them.
Indeed, travel agencies report increased domestic and international airline bookings since the cease-fire.
At the London office of Corporate Travel Consultant Travel Agency in Oakbrook Terrace, Ill., international travel, excluding the Middle East, dropped about 40% beginning in January, but is quickly recovering, said Joel Timmel, executive vp.
Domestic business travel began to increase about two weeks ago, said Roger Bowman, executive vp of Richfield, Minn.-based Corporate Travel Twin Cities Inc.
However, he hasn't noted any increase in international travel.
Corporate Travel normally handles a fair amount of travel to the Middle East, all of which still is on hold, Mr. Bowman said.
Trans World Airlines Inc. of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and Pan American World Airways Inc. of New York report increased domestic and international bookings since the cease-fire.
The two airlines are reviewing their suspension of service to cities in the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean countries.
TWA curtailed service in mid-January to Tel Aviv, Israel; Cairo, Egypt; Istanbul, Turkey; and Athens, Greece, a spokesmlan said.
Pan Am suspended service to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and Tel Aviv in early January and service to Athens, Istanbul and Ankara, Turkey, shortly before the Allied ground offensive last month.
The airline hopes to decide by the end of this week whether to resume service to those cities.
Some companies are relaxing their travel restrictions more than others.
Gillette Co. of Boston is still banning travel to the Middle East.
But travel in and around Europe and between Europe and North America is again allowed, if it is essential, said William L. Mather, director of risk management.
New levels of administrative approval have been set up for such travel and Gillette employees are told to use only airlines not affiliated with any of the coalition countries.
However, the travel policy, which took effect in late January, is being reviewed, Mr. Mather said.
No changes were reported in the travel policy that Holiday Inns Inc. set in January.  Domestic travel remains unrestricted, but "international travel is prohibited unless critical," said Anthony Rodolakis, vp of risk management and insurance at the Memphis, Tenn.-based company.
Those restrictions will remain until management feels the threat of terrorism has reduced, Mr. Rodolakis said.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. has relaxed its travel restrictions, said a spokesman at its New York headquarters.
AT&T banned international travel on Jan. 16, when the air war began, and discouraged domestic travel when the ground war began last month.
Under the relaxed policy, approval by a high-level executive is necessary only for employee travel to the Middle East.
While the company still is asking employees to re-evaluate all domestic and foreign travel plans, this to some extent is part of a travel cost-containment program begun in 1987, the company spokesman said.
Frank B. Hall & Co. of New York has not officially changed its travel restrictions since war broke out in the Persian Gulf, said Thomas V. Hallett, executive vp.
Officially, all travel to the Middle East, between Europe and North America and within Europe has been deferred unless there is a compelling business reason for the trips.
For example, a management awards meeting in April was moved to Hawaii from Italy for safety purposes.
Mr. Hallett concedes that administration of the policy has been somewhat relaxed recently.
Other employers are allowing greater travel.
Nearly all travel restrictions imposed by Hartford Group Inc. of Hartford, Conn., which were issued by parent ITT Corp. before the war broke out, have been lifted.  Company policy stated international travel should be undertaken only if necessary.
However, a Feb. 12 addition to the policy still stands: No more than four employees can be on the same commercial flight, a spokesman said.
At American International Underwriters, a unit of New York-based American International Group Inc., employees are again traveling relatively freely, though no official policy has replaced the international travel ban implemented in January, said Brian Street, manager of city production in London.
Employees are traveling with "due care," Mr. Street said.
Just before war broke out, Boehringer Ingelheim Corp., a Ridgefield, Conn.-based pharmaceutical manufacturer, prohibited international travel except for emergency business.
Such travel was at the discretion of executives, said Douglas S. Williams, associate director of corporate insurance for Boehringer Ingelheim.
Travel to Western Europe has resumed since the cease-fire.  But the continued threat of terrorism has prompted the pharmaceutical company to prepare safety tips for employees.
The tips, which are scheduled to appear in the company newsletter, include:
* Pick flights carefully.  Select non-stop flights when possible and avoid airlines based in coalition countries.
* Never leave luggage unattended.
* Try to blend in with the population of the destination country.  Do not dally in bars that Westerners frequent, and avoid wearing cowboy boots and flashy jewelry.
Company restrictions are being reduced, but security at airports, train and bus stations and ports is not.
U.S. airport and transit authorities responsible for safety, which significantly beefed up security at the onset of the Persian Gulf crisis, are leaving all security measures in place for the foreseeable future, officials report.
For example, the Federal Aviation Administration is not lifting its Jan. 17 orders prohibiting curbside baggage check-ins at airports and barring people without tickets from passing airport security checkpoints.
In addition, many U.S. airports continue to instruct security personnel to quickly pick up all unattended vehicles in front of terminal buildings.
The Washington Airport Authority in Washington, D.C., which oversees both Washington National Airport and Washington-Dulles International Airport, began taking additional security measures last fall.  More steps were added in January.
Bomb-sniffing dogs continue to roam the airport and trash cans that were removed from in front of the terminals have not been replaced, said an airport authority spokesman.
"We're not going to relax now, and neither are the rest of the airports around the country," he asserted.  "I don't foresee any changes in security in the near future."
At the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, the police force has been instructed to continue taking all precautions against terrorism, a spokesman said.
"With or without the war, there is always the threat of terrorism," he said.
"You're always guarding against the obvious.  We move more than half a million people every day, so we're very careful.  If there's a package left around, it's removed and examined immediately," he said.
A spokeswoman for the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority also said security is not being relaxed.
"We have always advised employees to be vigilant and report anything unusual.  Since the war, we have picked up a number of lost briefcases and packages, but none have contained bombs," she said.
The Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority in Boston also increased security with the outbreak of the war.  "Unresolved issues in the Middle East still exist, so we're not relaxing," a spokesman said.


End of Document