Terrorism spun to absolve Bush policy
University Wire
September 23, 2004 Thursday


Copyright 2004 Old Gold and Black via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 526 words
Byline: By Kevin Jones, Old Gold and Black; SOURCE: Wake Forest U.
Dateline: WINSTON-SALEM, N.C. 
Body


In spite of the controversy surrounding Dick Cheney's recent assertion that the United States would be in danger of another major terrorist attack if John Kerry wins, House Speaker Dennis Hastert said this weekend that he believed that al Qaeda "would like to influence this election" under the supposition that a Kerry presidency would facilitate the terrorists' objective.
In addition to representing the politicization of national security and fear-mongering at its worst, Hastert's comments are just plain wrong. Even fellow republicans, like Nebraska Sen. Chuck Hagel, recognize the comments as "silly."
As I wrote in my column last week, there is absolutely no distinction between the national security platforms of George W. Bush and Kerry aside from their positions on the war in Iraq. Cheney, Hastert and company are seeking to terrorize the American public with the notion that if we admit that the war in Iraq was a mistake, the terrorists will win. 
Hastert employed the example of the al Qaeda attack in Madrid and the resulting victory of anti-war socialist Zapatero in the Spanish presidential election to support his argument.  The first fallacy of this argument is that Kerry is not advocating the pull out of American troops from Iraq, so unlike in Spain, al Qaeda cannot expect an immediate political victory if Kerry is elected.
The more important fallacy of the argument, however, is evident when we consider al Qaeda's true motivation. Al Qaeda does not, as President Bush has frequently asserted, hate us because of our freedoms. They hate us because American global hegemony threatens the political sovereignty of Muslims and prevents the implementation of Islamic law throughout the Middle East. 
When the al Qaeda leadership speaks of their goals, they speak of the "near enemy," secular Muslim leaders, like Saddam Hussein, and the "far enemy," the U.S. and Israel. The elimination of Hussein's secular Baath regime satisfied the interests of both the U.S. and al Qaeda.  Now that the "near enemy" in Iraq has been eliminated, al Qaeda's objective there is to prevent the United States from retaining either direct or indirect control of Iraq by installing a puppet regime. 
This is where Hastert's argument stops: if al Qaeda wants to us "lose" in Iraq and Kerry recognizes (rationally) that we are losing, the terrorists must support Kerry.  Unfortunately for us, al Qaeda has a much simpler analysis of the war in Iraq: They win whether or not we leave.  The burgeoning guerilla war in Iraq is an equally desirable outcome for al Qaeda as a complete American departure.
Al Qaeda's global objectives certainly stretch beyond Iraq, and as was illustrated in the Osama Bin Laden's guerilla war against the Soviets in Afghanistan, engaging an imperial power in this sort of conflict builds broad public support. The sharp decline in positive perceptions of the U.S. within the Middle East represents the extent to which al Qaeda has been aided by the war in Iraq. Bush's employment of the pre-emptive doctrine in Iraq has actually been a significant victory for the terrorists, one way or the other.
(C) 2003 Old Gold and Black via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 23, 2004


End of Document