Terrorism bill passes Senate Measure would establish insurance to ease losses
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
June 19, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P4D
Length: 725 words
Byline: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


WASHINGTON - The Senate has approved a bill to help allay the costs of terrorism insurance, setting up a showdown with the House over how to help businesses survive possible future disasters. President Bush warned that he wanted the final measure to include protections against "predatory lawsuits."
The Democratic-controlled Senate approved the bill Tuesday by a vote of 84-14, sending it to a House-Senate conference committee and beginning a new fight over a final version to send to the president.
The House last year approved its own version of the bill, and the two sides will now get together and try to hammer out their differences.
Democrats say there is room for compromise with House Republicans. "The president wants this bill, the House wants this bill, we want this bill," said Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev.
Bush showed his desire for the bill earlier Tuesday, making calls to some senators to help twist arms on a vote to speed the bill's passage. After the vote, Bush applauded Senate passage.
After Sept. 11, many insurers limited or dropped coverage for casualty and property losses to terrorism because insurance companies faced record payouts of $ 30 billion to $ 50 billion.
In West Virginia, 75 to 80 commercial property insurers have asked the state to allow them to exclude terrorism from their policies' coverage, said Insurance Commissioner Jane Cline.
Cline said she has been granting the exclusions.
"If we don't then the premium that would be charged for particular properties could be cost prohibitive because how would you choose a premium for terrorism," she said. 
Also, state officials are pondering whether to obtain terrorism coverage for the state Capitol. The state's insurance policies are up for renewal for July 1.
Jack Canfield, a spokesman for Gov. Bob Wise, said West Virginia has been looking to the National Governors Association for guidance on how to deal with the issue.
The state also must decide whether to obtain terrorism insurance for roads and bridges, many of which have no coverage of any kind, including the New River Gorge Bridge, said Division of Highways spokeswoman Carol Melling.
The president of the American Insurance Association praised the U.S. Senate's action, saying it "sends a strong signal to businesses of all sizes, in all economic sectors, and in every state that Congress will secure the American economy by putting a terrorism reinsurance backstop in place."
The House has passed legislation under which the government would help insurers continue to offer terror insurance by agreeing to pick up, for at least one year, 90 percent of losses in any major attack.
Under the Senate bill, the insurance industry would have to pay $ 10 billion of insurance costs for terror attacks for two years. Beyond that level, the government would cover 90 percent with the insurance industry paying the remaining 10 percent.
There would be a $ 100 billion cap; the secretary would have to go to Congress if costs exceeded that.
The Treasury secretary could extend the program for a third year, in which case the industry would be responsible for the first $ 20 billion in costs.
The bill also would help some individual companies well before the $ 10 billion threshold kicks in, said Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas.
Republicans also want to shield companies from punitive damages and say Bush probably would veto the bill if it reached his desk without the protection.
"The president has said he will not sign a bill that will make victims of terrorists subject to attacks by plaintiff attorneys and subject to punitive damages," Gramm said.
The White House statement said Bush would sign "responsible terrorism insurance legislation."
"The final terrorism insurance package must include reasonable litigation procedures so that Americans who are victimized by terrorism do not also fall victim to predatory lawsuits and punitive damages," Bush said.
The Senate earlier Tuesday voted 65-31 to limit debate on the terrorism insurance bill, a maneuver that forbids introduction of unrelated amendments and forces a quick vote.
That move knocked out an amendment filed by Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., that would have banned issuing patents for cloning technology. The amendment was not allowed because it was unrelated to the terrorism bill, and its approval would have dimmed the legislation's chances of passing, Democrats said.

Load-Date: June 20, 2002


End of Document