Terrorism expert in Texas A&M speech: United Nations outdated
University Wire
March 3, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 507 words
Byline: By Matthew Watkins, The Battalion; SOURCE: Texas A&M
Dateline: COLLEGE STATION, Texas 
Body


The United States' power is weakening and its opportunities are slipping away, international terrorism expert Ray Raymond told students Thursday morning at the Student Conference on National Affairs.
"The U.S. finds itself in a complex and dangerous world of disorder," Raymond said. "There are no easy answers and no swift solutions."
Raymond was the opening speaker for the conference, which began Thursday. He passionately addressed many issues facing the United States, including the national deficit, the loss of leadership in science and engineering and an irretrievably broken United Nations.
"We are at war with shadowy, elusive jihadists," Raymond said. "This is not America's war; it is every civilized nation's war. To protect us we need an international forum to protect and provide legitimacy."
Raymond said the United States could not look to the United Nations to be such a forum, calling its methods corrupt and outdated by citing the Iraqi Oil-for-Food Program and other incidents of corruption.
He called for the United States to take initiative to create its own new and independent organization that is able to legitimately threaten the use of force in the war against terrorism.
Kelli Use, the vice chair of SCONA who introduced Raymond, said he was a top adviser to British Prime Minister Tony Blair. He has also taught politics and international relations at several northeastern universities and was the first non-American civilian appointed to the U.S Military Academy at West Point.
"Dr. Raymond has devoted almost all of his career to Anglo-American relations," Use said.
Dan Severn, a junior history major, asked Raymond whether he believed the United States should emulate 18th century British foreign policy.
Raymond responded saying the United States should do so by aggressively confronting foreign disputes and focusing on getting the job done, not on exit strategies.
Severn agreed and said it was the duty of the U.S. to ensure world order whether they wanted it or not.
"The problem the U.S. faces is that we have allowed the world to descend into anarchy," Severn said.
Another problem facing the United States, Raymond said, is its growing national debt.
"Thirty years from now we will face a fiscal tsunami," he said.
Raymond said the current deficit forces the United States to borrow $4 billion each day from overseas. This reliance on foreign capital weakens the federal government's capacity to maintain global leadership, invest in cutting edge science and technology and protect the country from unexpected economic crises, he said.
Fixing these problems will be difficult and the United States must begin now, Raymond said. He recommended changing the way Social Security benefits are calculated, implementing a mandatory savings plan that would require citizens to save three percent of their annual salaries, fix Medicare and Medicaid, and bring back the Budget Enforcement Act, which limits deficit spending.
"That's what I call the grownups' approach to the budget," Raymond said.
(C) 2006 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 3, 2006


End of Document