TERROR IN MOROCCO; TRAVELERS MUST BE VIGILANT WHEREVER THEY GO
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
January 5, 2019 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. WEB
Length: 300 words
Body


For most of the year, the U.S. State Department's travel advisory for Morocco said American visitors should "exercise normal precautions"- the same guidance given for visiting Canada.
But the murder of two women backpacking in the Atlas Mountains before Christmas is a reminder of the long struggle against terrorism in Morocco. In the wake of those deaths, the U.S. now is recommending U.S. visitors"exercise increased caution."
The U.S. media assiduously cover threats to the homeland, acts of terror in Western Europe and the military's fight against terrorists in places such as Afghanistan and Syria.Less attention is given to terror in Africa. But it's real.
Remember the 1998 bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenza and Tanzania that killed 224? What about the suicide bombings in the fabled Moroccan city of Casablanca that killed 33 in 2003 and and the 2011 cafe bombing in Marrakesh, Morocco, that killed 17?
Morocco has detained about 20 suspects in the deaths of 28-year-old Maren Ueland, a Norwegian, and 24-year-old Louisa Vesterager Jespersen, a Dane. At least four of the suspects appeared in a video pledging allegiance to the so-called Islamic State.
To his credit, Morocco's King Mohammed VI has worked to contain extremism, partly by giving his subjects plenty of outlets for religious sentiment and partly, as one expert told the Irish Times last year, by"advancing a version of Moroccan royal Islam that has the monarch at the helm."
The government insists that the women's deaths are not the harbinger of a larger problem. But it also said it had disrupted several other terrorist cells in 2018, and some Moroccan extremists have emigrated to commit violence elsewhere. American travelers should remember that terrorism can occur anywhere, at any time, and maintain constant vigilance.

Load-Date: January 30, 2019


End of Document