TERROR IN THE HEARTLAND;
Security for Americans may limit freedoms, experts say;
KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
April 20, 1995, Thursday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL NEWS,
Length: 657 words
Body


Drive into London's financial district these days and police will photograph your license plate and face before letting you pass. Stop at an outdoor cafe on Jerusalem's Jaffa Road and you can find yourself being sniffed by trained dogs on patrol.
In the wake of Wednesday's bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City, terrorism experts warned that Americans - born to celebrate life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness - may be forced to accept real limitations in their daily lives to prevent further terrorist attacks.
Experts said new counter measures could range from car searches in underground garages to concrete barriers to bomb-sniffing dogs in public places to thorough personal searches at government buildings.
Citizens of other nations already have accepted restrictions on their personal freedom as the price they pay for some measure of personal protection. But it isn't clear whether Americans are willing to pay the same price.
"We are a vulnerable society. We are so lax and so hated," said Mike Ackerman, an anti-terrorism expert based in Miami. "But if we get hit enough, then we have to accept some changes."
Ironically, the Oklahoma City attack came after major inroads in combating terrorism.
In 1994, no acts of terrorism by domestic or foreign groups were reported in the United States, and international terrorism was at a 23- year low.
In 1993, when Islamic fundamentalists bombed New York's World Trade Center, President Clinton argued that if terrorists "can get us to change the way we live and what we do" they have won half the battle.
Though metal detectors and closed-circuit cameras were installed in some office buildings, America picked itself up and went about its business.
But a terrorist strike in the American heartland raises new fears that no place - and no one - is safe. How can the pursuit of liberty and the need for security coexist?
Ackerman foresees a world where cars entering underground parking garages are searched for explosives; where parking lots are relocated away from tall buildings; where traffic patterns are regularly diverted to bolster security, and where bridges are made more secure.
"Sure it's a pain in the neck," he said Wednesday. "Anytime you go to war, you lose something about the character of your life. . . . But we are going to have to come to terms with this."
A former CIA counterterrorism officer called Wednesday's blast "a real watershed" for the American psyche.
"There is a threshold of pain that people absorb. Then they say enough is enough," said Stan Bedlington, who left the agency last year. "The question is what will the public accept?
"Maybe the world has reached a new level of terrorism," he added, noting that on the same day as the Oklahoma City bombing, poisonous gas was released in a train station in Yokohama, Japan, and a leading politician in Spain escaped a car-bomb attack.
Americans already have learned to accept some restrictions. Concert- goers routinely are searched before entering arenas or stadiums, and metal detectors are commonplace at airports, political rallies and in some government buildings and courtrooms.
Ackerman said three steps should be taken immediately to increase protection for Americans: better control of U.S. borders, increased spending on intelligence gathering, and consistent security planning.
He and others also cited legislation introduced by Sen. Joseph Biden (D-Del.) as necessary to expand federal powers to combat terrorism. Some security experts say Congress has hampered law enforcement by restricting the intelligence community after abuses in domestic surveillance during the 1960s and '70s.
The Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995 would enable the government to trace funds to and from terrorist-supporting groups, tighten the definition of terrorism, enlarge the powers of U.S. attorneys to combat terrorist groups, and make it illegal to plan or train for terrorism abroad and in the United States.

Load-Date: June 27, 1995


End of Document