Terrorism, Then Cooperation: An Informant's Fate Hangs in the Balance
The New York Times
May 16, 2017 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1390 words
Byline: By ADAM GOLDMAN; Matt Apuzzo contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- No one knew it at the time, but Al Qaeda's ability to strike in the West was severely damaged when a skinny onetime altar boy who grew up on Long Island stumbled into a Pakistani checkpoint in 2008, attacked a police officer and was detained.
Within days, F.B.I. agents had flown to Pakistan and were grilling the young man, Bryant Neal Vinas. He told them that he had consulted for Qaeda leadership on spectacular plans to blow up the Long Island Rail Road. Osama bin Laden wanted to turn him into a recruiting poster. 
  Mr. Vinas kept talking to the F.B.I. agents, and to federal prosecutors back in New York. He talked for the next eight years, taking part in 100 interviews, reviewing 1,000 photographs and assisting in more than 30 law enforcement investigations. Mr. Vinas, who had once volunteered to become a suicide bomber, turned on Al Qaeda with devastating effect.
  The extraordinary assistance from Mr. Vinas, now 34, created a dilemma for the federal judge deciding his fate last week. The judge had to decide how to punish a criminal who had demonstrated such a capacity for evil but who had also helped deliver a crushing blow to the terrorists responsible for the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
  ''The juxtaposition of Mr. Vinas's atrocious crimes and his remarkable postarrest cooperation is what makes the task of sentencing Mr. Vinas so difficult,'' the judge, Nicholas G. Garaufis, said during sentencing.
  For prosecutors, an overly harsh sentence would signal to other potential cooperators that agreeing to talk had no upside. Lawyers for Mr. Vinas, who faced a life sentence for pleading guilty to conspiring to murder United States nationals, providing material support to Al Qaeda and receiving military training from the group, argued that the nearly eight years he had spent locked up was sufficient.
  ''The seriousness of the offense is among the most serious you can imagine,'' said David Bitkower, a former Justice Department national security official and prosecutor in Brooklyn, who was not directly involved in Mr. Vinas's case. ''On the other hand, the value of the cooperation is among the most valuable you can imagine.''
  He added, ''How do you balance one off-the-chart factor against another?''
  Mr. Vinas is a remnant of an era in the war on terrorism when Al Qaeda was the main threat and Americans under the spell of Bin Laden traveled to Pakistan to swear loyalty to him.
  Syria was not yet at war, and the Islamic State did not exist. Neither did social media outlets like Twitter, nor a bevy of easy-to-use encrypted chat services that terrorists have exploited in recent years to sway potential sympathizers.
  ''Back then, A.Q. was the only game in town,'' said Jeffrey Ringel, a former F.B.I. agent with extensive counterterrorism experience. ''It was a different model.''
  Mr. Vinas was an early harbinger of the stream of Westerners attracted to jihadist movements. He watched videos of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a notorious Qaeda operative with a thirst for beheading people, who pioneered the use of gruesome videos to draw recruits like Mr. Vinas.
  ''We didn't have all these 18-year-olds going on Facebook and getting radicalized,'' said Don Borelli, a former F.B.I. supervisor who oversaw Mr. Vinas's case. ''He was one of the first guys we saw who did that.''
  Mr. Vinas traveled an unremarkable path to notoriety.
  He was born in Queens in 1982 and raised in Medford, Long Island, where he attended Catholic church regularly. His parents divorced, and he lived with his mother after that. According to court documents, he was abused as a child, though at whose hands is unclear.
  He enlisted in the Army as a petroleum supply specialist six months after Sept. 11, but washed out weeks later. He was given a Chapter 11 discharge -- a failure to adapt to the military. His superiors were also concerned that he was suicidal.
  By then 19, Mr. Vinas jumped from job to job, working at a carwash, a greenhouse and trucking company. Rudderless, he found Islam in 2004 through a friend, converting at a Queens mosque that other extremists had embraced.
  As the United States invasion of Afghanistan dragged on and Iraq plunged into a catastrophic civil war, Mr. Vinas, prosecutors say, fell under the sway of Mr. Zarqawi's videos and other propaganda. With little else to lose, he set off for Pakistan.
  In September 2007, he flew to Lahore, a city near the Indian border known as a center of arts and literature, figuring he would arouse less suspicion there than in a city, like Peshawar, that was swarming with militants.
  Mr. Vinas eventually traveled to North Waziristan, a remote region that was home to many militants, and wound up in a four-month Qaeda boot camp. There, he learned to handle small arms and explosives and make suicide vests.
  After training, he was issued an AK-47 assault rifle by Al Qaeda, and he played minor roles in a pair of unsuccessful attacks on an American military base in Afghanistan.
  But Mr. Vinas had more to offer Al Qaeda than being a low-level fighter: He had ideas. According to court documents, he considered establishing a Qaeda training camp in Peru and was involved in creating Qaeda communication systems. One of the few in the terrorist group who knew New York, Mr. Vinas proposed targeting the Long Island Rail Road -- traveled by hundreds of thousands of commuters each day -- and a Walmart.
  Mr. Vinas acquired a nickname among his fellow fighters. They called him Bashir al-Ameriki, ''the American who brings good news.''
  In October 2008, Mr. Vinas headed for Peshawar in search of a wife. He never found one. At a checkpoint, he was pulled off a bus and questioned. Trying to escape, he attempted to stab a police officer. He was arrested and turned over to the American authorities. The F.B.I. took custody of Mr. Vinas and flew him back to New York.
  He started to cooperate immediately. He disclosed the plot against the Long Island Rail Road; people living in New York who he thought would be of interest to the F.B.I.; how to join Al Qaeda; and its structure, communications systems, planning, training and tactics.
  Al Qaeda felt the effects of his decision almost as quickly, as C.I.A.-operated drones obliterated the places where he had trained and lived.
  ''He was a big deal,'' Mr. Borelli said. ''He allowed the government to gain critical insights into Al Qaeda. Having that insight allowed the U.S. government to mount disruption operations.''
  He also helped convict both a senior Qaeda operative and a suspect in another subway bomb plot, Adis Medunjanin, establishing that he met with Al Qaeda's leaders. The cooperation also allowed Brooklyn prosecutors to charge another member of Al Qaeda in a case whose details remain secret.
  ''To say that the defendant provided substantial assistance to the government is an understatement,'' prosecutors wrote in a memorandum in March, calling Vinas the ''single most valuable cooperating witness'' about Qaeda activities spanning his time in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
  Before he was sentenced on Thursday, an emotional Mr. Vinas stood and addressed the court.
  ''I understand that there is no excuse that would justify what I did; I accept full responsibility,'' he said. ''I blame no one but myself.''
  He said he would like to ''turn a bad thing into a good thing'' and become a paid counterterrorism expert. If that didn't work, he'd like a job in construction.
  Judge Garaufis listened to lawyers on both sides and then announced his decision.
  ''I am cautiously optimistic that Mr. Vinas has learned the error of his ways and will never again commit another crime of this nature,'' he said. ''No one, that is, no one, even Mr. Vinas himself, has a crystal ball and can know for certain whether Mr. Vinas will re-offend. However, he is in control of his destiny.''
  He then sentenced Mr. Vinas, giving him just three more months in prison. He'll spend the rest of his life under tight supervision.
  Even agents and prosecutors couldn't have predicted such a light sentence, though his lawyers praised the decision.
  ''He got the sentence he deserved,'' said Steve Zissou, who represented Mr. Vinas. ''He really did become the instrument of Al Qaeda's destruction.''
  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/15/us/politics/service-to-both-al-qaeda-and-us-and-a-fate-hanging-in-the-balance.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Mr. Vinas traveled to the North Waziristan region of Pakistan, where he spent several months at a Qaeda boot camp. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IJAZ MUHAMMAD/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Bryant Neal Vinas       

Load-Date: May 16, 2017


End of Document