TERRORISM GUIDELINES MAKE GRIM LESSON PLAN;
SCHOOLS PONDER ATTACK RESPONSE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
February 16, 2003 Sunday City Edition


Copyright 2003 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. A-7
Length: 845 words
Byline: Gil Klein, Media General News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The principals gathered around a map of Virginia's Fairfax County that James McLain, security chief of the county school system, had mounted on an easel.
Large red circles indicated where chlorine gas for water treatment is stored. Smaller circles showed other chemical-storage sites.
If terrorists blew up one of those chlorine tanks, McLain said, a huge orange cloud of poison gas could engulf nearby schools.
"If we have one of these attacks, the response is going to be massive to your school," McLain told the principals. "It's going to look like a Steven Spielberg movie."
Add terrorist attacks to the problems facing school principals. The government has raised the terror-threat level for the nation, and people are buying out supplies of duct tape and plastic sheeting to protect themselves at home. School officials wonder what they should do.
"Schools are calling and asking what code orange means," said William Modzeleski, director of the Education Department's safe and drug-free schools program. "After 9/11, schools have to plan for all kinds of possibilities. Nobody says they are going to happen, but they are possible."
His department will issue terrorism guidelines this spring that he said will "get schools to expand their thinking," since an attack anywhere in a community affects the schools.
"We need to get schools to understand that they are not just playing the odds about whether this is going to happen to them directly," he said. "What happens outside in their community may have an impact inside their four walls."
Nearly 80 percent of schools nationwide are not prepared for an attack, according to a July 2002 survey, said Curt Lavarello, executive director of the National Association of School Resource Officers.
"They did not have a specific school crisis plan to handle an incident, and training had decreased since 9/11, which was extremely surprising," he said. "Most teachers and staff had not received any kind of terrorism-specific training."
His association is calling for an Education Homeland Security Act that would mandate training for school- based law-enforcement officers, teachers and staff.
With the threat spiking now, some schools are not waiting for federal guidelines.
"We're always on a state of alert," said Jim Kelly, chief of police for Palm Beach County schools in Florida. "We're always suspicious of people coming from the outside. We're always suspicious of strange vehicles or anything else that looks out of place. We are in tight communication with local and state police."
Ted Pearson, security director for the Charlotte-Mecklenburg, N.C., school system, said he has been training teachers and principals to respond to plans that his school system developed with police and the FBI.
"We have tweaked our plans to make them more aggressive," he said. "Our staff and students understand we have something in place should we have a crisis, to minimize casualties and to bring the crisis under control."
School system have to focus on responding to their most likely threats - chemical, biological or nuclear. Fairfax officials organized their plans around the many chemical tanks in the county as well as railroads that carry chemicals.
McLain explained to principals how to shelter students inside a school building during a chemical attack. If a chlorine tank explodes, schools in the affected area would be contacted immediately and told to activate their emergency plan.
"You will not be on your own," McLain told the principals. "We are going to be on the line with you, and we are going to make sure it is done right."
The important thing, he said, is getting students inside within a minute or two, immediately shutting down air-conditioning and heating systems and closing vents and windows. Electricity must be shut off and elevators not used.
That can keep the gas outside until it dissipates. But teachers should be trained to watch for signs of exposure, McLain said. Victims must be separated immediately from the others, and then they should shower.
"Don't think you will be in the cafeteria line waiting to be stripped and showered," he said. "But if a kid is experiencing real problems, you need to get to them first. We're talking 60 to 90 seconds" before the chemical starts to burn the skin.
Fairfax crisis-management workers will be visiting schools to make sure each of the key switches and valves is clearly marked before an emergency strikes, he said.
McLain has been briefing parent groups as well as principals.
"It certainly calmed my fears," said Diane Brody, president of the Fairfax County Council of PTAs and the mother of a high school freshman. "The children are probably better off at school than at home as far as preparedness."
Chantilly High School Principal Tammy Turner said her students are taking the threat in stride.
"The kids are pretty resilient," she said. "Everyone has a cell phone. The kids are telling me when they see someone who doesn't belong here. Unfortunately, these kids have gone through too much with 9/11, the sniper attack and now this. They're saying, 'OK, what next?'"

Load-Date: February 18, 2003


End of Document