TERRORISM, ECONOMY TEST OUR CONFIDENCE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 29, 2002 Tuesday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 2498 words
Body


Larry D. Richardson
Eighteen months ago, before the abrupt downturn in the stock market and the economic recession, Larry D. Richardson was looking at an early retirement -- possibly within 10 years.
Now the A.G. Edwards & Sons vice president and branch manager of the c ompany's office in Grandview Plaza in Florissant is less sure about his future.
"My life is good," he said. "But it has been better."
Like many other investors, Richardson, 50, has taken a hit in the market and he says he is now cautious about investments -- for his clients and for his family.
He says he and his wife would like to buy a new house, but they aren't sure if this is the right time.
Despite his concern over the economy, Richardson says that terrorism should remain the top priority of Bush's administration.
"It's right on our doorstep," he said. "The president and Congress seem to be doing what they can to handle it."
He is encouraging his investors to be "diversified and insulated" in their portfolios.
"In the long term, we're going to be all right," he said.
Amy Zimmerman
When Amy Zimmerman first learned of the terrorist attacks on America, her thoughts turned instantly to the 4-month-old fetus inside her womb.
"I began to wonder, 'What kind of world am I bringing this child into?'" said the 30-year-old media coordinator at St. John's Mercy Medical Center.
Gradually, though, she began to realize, "You can't worry about the what-ifs; you have to enjoy each moment.
"Our nation faces a lot of challenges, but we are facing them and we will pull out of this just fine."
The baby -- her first -- is due Wednesday, just hours after President Bush is scheduled to deliver his first State of the Union address to the nation.
Zimmerman and her husband, Todd, an employee of Wells Fargo Home Mortgage in Clayton, live in the city's Dogtown area. They are happy there, she said, but once their child is old enough to attend school, they likely will leave for the suburbs. They believe strongly in public education, but they don't see the city's public school system improving quickly enough. While the government has to bear some of the burden, Zimmerman says, ultimately good education is the responsibility of local administrators, teachers and especially parents.
The economy is not a significant concern, she says -- at least not to her family. "We will pull out of it," she said.
She admires the job President Bush has been doing, especially dealing with terrorism, and she is hopeful about the future -- for herself, her husband and her new baby.
"I feel the next few years will be a really exciting time."
Tanisha Grant
Tanisha Grant, 25, a St. Louis County police officer, hopes some of the changes she's seen in the country since Sept. 11 stick.
One of the biggest changes, she says, has been a new respect and appreciation for police officers and firefighters.
"I was taking a prisoner to jail a while ago, and he said, 'I have a lot more respect for you now.' He was really sincere."
Grant is originally from New York, where her father is a police officer. She said the divisions among many Americans -- along racial, economic and sexual orientation lines, among others -- are one of the country's biggest problems. She's seen those divides dissolve a little since Sept. 11 and hopes that, too, is a longer-term change.
"The biggest problem is we can't relate to one another until something bad happens," she said. "It's funny how you can drop all that hatred when someone is attacking you."
Also, she said, more people are thinking about international politics and the effects our actions have on people in other countries.
Grant, who is single and lives in unincorporated St. Louis County near Florissant, said she felt secure in her job -- "We're always going to need police officers" -- but has curtailed her shopping as the nation's recession seems to grow deeper.
"I'm going through mall withdrawal," she said. "I'm trying to save more, just in case."
She said she had been impressed with the decisions of Bush's administration since the attacks.
She believes we've made careful, calculated moves after first thinking them through.
"I give the United States a lot of credit for that," she said.
Anne Valk
Anne Valk, a history professor at Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville, worries about many of the same things that worry other Americans. But she worries most about the untold stories.
For example, she said she hears a lot about disappearing pensions and dot-com implosions, but not as much about the effects of the recession on those on the lower rungs of the economic ladder.
"The focus has been on white-collar workers," said Valk, who lives in St. Louis' Benton Park neighborhood with her partner. "Issues that relate to poverty and the working poor have been totally neglected."
She said she's also concerned about the stories that are not being reported in the war on terrorism: the number of Afghan casualties, information about those who have been detained since Sept. 11 and the treatment of suspected terrorist prisoners.
"Have we given the Bush administration a blank check?" she said. As a historian, she said, she's concerned that stereotyping and detainment of Arab-Americans and Arab noncitizens in our country will grow to resemble the detainment of Japanese-Americans during World War II and the Palmer Raids, which largely targeted immigrants and aliens in a wave of anti-Communist and socialist arrests and violence after World War I.
Bush's administration has been different, and in a few ways better, than she imagined it would be, she said.
"He's shown himself to be a strong leader," said Valk, 37.
Not surprisingly, she thinks education should be a priority for the nation. "It's shortsighted to be pulling back from higher education. We should be thinking longer term."
Jerry Griffiths
Jerry Griffiths has owned his Bridgeton barber shop for too many years to panic about the economy. In his 40 years cutting hair from the same spot, he's seen recessions come and go -- many more severe than the current one.
"I'm 64 years old," he said. "The economy goes up and it goes down. That's all there is to it."
Griffiths said he did not sense much anxiety among his customers either. Most are retired, he said, but even those who work are more concerned about the impact of runway expansions at Lambert Field. The project is forcing hundreds of families near the barber shop to relocate.
But the barber said a lot of those families -- his own included -- were taking the relocation packages and building much more expensive homes. If anything, he said, the builders working on his home seem to have too much work.
Still, Griffiths said he wasn't naive. He said Ford's decision to close its Hazelwood plant and lay off 2,500 workers would have ripple effects. He is reminded of that when he sees freight cars loaded with Fords pass within yards of his shop. When those trains stop, people all over will know it, he said.
Griffiths said he had confidence in President Bush reviving the economy. He supports the war effort in Afghanistan and is buoyed by a new spirit of unity in Congress.
But he is watching the Enron situation carefully. "It's hell that the little guy got hurt again," he said. "But it's usually the little guy."
Charlie Kohler
Thirty times a month, Charlie Kohler reaches across his desk at Belleville's Auffenberg Ford and seals another deal with a handshake and a smile. Despite the downturn in the economy and Ford's recent problems, Kohler remains an optimist.
"If I walked in every day and said the economy is terrible, I'd never sell any cars," he said. "People have an instinct for that."
For many years, Kohler ran an IGA grocery store in East St. Louis. His partner was murdered in 1972, and the store was robbed repeatedly. With the city unable to right itself from a precipitous economic decline, the store closed in May 1976.
Five months later, Kohler landed the job at Auffenberg. The closing of the grocery store shattered his self-confidence, but he said he eventually was able to adjust.
Despite the country's economic problems, Kohler and Auffenberg have fared well. Kohler -- who puts in 70-hour workweeks -- usually sells about 30 cars a month. But in October, thanks to the zero percent interest rates then being offered by Ford, he sold 57.
Kohler, 62, of Fairview Heights, has been married 42 years, and the couple have three grown children. He says in some ways, the country has stumbled a bit, just like he did.
Still, he believes the state of the union is strong.
And the more the country moves to fight terrorism, the stronger the union will be. "Terrorism was like a cancer," he said. "It was going to keep spreading."
Noy Liam
Since Noy Liam, 45, immigrated to the United States and St. Louis in 1980, the native of Thailand has come to believe in the American dream. He and his family operate the Jay International Food Corp. grocery, 3172 South Grand Boulevard, as well as the King and I restaurant across the street. Even with the soft economy, he says, the grocery store enjoyed its most successful year ever last year. At the same time, though, business at the restaurant was down, as St. Louisans kept a tighter hold on their discretionary cash.
Overall, he said, "We're doing just fine," and he credited much of that, simply, to the strength of his adopted country.
"I don't see anybody complaining a lot," he said.
At the same time, he said, his confidence in the stock market has been shaken in the past several months, and he remains worried about new acts of terrorism.
"I still worry," he said, "like all normal people." But he adds he is not worried enough to stop flying or continue conducting his business and his life as usual.
Interestingly, he says he is bothered by continuing large-scale immigration to the United States. He is especially upset about the huge numbers of illegal immigrants flooding into the country.
"I am an immigrant, but I am 100 percent legal," he said. "It is just not fair that people are allowed to come in here illegally. It's not fair to the taxpayers."
Married, with no children, Liam says he applauds the job being done by the president.
"I have confidence in him," he said. "He has shown he can handle things pretty well."
Dolores Gunn
Dolores Gunn grew up in Detroit's tough, gritty urban core, battling long odds to become the first, and still only, member of her family to graduate from high school. Today, the 33-year-old divorced mother is a physician in St. Louis County with all the concerns of a young mother and all the ideals of a doctor serving some of the county's poorest residents.
Before Sept. 11, she admits, she was a proud Democrat, like her mother and grandparents before her. Now, though, she is not so sure.
"After Sept. 11, like most Americans, I was looking for leadership," she said. "I was very, very pleased.
"I'm not really a Democrat or a Republican now," she said. "Now I am just an American."
Dr. Gunn, who lives in North County and works at county health clinics in Berkeley and Pine Lawn as a National Service Corps physician, says she will be paying close attention to what Bush has to tell the country this evening.
America's top priority, she says, must remain its battle against terrorism. She still remembers her great-grandmother telling her, "if somebody comes into your house and deliberately tries to destroy it, then all the people of that house must stand together." The words, she said, have never seemed truer.
She also says education and health care for the nation's disadvantaged must be improved, and improved dramatically, if we are to become a truly great country.
Many high school graduates in inner cities can barely read above a sixth-grade level, she says; health care access for uninsured Americans facing life-threatening illnesses remains an urgent priority.
"It costs money to treat breast cancer," she said.
She has fewer concerns about the economy. "I think it will do fine," she said. "We're a lot more resilient than some people think we are."
Mary-Alice Kissel
Mary-Alice Kissel admits she has plenty to worry about as the first month of the new year comes to an end.
She worries about terrorism, the sputtering economy, and especially the futures of her five grandsons, ages 3 months to 11 years.
"I guess I never stop worrying," said the 64-year-old widow from Crestwood and former secretary with St. Louis Community College at Meramec. "Let's face it, we've had very good times for a very long time. We've all been spoiled."
The terrorist attacks Sept. 11 and, to a lesser extent the faltering economy, have shaken America from a deep, cozy sleep and reminded us just how vulnerable we can be.
Still, she says, there is much good that has come from it. "I've never seen so many flags," she said.
And, she said, Sept. 11 has drawn her "closer to my family, closer to my friends and closer to God."
Kissel said that she understood why the country and Bush have been so preoccupied with the war in Afghanistan and the battle against terrorism in recent months.
But, she warned, "he's going to have to start putting some of this in the back of his mind.
"Other areas have been suffering -- education, taxes, Social Security."
The cost of health insurance (she pays $500 a month) has become outrageous, the stock market (where she has investments) has been sluggish and the cost of utilities continues to rise.
She said she hoped Bush was prepared for the next three years. "He has a hard road ahead of him."
Sarah Briscoe
As the school day begins in Sarah Briscoe's classroom, her third-graders rise, place their hands over their hearts and begin singing:
"My country 'tis of thee
Sweet land of liberty ..."
The sound from Briscoe's class and the 17 other classrooms at Farragut Elementary spills out into the hall, across the polished hardwood floor and outside to where the stately oak trees stand on the lawn.
Before Sept. 11, the classes at the St. Louis elementary school didn't sing patriotic songs at the opening of each day. And Briscoe said she didn't have an uneasy feeling every time she saw a plane fly overhead.
"At the back of my mind, I keep thinking, are we really safe?" she said.
For Briscoe and some of her colleagues, that nagging worry reminds them that the state of the union remains uncertain. For them, fighting the war on terrorism is a top priority. Briscoe also has picked up the habit of watching CNN and listening to radio news.
Economically, she has relatively few worries. As a teacher with six years at Farragut, she has a stable job. She has a 1-year-old son and bought a three-bedroom home in Bellefontaine Neighbors a few months before the attack.
Briscoe is 29, and she runs her class of 16 with a quiet confidence. In some ways, she said, the apprehension following Sept. 11 has given her, her students and her colleagues a greater appreciation of their lives.
"Economically, our country has not gained, but emotionally we've pulled together," she said. "We realize how lucky we are."
===
What: President George W. Bush's State of the Union speech
When: 8 tonight

Notes

ASSESSING THE STRENGTH OF THE NATION

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) PHOTO by SAM LEONE / POST-DISPATCH - Noy Liam helps Garie Perry last week find a certain type of bread that his store sells. Liam and his family operate Jay International Food Corp. grocery, 3172 South Grand Boulevard. He came to the United States from Thailand in 1980, but he says he is bothered by large-scale illegal immigration to the United States. "It is just not fair that people are allowed to come in here illegally. It's not fair to the taxpayers."; (2) Color PHOTO by ODELL MITCHELL JR. / POST-DISPATCH - Charlie Kohler, a salesman at Auffenberg Ford in Belleville, is optimistic despite the downturn in the economy and Ford's recent problems. "If I walked in every day and said the economy is terrible, I'd never sell any cars," he said.; (3) PHOTO by TEAK PHILLIPS / POST-DISPATCH - Sarah Briscoe reviews papers last week in her third-grade classroom at Farragut Elementary in St. Louis. Since Sept. 11, her students sing patriotic songs at the opening of each day. "Economically, our country has not gained, but emotionally we've pulled together," she said. "We realize how lucky we are."; (4) Color Photo headshots - Mary-Alice Kissel, Dolores Gunn, Larry D. Richardson, Amy Zimmerman, Anne Valk, Tanisha Grant, Jerry Griffiths

Load-Date: January 29, 2002


End of Document