Terrorism will stalk long after bin Laden's gone
USA TODAY
March 3, 2004, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 1045 words
Byline: Robert Andrews
Body

Sooner or later, the United States, with Pakistan's help, will kill or capture Osama bin Laden.
In recent days, U.S. military officers and Pakistani leaders have said they have intensified their hunt for the al-Qaeda leader, converging from opposite sides of the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, where he is believed to be hiding.
But his capture won't end terrorism's danger. That won't happen until the U.S. changes its strategy from attacking terrorist organizations to a more nuanced approach that is difficult to execute but strikes at the core of the threat.
The fundamental problem is not terrorism and terrorist organizations, but one of religion, at least as viewed by Islamic extremists. Terrorism is a means to an end, not an end itself. Terrorism is the means chosen by these "holy warriors," who believe that it is their religious duty to kill Americans and that if they die in the attempt, they will be rewarded in paradise.
This is not a war about Israel. Or U.S. foreign policy. Or global inequities. It is a war on Western culture. It will not end until the U.S. recognizes that the threat is rooted in an extremist religious ideology that fuels organizations such as al-Qaeda.
Our strategy tends to focus on organizations rather than the ideologies that feed them. Reflexively, our military planners and intelligence services assess the enemy's military positioning. Customarily, planners arrange adversaries by order of battle, then stack up military units to oppose them. This is how we destroyed Saddam Hussein's divisions in Iraq, for instance. So it is not surprising that military planners and intelligence agencies now are trying to target something concrete, such as "terrorist organizations." But that's just another example of the adage that when your only tool is a hammer, you try to make all of your problems look like nails.
The other problem is America's hypersensitivity toward religion. Since 9/11, President Bush and other leaders never have missed an opportunity to announce that we are not at war with Islam. True, we are not. But to prove this, we tiptoe around the brutal fact that an extremist portion of Islam considers itself at war with us. By ignoring this insurgency's religious mainspring, we avoid facing the monumental job of draining the radical Islamist fundamentalist swamp that will produce successors to today's bin Ladens and generations of suicide "martyrs" to continue their war against us.
Our traditional military planning and reluctance to appear "judgmental" about religion combine to oversimplify our problem in two important ways. First, organizations can be taken down more easily than deep-seated religious beliefs can be changed. Yet, Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry recently described the terrorist threat as a matter for "intelligence and law enforcement," as though al-Qaeda were just another criminal gang and the answer were to arrest Islamic terrorists and haul them into our courts.
Second, focusing on terrorist organizations casts the insurgency as a war of the terrorist organization solely against America and its allies. But that's not so. We pay too little attention to the fact that the jihadists also are at war within Islam. Few of us understand that bin Laden and his al-Qaeda have killed far more Muslims than Americans. An ominous silence spreads as intimidation and assassination still the voices of moderate Muslims.
A new strategy to deal with the insurgency requires accomplishing four objectives:
 * Demolish their theological sanctuary.
Unless bin Laden and his followers are stripped of the mantle of Islamic legitimacy, the jihad against us will continue after we kill or capture bin Laden. The jihad will end only when the Islamic world sees bin Laden and his like as heretics, not holy warriors. Such rethinking has to come from within Islam. It cannot be imposed from the outside, but we can support and nurture communications between Islamic moderates. A first step would be to create an agency to wage the war of ideas.
 * Support moderate Muslims.
Governments of nations such as Algeria, Indonesia and Tunisia understand the threat to their aspirations for a better life. Even Saudi Arabia may be awakening to the poisonous consequences of its support for the fundamentalists. These nations should be encouraged to wage their own wars on homegrown jihadists without trampling basic human rights. In the USA, we must shield moderate Muslims from intimidation and violence by gaining a better understanding of the influence of fundamentalism in U.S. Islamic communities.
 * Relentlessly pursue terrorists.
We cannot permit the jihadists to manipulate our passion for justice to destroy us. This is an insurgency being waged not by criminals, but by fanatics bent on demolishing cultures. Our survival demands that we constantly keep that in mind. While legal resources such as the Patriot Act are needed, we must continue to improve our intelligence. Despite advances since 9/11, we must do more, such as consider a dedicated domestic intelligence agency much like the British MI-5.
 * Encourage an Islamic reformation.
We are unaccustomed to think in terms of religious policy. But an inescapable consequence of 9/11 has been to create an upheaval in Islam, a world already long in ferment. Assassinations of Iraqi leaders, repression of moderates in Iran and recent episodes of al-Qaeda violence inside Saudi Arabia are but three examples of growing unrest. Out of this upheaval can emerge an Islam either more at peace with the world or more at war with it.
Islam is undergoing change. It will be difficult for those outside of it to influence that change. But we have no choice but to try. Certainly, we will win battles against al-Qaeda and its offspring around the world. We will develop better intelligence and more precisely focus our military might.
But the larger war that threatens us all can be won only when ideas transform one of the world's great religions.
***
Robert Andrews, a former Green Beret and CIA officer, is a Washington novelist and an adjunct fellow of the Hudson Institute. He served as a deputy assistant secretary of Defense and as a policy adviser to Secretary Donald Rumsfeld on special operations and low-intensity conflict from July 2001 to July 2002.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Alejandro Gonzalez, USA TODAY

Load-Date: March 3, 2004


End of Document