Terror attacks in India pose early test for Obama's team
USA TODAY
December 1, 2008 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11A
Length: 463 words
Body


As President-elect Barack Obama introduces his national security team today, the full horror of the terrorist siege on high-profile targets in Mumbai, India -- in which at least six Americans died along with scores of others -- is still sinking in.
The challenge Obama and his team will inherit is to seek justice for the murders and ensure that the terrorists do not achieve their aims.  Those goals, while murky, might involve stirring civil conflict within India (much as al-Qaeda in Iraq stoked sectarian violence between Sunnis and Shiites there) or, more broadly, focusing attention on divided Kashmir, long a flashpoint between nuclear-armed neighbors India and Pakistan.
On one level, preventing a new cycle of accusation and recrimination is a tall order.  The attackers appear to have been as few as 10 fanatical young Muslim men.  As with the 9/11 attacks in the USA, they were prepared to die in a plan designed to exact maximum carnage, attention and economic impact.  That the men were apparently Islamic extremists is already enough to light a match in the tinderbox of enmities between India's minority Muslims and majority Hindus.  Not that sparks are in short supply, including from the long-running military dispute with Pakistan over Kashmir.
While some Indian officials are already pointing fingers at Pakistan, there are encouraging signs that both countries want to contain the conflagration.  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has opened talks with other parties on setting up a serious, clear-eyed investigation.
Pakistan, meanwhile, is vigorously denying any involvement and promising to go after "any entity or group involved in the ghastly act."  It needs to make good on its word.
Both countries could make the potent gesture of high-level meetings to push forward on the recent path of warming relations as well as working more smartly to counter terrorism.  Some obvious steps include the re-introduction of an Indian anti-terrorism act that expired, better intelligence-sharing and for Pakistan to step up the shakeout of its notorious intelligence services that have frequently been tied to terrorism or turned a blind eye.
The test for the Bush administration and, in seven weeks, the Obama administration, is to support the investigation and to prevent events from spinning out of control.
Before his first debate with John McCain, Obama noted that presidents need to be able to do more than one thing at a time.  The Mumbai massacre underscored that he will have to fight the war on terror simultaneously with the battle to save the U.S. economy.  For the U.S., India and Pakistan, the best revenge for the atrocities of Mumbai will be to cooperate to counteract the scourge of terrorism and prevent the terrorists from inciting even more violence. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Desmond Boylan, Reuters

Load-Date: December 1, 2008


End of Document