Terrorism has the book world off balance
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 23, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: PERSPECTIVE; BOOKS; Pg. 7D; COLUMN
Length: 961 words
Byline: MARGO HAMMOND
Body


Promoting books after this month's terrorist attacks has proved to be a delicate task. How can publishers flag titles they think might sell in light of the terrorist attacks without appearing to be capitalizing on people's grief? How can authors draw attention to their books when the nation's attention is riveted on "the subject"?
"As you can imagine, this is not a great time to promote a book," author Clea Simon wrote in an e-mail last week. Her publisher, Wiley, was shipping out her new book, Fatherless Women: How We Change After We Lose Our Dads, to bookstores, and Simon was wondering whether anyone would notice. "I'm scheduled to appear on Good Morning America on Oct. 17, but with the world in its current state, I wouldn't be surprised if I get bumped," Simon said. "Clearly, many things are more important right now."
COLUMN
Simon thinks she has problems. At least her book addresses topics - death and grief - that are on our minds these days. What about the books about to be published that suddenly seem incredibly beside the point after the terrorist attacks? How hard will it be for publishers to promote such titles as Pickled, Potted and Canned: How the Art and Science of Food Preserving Changed the World?
 Or how about books that suddenly seem in questionable taste? Dave Barry's latest book,    Hitting Below the Beltway has been held up at the warehouse: No one wants to read jokes about the government. The movie based on Barry's first novel, Big Trouble, which involves a bomb brought on an airplane, has been pulled indefinitely. Or what about Nine Minutes, Twenty Seconds: The Tragedy & Triumph of ASA Flight 529, the story of an airplane crash? Author Gary M. Pomerantz had several bookstore appearances canceled last week (although some booksellers thought it was just what we needed to read about now).
Some current books, of course, are eerily prescient - or at least the press releases I'm receiving make them seem so. Forgiveness Is a Choice: A Step-by-Step Process for Resolving Anger and Restoring Hope is being touted by the American Psychological Association as "a new book from a leader in social science and mental psychology" who offers "a message of hope and healing." Its publication date was Sept. 11.
Last week, two books on New York were sent to my office for review. At first I thought the publishers greedily were trying to milk people's sympathy for New York (a coffee table book about the World Trade Center, after all, was No. 2 on Amazon.com's bestseller list), but then I realized both books were due out in October and would have been sent to me no matter what. From Berkeley Press, there was the now chillingly titled It Happened in Manhattan: An Oral History of Life in the City During the Mid-Twentieth Century, a compilation of stories about New York well before the World Trade Center towers were built. New York: An Illustrated History, from Knopf, is the companion volume to an upcoming PBS series, scheduled to be aired on WEDU-TV Sept. 30. The volume heart-breakingly includes a glittering night shot of the World Trade Center towers taken from the Brooklyn Bridge.
One publishing house combed its backlist in search of appropriate titles to promote. Prometheus Books touted six titles, promising they would examine "terrorism, grief, jihad, air safety, evil and Nostradamus." The "terrorism" book, published earlier this year, certainly appeared to be current: In The CIA's Black Ops: Covert Action, Foreign Policy, and Democracy, John Jacob Nutter writes about the problems of fighting a "war" against terrorists, specifically addressing the problems of finding and assassinating Osama bin Laden.
Several publishers are also promising books on terrorism by the end of the year. The Free Press announced that Holy War Inc.: Inside the Secret World of Osama bin Laden, originally scheduled for next spring, will be out by November. The book is by Peter Bergen, seen so much recently on CNN as its terrorism analyst (a new job category, apparently). Novelist and military historian Caleb Carr has begun writing a book on the history of terrorism that Random House says will be ready by December. HarperCollins is working on God Bless America, a literary anthology about the attacks, for the end of the year, while two Internet companies, BookSurge.com and Blueear.com, are collaborating on 09/11 8:48 A.M., an anthology of survivor stories due out Sept. 30 both on-line and in book form.
Meanwhile, at least one publicist living and working in New York gallantly tried to provide some balance in all this rush to promote books on "terrorism, grief, the jihad, air safety and Nostradamus." "I'm acting as though things are normal, even though nothing is, and won't be for a long time to come," Victoria Meyers, head of public relations at Simon and Schuster, wrote to me via e-mail. "But in the interest of soldiering on, here are the key nonfiction titles from S&S for October."
Among the titles she named was America's Secret War Against Biological Weapons, a "chilling book about bio-terrorism by Judith Miller, Stephen Engelberg and William Broad of the New York Times." It, no doubt, will be Simon and Schuster's biggest fall book. (Even before publication, it skyrocketed to the top of the bestseller list at Amazon.com.)
But she also urged us to read Richard Reeves' President Nixon: Alone in the White House, David Owens' Chosen One: Tiger Woods and the Dilemma of Greatness, Jan Morris' Trieste and the Meaning of Nowhere, Reeve Lindbergh's No More Words: A Journal of My Mother and Bill Weber and Amy Vedder's In the Kingdom of Gorillas - books about history, race, exile, illness and ecology. It was good to be reminded that, yes, there is a whole world of pressing topics out there meriting our attention.

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document