Terrorism conference at WSU draws protest
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 4, 2010 Thursday


Copyright 2010 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: WEATHER; Pg. A9
Length: 319 words
Byline: By Jim DeBrosse Staff Writer
Body


FAIRBORN - A dozen academic, military and law enforcement experts held a closed workshop on the psychology of terrorism at Wright State University on Wednesday afternoon, Feb. 3, while a half-dozen antiwar activists protested outside the student union.
The two-day conference, which continues today, is sponsored by WSU's Institute of Defense Studies and Education and led by Larry C. James, the dean of Wright State's School of Professional Psychology.
James, a retired colonel and recipient of a Bronze Star for his military work in Iraq, has been under fire for several years by psychologists and human rights activists who question his role as the chief psychologist to interrogators at the Guantanamo Bay detention center.
The half-dozen protesters held signs alleging that James had been a part of the abusive interrogation practices at Gitmo during his tours of duty there from January to May 2003 and June 2007 to June 2008.
"I'm repulsed that they're trying to legitimize torture in a university setting" by holding the workshop at Wright State, said Pete Johnson, an anti-war activist from Columbus.
Emily Journey, a former psychotherapist from Columbus, said James should lose his license for his actions at Gitmo.
"He made violations of the Ohio Psychological Association's code of ethics, and admitted to those in his own book and in his own words," she said.
In his book "Fixing Hell," James acknowledged that he did not report abuses he witnessed at Gitmo because he felt he would be more effective in reforming practices by working directly with interrogators.
Vikram Sethi, director of the institute, said the event was closed to the media because "there are individuals (attending) who have sensitive positions related to national defense."
Participants paid $2,000 for the workshop, whose goals include understanding "the psychological make-up of the suicide bomber," according to the institute's Web site.

Load-Date: February 4, 2010


End of Document