Terror cases: Women wanted to fight
The Bismarck Tribune
April 5, 2015 Sunday


Copyright 2015 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 6
Length: 303 words
Byline: TOM HAYS and JAKE PEARSON Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK (AP) — Two women accused in New York City's latest homegrown terrorism case may be part of what some experts say is an evolving threat — a greater willingness by women to shed blood in the name of militant Islamic jihad.
The pair allegedly wanted to "make history" on their own by building a bomb and attacking a domestic target. Just a day after the New York pair was arrested, a Philadelphia woman was accused of expressing her willingness to die as a martyr for the Islamic State group.
While past cases often involved women answering the call by the Islamic State group on social media to join the cause as nurses or wives, "the idea that they want to fight is more a noticeable new trend," said Karen Greenberg, director of Fordham Law School's Center on National Security.
The sometimes boastful and profane language one of the New York women was quoted as using in the criminal complaint — bolstered the idea that the defendants weren't candidates for nonmilitary roles in a caliphate.
The two U.S. citizens "were determined to play an essentially military role, so that's different," said Jessica Stern, who was on the National Security Council staff during the Clinton administration and lectures on terrorism at Harvard University. "In that way, they were typical Americans. They're sort of between these two cultures with a kind of amorphous identity."
Another expert, Mia Bloom, professor at University of Massachusetts and the author of "Bombshell: Women and Terrorism," disagreed with the conclusion that more women are now participating in global terrorism, citing large percentages of women among insurgents in Chechnya and Turkey. In Nigeria, the Islamic extremist group Boko Haram has begun using teenage girls and young women for suicide bombings in marketplaces, bus stations and other busy areas.

Load-Date: April 5, 2015


End of Document