Terror classes growing trend at Penn State, across nation
University Wire
September 21, 2004 Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Daily Collegian via U-Wire
Length: 451 words
Byline: By Kristin Colella, Daily Collegian; SOURCE: Pennsylvania State U.
Dateline: UNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. 
Body


As a response to the threat of worldwide terrorism, many Pennsylvania State University undergraduate programs are starting to include terrorism education in their curricula.
Penn State's response represents a trend among universities nationwide to implement the increased study of terrorism.
"Given that the risks of terrorism will not be eliminated anytime soon, I believe we will see increased demand for individual courses, certificate programs and even degrees in counterterrorism at colleges and universities in this country," Vice President and University Provost Rodney Erickson said in an e-mail message.
Erickson added he expects the field to grow significantly in the next few years, with better post-graduation employment prospects.
One professor participating in expanded terrorism education is political science professor Navin Bapat, who teaches The Politics of Terrorism.
The class was created after Sept. 11, 2001.
"We first start talking about patterns in terrorism," he said. "Our main goal is to try to explain what is going on."
Bapat said the course addresses such questions and topics as why individuals join terror groups, how terror groups mobilize, and conflicts within states.
Although there is only one section of the class available this semester, there will be two sections offered in the spring, he said.
In the Penn State geography department, professor Colin Flint is leading the movement in terrorism education classes.
Last spring, he taught Geography of Political Extremism: The Causes and Consequences of Contemporary Terrorism, which addressed the geographical contexts that breed terrorism. Flint said he hopes to offer the course again in spring 2006.
Flint has also incorporated the topic of terrorism into the curricula of other classes with more general topics, such as Geography of International Affairs and Political Geography.
Although the classes were developed a few years before Sept. 11, Flint said the terrorist attacks on the United States made the topics more clear for students.
"The class focuses on America's role in the world, why it's challenged, why people across the world want to challenge America," he said.
"It always addressed that, but 9/11 made quite clear what the nature of the challenge was."
Penn State spokesman Tysen Kendig said that considering the often-contentious climate following the terrorist attacks on U.S. soil, an important part of a student's education is having knowledge and awareness of world issues.
"Particularly in light of 9/11, I think subjects that examine terrorism from any number of angles would certainly be of interest to students and valuable in understanding the world we live in," he said.
(C) 2003 Daily Collegian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 21, 2004


End of Document