Terrorism looms as candidates compete in Western states
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
March 23, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 8
Length: 329 words
Byline: STEVE PEOPLES Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - Under a fresh cloud of overseas violence, Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton fought to extend their delegate leads in primary voting across three Western states on Tuesday as the 2016 presidential contest turned into a clash of would-be commanders in chief.
The contests in Arizona, Utah and Idaho were largely an afterthought for much of the day as the world grappled with a new wave of bloody attacks in Europe. The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for a series of blasts in Brussels that left dozens dead.
As voters cast ballots, the presidential candidates lashed out at each other's foreign policy prescriptions.
Trump, the Republican front-runner, charged that the United States has "no choice" but to adopt his proposed temporary ban on Muslims entering the country to prevent the spread of terrorism. He described as "eggheads" those who respect international law's ban on torture, the use of which he argued would have prevented the day's attacks.
"We can be nice about it, and we can be politically correct about it, but we're being fools," Trump said in an interview on CNN.
Clinton and Trump's Republican rivals, meanwhile, questioned the GOP front-runner's temperament and readiness to serve as commander in chief.
"I see the challenge ahead as one where we're bringing the world together, where we're leading the world against these terrorist networks," Clinton said Tuesday at a union hall in Everett, Wash.
Texas Sen. Ted Cruz seized on Trump's foreign policy inexperience while declaring that the U.S. is at war with the Islamic State group.
"He doesn't have the minimal knowledge one would expect from a staffer at the State Department, much less from the commander in chief," he told reporters. "The stakes are too high for learning on the job."
Trump and Clinton both enjoyed overwhelming delegate leads heading into Tuesday's contests. Arizona and Utah featured elections for both parties, while Idaho Democrats also held presidential caucuses.

Load-Date: April 21, 2016


End of Document