Terrorism insurance burden seen as ominous
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 17, 2002 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Business;
Length: 1106 words
Byline: TASGOLA KARLA BRUNER
Body


Astronomical increases in insurance premiums for buildings in metro Atlanta and nationwide will endanger the economy if the federal government doesn't help insurers offer affordable terrorism coverage, property managers warn.
September's terrorist attacks are blamed for increases of 50 percent to 600 percent in insurance premiums for metro Atlanta office buildings, says Michael Hoffer of the Building Owners and Managers Association in Atlanta, which has 970 members representing more than 100 buildings.
"It is especially costly for those considered to be 'trophy' properties or having as tenants government agencies, foreign consulates, internationally known corporations or financial institutions," Hoffer said.
One downtown Atlanta high-rise building manager, for example, had an insurance cost of a little more than $78,000 in 2001 but expects the 2002 cost to be more than $230,000 --- a nearly 200 percent increase. This cost has to be passed on to the building's tenants, so even a small retailer would see a rental increase, said Hoffer, who is co-chair of BOMA-Atlanta's legislative committee.
AJC
In his comprehensive strategy for fighting terrorism submitted to Congress on Tuesday, President Bush urged states to work with the federal government to ensure the availability of terrorism insurance for business and property owners.
Georgia Insurance Commissioner John Oxendine in January rejected a proposal by the Insurance Services Office rating organization that would have allowed insurers to drop coverage of dwellings damaged or destroyed by an act of terrorism. Georgia is one of a handful of states to reject this exclusion.
Oxendine said the state regulates commercial property insurance policies except for "surplus lines" risks or "non-admitted market" risks, which include extraordinary risks such as terrorism, or environmental coverage policies, he said.
"Insurance is regulated on a state level but the federal government is going to have to come up with a program for terrorism as they do for flooding, for example. Insurance companies don't cover flooding, and there's a U.S. flood program, which provides a market in which people can purchase flood coverage," Oxendine said.
Economic ripple
Tom Bell, president and chief executive officer of Cousins Properties Inc. in Atlanta, says the lack of affordable insurance against terrorism creates a negative economic ripple: Investment capital is consumed by the extra cost of insurance, jobs are lost, fixed costs increase, consumer costs go up and construction plans are delayed while lenders make sure their investments are protected.
"If you can't get terrorism insurance, it's going to definitely, significantly slow down economic growth," he said.
The American Academy of Actuaries says insurance companies across the country are "significantly" raising premiums and eliminating or limiting terrorism coverage "because of the tremendous financial risks posed by the threat of terrorism."
Building Owners and Managers Association International has warned that "many of America's landmark buildings, shopping centers, stadiums, airports, industries and transportation systems have no insurance --- or are drastically underinsured --- against any future terrorist attack."
BOMA International says another terrorist attack would be economically devastating because of these issues.
Bell said it was "quite expensive and difficult" to obtain terrorism insurance for the Bank of America Plaza building in Midtown, which is managed by Cousins Properties.
"We had to place terrorism insurance on the Bank of America building, which probably only insures half of the building --- the amount of the mortgage but not the value of the building," Bell said.
He said the number of building projects "down the pipeline" in Atlanta has gone down "precipitously."
This can be blamed on the sluggish economy, but it is "compounded by the wait-and-see attitude" regarding terrorism insurance and what Congress will do about it, he said.
Bell says the slowdown in the economy is actually masking some of the problems.
"If we had a booming economy, you'd be hearing more about this because people would be screaming that they can't get insured," he said. "You never want a recession, but it has given Congress time to deal with the problem."
And the government's help is what many are counting on.
Conflicting bills
In June, the Senate passed legislation that would bail out insurance companies with taxpayers' money in the event of a devastating terrorist attack. The Senate measure differs sharply from the House version, mainly on the issue of restrictions of lawsuits stemming from terrorism attacks.
The Senate bill would require taxpayers to pay 80 percent of terrorism losses up to $10 billion after an insurance company's deductible, and 90 percent of losses above $10 billion. The maximum annual taxpayer bailout would be $100 billion.
The House bill would require insurance companies and policyholders to eventually repay the government for any losses that taxpayers covered. The Senate bill has no such provision.
The Senate bill would also prevent the use of taxpayers' money to pay punitive damages in lawsuits stemming from terrorism attacks, while the House bill has broader language to ban punitive damages --- other than against terrorists.
The Senate vote on June 18 set the stage for a committee of lawmakers from the Republican-controlled House and the Democratic-run Senate to reconcile the two bills. In a Congress evenly divided between the two major political parties, such committees have swallowed up some of this year's most contentious pieces of legislation.
Many leave business
Before Sept. 11, terrorism coverage wasn't such a huge issue.
"There was some coverage in past policies, but the terrorism issue was not prevalent," said Steve Harrison, president of BOMA in Atlanta.
"We hadn't had a major attack. Before we didn't see it was a threat in this country. Now insurance companies are saying we have to be more specific about what the coverage will be and we have to charge more."
Many insurance companies have opted to simply get out of the terrorism insurance business after Sept. 11.
But AIG --- American International Group --- insurance company in New York stayed in it, said John Willett, who is with the marketing department of an AIG subsidiary in Boston.
"It was mostly because our customers said, 'We need this,' " he said. "They said, 'We have a collateralized loan and now you're telling me there's no terrorism coverage and we have a big building in Manhattan. We need it.' We decided to be in a leadership position."
--- News services contributed to this article.

Load-Date: July 17, 2002


End of Document