Terrorism is the next Red Scare
University Wire
November 7, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Daily Trojan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 1019 words
Byline: By Tim Strube, Daily Trojan; SOURCE: USC
Dateline: LOS ANGELES 
Body


Without a doubt, terrorism is a serious issue. The inclination of any individual, organization or political faction to utilize brutal, unrestrained violence that breaches the laws of war (e.g. targeting civilians, taking hostages, perfidy) is undoubtedly troublesome because the very notion of terrorism is that there are no rules; do whatever it takes, regardless of who will die or what will be lost.
But people in the United States don't need to be reminded of the horrible cost of terrorism.
The dictionary defines terrorism as "the unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence ...with the intention of intimidating or coercing societies or governments, often for ideological or political reasons."
Our government's current concept of terrorism, however, as a broad, menacing force that can strike at any moment and is even hibernating among us is eerily reminiscent of the consuming paranoia that gripped the United States during the years of the Cold War and the influx of Communism.
In a 2001 address, President Bush said, "The only way to defeat terrorism as a threat to our way of life is to stop it... and destroy it where it grows," because "if we wait for threats to fully materialize, we will have waited too long."
This preemptive sentiment of "If we don't attack them first, they'll attack us" was the rationale behind our military action against Afghanistan and Iraq, and it goes without saying that it's strikingly similar to the preventative mentality that led to the Vietnam War.
Senator Joseph McCarthy, the Wisconsin Republican who was given his own "-ism" for purporting ideological paranoia, made a similar assertion that Americans would "pay the price that must be paid by those who wait too long," if action was not taken against the spread of Communism.
Although comparisons between Vietnam and Iraq have already been exhausted, it's not the war itself that's of concern, but the open-ended rationale behind such wars as more of a game of "pin the tale on the donkey" than diplomatic foreign policy.
It's as though the Bush administration is inspiring a new kind of McCarthyism, but instead of fearing Communists, we're being told to consistently fear the influence of terrorists, or "Jihadism", another lurking faction hell bent on destroying the American way of life.
From what we're led to believe, a terrorist could be your neighbor, the guy in line in front of you at the airport, hiding under your bed or in your bedroom closet.
In a recent political ad, Mitt Romney described Jihadism as "this century's nightmare," aimed at uniting "the world under a single Jihadist caliphate."
To meet that goal, he says, "they must collapse freedom loving nations, like us," and in true Cold War fashion, he arrogantly asserts "we can and will stop Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons," (even though there's nothing but speculation with regards to Iran's nuclear program).
Through all this, our administration's use of the words "terror" and "Jihad" have simply lost their meaning.
Instead, "terrorist" has become nothing more than an arbitrary term for "bad guy", similar to "Commie" or "Red." We represent freedom, and their "Jihad" represents "terror" (the moral equivalent of evil).
Author Christopher Hitchens says this generous, ambiguous use of the word "terror" in political discourse is "a disgrace to language as well as politics," for it's become "a convenience word, [or] a junk word, designed to obliterate distinctions."
Simply enough, we're good, and they're bad.
Circumstances of infinite complication are portrayed as black and white when they're anything but.
It's as if we're being spoken down to like children, accepting lofty rhetoric that oversimplifies an international conflict of immense complexity.
Instead of encouraging Americans to understand the nature of conflict in our world, the current administration openly promotes a system of ignorance, hegemony and narrow-minded thinking.
Upon revisiting the most basic definition of terrorism, it's evident our current foreign policy and the American outlook on what defines terrorism is nothing more than a categorical paradox.
One could certainly argue our military action against Iraq was, as the dictionary would suggest, an "unlawful use... of force," and when considering our current tensions with neighboring Iran, it seems the United States is threatening further use of such force "with the intention of intimidating or coercing" the Iranian government "for ideological or political reasons." Not to mention the estimated 655,000 innocent Iraqi civilians who have been killed since the March 2003 invasion, either as a direct or indirect result of the U.S. military presence.
The United States also has plans to establish 14 "long-term bases" in Iraq's borders in order to create a permanent military presence.
In the minds of Iraqi's so-called insurgents, they're the ones who are fighting for freedom: freedom from the occupation of the U.S. military and the Western world's continued perversion of Middle Eastern affairs.
To them, we're the terrorists. The United States government will take any and all steps to threaten, diffuse and topple competing ideologies, lawful or not.
This is not to say U.S. soldiers are terrorists, or the inhumane efforts of suicide bombers are justified by any means. In fact, that's about as far from the point as you can get.
On the contrary, this point of view exemplifies the abuse and exploitation of the courageous individuals of our armed forces in the name of the unlawful and unjust actions taken by our government under the guise of freedom and democracy and most of all, the devastating effect it's had on millions of Middle Eastern citizens.
Terrorism is a serious issue, but aggressive, violent military action is not the answer. It's as if our administration's never heard the idiom "two wrongs don't make a right."
If anything, the only bad guys who are threatening what's left of our freedom are the politicians who shroud their intentions in one-dimensional rhetoric and continue to promote a culture of ignorance and fear.
Welcome to the Terror Scare.
(C) 2007 Daily Trojan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 8, 2007


End of Document