Terrorism Hits Home With The Arrest Of Sami Al-Arian
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 23, 2003, Sunday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: COMMENTARY,
Length: 888 words
Body

Kudos To Trib Reporters
Regarding "Terror Traced To Tampa" (Nation/World, Feb. 21):
With the breaking story about Sami Al-Arian's arrest, the anchors on the Fox News Channel have been bragging about Bill O'Reilly's contributing interview with Al-Arian as being responsible for his arrest. Taking nothing from O'Reilly's story, I would just like to point out the great work by your own reporters. I have been reading the story in your newspaper since 1995. Kudos where it belongs.
CHARLES E. KINNEY
Tampa

WISE Facilitators
Now that Professor Sami Al-Arian and others have at last been indicted for their alleged crimes, isn't it time for the University of South Florida to publicly identify those USF faculty members who, together with Al-Arian, organized and administered World and Islam Studies Enterprise, the so-called think tank on the USF campus that facilitated Al-Arian's work?
GILBERT KUSHNER
Tampa
The writer is professor emeritus at USF.

Arrest Was Sad News
Thursday was a very sad day for me. I woke up to the news that a person who I have seen in action for community problems and who has educated thousands of our children was being arrested. The government says Sami Al-Arian was arrested for supporting terrorists. But he is a man of God who prays all day long and doesn't believe in taking another human's life. So why would he support terrorists? He doesn't.
My father was a man who fought in World War II, was wounded and died from his war wounds two years ago. My uncle was killed on a submarine in World War II on the last two days of the war. These are two men who fought for our freedom, and I believe they would have been proud to know a person like Al-Arian.
It's men like Bill O'Reilly who hurt a good man's reputation, and it's sad we believe him. Remember, Jesus was a good man who suffered for us.
JOSEPH BUCZEK
Tampa

Belongs In Prison
As a University of South Florida alumnus and member of the community, I was relieved to hear of the arrest of Sami Al-Arian. He has been like a cancerous growth for the university, and his problems have created unfair bad publicity for USF. Finally, the government has obtained a mountain of evidence that proves that where there is smoke, there is also generally fire. It appears his years of lies and deceit have finally caught up with him. Now it is more likely than not that instead of being known by titles like "professor" or "head of Palestinian Islamic Jihad," he will simply be known by a prison number.
MIKE BELL
Tampa

Take Responsibility, USF
In view of the damning indictment of Sami Al-Arian as an alleged international terrorist (facts that were widely reported in your newspaper years ago), the entire spineless USF Board of Trustees must take responsibility for their inaction and Judy Genshaft must immediately step down from the high office she holds.
Al-Arian's actions may have led to the death of countless people, including Americans. Florida taxpayers' moneys may have financed international terrorism!
Yes, Al-Arian will have his day in court. The outcome has never been doubted by most common folk.
SAM BABU
Wesley Chapel

Genshaft's Redemption
I think that it is time for all of the critics of University of South Florida President Judy Genshaft to speak up and come crawling on their hands and knees to ask for her forgiveness in the matter of Professor Sami Al-Arian. I, for one, am proud that she stood firm on his removal from the USF campus.
I am sick and tired of these people who are determined to destroy our country and way of life and hide behind our Constitution. I am hopeful that our government can prosecute Al-Arian and his murdering associates to the full extent of the law so they will not see the light of day again.
EUGENE M. PERDOMO
Tampa

Don't Support Al-Arian
My son and my money both go to the University of South Florida. I fully understand, as does my son, that most college professors teaching today are socialists or at least very liberal. On my son's first day as a freshman, his first introduction to college ideology was when the very first words out of his professor's mouth were, "I think pot ought to be legal, and I hate George W. Bush!" Thankfully, my son is a very intelligent, Christian conservative and knows how to play the game and ended up with a "B" in the course.
Finally, I believe all are innocent until proven guilty. I want Sami Al-Arian to have his day in court. However, if the charges are proved and the USF Faculty Senate continues to back him, USF can say goodbye to my son and my money!
ROBERT BINGHAM
St. Petersburg

A Citizen's Rights?
It just made my day to see Sami Al-Arian taken away in handcuffs. As an honors graduate of the University of South Florida and a member of the alumni association, I feel that the situation with Al-Arian is a blot upon the reputation of my alma mater. I strongly believe in freedom of speech, but just as one cannot yell "fire" in a crowded theater and call it freedom of speech, I don't think one should be able to damn our country repeatedly and still stay here, living on the taxpayers' money.
I sincerely hope that he is either kept in jail for a very long time or deported or both. I also don't think that all of the rights we enjoy as Americans should apply to someone who has never bothered to become an American citizen and who repeatedly voices hatred for America.
CAROL LORD
Tampa

Notes

LETTERS

Load-Date: February 24, 2003


End of Document