Terror in Spain should renew resolve to fight
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
March 16, 2004, Tuesday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; EDITORIALS
Length: 649 words
Body


When Muslim militants piloted jetliners into New York and Washington buildings on Sept. 11, 2001, killing more than 3,000 people and sparking a worldwide war on terrorism, most civilized people wept for the dead of 80 nations and pledged to combat terror with all their strength.
When Muslim militants bombed trains in Madrid on March 11, 2004, killing 200 people and wounding more than 1,500, most civilized people again mourned the massacre and vowed to soldier on.
But some responded otherwise.
Appeasement of terrorism has raised its ugly head in Spain. Three days after the terrorist attack, the Spanish people threw out a government they were comfortable with and adopted a government that blames American and Spanish involvement in Iraq for the train bombings.
#EDITORIALS.LIB#
Prime Minister-elect Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero has pledged to withdraw Spanish troops from Iraq. That is appeasement of terrorism and establishes a dangerous precedent.
Now al-Qaida, which is the prime suspect in the Madrid massacre, has a new reason to celebrate. Not only can it challenge the security of America and the world in general, but it can affect the outcome of a country's elections and force the withdrawal of foreign troops from a Muslim nation.
Osama bin Laden, who giggled so gleefully in the videotape in which he praised the attacks on New York and Washington, must be dancing in his Afghan cave over the results of the bombings in Madrid.
We sympathize with the Spanish. They have suffered immeasurably from these atrocities. Grief has driven them to distraction. We should not blame them for voting as they did or for believing that withdrawal from the war on terrorism may be their safest course.
But we should blame their leaders for suggesting this course of action.
Zapatero should know better than to believe that trying to appease terrorists of bin Laden's murderous ilk will promote Spanish security. He has perpetrated a fraud on his people.
It is natural for people to try to avoid distress, but there is no way for anyone to walk away from terrorism at this late date. Terrorism will follow them.
Between Sept. 11, 2001, and March 11, 2004, al-Qaida and its affiliated terror cells have originated dozens of terror attacks around the world &tstr; from Indonesia to Saudi Arabia, from Turkey to North Africa.
What makes the incoming Spanish leadership believe that appeasement will persuade these terrorists to stop attacking?
If anything, recognition that the Madrid bombings altered election results and may prompt a withdrawal of Spanish troops from Iraq will persuade al-Qaida to escalate its attacks and create further havoc and fear.
But while Zapatero blinks, fortunately, other Europeans are made of sterner stuff.
Said British foreign minister Jack Straw, "Nobody, nobody, nobody should believe that somehow we can opt out of the war against Islamic terrorism.''
Said Polish prime minister Leszek Miller, "Revising our positions on Iraq after terrorist attacks would be to admit that terrorists are stronger than they are right.''
Spain aside, there must be no admission that terrorists can prevail, especially not when Muslim extremists vow to escalate their war.
A group claiming links to al-Qaida wrote a letter claiming responsibility for the Spanish bombings. In that letter, the group said that the "winds of black death strike against America is now in its final stage.''
The terrorists mean to unhinge the world.
Renewed efforts to capture bin Laden along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border may not be enough to derail terrorist plans. Experts on al-Qaida's network say it is now decentralized, with the capability to carry out attacks without a central command.
That is why all civilized people &tstr; even grieving Spaniards &tstr; should renew their pledge to combat a terrorist cult that repeatedly has said it loves death more than life and plans to reduce civilization to ashes.

Load-Date: March 17, 2004


End of Document