Terrorism strikes, patriotism prevails
Independent Collegian: University of Toledo 
October 3, 2011 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2011 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 459 words
Body


Last week, Americans were comforted as news reports from across the Atlantic stated American-born terrorist Anwar Awlaki was killed in an airstrike in Yemen. There were not many details reported about the attack.
Awlaki was the voice of Al Qaeda to the western people. He was born in New Mexico and spoke perfect English. Using his American background to his advantage, he made video and audio recordings to post on the Internet, persuading the American people to be part of his Al Qaeda ideology. One example of an American succumbing to the words of this Al Qaeda ruler is the "Underwear Bomber" in December of 2009 who was on a plane from Amsterdam to Detroit on Christmas day.
Awlaki was the prominent Al Qaeda figure who "spread Islamic extremism across the Arabian Peninsula and was behind failed attempts to blow up American airplanes," according to the Los Angeles Times.
U.S. officials confirmed this terrorist's death, but never discussed our country's role, if any, in the attack.
Americans thought they could breathe a little easier last May after we heard of the attack ordered by the Obama administration that killed Osama Bin Laden. Now we've killed another less than a year later? Should we still breathe easier?
The answer isn't a very simple one. Americans can breathe easier knowing that terrorism has been struck down again and we are still fighting for peace. However, we've come in contact with terrorism from overseas, and we need to realize terrorism is everywhere. We live in a world that is filled with people who don't accept the ideologies or beliefs of others.
These terrorists felt that their way of thinking was what was best for everyone, even those outside of their country. As one of the most powerful countries in the world, the U.S. has been a major target from the beginning.
Could we have stopped these Al Qaeda terrorists earlier than 2011? Some say it was a long time coming. Maybe we were so oblivious to terrorism prior to 9/11 that we just assumed it didn't exist on our soil.
Now, though, we have American citizens participating in terrorist actions because they were convinced by Awlaki that it what the right thing to do. If our fellow citizens were planning attacks on us, who are we to trust?
Despite our frustration towards those who betray or harm our country, we remain thankful that the U.S. is still standing, regardless of who our opponents have been.
We thought Al Qaeda terrorism was defeated along with Osama Bin Laden's death. Now it's on our soil, tampering with the minds of U.S. citizens and convincing them to kill their fellow Americans.
But the faith of a U.S. citizen is strong, and the people of America will continue to stand for the destruction of terrorism and the acclamation of restored patriotism.

Load-Date: June 4, 2014


End of Document