TERRORISM BILL PASSES IN HOUSE
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 03, 1996, Saturday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 698 words
Byline: Marcy Gordon
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Prodded by the TWA explosion and Olympics bombing,
the House overwhelmingly passed a GOP anti-terrorism bill Friday
providing for new airport security measures. But it excludes President
Clinton's proposals to expand wiretapping authority.
Most Democrats, who generally denounced the bill as grossly lacking
compared with what was necessary, reluctantly cast their votes for it,
and it prevailed, 389-22.
One of West Virginia's three congressmen on Friday voted against.
While West Virginia Democrats Bob Wise and Nick Rahall supported the
bill, Rep. Alan Mollohan opposed it.
House Republicans added a last-minute concession: a provision for a
study of whether chemical markers should be placed in black and
smokeless powders, which are commonly used in making bombs. Clinton
had pushed for a study of the markers, called taggants, but ran into
stiff opposition this week from some Republicans.
Senate action on the measure appeared unlikely before Congress' month-
long recess begins this weekend.
The rejected wiretap provisions were part of a more comprehensive,
bipartisan package negotiated this week by House and Senate leaders
and administration officials that was inspired by the TWA explosion
and the Olympics bombing.
Thursday night, they gave up trying to enact a broader package before
the recess.
Clinton said he was disappointed by the bill that resulted from House
deliberations and suggested that Democrats may use the issue against
Republicans in November's elections.
"I think it is legitimate for those who believe more should be done to
continue to press for more to be done," the president said.
For his part, House Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., attacked the
administration's terrorism policy.
"Right now they do not have a strategy, either domestically or
overseas," he said.
Gingrich said he and Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., would
send Clinton a letter asking the administration to produce "a series
of plans" to combat terrorism.
Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., a negotiator of the broader package,
described the new House measure as a sham, "a mere shadow of what law
enforcement had asked for."
"What we have here is an act at best of deception and at worst of
cowardice," Schumer told his colleagues. He said House GOP leaders
"caved in" to the gun lobby.
But Majority Leader Dick Armey said the bill would help fight
terrorism without giving in to a "panic that infringes against the
liberties" of Americans.
"This is a time to show America that we are a nation with a government
that understands and cares about the threat, and understands and cares
about our citizens' liberties," Armey, R-Texas, said on the House
floor.
Clinton's proposed study of taggants was excluded from the
Republicans' earlier bill introduced by Rep. Christopher Cox,
R-Calif., in the wee hours of Friday.
The new version gives the administration a one-year study but says it
must be done outside the government. Democrats had insisted on a
Treasury Department study.
Clinton pointedly noted this week that the FBI supported taggant use
to help investigators trace the origin of explosives after they are
detonated.
The National Rifle Association opposes them on the ground that their
presence could make black and smokeless powders unstable, a safety
risk.
The bill includes airport security provisions such as background
investigations for airport personnel and assignment of FBI agents to
high-risk airports, especially those with international flights.
Bomb-sniffing dogs would be used at the largest commercial airports.
Also included is a provision to allow prosecution of terrorist
suspects under federal racketeering laws, making them subject to
forfeiture of assets and longer prison sentences.
Telephone companies would be reimbursed for expenses related to
technology used by law enforcement to trace phone numbers called by
terrorist suspects.
In addition, a bipartisan commission would be established to review
the government's anti-terrorism strategies and recommend for
longer-term measures.
Responding to concerns about what they perceive as potential threats
to privacy, the Republicans included a provision doubling to 10 years
the maximum penalty for unlawful disclosure of information obtained
from a wiretap.

Load-Date: August 3, 1996


End of Document