Terrorism Insurance Central To Coordinating Council Plan
The American Banker
January 9, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 American Banker, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 650 words
Byline: BY MICHELE HELLER
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Financial services lobbyists outlined a common agenda Tuesday, and in the process sought to demonstrate that their historically tumultuous relationship has matured into a powerful lobbying force.
Slightly more than two years after passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act tore down barriers among the banking, insurance, and securities industries, the leading lobbyists of five major trade groups pointed to their joint successes last year under the umbrella of the Financial Services Coordinating Council and said they would focus this year on financial privacy issues at home and abroad; pension reform and other savings and investment issues; and matters stemming from the Sept. 11 attacks, including terrorism insurance, money-laundering legislation and rules, and other security concerns.
At a news conference they listed their 2001 accomplishments, including: enactment of a $1.35 trillion tax cut that includes savings and investment incentives; a reduction in securities fees; a successful defense against new state financial privacy laws; and a coordinated response to new national security concerns by, among other things, working with Congress on money-laundering legislation.
One of the toughest battles on the immediate horizon is getting Congress to establish a federal reinsurance system so that primary property/casualty insurers will take on the risk of covering claims resulting from future terrorist strikes.
Reinsurers stopped providing coverage for terrorism after Sept. 11, and primary insurers followed suit Jan. 1. Now coverage for terrorism can be bought only at very high prices from offshore companies and some well-capitalized U.S. insurers.
The financial services industry, led by insurance lobbyists, pressed Congress to establish a federal reinsurance system by yearend. That did not happen, and now the onus is on the industry to convince lawmakers that business really is being disrupted and that a federal solution is needed.
In fact, in a conference call Monday the Bush administration began soliciting the help of insurers, real estate agents, and bankers for real-life examples of why the government needs to become a reinsurer. "We need hard evidence," Sheila Bair, the Treasury's assistant secretary for financial institutions, told industry officials in the call, The Washington Post reported Tuesday.
The House Financial Services Committee is also joining the effort by planning a hearing for Jan. 23 on the market implications of the lack of terrorism insurance, industry sources said.
"If there is not adverse economic dislocation, I don't see Congress getting into this fight," Lee Ann Pusey, the top lobbyist for the American Insurance Association, told reporters a day after the conference call.
"Our hope is to have evidence out there" of problems attributable to the lack of terrorism insurance, she said.
However, she and the other lobbyists acknowledged that they do not yet have concrete examples of lenders tightening credit or of other fallout. "We're still trying to get our hands around that," Ms. Pusey said, emphasizing that it may take some time for problems to manifest themselves.
Lenders and their regulators have no plans right now to tighten access to credit to borrowers who lack terrorism insurance, American Banker reported this week.
The council's five members are the American Bankers Association, the American Council of Life Insurers, Investment Company Institute, the Securities Industry Association, and the AIA.
Noticeably absent from the council's legislative agenda is an overhaul of the nation's bankruptcy laws. Edward L. Yingling, the top lobbyist for the ABA, said trade groups are working independently to push legislation that has been stalled in Congress because of unrelated political controversies.
 
Copyright c 2002 Thomson Financial. All Rights Reserved. http://www.americanbanker.com 

Graphic

 
photo, Pusey

Load-Date: January 9, 2002


End of Document