Terrorism situation is worse than reported, State Dept. says
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 23, 2004 Wednesday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS
Length: 562 words
Byline: BARRY SCHWEID The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Significant acts of terrorism worldwide reached a 21-year high last year, the State Department announced Tuesday as it corrected a mistaken report that had been cited to boost President George W. Bush's war on terrorism. Incidents of terrorism increased slightly during the year, and the number of people wounded rose dramatically, the department said. J. Cofer Black, who heads the department's counterterrorism office, said the report, even as revised, showed "we have made significant progress" in the campaign against international terror. Phil Singer, a spokesman for Sen. John Kerry's presidential campaign, said that the corrected report showed that Bush's administration was "playing fast and loose with the truth when it comes to the war on terror." The administration "has now been caught trying to inflate its success on terrorism," he said. In all, the department recorded 208 incidents of terrorism last year, compared with 205 in 2002. There were 175 "significant events" in 2003, which Black said was the highest number since 1982. Americans were victims in 1 percent to 1.5 percent of all the attacks, and Muslim militants were responsible for most of them, he said. About half the casualties resulted from 11 incidents in seven countries, and all were caused by Islamic terrorists, Black said. The department also reported a decline in the number of people killed, to 625 last year from 725 during 2002. The department said in its April report that 307 people had been killed last year.
"The numbers were off," Secretary of State Colin Powell said, and "we have identified how we have to do this in the future." He also said the initial report was not designed "to make our efforts look better or worse." The findings had been used by senior administration officials to bolster Bush's claim of success in countering terrorism. Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, for instance, declared in April that the report provided "clear evidence that we are prevailing in this fight." On Tuesday, Powell said Armitage did not have correct information and also had not claimed that the war on terrorism was won. "It is not won," Powell said. "It continues." Black said at a news conference that the State Department "should have caught errors in the draft." "It was an honest mistake, not a deliberate deception." Thirty-five U.S. citizens died in international terrorist attacks last year. The deadliest was a suicide bombing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, in May that counted nine Americans among the 26 victims. The report did not include U.S. troops killed or wounded in Iraq, or attacks by resistance fighters against American troops, "because they were directed at combatants." Attacks in Iraq against civilians and unarmed military personnel were included. In all, 3,646 people were wounded worldwide in terror attacks last year, the report said. This represented a sharp increase from the 2,013 wounded in 2002. In April, the department had said that 1,593 people were wounded in 2003, a sharp decline from the previous year. The initial report was issued April 28. On June 10, in response to inquiries by Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., and several analysts, the State Department acknowledged the findings were inaccurate. Powell attributed the errors partly to a new data system and said there was no attempt to manipulate the figures to buttress Bush's stature.

Load-Date: June 23, 2004


End of Document