Terrorism Won't Keep Snowbirds Off Roads
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
October 16, 2001, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 585 words
Byline: BRAD SMITH, bsmith@tampatrib.com; Reporter Brad Smith can be reached at (813) 259-7365  
Body


AREA RV PARKS EXPECT TO BE FULL
TAMPA - Snowbirds are emerging as one of the brighter spots in Florida's decimated tourism industry.
While the number of Florida visitors is off sharply since the Sept. 11 terror attacks, far fewer seasonal residents from colder climates appear to be canceling their winter migration plans.
Scattered reports from Central Florida recreational vehicle parks show no hesitancy or fear among long-term customers who drive to Florida to escape snowy winters up north. Managers say business so far is unaffected.
"Some of my six-monthers have arrived already and, by the next two weeks, there will be a ton of those," said Martha Harkless of Clearwater Travel Resort, an RV park in Pinellas County.
Although the poor exchange rate for Canadian dollars (65 cents) and what many economists deem a recession in the United States caused a slowdown in RV park reservations earlier this year, the pace has quickened since.
"Even with my Canadian residents, I haven't had any cancellations," Harkless said.
Joe Striska, president and chief executive officer of the Florida Association of RV Parks and Campgrounds in Tallahassee, said he's unaware of any wave of snowbird cancellations linked to fears about terrorist attacks.
"So far, it's been good," he said. The association represents 450 of more than 700 Florida RV parks where many seasonal residents spend the winter.
Unlike the downturn in Florida hotel and motel reservations and theme park attendance in the past month, Florida RV parks and winter campgrounds are reporting few ripple effects from terrorism.
One reason could be many Florida snowbirds drive south for the winter rather than fly from the Midwest and Northeast. Much of the falloff in Florida tourism after last month's attacks has been linked to a sharp drop in the number of short-term visitors who reach the state by air.
"People are feeling more comfortable on the road in their own vehicles," Striska said. "RVers are a hardy bunch, and they're going to do their own thing anyway. They can just as well hear about terrorism in Florida as in Michigan, Ohio or New York."
Messages posted at www.rv.net, a Web site about RV lifestyles, show virtually no one changing winter travel plans because of terrorism.
"My wife and I are going ahead with our plans to go to Florida in early October. If we didn't, I would feel like those monsters had won. We're going on with our lives," wrote "Dan & Norma Jeanne" of Edmond, Okla., a few days after the attacks.

Trying To Reassure Canadians
Zaneta Hubbard, public relations manager of the St. Petersburg-Clearwater Area Convention and Visitors Bureau, said her organization is advertising heavily in print and on television in major Canadian markets to reassure Canadians and to entice them to visit.
It's too soon to know if the season will be off this year, but the agency has no reports of snowbird cancellations.
"A lot of people are probably feeling safer on the ground right now," Hubbard said. "I haven't seen anything about them going back early."
Pat Burnworth, manager of Encore Extended Stay RV Park in north Tampa, said she's had a few cancellations, but none related to the Sept. 11 attacks or subsequent anthrax scares.
At least 20 snowbirds already are parked for the winter at the 292-unit Hideaway RV Resort in Ruskin.
"We haven't had any cancellations," said manager Jan Mince.
Andy's Travel Trailer Park in Zephyrhills reported business as usual since the attacks.
"I haven't noticed any difference yet," owner Jody Renaud said.

Load-Date: October 17, 2001


End of Document