Terror case files to remain open
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 27, 2006 Friday
Main Edition


Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 3D
Length: 418 words
Byline: BILL TORPY

Staff
Body


A federal magistrate Thursday denied prosecutors' attempts to seal court documents containing unclassified material in the case of two Atlanta area men held on terrorism-related charges.
Magistrate Judge Gerrilyn G. Brill ruled that prosecutors' requests were too broad and "would seal [at least initially] virtually all filings" and impose a "significant administrative burden on the court."
Prosecutors in the case of Syed Haris Ahmed and Ehsanul Islam Sadequee, who are charged with providing material support to terrorists, had argued that unclassified but "sensitive" information handed over to defense attorneys could not be used in further court pleadings unless first put under seal. The judge then would have had to determine what could be released to the public and what could not.
Prosecutors said such "sensitive" information might disclose ongoing investigations, implicate people who are not charged with crimes and shine light on foreign governments' operations.
Brill wrote that, if the government wants unclassified information to remain under seal, it must "narrowly tailor" its arguments for doing so --- not seek a blanket order.
Classified information that is turned over to the defense will be kept in a secure room where lawyers can go to view it. If defense attorneys want to quote any classified information in their motions, they must turn the documents over to a court security officer, who's charged with producing filtered versions for the public file.
The case highlights the difficulty of trying suspects in terrorism-related cases using foreign intelligence and other sensitive and classified information.
Tom Clyde, attorney for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The Associated Press and TV station WSB, said that the prosecution's arguments for enhanced secrecy was a "reversal of the presumption of openness" and "is plainly unworkable. The order reflects that fact that our court system is founded on a principle of openness," Clyde said Thursday. "Even in a terrorism case, the government does not get a free pass to litigate the case in secret. If the government wants to have records sealed, it is going to have to demonstrate why that is necessary."
Sadequee, 20, of Roswell, and Ahmed, 21, a former Georgia Tech student, are accused of traveling to Canada in March 2005 and meeting with others to discuss "violent jihad." The two men allegedly took "casing videos" of potential targets in Washington in April 2005 and discussed an attack on Dobbins Air Reserve Base in Marietta.

Load-Date: October 27, 2006


End of Document