Terrorism not about religion
University Wire
July 15, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 725 words
Byline: By James Burnham, Daily Texan; SOURCE: U. Texas
Dateline: AUSTIN, Texas 
Body


It turns out the London terrorists were almost certainly suicide bombers who were London residents of Pakistani origin. These men were not products of a despotic Arab regime but came from one of the most open and free societies in the world. So free that it allows people from Pakistan to immigrate there and travel back and forth to their original home.
It's ironic that our greatest strength is also our greatest weakness.
Freedom is what makes our society powerful and just, but it is also what makes it so vulnerable to the predations of disturbed men like the London terrorists. In some sense, terrorism is an extreme manifestation of the isolation of the modern world. Because society has become so devoid of spirituality, people turn to religion in its most heinous and hateful form for comfort and stability.
To be sure, some of the terrorists are mere schoolyard bullies and thugs, but others among them are the same types of disaffected youths who took up weapons at Columbine. They become so consumed with rage at a society they believe abandoned them that they turn to an ideology providing structure and credence to their perception of society's evils.
It is a great irony that the modern culture of secularism and relativism would also spawn such virulent fundamentalists.
As a leaked dossier from British Intelligence reveals, al Qaeda has begun recruiting affluent Muslim men from British universities. Men like that are supposed to be too well informed to commit such vile deeds. To date, the terrorists have come from either the Islamic fundamentalist regimes in the Middle East or the freest societies of the West. What commonality could exist in these two opposite worlds to explain their shared foundations for terror?
The most obvious answer is the loss or manipulation of spirituality.
As the West becomes increasingly secular, it leaves behind a portion of society that is not prepared to accept this secular worldview. They respond to the harsh realities of capitalism and individualism by adopting an ideology that spurns the prevalent elements they see as alienating. Things like modernity, pluralism and Western decadence.
The Saudi Arabian regime manipulates faith and uses Islam as a tool to control the people. This manipulation of spirituality is worse than its Western absence. It is proactive in alienating the youth of its society, some of whom turn to the particularly savage Wahhabi sect (that of al Qaeda) for validation and a cause.
This need for a cause must not be underestimated. From protesting the Vietnam War to fighting in the French Resistance, the young have sought to bring idealism to a harsh world. In this case, however, the ideals are ones of destruction.
This hateful condemnation makes them feel noble and virtuous.
There is no real difference between the neo-Nazi who murders Jews and revels in his racial superiority and the al Qaeda terrorist who murders Londoners and has the egoistic joy of dying a "martyr" for his cause. These conscious martyrs believe they will go on to paradise and be eternally remembered.
This is why it is so misguided to blame the Iraq war or the existence of Israel for spawning terrorism. To do so implies that terrorism has a level of rationality and reasonable consideration of information. It does not.
The men who destroyed themselves in order to destroy many others on the London subway probably did not sit down the night before and think about how their action may affect the geopolitical balance of the world.
They did not blow themselves up to "save" Iraqi civilians. They blew themselves up because, like spoiled children, they wanted to revel in their superiority. It is one thing to be willing to die for your cause; it is a distinctly different thing to desire death. Conscious seeking of martyrdom is not brave, it is immature and self-indulgent.
The important realization that must come from all of this is how deep the illness of a world must be that creates terrorists. It has nothing to do with Iraq or Israel or even Islam itself.
If it were not Islam it would be something else. Radical Islam is just the latest manifestation of Nazism, racism and all other -isms that have sought to destroy others for their "inferiority."
If our way of life is to survive, this ideology must be destroyed by force and all other means necessary.
(C) 2005 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 15, 2005


End of Document