Terror plot mom touts film probe
Daily News (New York)
July 21, 2014 Monday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 11
Length: 339 words
Byline: BY DANIEL BEEKMAN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE MOTHER of an upstate man snared by the FBI in a terrorism scheme has a message for President Obama: Watch "The Newburgh Sting," a documentary airing Monday on HBO.
Elizabeth McWilliams, mom of David Williams, 33, says it shows her son was no terrorist.
"I just want people to see this film," McWilliams told the Daily News in an exclusive interview. "I pray somebody with power says, 'This was wrong. Let's correct it.' "
The film tracks the story of four Muslim converts in Newburgh, including Williams, who join a plot to bomb synagogues in the Bronx and down military planes with missiles.
The scheme, which earned the men 25-year prison sentences in 2011, may sound like a Hollywood movie because it was scripted by the FBI, "Sting" director David Heilbroner told The News.
The feds had an undercover informant befriend the down-and-out men, promise them hundreds of thousands of dollars, draw up a plot and then hand them the tools to carry it out, said Heilbroner, a former Manhattan prosecutor.
"This case is often cited as an example of entrapment, but in making this film, I've come to believe it was something much, much worse," Heilbroner said.
The directors plan to use the film as a launch pad in lobbying Congress to rein in the FBI.No current FBI personnel would go on record for the documentary, Heilbroner said. But Mike German, a former FBI anti-terrorism agent, is featured in the film. He calls the Newburgh case deeply troubling despite the guilty verdicts handed down by a Manhattan Federal Court jury in 2010.
"To put anti-terrorism resources against people who aren't posing a threat and then afterward to aggrandize that threat doesn't serve a legitimate government purpose," German told The News.
"It seems more designed to engender fear."
Defense lawyers argued their clients were entrapped by the feds but failed to persuade the jurors, who were presented with tapes of the men discussing violence and making anti-Semitic comments.
A spokesman for Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara declined to comment on the film.

Graphic

 
Elizabeth McWilliams (r.), mom of convicted terror plotter David Williams.

Load-Date: July 21, 2014


End of Document