TERRORISM BY JOYSTICK; APPARENT DRONE ATTACKS IN CARACAS AND ABU DHABI INTRODUCE A NEW ERA IN POLITICAL VIOLENCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
August 7, 2018 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2018 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-9
Length: 617 words
Byline: Bernard Hudson
Body


A failed assassination attempt against Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro on Saturday was mounted with explosive-armed drones, according to news reports. Nine days earlier, on the other side of the world, terrorists claimed to have sent an armed drone to attack the international airport in Abu Dhabi, the capital of the United Arab Emirates. No one was killed in either case, and the circumstances of both remain murky. But a new and dangerous era in non-state-sponsored terrorism clearly has begun, and no one is adequately prepared to counter it.
In Caracas, Venezuela's capital, government officials said one or more drones detonated explosives above the audience at a nationally televised military event. Several people were injured, though not the president. Mr. Maduro blamed his political opponents.
In Abu Dhabi, Houthi rebels from Yemen said they had launched a drone attack at the airport. UAE authorities deny the incident, but the greater truth is that it would not have been difficult for the rebels to have done so. They reportedly are being advised by Iran's security services, which have shown an impressive capability for such things.
Both these episodes will encourage other technologically savvy groups and disgruntled individuals to use drones to commit political violence. While news of the events in Venezuela and the UAE was disturbing, the failed attempt in Abu Dhabi is especially worrisome because of the mass casualties that destroying an airliner could cause.
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, or drones) represent a fresh threat to the traveling public. A concerted effort must be made to confront this threat before lives are lost.
Weaponized drones start with a tactical advantage: Most can fly lower than current technology is capable of readily detecting. Even if they were carrying only a small amount of explosives, they could bring down a civilian aircraft. Commercial airliners are vulnerable during takeoffs and landings when there is limited time for aircrews to react to unforeseen, and potentially hostile, events.
A simple hobbyist's drone could potentially down an airplane if joysticked into its path. Militarized drones likely available to groups such as the Houthis are heavier but can weigh less than an adult human and can carry several pounds of explosives at speeds of up to 100 miles per hour with a range of 400 miles. These flying robots can be programmed to maneuver into active airspace and wreak havoc without human guidance.
Airport security, as currently designed, is focused on ways to mitigate threats from people who have access to the facility, such as passengers and staff, and from cargo transiting the grounds. Airports are not designed to guard against attacks from the sky. Ways to monitor and fend off low-flying objects such as drones are urgently needed.
One option: Position security drones above airports, looking down with constant vigilance for airborne threats. Another: Eventually require all drones to be connected to cellular networks so that at least hobbyists' drones could be detected before they collide with commercial jets.
Protecting heads of state from drone attacks will be even more complex, so varied are leaders' schedules and public appearances. Not only can preprogrammed drones swoop in from almost any direction, but they also can be used by anyone with the means to buy them. Worse, threats from the sky used to be exclusively the domain of nation-states. Now, a far broader and more elusive menace has emerged and must be addressed.
Weaponized drones are firmly in the hands of non-state actors. No one is safe. Not heads of state. Not the flying public. We cannot afford delay in devising ways to combat this new peril.

Notes

Bernard Hudson, a former director of counterterrorism for the CIA, is a nonresident fellow at Harvard University's Belfer Center. He wrote this for The Washington Post. /

Load-Date: August 10, 2018


End of Document