Terrorists at the Peace Table
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
November 9, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION; Column; Pg. 18
Length: 612 words
Byline: David D. Newsom; David D. Newsom, former undersecretary of state, is Cumming Memorial Professor of International Affairs at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
Body


RECENT events, including the cease-fires of Catholic and
Protestant militants in Northern Ireland and acts of violence by
Hamas in Israel, have brought terrorism and its results once more
to public attention. The two cases illustrate the problems of
curbing and ultimately eliminating the threat of such acts.
Terrorism, as repugnant as it is, can achieve at least partial
results. The Irish Republican Army (IRA) appears to be pushing
effectively toward a seat at the negotiating table on the future of
Northern Ireland, although polls in Ulster register only about 12.5
percent support for its political wing, Sinn Fein. Hamas, the
militant Islamic Palestinian organization, through kidnappings and
attacks in Israel, has achieved at least part of its goal of
disrupting the Middle East peace process. Its actions have resulted
in harsh measures by the Israeli government against Palestinians
that may well increase support for the Hamas position in Gaza,
Jericho, and the occupied territories.
The strength of such movements lies to a considerable extent in
their capacity to develop support in countries not directly
involved in the issues that spark the violence. The IRA for many
years benefited from assistance from Irish individuals and groups
in the United States; although the US may seek to play a role in
the resolution of the Northern Ireland conflict, the ultimate
decisions rest with Britain, the Republic of Ireland, and the
people of the territory.
Hamas reportedly receives assistance from groups in the US and
individuals - if not governments - in Saudi Arabia and the Persian
Gulf. The final determination of the course of events in Israel and
the Palestinian territories, however, will rest only tangentially,
if at all, with these supporters.
The ardent external supporters of extremist groups see issues
through a narrow focus. Among its politically influential allies in
the US, the IRA is erroneously assumed to represent majority
Catholic opinion in Northern Ireland. Thus, it was Gerry Adams of
the IRA who received high-level executive and congressional
attention in Washington when he declared a cease-fire, not John
Hume, the leader of a more widely supported moderate Catholic
party, the Social Democratic and Labour Party.
Supporters of Hamas reject the compromises that PLO Chairman
Yasser Arafat has made to achieve peace and pursue a disruptive
campaign of violence against Israel.
In both cases, if there is to be peace, the groups responsible
for terrorist acts are likely to be represented in future elections
to determine the fate and the leadership in the affected
territories. As the IRA has done, presumably Hamas will need to
agree to a renunciation of violence. But then another obstacle
arises. The positions of each are irreconcilable with solutions
envisaged by the responsible parties. The IRA seeks the
incorporation of the six provinces of Northern Ireland into a
united Ireland, a position counter to the interests of the
Protestant majority supported by the British. In the occupied
territories of Palestine, Hamas strongly opposes the peace process
and presumably seeks an unconditional return of all the territories
to an independent Palestinian state, a position unlikely to be
accepted by any Israeli government.
If, through acts of violence, parties push their way to the
negotiating table and an election process, will they then be
prepared to accept the results peacefully? This question looms
ahead in both situations. The answer will lie largely with external
supporters. If IRA supporters in the United States or Hamas
supporters in the Arab world resist accepting election results and
continue to support unrealistic goals through violent means, all
parties will be losers.

Load-Date: November 10, 1994


End of Document