TERRORISM BILL FLAWS
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
April 26, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 550 words
Body


WHEN civil liberties expert Nat Hentoff spoke in the Kanawha Valley
twice Saturday, he said Americans don't realize it, but they lost part
of their freedom when President Clinton signed the Antiterrorism Act.
Specifically, Hentoff protested the act's curtailment of habeus corpus,
the principle that allows prisoners sentenced to death by state courts
to appeal to federal courts.
This principle has nothing to do with terrorism such as the bombing of
the World Trade Center or the Oklahoma City federal building. The
curtailment was inserted in the terrorism act by death penalty advocates
who want states to execute prisoners more quickly.
(There's something ugly about "pro-death" politicians - and most of them
call themselves "pro-life" on another hot issue.)
Hentoff said the cutback on habeus corpus - a basic human right
guaranteed by Article 1, Section 9 of the U.S. Constitution - will mean
that innocent people, or half-innocent ones, will be put to death.
Since 1976, federal habeus corpus petitions have freed 54 people from
death rows in state prisons. For example, the U.S. Supreme Court freed a
Louisiana man last year after it was learned that his conviction was
based on an informant's lie - a lie that police had concealed.
Under the new antiterrorism bill, a condemned prisoner is allowed just
one habeus corpus appeal, which must be made hastily within a year after
conviction. Under this limit, the Louisiana man would have been killed
long ago, because it took years to bring the false testimony to light.
Other experts are denouncing other aspects of the Antiterrorism Act.
"This bill has little to do with fighting terrorism, and much to do with
taking freedoms from citizens and aliens," said Georgetown University
law professor David Cole.
He said refugees fleeing from military dictatorships can be sent back by
a single immigration officer. Such aliens "no longer have a right to a
hearing," Cole said. "There is no judicial review. And Congress added
that there can be no court challenge."
Worse, some immigrants can be expelled on charges of having terrorist
connections, without being told the evidence against them.
"For the first time in 200 years, secret evidence will be allowed in a
U.S. court," Cole said. "It is impossible to challenge or refute
evidence you cannot see."
Under the new law, Americans who give humanitarian aid to certain
foreign reform groups can be jailed. Cole said:
"Think of the thousands of individuals in the '80s who gave money to
support the African National Congress' stand against apartheid. ANC was
considered a terrorist organization by the U.S. government. This bill
will unleash the FBI. It will cause the FBI to spend time looking into
people's peaceful, non-violent activities."
Those caught supporting such groups may have their bank accounts frozen,
without evidence of wrongdoing.
Charles Levendosky of the Casper (Wyo.) Star-Tribune wrote: "With this
antiterrorism bill, America creeps relentlessly toward a police state."
Maybe some of these alarms are too apprehensive. But freedom and
personal rights are treasures that must be protected against erosion.
We hope court rulings prevent the Antiterrorism Act from trampling on
individual liberties. And if courts can't do it, we hope West Virginia's
members of Congress support revisions that will excise any Gestapo
provisions.

Load-Date: April 26, 1996


End of Document