TERRORISM STRIKES HOME
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
April 21, 1995, Friday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. A1
Length: 280 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


THE DEVASTATION IN OKLAHOMA CITY
BULLETIN:
WASHINGTON (AP) With thousands of tips about the Oklahoma City bombing flooding in, federal investigators today began to focus more on domestic than international groups, and moved closer to
identifying two white men sought in the case.
Attorney General Janet Reno scheduled a statement in the case for midafternoon amid broadcast reports that one suspect had been apprehended.
"We have a number of good possibilities for the names and identities" of two men for whom warrants have been issued, a law enforcement official said.
REGION NATION WORLD, PAGE B1
The baby whose picture became a symbol of the bomb attack (right)
was a girl who had just celebrated her first birthday.
Violent elements of the white supremacist movement are coming under scrutiny as investigators look for suspects.
Bombing shatters the myth of safety in America's heartland.
HOW TO HELP, PAGE A5
Lacal residents can donate money to Oklahoma City relief efforts.
AT A GLANCE
CASUALTIES: Death toll of 57, including 12 children, sure to rise.
REWARD: $ 2 million for leads on bombers offered by Attorney
General Janet Reno.
SECURITY: Six weeks ago, federal agents reviewed security at the building and decided one guard patrolling four buildings was sufficient. On Thursday, President Clinton ordered more protection
for all federal buildings.
HISTORY: The deadliest previous bombing in the U.S. was in 1927, when a man fearful he couldn't pay taxes blew up a school near Lansing, Mich., with dynamite. Forty-five people, 38 of them
children, were killed.
FBI HOT LINE
The FBI has set up a nationwide hot line for information about the Oklahoma City bombing. The number is (800) 905-1514.

Graphic

 
Rescue workers help each other across debris as they look for victims in Oklahoma City.

Load-Date: April 21, 1995


End of Document