Terrorism: after the Libyan raid
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
July 16, 1986, Wednesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Column; Pg. 11
Length: 591 words
Byline: JOHN HUGHES
Body


BOMBS go off in European capitals, but the fact is that since the punitive air strikes against Libya, as of the time of writing this column there have been no major terrorist attacks on Americans directed by Col. Muammar Qaddafi.
Even Syria's President Assad, who has long permitted terrorists to operate from his country, has been making the right public pronouncements on terrorism and has been talking about helping to get United States hostages in Lebanon freed.
Thus, some of the states that sponsor terrorism have paused in their activities to reflect and reassess the situation. Colonel Qaddafi is apparently pretty shaken up, and continuing American air and naval operations off the Gulf of Sidra are intended to keep him off balance.
There are some other apparent benefits flowing from the US show of force against Libya.
Although many Europeans grumbled and protested about the US air strikes, their governments have been prodded into vigorous new antiterrorism campaigns. So at a number of European airports there is stricter screening of air travelers, specially trained dogs are hunting for explosives in baggage, and armored cars cruise runways protecting American and other airliners considered likely targets. Many Libyans of questionable background have been expelled from Europe, and others are under strict surveillance.
The result is that those Americans who did go to Europe this summer are so far having a pretty good time of it. Some of them interviewed think they are a lot safer in Europe than in New York City on a non-Liberty weekend.
They are also a lot less crowded by other Americans, because many Americans did stay home, or at least redirected their summer travels to locations other than Europe.
This has wrought havoc with the summer tourist season in Europe. A lot of transatlantic airline seats are unfilled. You can get a hotel room in Paris, or go to Gucci's first-ever discount sale in Rome. Even those overfed pigeons in Trafalgar Square are having to hustle instead of taking American handouts for granted.
The tune throughout Europe seems to be ''Yankee, come back,'' and it is a sweeter refrain than one has sometimes heard in earlier years.
Does this mean that major terrorism has been vanquished? Only the foolhardy would believe so. State Department counterterrorism experts do not think the masterminds behind terrorism have given up. They think they are adaptable and can be expected to continue.
What we seem to have, then, is a little breathing space to ponder future tactics.
It is a good time for those in the business of communications, particularly television news, to consider whether they can cover terrorism more responsibly. Terrorism is theater, and the networks bring it into millions of American living rooms. Some network executives are self-critical of their coverage of the TWA hijacking in Lebanon and want to do better if there is another such incident. This process of professional self-examination is a worthy one.
Diplomats should also be probing for new opportunity. The air strikes against Libya were a vindication of Secretary of State George P. Shultz, in an administration ''heavy'' on terrorism. He has long argued that diplomacy must be backed up by the willingness to use force when all else fails. Force apparently paid dividends against Libya. Is there now a renewed opportunity for diplomacy to get at some of the causes of unrest in the Middle East?
The disappointments have been many, but the goal is so worthy that it may be worth the expenditure of some more time and energy.


End of Document