Terrorism in '85 prompts fresh look at US special-forces units
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
January 2, 1986, Thursday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 846 words
Byline: By Peter Grier, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Body


The COMBAT TALON II is an Air Force plane being developed for use on special missions a thousand miles or more inside hostile territory.
A modified C-130 transport, it will have special electronics for precise navigation - at tree-top level, at night, going full-speed. Without landing, it will be able to snatch six men off the ground via its STAR recovery system.
At $47 million a copy, TALON II is a good example of the new status of United States special operations forces. Since 1981, money for units such as the Army Green Berets and the Navy SEALS has tripled. Their numbers have increased 30 percent.
But as terrorism has grown more frustrating, these special troops have come under increasing verbal fire. Congress wants a more streamlined antiterror force - and may create a new military service to get it.
''Revitalization of Special Operations Forces is critically important to our national defense effort,'' said a recent House report on the 1986 defense budget.
High-level dissatisfaction with US secret soldiers probably dates back to 1980, when an attempt to rescue the hostages held at the US Embassy in Tehran, Iran, ended in a swirl of desert dust and smashed helicopters.
The Reagan administration took office vowing to increase special-force budgets, which had dwindled to less than $100 million a year in the mid '70s. Special forces now get some $600 million a year, and have an active-duty strength of 14,900 men, according to the Center for Defense Information.
The main elements of US special forces are:
Army: The Green Berets and Rangers are perhaps the best-known US elite units. Both are trained primarily for conventional combat in enemy territory. The Army also counts Civil Affairs and Pyschological Operations troops as ''special ops,'' and at Fort Campbell, Ky., maintains Task Force 160, a short-range helicopter force renowned for flying skill. ''They don't go up until it's dark and rainy,'' says one source.
Navy: The SEALs (Sea-Air-Land) are direct descendants of World War II frogmen. Outside experts consider them the best trained of all US troops. The Reagan administration has increased the number of SEAL teams by one, to six, and has plans for one more.
During the recent hijacking of the cruise liner Achille Lauro, SEALS were reportedly positioned nearby on the Marine helicopter ship Guam, but they never received the call to action.
Air Force: Long-range transport of secret soldiers is an Air Force responsibility. Besides 21 new COMBAT TALON IIs to replace current planes, the service is slated to receive in-flight refuelable ''Nighthawk'' secret helicopters, beginning in 1988.
DELTA Force: This supersecret antiterrorist group dates from the mid '70s. Probably a few hundred men strong, it is based at Fort Bragg, N.C. It was reportedly dispatched in response to the recent hijacking of an Egyptian airliner but was refused permission to land near the plane, on Malta.
As the Egyptian hijacking shows, it doesn't matter how good US antiterror troops are if politics precludes their use.
Much of the frustration of not being able to fight terrorists with force stems from the fact that it is hard to find the right target and the right time.
Even so, there are still deficiencies in US secret forces that need remedies, say outside critics and administration officials.
For one thing, US military culture holds that special operations is not a route to the top. ''In general the various services don't care a whole lot about special forces,'' says Center for Defense Information analyst Stephen Goose.
The Pentagon realizes this and is making an effort to inculcate a more positive view of special forces in West Point graduates and other young officers, said Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Noel Koch in recently declassified congressional testimony.
One result of this bureaucratic disinterest is that the Air Force is proving reluctant to improve is special-operations capability, although Congress has pushed them to do so for years, claim congressional aides. The timetable for buying new TALON IIs has slipped, and the operational readiness of the current 38 Air Force special-force aircraft is poor, say these sources.
Indeed, the Air Force has been trying to give its special-force responsibility and assets to the Army. But top Pentagon officials have put that effort on hold.
Congress also worries that with so many different secret units, command and control of any major special operation would be difficult.
This problem surfaced during the ill-fated Iran rescue attempt, when the use of pilots from various services caused confusion.
Accordingly, a special House of Representatives panel chaired by Rep. Earl Hutto (D) of Florida meets most Wednesdays at 3:00 p.m. to consider ways of improving US secret forces.
One alternative under study is a brand-new, all special-ops service, says an aide to Representative Hutto. Another is simply taking all current special forces and assigning them to the Marines.
The House panel expects to make a recommendation in time to influence next year's Defense Department authorization bill.

Graphic

 
Picture, Green Berets, one of military's elite units,train at tree-top level at Fort Bragg, N.C., FILE PHOTO/US ARMY


End of Document