Terrorism and the Lone Gunman
The Forward
August 22, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. 8
Length: 514 words
Body


Hossam Dwayyat, 31, a Palestinian construction worker from  East Jerusalem, went on a rampage July 2 and drove his bulldozer  into a bus and several cars, killing three Israeli women  and wounding dozens more before he was shot dead. Police quickly  determined that he had acted alone and had no links to terrorist  organizations. Rather, he had a criminal record for drug abuse, and  friends said he was despondent over a failed romance. Still, the incident  was ruled terrorism, though foreign critics questioned the term.  A weeks-long debate ensued over whether to demolish the home of  the terrorist's family as a deterrent. One expert, former Jerusalem  police chief Mickey Levy, confidently stated that the incident was  sporadic and would not inspire copycat attacks.
Three weeks later, on July 22, there was a copycat attack. East  Jerusalem construction worker Ghassan Abu Tir, 22, drove his bulldozer  into several vehicles, injuring some two dozen Israelis before he was shot  dead. Like Dwayyat, he had no known links to terrorist organizations.  His father blamed the act on confused identity as an East Jerusalem  Arab with no clear nationality, Palestinian or Israeli. A search of his  home turned up Islamic extremist literature, confirming authorities'  belief that he acted from terrorist motives.
Five days later, on July 27, unemployed Tennessee truck driver  Jim D. Adkisson, 58, allegedly entered a Unitarian Universalist church  in Knoxville and opened fire with a shotgun, killing two persons and  wounding six. A note found in his truck reportedly said he hated the  liberal movement and its social teachings. He also complained about  his inability to find a job and his loss of food stamps. News reports  said a search of his home turned up books by Bill O'Reilly, Michael  Savage and Sean Hannity, conservative talk show hosts known for their  slashing verbal attacks on liberals. Following his arrest, according to a  police affidavit, Adkisson told officers that because he could not get  to the leaders of the liberal movement   he would then target those  that had voted them into office.
On August 13, an Arkansas man successfully tracked down a  liberal movement leader, and killed him. The alleged shooter, Timothy  Dale Johnson, 50, lost his job in a Target store and promptly drove 50  miles to the Little Rock headquarters of the Arkansas state Democratic  Party, where he asked for the state chairman, Bill Gwatney. He then  barged into Gwatney's office and shot him dead. Johnson was later  killed in a shootout with police. News reports consistently describe  both Adkisson and Johnson as lone gunmen.
Do two isolated cases, three weeks apart, constitute a criminal  pattern? If the attackers appeared intent on killing a particular class  of victim, but have no links to an organized group, is it terrorism? If  the attacker had literature at home, demonizing the victim group and  urging action, did the authors incite the attacks?
Israeli authorities are clear on the answers. American authorities  don't seem to have figured out the questions yet.

Load-Date: August 18, 2008


End of Document