Terrorism No Longer Just On The "Radar Screen'
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 30, 2001, Sunday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: PASCO,
Length: 709 words
Byline: WILLIAM YELVERTON; William Yelverton, the Pasco Tribune's editorial writer and commentary editor, can be reached at (813) 948-4228.
Body


Michele Baker was driving to a county commission meeting the morning of Sept. 11 when she heard the unimaginable on her car radio - an airplane had hit the World Trade Center.
She didn't see the pictures until later.
"I was horrified. I was shocked," she says. "When you hear something like that, you knew the loss of life would be high."
As Pasco's director of emergency management, Baker's job is disaster - preparing for it, responding to it and conducting all the testing, surveying and checking in between.
She knows and does her job well. She was hurricane coordinator for Dade County when a storm named Andrew ravaged Homestead and other areas nine years ago. The hurricane, which barreled across South Florida into the gulf, then came ashore again in Louisiana, killed 23 people and caused $25 billion in damage. It is the United States' costliest natural disaster.
Andrew left what looked like a war zone, one filled with chaos and widespread suffering. It's probably the closest thing we've seen to the 16-acre path of destruction in lower Manhattan.
If a terrorist attacked occurred in Pasco, Baker would be the point person. If she's daunted, she does not let on.
"Is any community prepared to deal with that?" she asks. "Personally, I'm on standby to go to New York to help them. I'm prepared to deal with something like that mentally. We were not prepared to deal with Andrew either, and we got through that. We have to be prepared."
And fortunately for Pasco residents, as well as others throughout Florida, steps had been taken to address terrorist strikes at home before the morning of Sept. 11. As Baker says: "It's not like this is the first terrorist attack. It's the worst." The threat, she notes, "was already on the radar."
So, as if threats of hurricanes, tornadoes, wildfires and other natural disasters aren't enough, Baker now has to move terrorism up the ladder of possibilities, to be prepared for WMD: weapons of mass destruction.
Even before the attacks in New York City and Washington, Pasco and other Florida counties had assessed terrorism threats and planned responses following a state initiative. Some of the information is closely held, as it should be.
"Suffice to say," Baker says, "we have risks." The response capabilities to some of those risks, she adds, are "moderately low."
"If you assume a potential terrorist is going to use an incendiary device," she continues, "we have a basic capability to respond."
Bioterrorism would be a different story.
As part of Pasco's terrorism assessment, which was done by a consultant with the help of Baker and other officials, general terrorism training for emergency, law enforcement and other officials was conducted Aug. 29, followed by a "tabletop" exercise.
The scenario: a small chemical device discharged during a public gathering at a park. There were mass casualties, including a couple of deaths and contamination. Baker did not want to be more specific about the scenario. But she said she did not see any major problems in how participants responded.
"I was actually very pleased with the thought process," she says. "Did we identify additional needs? Sure. We don't have a lot of equipment to deal with weapons of mass destruction."
That was a state decision. Instead of allocating money to each county for detailed terrorism training and equipment, the state decided to break Florida into seven regions. Were terrorists to strike in Pasco, a specially trained team from Hillsborough would respond. Hillsborough officials did receive money for detailed terrorism training and equipment, Baker says.
As for the threat of terrorism in Pasco, Baker says, yes, there is that potential, probably from domestic groups. But she notes Pasco does not have the type buildings that could be viewed as targets.
Baker, and others, can find some degree of comfort in the words of Marco Rimanelli, a former CIA analyst who participated in a panel discussion on terrorism last week at Saint Leo University.
"It is the large cities that are the targets," he said. "They're not coming to Pasco."
But Baker and colleagues from several county offices are preparing for the possibility that terrorism has moved from the radar screen to the front burner, right beside hurricanes, tornadoes and wildfires.

Notes

OUR VIEW

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document