Terrorism at Home: Bombs in the Mail; letters
The New York Times 
October 24, 2018 Wednesday 15:25 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; letters
Length: 292 words
Highlight: Readers view the attempted bombings of conservative targets as an attempt to influence the midterms and inspired by President Trump’s rhetoric. 
Body


To the Editor:
Re “Explosive Devices Sent to Hillary Clinton, Obama and CNN” (nytimes.com, Oct. 24):
One or more persons are sending bombs to those regarded as enemies by many Republicans. There may be political motivations behind these attempted bombings, or we may be talking about a seriously deranged person or persons seeking to destroy partisan enemies and encourage more Republicans to vote. Whoever is doing this, and why, may or may not be determined.
But let’s make no mistake about what is happening: An attempt is being made to injure or kill some individuals, most likely in an attempt to affect the outcome of next month’s midterm elections. And this action most definitely falls under the definition of “terrorism.” So let’s be blunt and honest in our terminology and call what’s happening terrorist acts. No linguistic pussyfooting around the truth. This is domestic terrorism, and people may die as a result. 
Whether or not one is in the line of fire, this is terrorism aimed at all of us who cling to notions of a free and open democracy.
Kathy HeggemeierCary, N.C.
To the Editor:
My suggestion for a White House press statement: “We condemn these attempted acts of violence against Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton and were really just kidding when the president said he liked candidates who body-slam reporters, suggested beating up protesters and encouraged hateful chants at rallies. We are hopeful that saying these things day after day at large public rallies has not been inciting hatred in others.”
Larry LobertGrosse Pointe Park, Mich.
PHOTO: CNN’s offices in Manhattan were evacuated after an explosive device was sent there, a law enforcement official said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jeenah Moon for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 26, 2018


End of Document