TERRORISM, LIKE INFANTICIDE, PRODUCT OF RATIONAL THOUGHT
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
February 16, 1997, Sunday


Copyright 1997 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: B section; Pg. 13
Length: 842 words
Byline: By Stephen Mosier - Brush Prairie
Body


In her Jan. 22 opinion, "War torn: Pro-life rhetoric escalates anti-abortion violence," Erin Middlewood joined the choir of pro-abortion voices decrying clinic bombings as the evil manifestation of pro-life rhetoric. Giving tit-for-tat, pro-life voices blame pro-abortion rhetoric for the increasing rate of infanticide.
Others have said as much about the environmental rhetoric of Greenpeace, the Sierra Club, et al, regarding their responsibility for inspiring the anti-industrial violence of the Unabomber.
If we accept the premise that a statement for or against something by one person is the cause of a violent act by another, then surely regulating free speech to prevent violence is more justified than is regulating guns for the same purpose. But having lost the right to keep and bear arms with no resultant reduction in the rate of violent crime, we ought to know by now that depriving law-abiding citizens of their rights does not prevent others from committing wrongs. To avoid going down the same road with the First Amendment that we have with our Second Amendment, we must stop focusing on rhetoric and look elsewhere for the cause of these social atrocities.
Common to the motivations of these bad actors is that they are all seeking to solve a problem. Also common among them is that they have chosen a bad course of action toward the solution of the problem. This suggests that their problem-solving skills are the cause of their bad actions.
In this regard, Patricia Krieter, in her Feb. 9 letter "Abortion begets violence," came very near the heart of the problem when she wrote that abortion clinic bombers have "gone beyond the point of rational thinking" in their campaign against abortion.
The case is quite to the contrary, however. It is precisely rational thinking that such persons have employed in finding solutions to their problems. Rationalism, not rhetoric, is the root cause of abortion, infanticide, terrorism and other varieties of today's social malaise.
Rationalism, like its ugly siblings relativism and materialism, is the necessary offspring of naturalism, which begins by saying that nature is all there is and that there is no reality beyond that which is material and natural. Rationalism takes it from there and says that belief in or reliance upon anything other than that which is "real" is irrational. Nature in and of itself has no need of moral values, and therefore none exist.
It follows from there that belief in or reliance upon any imagined set of absolute moral values is irrational. Relativism picks up from there and says that such moral values as do exist are created within the human mind and relate only to a particular human need at the time created. So values and ethics are relative, temporal and situational, not absolute.
Academia has embraced this concept for the better part of this century. It has been espoused in our universities and taught in our colleges, public schools and, incredibly, even in many of our churches and parochial schools, to the end that today we live in a culture dominated by the concept of rationalistic thinking.
The practical application of the concept is that, with no known or accepted truths to start from and none to work toward, there can be none to guide us along the way. We go about problem-solving in this manner: I am here and I want to get there. Any course of action that will get me from here to there is rational. What others may view as right or wrong is of no consequence to me; I need only be concerned with what is useful to me and my goals at this time and in this situation.
If abortion is useful to one's purpose, then choosing abortion is the rational thing to do relative to that person's problem and solution. Ditto infanticide, terrorism and genocide, not to leave out gang violence, drive-by shootings, illegal use of an unlawfully recorded telephone conversations and other manifestations of the-end-justifies-the-means mentality.
In the same century that science and technology has ushered in an age of unprecedented social, moral and ethical complexities and challenges, rationalism has set us afoot without benefit of moral compass, map or guidepost. We are left, each to decide (among other things) the work of a human life relative to our own self-interests. That is the current reality. And so is the harvest of violence we are reaping.
It has been said before and it is worth repeating: Ideas have consequences, and bad ideas have bad consequences. This century's effort to define its cultural values in terms of rationalism and relativism has proved to be a bad idea. As a preferable alternative, a growing host of voices are calling for a return to reason. Reason, in sharp contrast to rationalism, begins at a point of known truth and, guided by that truth, proceeds forward in search of a solution consistent with the truth.
Truth does exist, and with God's help we can rediscover it and begin to rebuild our badly damaged civilization around it. The flame has not yet gone out, and it is ours to rekindle for the next generation.

Load-Date: February 17, 1997


End of Document