TERRORISM MEASURE CLEARS SENATE;
91-8 VOTE SETS STAGE FOR HOUSE ACTION
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 18, 1996, Thursday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: GENERAL,; (lko)
Length: 520 words
Byline: Mark Johnson; Media General News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate passed the anti-terrorism bill yesterday, bringing Republicans halfway to their goal of having Congress pass the legislation by tomorrow, the one-year anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing.
After batting down a string of Democratic objections, Republican leaders won a 91-8 vote for the bill, which grants new powers to law enforcement and restricts a death row inmate's appeals.  The House is expected to pass the bill today.
Both Virginia senators voted for the bill.
''We have a (bill) that will give us a strong upper hand in the battle'' against terrorism, said Sen. Bob Dole, R-Kan, the majority leader.
Yesterday's vote comes after a year of wrangling between Democrats and Republicans over government powers, citizens' privacy and a host of other issues tied to the bill.
Some of those same disagreements flared yesterday.
Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman, D-Conn., chided Republicans for deleting a portion of the bill that would have given the FBI authority to wiretap calls made by the same person on numerous phones.  Law enforcement officials contend that terrorists and other criminals use multiple cellular phones to avoid detection.
''The criminals, the bad guys can use all this modern communications equipment, but we're going to keep law enforcement from trailing them,'' Lieberman said.
Leading the Republican push for the bill, Sen. Orrin G. Hatch, R-Utah, said expanding the wiretapping powers required more study in order to protect citizens' privacy.
''This provision would have done nothing to stop the Oklahoma City bombing,'' said Hatch, who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee.
Democrats also objected to the bill's reform of death row appeals, a measure that essentially would limit condemned prisoners to one federal appeal after they have exhausted their appeals in the state courts.
Typically, after an inmate on death row has appealed through two or three layers of state courts, he or she begins a series of appeals in federal courts. Republicans, and some Democrats, argue that convicted killers should not be afforded 10 to 15 years to string out their appeals.
Sen. Daniel P. Moynihan, D-N.Y., called that provision unconstitutional, saying it undermines a fundamental civil liberty. A measure so drastic might otherwise arise only in times of crisis, Moynihan said.
''(But) we have not been invaded and the only rebellion appears to be against the Constitution itself,'' he said.
Hatch responded that death penalty cases go through as many as six levels of appeals at the state level. Federal courts should not start from scratch, essentially retrying the cases, he said.
''I believe (Democratic opponents) are motivated by their desire to oppose the death penalty,'' Hatch said.
Many provisions in the anti-terrorism legislation met little or no objection, including new penalties for terrorist acts, a prohibition on fund-raising by suspected terrorist groups and expedited expulsion for suspected foreign terrorists.
President Clinton has not said what he will do with the bill. But Hatch said Monday that, after a conversation with Clinton, he thinks the president will sign the legislation.

Load-Date: April 19, 1996


End of Document