Terrorism Threat Shifts Local Policing Role
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 12, 2001, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 1371 words
Byline: DEBORAH ALBERTO, dalberto@tampatrib.com; Reporters Geoff Dutton, Brenna Kelly and Jose Patino Girona contributed to this report. Reporter Deborah Alberto can be reached at (863) 683-6538.  
Body


TAMPA - Training in nuclear and biological terror has taken the place of crime prevention and community policing courses in some local law enforcement agencies.
And while agencies are preparing for potential threats of bioterrorism, they also are working to secure and educate the community.
Police and deputies in many cases are on the front lines of the heightened security around potential targets. They are often the first responders in cases involving suspicious mail. They are working with the Tampa Port Authority to evaluate safety. They are training alongside military agencies such as the National Guard.
Throughout the Tampa Bay area, law enforcement agencies are coming together and shifting resources to meet the challenges that lie in homeland defense.
Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the Hillsborough County Sheriff's Office has changed some of its focus on undercover investigations to intelligence and security details that deal with potential terrorist activity, sheriff's Col. David Gee said.
"We are still answering 911 calls," said Gee, who wouldn't specify what undercover work has been reduced. "We have an immediate concern, and we just had to do that."
This all comes on the heels of new legislation that gives law enforcement the intelligence-sharing tools to help track terrorists.
Team Effort To Prevent Terrorism
Fire departments, law enforcement agencies and other emergency response agencies throughout the Bay area are developing a cohesive plan to generate a team effort in the event of a terrorist attack.
"There's an open willingness to share intelligence," Polk County Sheriff Lawrence Crow said. "It's like a giant insurance policy."
Crow said he "would not be surprised to see community policing transfer to the front line [of defense] in an attack."
"Hasn't it changed our lives?" he said. "It's caused everything we do to take a back seat to terrorism."
The war against terrorism is hitting home at a neighborhood level for central Tampa residents who conduct late-night, antiprostitution walks along Nebraska Avenue. Members of the group, called The Exercise Club, are finding themselves without police escorts.
The Tampa Police Department has postponed the escorts indefinitely because of increased responsibilities against possible terrorism.
"The problem at this point is homeland security," said police Capt. Hugh Miller, who oversees the department's firehouse program, a division of officers assigned to city neighborhoods, some of whom had been protecting the residents during their monthly walks.
In addition to being more alert and on watch for suspicious characters than they were before Sept. 11, some Tampa police officers now have new duties.
A few are assigned to key security-sensitive locations in the city, such as the airport, the port and areas around MacDill Air Force Base.
"Those officers are assigned there 24 hours a day, seven days a week," police spokesman Joe Durkin said.
That may take away from routine patrols a bit, he said.
A Heightened Sense Of Alert
The problem is "there are no specific threats and no identified means of deployment" of terrorist weapons in the Tampa area, Durkin said. Still, "we are on a heightened sense of alert."
The regional antiterrorist task force involves nine Bay area counties and is divided up to cover everything from intelligence and security to public relations.
Whereas community policing and crime prevention were once the main focus of professional development for Polk County law enforcement personnel, most training now focuses on what is referred to as "NBC" - Nuclear Bio Chemical.
"Prior to this, I thought NBC was a television station," Crow said.
Even equipment priorities are changing, he said. "Every first responder will be equipped with a gas mask and a chemical suit in their cars."
Overkill?
Not really, Pasco sheriff's Col. Al Neinhuis said. "It's a difficult thing to wrestle with. We want people to be alert, and we want to be prepared. Although we don't think Pasco County is a target, an attack on Tampa would affect us in some way, shape or form."
Pinellas County officials said they were already ahead of the game when it comes to preparing for worst case scenarios. "We have a unit to cover just about everything," Pinellas sheriff's Deputy Cal Dennie said. "The only thing we don't have is a bomb squad, and we're fixing to rectify that real soon."
Calming The Fears
Law enforcement agencies must balance their approach between the need to be prepared, the need to prepare society and calming the sometimes irrational community fears.
"We're sharing intelligence and educating the people through the media and community forums," Neinhuis said.
Some police agencies are offering a mail handling course to educate and inform the public on safety measures.
Lakeland police offer the course to city employees and some businesses. The class also is geared toward easing fear.
Participants are shown copies of letters sent to the U.S. Senate's majority leader, Tom Daschle, and NBC's Tom Brokaw, and are told what to do if they receive a letter similar in appearance.
Don't open it. Don't touch it. Isolate. Evacuate. Wash your hands with soap and water.
As part of the course, participants are taught to use common sense, and fears are eased by showing them the statistics involving anthrax.
"There have been 17 known cases of anthrax since [Sept. 11]," Lakeland Police Department "crime prevention practitioner" Greg Robinson told a class of about 25. "In the U.S., 270 people are killed by guns every day.
"It may never happen here, but this is prevention. It's like locking your doors at home. We are trying to relax America, but it's hard with the continued threats."
Diane Eshelman was asked to attend the course by her supervisor at the Lakeland Community Credit Union.
"I'm glad to see that law enforcement is taking an interest in things that involve the public in a broad perspective," Eshelman said. "I was surprised to learn how long anthrax has been around."
Gee said the Hillsborough sheriff's office has taught a class in the past on how to handle mail. But it never received much attention. Since Sept. 11, deputies have been teaching the course to government agencies. Recently, deputies had a class for the tax collector's office, Gee said.
Much of the task force discussions are confidential, but Crow said there has been talk of what course of action to take in the event of a smallpox outbreak. "We would have to make a decision on whether to forcefully - at gunpoint - quarantine those that are infected," he said. "Imagine public reaction to something like that."
A New PR Campaign
Even public information officers are straying from their routine duties in the war against terrorism.
Lt. Rod Reder of the Hillsborough sheriff's office, who leads the public information initiative for the task force, said departments are working on a public relations campaign.
"Generally, people don't go to public forums," Reder said. "We're talking about putting together some public service announcements [for television] and getting information out to people via the Internet. The goal is to allay fears."
For deputies who patrol Hillsborough, new threats of terrorism and anthrax mean more work and less manpower.
Since Sept. 11, the department has lost 29 members to the [military] reserves. "We could lose as many as 85," Reder said. Hillsborough Sheriff Cal Henderson temporarily transferred investigators from his narcotics division to his intelligence division to help guard against terrorism.
"Our intelligence unit is putting out multiple fliers so people will be on the lookout for people the federal government wants to talk to," Reder said.
In Temple Terrace, officers were trained not only in weapons of mass destruction but also in cultural diversity. "We have a large Islamic population here," Police Chief Tony Velong said. "Initially, I was more worried about retaliatory acts than anything else."
The training was an effort to provide officers with information they can use if intolerance in the community becomes a problem. "Fortunately, it didn't," Velong said.
Overall, it's a new era for officers.
"Things are changing, slowly but surely," Reder said. "I think the scope of law enforcement has changed nationally."

Graphic

 
PHOTO 2 (1C)
Tribune photo by GREG FIGHT
(C) Lakeland police Officer Michael Robinson discusses anthrax during a mail handling course. The Lakeland Police Department offers the class to city employees and some businesses.
Tribune photo by GREG FIGHT
Lakeland Police crime prevention Officer Greg Robinson shows a copy of the letter sent to NBC's Tom Brokaw to explain how to handle a similar situation.

Load-Date: November 14, 2001


End of Document