Terrorism drill comes to Chicago; Hospital plans are tested in the nationwide simulation of attacks
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
May 14, 2003 Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Woodward Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. b8
Length: 298 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


A national bioterrorism drill mirrored real life Tuesday as coughing, sneezing patients trooped into Chicago-area emergency rooms acting out symptoms of a mystery SARS-like illness.
The mock patients were fitted with surgical masks and whisked away on gurneys and in wheelchairs on the second day of the five-day drill, which began Monday in Seattle with the simulated detonation of a radioactive "dirty bomb."
"We've never experienced a bioterrorism attack here in Chicago, and I really wouldn't know what to do without having some sort of practice or experience," said Teresa Chou, manager of infection control at Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center.
The drill, aimed at testing the readiness of local, state and federal authorities, is the nation's first large-scale counterterrorism exercise since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
According to the drill's script, the same mock terrorist organization responsible for the Seattle explosion also released a deadly plague in Chicago on Saturday. The volunteer patients who showed up at area hospitals Tuesday gave health officials their first clue they were dealing with a possible act of terrorism.
About 160 hospitals in Illinois were participating in the drill. Some received live "patients" dressed in bright yellow T-shirts with the words "role player" on the back. Others were informed by fax of mock patients and their symptoms.
Illinois Masonic enacted its emergency plan about an hour after the first live patients arrived, with nurses and doctors scurrying to turn the lobby into a triage area.
Dr. Richard Fantus, director of trauma services, said the hospital called in extra staff this week to ensure that real patients would not be affected by the drill. He said the goal is to identify weaknesses in the hospital's emergency plan.

Load-Date: May 14, 2003


End of Document