Terrorism coverage poses challenges, opportunities; CPCU Society 2003 Annual Meeting
Business Insurance
December 1, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 16D
Length: 765 words
Byline: MICHAEL BRADFORD
Body


Despite the fear and uncertainty that surrounds terrorism, careful insurers can provide coverage for the catastrophic exposure and, in fact, may be able to gain competitive advantages by underwriting it properly, according to a terrorism expert.
''I think terrorism is a manageable risk,'' said Peter W. Ulrich, managing director with catastrophe modeler Risk Management Solutions Inc. in Newark, Calif. ''I don't envy the underwriters who are being forced to write it, but I think the tools are out there to help you understand and manage the risk.''
''While terrorism underwriting is certainly very challenging, any time that something is very difficult in the market, if you can understand more than your competitors, there may actually be some opportunities for you,'' Mr. Ulrich told underwriters during a panel discussion at the 2003 Annual Meeting of the CPCU Society, held in New Orleans in October.
''Terrorism is a very focused peril. With the exception of weapons of mass destruction, they can't cause damage across a huge area.'' Mr. Ulrich said.
Therefore, it is important for underwriters to know ''exactly where you are writing a risk'' and whether there are potential targets nearby.
''An attack could occur anywhere,'' Mr. Ulrich said, but it is more likely to happen at a high-profile location. A terrorist who plans to die in an attack wants to ''maximize the utility of the event,'' he said. To strike a blow at the United States and encourage fellow terrorists to strike, ''this is something that should have a huge economic impact, the potential for a large number of casualties and also symbolic impact.''
That made the World Trade Center an ideal target, Mr. Ulrich suggested. ''If you're looking at those criteria, there are not that many targets that would really satisfy a terrorist's goals.''
Given a finite number of targets and ''relatively small damage footprints,'' underwriters would be mistaken to consider all sections of areas such as Manhattan to be at high risk of damage from an attack, Mr. Ulrich explained. A section near a potential target should be considered riskier than a neighborhood in the same city but farther away from an area where terrorists might strike. Again, he stressed, ''it is important to know exactly where you are writing a risk.''
Under the federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, insurers must offer terrorism coverage, although policyholders are not required to buy it. Insurers have been ''put on the hot seat to provide coverage for a peril you probably don't want to write,'' Mr. Ulrich said. But those who differentiate exposures ''at a very high level of resolution'' across areas considered likely locations for terrorists to strike are able to more effectively manage the risk, he added.
Mr. Ulrich said underwriters have to differentiate terrorism exposures on a multiline basis.
''If you're a property underwriter, you may think you're doing a great job diversifying your risk. But if you're sitting right next to a comp writer'' who is working on coverage for the same locations, it is important to remember that those exposures should receive the same type of consideration, he said.
There are uncertainties as to what would happen if TRIA were to expire in 2005 without being renewed, Mr. Ulrich noted. ''It's one thing to manage the risk when you've got the government's 90% quota share there, but what happens if that goes away?'' he asked.
Even with TRIA in effect, there is uncertainty as to how it will work, said Gregory D. Hopp, an insurer attorney with Cozen O'Connor in Chicago.
''All of us who talk about the terrorism legislation are going out on a limb, simply because until there is a terrorist act'' to which TRIA applies, no one will know exactly how it will work, said Mr. Hopp, who was a panelist at the session.
For instance, Mr. Hopp pointed out, coverage applies under the act if a ''certified act of terrorism'' is committed in an attempt to '''coerce the civilian population,' whatever on Earth that means, 'or to influence the policy...of the U.S. government by coercion.'''
And terrorist acts arising out of a war can be excluded, Mr. Hopp noted.
''As I read it, if there had been a terrorist attack by Iraqi interests'' if Congress had declared war on Iraq, (that) could be excluded, and TRIA would have no application, Mr. Hopp said.
Also on the panel was Bohdan Krywiak, manager-technical services for Crawford Adjusters Canada Inc. in Vancouver, British Columbia.
The panel discussion was moderated by Darnell W. Pettengill, vp of claims/ contracts for American Agricultural Insurance Co. in Park Ridge, Ill.

Load-Date: December 3, 2003


End of Document