Terrorism stems from instability
Old Gold and Black: Wake Forest University
March 5, 2015 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS; Pg. 1
Length: 621 words
Byline: Ahmad Sharafeldin
Body


The Middle East is facing very dangerous events nowadays.The progressing crisis in Syria and Iraq has now been matched with new developments in Libya and Yemen, while the Israeli-Palestinian clash proceeds unabated while ISIS rises as a terrorist group under the cover of Islam.The general situation in the Middle East will get worse if the concerned countries of the world don't act rapidly to reign in the chaos and savagery.
One thing I observe in the media coverage is that the extremist group ISIS is most frequently viewed in relation to Islam. Although, I do think it's important that we acknowledge that within other faiths, as well  - Christian, Jewish, Buddhist or Hindu  - there can also be extremism.
One of the reasons it should be addressed is the desire - since many of the victims of terrorism are indeed Muslims  - to make sure that we put this issue out on the table and that all of us work on achieving a change in the way that view religion. Obviously that is a challenge for Islam, but it's a challenge that we should all engage in.
It is time to mobilize and to organize to achieve this aim, and as of now we are doing neither adequately or with the necessary urgency. The victims of terrorist acts are not just the civilian casualties.
There are many in the U.S. and in the western world in general who might consider such terrorist acts and say that the issue is Islam. Yet, I can let you know that the issue isn't Islam - it's more about illiteracy, ignorance and poverty. It's the sort of misery that festers in large amounts of the Syrian and Palestinian exile camps, and in war-exhausted towns and towns in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Libya and Gaza.
It's the poverty we see in the poorer neighborhoods of Europe's awesome urban communities, even in the U.S. Furthermore, it is this misery, which knows no state or religion, that we have to face to stem the tide of terrorism.
Terrorism is mainly committed by persons who are disappointed by their societal expectations. The reason they form terrorist groups mainly lies within society. So my point is that terrorism has no future. The issue can be eradicated fully if all of us join together.
It is our responsibility to provide proper education and jobs that are crucial to defeating terrorism, much of it fed by religious extremism, since security measures will not succeed alone. There is little disagreement now about the nature of this scourge. It is extremism based on a perversion of religious belief, a fanaticism that abuses faith to justify violence against innocent civilians.
Moreover, it is not just a question of mere educational improvement, but of educating about diversity and difference, tolerance and respect, in the same way that the humanities, sciences and languages are taught.
The role of education in countering extremist ideologies which provoke hatred and violence is to open the doors of understanding.
We must work together for strategies to confront this terrible phenomenon - and, in particular, to reach young people and to help them see a world of fairness and justice, of opportunity and empowerment.
The soil in which extremists plant the seeds of hate is the soil of ignorance, of warped thinking producing warped minds and in particular of a distorted and false view of religion. We will not deal with the root causes of terrorism unless we confront this fact.
That is why in the 21st century, education is a security issue. An education specifically that will open young minds to "the other," those who are culturally and religiously different, and shows them how the only future that works is one in which people are respected as equals whatever their faith or culture. To see myself in you: peaceful co-existence should be our aim.

Load-Date: March 5, 2015


End of Document