Terrorism backstop more important now
Business Insurance
May 16, 2011


Copyright 2011 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 6; Vol. 45
Length: 557 words
Byline: Mark A. Hofmann

mhofmann@businessinsurance.com
Body


Two things are certain: Osama bin Laden is dead and the threat of terrorism did not die with him.
In fact, the threat could grow more pronounced in the future as his supporters and wannabes seek to use his death at the hand of U.S. Navy SEALs as an excuse for attacks.
Now that the euphoria over the mission's success has faded somewhat, it's time to start thinking about how best to make sure there is certainty about a third issue: the continued existence of the federal government's terrorism insurance backstop.
The backstop doesn't sunset until the end of 2014, which guarantees that it's going to be off official Washington's mind for a while. But if and when Congress decides to get serious about tackling the nation's debt and budget deficit, the backstop could receive some unwanted attention.
Bear in mind that the backstop itself costs next to nothing, and that any funds it might disburse to insurers after a catastrophic terrorist attack would have to be repaid. But in recent years, government analyses using projected losses that are divorced from actuarial reality have concluded that the program-which has yet to pay even a single claim-costs the government money.
Ironically, the way the feds come up with this conclusion shows precisely why the backstop is needed. There is no way to underwrite the terrorism exposure, which differs significantly from, for example, a hurricane. Underwriters don't know exactly when or where a hurricane will strike but, because of more than 100 years worth of data, they can provide pretty good estimates of how great a loss will ensue if a hurricane of a given strength makes landfall at a given location.
There's no such record with terrorism.
We have had two catastrophic yet unrelated terrorist attacks on U.S. soil since 1995-the attack on the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1995; and the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks on New York's World Trade Center and the Pentagon. There is no way even the most skilled underwriter could have taken the first event-carried out by a native-born anti-government terrorist-and used it to figure out how to underwrite the terrorism exposure that confronted the World Trade Center before the 2001 attack, which was carried out by foreign-based Islamic extremist terrorists tied to Mr. bin Laden.
The death of Mr. bin Laden changes nothing about that. The terrorist threat remains. If some analysts are right, it's going to become even more dangerous in the months ahead. Odds are that Mr. bin Laden's supporters are going to look for revenge and will strike when and where they can, probably at U.S. targets abroad but quite possibly in the United States itself.
After all, some of the computer files recovered in the raid on Mr. bin Laden's hiding place in Pakistan indicate that there may already have been plans to strike U.S. transportation systems this Sept. 11.
The federal terrorism insurance backstop is critical to responding to such possibilities. Even though it won't have to be renewed until the end of 2014, it's not too early for supporters to begin mulling strategies to ensure the program's continued existence.
The death of Mr. bin Laden did nothing to diminish the need for the backstop. If anything, it makes a more compelling case for keeping the program in place-and the time to begin efforts to assure that it does so is now.

Load-Date: May 19, 2011


End of Document