Terror with current terrorism
The Mesa Press: San Diego Mesa College
April 11, 2016 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: A-E; Pg. 1
Length: 862 words
Byline: Karen Olea
Body


32 people dead, approximately 270 people injured; The Brussels Airport took on two explosions and moments later there was a third attack at Maalbeek Metro Station in March of this year. Isis took responsibility for the crucial assault. This bombing connected back to last years November attack in Europe that killed 130 people. Among the current bombing, several americans were included in the incident.
An example as to why such violence is occurring could be because people are beginning to feel helpless with the social and political injustice. Civilians are finding the courage to take matters into their own hands, resulting in chaos. Innocent lives are being taken in the process of proving a point. It seems as though violence is the last and only option for getting a message across. It is ludicrous to think that such matters have taken place in order to have a voice heard.
14 people killed, approximately 22 people wounded; The San Bernardino terror attack in December of last year alarmed California and the U.S in general. A couple named Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik striked Riverside City College and the 91 freeway. With the plotting help of Farook's long time friend, Enrique Marquez, the couple attacked students as they fled out of the college, set bombs in the cafeteria and opened fire onto the freeway during rush hour.
6 people killed, 2 people injured; Two military facilities in Chattanooga, Tennessee in July, last year, were shot at by Mohammod Youssuf Abdulazeez. There was never a clear motive behind his actions, although Abdulazeez shared that he was displeased with the U.S government and it's control with war. It also looked like Isis had nothing to do with his outrage, making his drug use the probably motive.
Attackers will always have an alternative way to get their point across or to prove a point or share their opinion. It is known that terrorism attacks are an exaggeration of how frustrated or angry the terrorist is towards something. It is a domino effect of how the attacker is feeling, whether they are socially or politically troubled. Why is such an extreme method like terrorism taking place in order to make a point?
3 people dead, 9 people wounded; In November of last year, a Planned Parenthood in Colorado Springs, Colorado was attacked by an armed man with a rifle who surrendered after more than four hours of shooting. The shooter named Robert Lewis Dear walked in and began to fire. There was no clear reason behind his shooting towards the clinic. A motive behind his attack would be the action of anti-abortion protests that were taking place at that moment that was causing quite a riot at the time.
People reach the extremes and believe that terrorist tactics are most effective. The controversy with gun control and gun rights can come to one's attention when reading of these incidents that make headline news. It doesn't take much to have personal ownership of your own gun, let alone, access to fire one. There could be a drop in terrorism if the access to guns minimized and was in more strict control.
Leave a Comment
About the Contributor
Karen Olea, staff writer
My name's Karen Olea and I'm a writer for the Mesa Press this semester. I'm majoring in Journalism Broadcasting with a minor in Spanish. I enjoy fashion,...
Recent Comments
joker1230 on 'Joker' lets loose in the R-rated realm
chas holman on Does a transparent administration lie to the public?
Yoga is for anyone at any time on Yoga is for anyone at any time
Timothy Phelps on Preaching the gospel of hate
Amy on Adderall abuse rising in college student circles
Navigate Left
News Mesa president selected as finalist in search for new chancellor
Crime I Smell Gunpowder: Shooting at Asian Bistro (First Hand Account)
Sports Mesa Baseball wins one, loses one
Crime Paintball poser lurks on campus
News Financial Literacy talks budgeting during the holidays
Culture #MeToo Brings Justice to Survivors
News Mesa College Targeted by Signature Gatherers
climate California continues to burn while nearing end of the year
Culture Mesa offers assistance for students in need
News Wildfires leave Northern California Communities in Ruins
Navigate Right
The Mesa Press
RSS Feed
Snapchat
SoundCloud
Instagram
Twitter
Facebook
The independent student news site of San Diego Mesa College.
Submit Search
Search
About The Mesa Press
Advertise with The Mesa Press
Classifieds
Staff
© 2022 · Advertise · FLEX WordPress Theme by SNO · Log in
0
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share via Email
Print
Search
Submit Search
Activate SearchScroll to TopTerror with current terrorism
Search
News
Opinion
Features
Sports
Podcasts
Advertise with The Mesa Press
Classifieds
About The Mesa Press
Staff
CloseClose Modal Window
Comments (0)
Here at The Mesa Press, we want to foster a community for civil discussions.
We welcome your insight and perspective. Comments posted must be appropriate for all ages. Any profanity or cursing is prohibited. That includes any attempts to curse with special characters (!@#) or spacing.
Discuss and criticize ideas. We don't allow comments that intend to intimidate, demean or harass other readers in any way.
All
The Mesa Press Picks
Reader Picks
Sort: Newest

Load-Date: February 22, 2022


End of Document