TERRORISM WILL CURB RIGHT TO GUNS, BOMBS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 11, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C; RICHARD COHEN COLUMN
Length: 532 words
Byline: Richard Cohen Copyright Washington Post Writers Group
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


About four hours after a bomb went off in the World Trade Center here, I saw a traffic officer ticket a car illegally parked about a block away. The car, a Lexus with New Jersey plates, was the only one on the street.  Nearby, soot-covered office workers were still making their way out of the Trade Center, and the realization was beginning to sink in that a bomb - not some sort of electrical malfunction - had produced the explosion. America was still in its Age of Innocence.
Elsewhere in the world - Beirut, Bogota, London, anywhere in Israel - a lone car, parked illegally near the site of a terrorist bombing, would have brought an entirely different reaction. Someone would have noticed it and yelled a warning. Authorities would be summoned and the car treated with utmost respect. A mere abandoned shopping bag triggers that kind of reaction in Israel.
New York is a changed city. The meaning of the bombing is beginning to sink in. The Trade Center was nearly mortally wounded. The economic repercussions are staggering - $ 1 billion is now being mentioned, and it could be another month before the center is functioning again.
Instead of an explosive device concocted by some evil genius out of exotic materials, the bomb turned out to be made from store-shelf items and may well have been placed by a rank amateur. Instead of the vehicle being stripped of all identifying numbers, it was left as is - and quickly traced to a suspect.  All it really takes to blow a hole in the economy of New York is the desire to do it.
It might seem like a leap - both of geography and logic - to connect the bombing here with the shootout between federal officials and members of the Branch Davidians outside of Waco, Texas, but they are connected by an idiosyncratic American ethos: the ease with which we can arm ourselves or procure explosives. In almost no other country, certainly not an industrialized one, could the deaths of four federal agents be blamed on the government being outgunned. It was a stunning admission and worth pondering: A collection of nuts had more firepower than the government agents who had come to arrest them.
A similarly anachronistic situation applies to explosives. It's not hard to assemble large quantities of explosives without having to smuggle them in from foreign countries. In this country, some would insist, you have a constitutional right to arm yourself like a guerrilla fighter and buy explosives like a terrorist. It's an insane state of affairs.
No amount of regulation could make America terrorist-free. But tougher regulations would make terrorism immeasurably harder to pull off and immeasurably easier to police. Americans fighting to retain their so-called right to bear arms or buy explosive materials over the counter have elevated these privileges so that they take precedence over our personal safety.
Airport searches are now routine; so is restricted access to both private and public buildings. The lesson of the World Trade Center bombing is that more of that is going to happen. When it comes to terrorism, we're going to have to lose more than our innocence. We're going to have to lose our outdated policy on guns and explosives as well.

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document