Terrorism not an existential threat
The Falcon: Seattle Pacific University
February 3, 2016 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 708 words
Byline: Kat Wynn
Body


U.S strategy breeds more terrorism
It was 1968 when Phyllis Bennis was introduced to activism in the anti-Vietnam war movement while in college.
"I was lucky enough to be starting university in the last years of the war in Vietnam where campus organizing and student organizing had taken over," Bennis said in a phone interview with The Falcon. "So that was my real education."
More so than just an anti-war sentiment, it was necessary to understand the Vietnamese and why the war was happening to address the issues of U.S. involvement oversees. It made the movement an extraordinary learning process, according to Bennis.
Now Bennis works on middle east, anti-war and Israel-Palestine issues as a public scholar at The Institute for Policy Studies.
As a public scholar, Bennis works to get information to people who are building social movements to oppose bad policies.
"Our work is with people who are building protest movements to change the policies, to change the society that we live in," Bennis said.
On Tuesday, Feb. 2. Bennis spoke about the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria to over 70 faculty, staff, students and community members, giving her unique perspective and breaking down the major issues surrounding it.
The birth of ISIS is not rooted in President Barack Obama's withdrawal of troops, according to Bennis, rather it began in 2004 with the U.S. occupation and invasion of Iraq.
"What are we doing in the middle east?" Bennis said of the United States Foreign Policy and military interventions. "We're doing the same thing over and over again on groundhog day."
"It was wrong the first time, it didn't work the first time and it's not working the 15th time," Bennis said.
Bennis noted that terrorism is a personal threat and not an existential or military threat to the existence of the United States.
"By using military force the way we do, we are simply breeding more terrorism in all of these global crises," Bennis said. "At the end of the day you can't bomb terrorism away."
Often times issues in the Middle East are said to be a crisis of religion and ancient disagreements but none of that's true, according to Bennis.
"Religion becomes the way people claim their identities ... when their own government acts as a sectarian force privileging one group and discriminating against another group," Bennis said. "So those groups tend to be identified by religion the way our country [U.S.] they're identified by race."
Bennis noted that this religious discrimination is what drives Sunni's, who have nothing but anger, into the arms of ISIS who they see as protecting them from the government in Baghdad.
The Sunni's who join ISIS are willing to put up with the religious extremism, even though they are not necessarily extreme, so that they are supported and have help, Bennis said.
The Palestine-Israel conflict is also described as an issue of religion, that it is a struggle between Muslims and Jews, Bennis added.
"This is not about religion, this is about rights and land," Bennis said.
This situation is the definition of apartheid in international law, Bennis said, which is when in a territory one government body imposes two or more legal systems that are divided by race or religion.
Bennis used an example that in Israel, at age 14 a Palestinian would be brought before a regular military court for criminal charges, whereas an Israeli is tried in a juvenile courts until age 18.
"This notion that Israel is a democracy and therefore our best friend, is really misguided," Bennis said. "That the $3.1 billion a year that we give to the Israeli military is not a good use of our tax dollars."
Bennis also noted that the next ten years of spending are being negotiated and it may go up to $5 billion a year.
Using the website nationalpriorities.org, which works to make the federal budget transparent and more accessible, Bennis calculated that since August 2014 the state of Washington has spent $154 million in tax money just on the war against ISIS.
Bennis believes students don't need to be an expert on these issues to engage in them and get involved in them.
"Engage with other people, people can't do all that much on their own, but boy, a small group, never doubt how much a small group of people working together can do, "Bennis said.

Load-Date: February 4, 2022


End of Document