Terrorism taking focus away from drugs
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
June 22, 2003, Sunday


Copyright 2003 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 536 words
Byline: By Curt Anderson Associated Press and Joe Dougherty Deseret Morning News
Body


WASHINGTON -- In Utah as in the rest of the nation, nearly half of the FBI agents who once handled drug cases are now concentrating on the fight against terrorism, a shift that has caused concern in Congress about a possible lack of attention to other crime problems.
The General Accounting Office has informed a House committee that the number of FBI field agent positions dedicated to drug crimes had dropped from about 1,400 in fall 2001 to slightly more than 800 today.
The FBI's Salt Lake City office has shifted about the same ratio of agents from the drug squad to work on counterterrorism, spokesman George Dougherty said.
Simultaneously, drug squad agents have begun working with various task forces around Salt Lake City to supplement their efforts. Because protecting the United States is the FBI's priority, that is where more resources are concentrated, Dougherty said.
"That's the biggest thing out there," he said.
Nationally, the number of new drug investigations fell from 1,825 in 2000 to 944 last year and just 310 in the first half of this year. At the same time, new FBI counterterrorism investigations rose from slightly more than 1,000 prior to the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, to 4,408 by early this year.
Rep. Hal Rogers, R-Ky., told FBI Director Robert Mueller at a House appropriations subcommittee meeting that the shift could be "leaving a big hole in America's fabric."
"We still need the FBI for the old traditional things that the FBI has always done," Rogers said.
Mueller acknowledged that the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks resulted in a drastic change in the FBI's priorities toward detecting and preventing future attacks. He cited the permanent reassignment of 674 agent positions to counterterrorism and counterintelligence from their work on violent crime, white-collar investigations and especially drugs.
"We have had to focus on priorities," Mueller said. "We have to pick and choose."
That means some smaller-scale embezzlement cases might be left for local authorities, the Drug Enforcement Administration is handling more drug cases and the FBI is getting involved in traditional crimes most often when such cases cross state lines or require the bureau's special expertise, Mueller said.
The report by the GAO, the investigative arm of Congress, found that 36 percent of the FBI's field agent positions are now working on either counterterrorism or counterintelligence, compared with 26 percent shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks. The report says that the FBI faces challenges in finding enough agents to meet the terror threat without further siphoning off resources from other criminal investigations.
On drug cases, the DEA has reassigned dozens of agents to focus on high-priority trafficking cases and is asking Congress for 233 new positions, plus reassignment of 293 others. But the GAO report says that these changes will fill some but not all of the drug program personnel gap left by the FBI's reassignments.
To keep pace, Mueller said the FBI will need approval from Congress for more agents. "We are stretched," he said.
One FBI program that deals directly with organized crime and drug trafficking has not seen any agents transferred, remaining steady at 488, the report says.

Load-Date: June 22, 2003


End of Document