Terrorism experts sent to embassies;

The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 8, 1998, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 285 words
Byline: Compiled from Tribune wires;
Body


WASHINGTON - Alarmed by evidence that terrorists are planning more attacks on U.S. embassies, the  Clinton administration has dispatched counterterrorism experts to diplomatic missions around the  world to determine if any are so vulnerable that they should be shuttered immediately,  administration officials say.
The White House is expected to seek from Congress this week between $ 1 billion and $ 3 billion to  build embassies to replace those in Kenya and Tanzania, and to pay for security improvements  elsewhere.
Indonesia site of more riots
JAKARTA, Indonesia - At least 2,000 student protesters tore down the gates of Indonesia's  parliament Monday and threw plastic bottles at riot police during a demonstration against President  B.J. Habibie.
The students seek Habibie's resignation and a trial for former President Suharto. Riots earlier  this year spurred by economic troubles and government corruption ousted Suharto after a 32-year  rule.  Milosevic rejects calls for probe
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia - President Slobodan Milosevic turned down U.S. appeals Monday for access to  the ravaged province of Kosovo, but said he would consider an international probe into atrocities  there.
John Shattuck, U.S. assistant secretary of state, and former U.S. Sen. Bob Dole met with  Milosevic following a weekend fact-finding tour of Kosovo. "What we have seen is massive destruction  and horrendous human rights abuses on civilians," Shattuck said afterward.
Local residents say male citizens in recent weeks have gone missing after being taken into Serb  custody. During the Bosnian war, such occurrences resulted in allegations of genocide after mass  graves were located in areas where the men and boys went missing.

Notes

IN BRIEF NEWS OF THE WORLD

Load-Date: September 9, 1998


End of Document