Terrorism can work, author explains in 'Anonymous Soldiers' FICTION - BOOKS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 1, 2015 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A&E; Pg. D9
Length: 798 words
Byline:  By Repps Hudson Special to the Post-Dispatch   
Body


Terrorism can work. It can get the intended results.
That's the conclusion of Bruce Hoffman, an American terrorism expert who teaches at Georgetown University, in his well-sourced, exhaustive study of the Jewish underground during the 30 years the British tried to govern Palestine.
"The [Jewish underground group] Irgun's terrorism campaign in fact is critical to understanding the evolution and development of contemporary terrorism," writes Hoffman, stating his thesis. "The group effectively directed its message to audiences far beyond the immediate geographic locus of its struggle - in New York and Washington and Paris and Moscow as much as in London and Jerusalem. This taught a powerful lesson to similarly aggrieved peoples elsewhere, who now saw in terrorism an effective means of transforming hitherto local conflicts into international issues."
Those interested in the Arab-Israeli conflict will want this book in their library. Hoffman has written it without using the kind of accusatory language that often is the hallmark of such books. It's straightforward scholarship, written in an interesting style, and richly footnoted based on the author's access to declassified British, Israeli and American documents.
Other writers on the conflict over the years have pointed out, sometimes in a strongly defamatory tone, that the Jews who founded Israel used the tactics of terror to accomplish their goal. Hoffman, without passing judgment, simply tells what happened, why and what the results were. This makes his book one to read.
Hoffman goes so far as to attribute the rise of modern terrorism, even by the Palestine Liberation Organization, to Jewish insurgents who were determined to drive the British out of the mandate so they could establish the state of Israel.
When we review the tactics and strategy of the PLO, its taking of hostages and many acts of violence throughout Europe and the Middle East in the 1970s and 1980s, we can see the similarities to which Hoffman refers.
However, the Jewish underground was careful to strike at British and military targets, not civilians, a distinction the PLO usually did not make. Yes, civilians died when the King David Hotel was bombed in 1946, but the target was British government offices.
A key figure in the terrorist campaign against the British was Menachem Begin, who led the underground Irgun Zvai Le'umi, then the Herut Party after Israel was established. He became prime minister in 1977 as head of the conservative Likud Party.
Begin, however, then made the Camp David peace with Egypt that broke the Arab isolation of Israel and won, with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, the Nobel Peace Prize.
During the Jewish underground's campaign, the greatest wave of terror against the British included the assassination of Lord Moyne in Cairo in 1944, the bombings of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem and the British embassy in Rome in 1946 and the kidnapping and lynching of two British enlisted men in 1947.
The latter was the event that caused the Cabinet to decide to turn Palestine over to the fledgling United Nations. It also sparked a wave of anti-Jewish protests and destruction of synagogues and Jewish businesses in parts of England, acts similar to protests in Europe in recent times in reaction to Israeli military actions in, say, Gaza.
By late 1947, the British Cabinet in London decided it could no longer control the conflict, sometimes between Jewish fighters and the British army and police, and sometimes between the Jews and the Arabs also living in Palestine.
"At the foundation of the Irgun's strategy was Begin's belief that the British, unlike the Germans, who during the [Second World] war had carried out wholesale reprisals against civilians, were incapable of such barbarity," Hoffman writes. "By pushing a liberal democracy like Britain to mount increasingly repressive measures against the Yishuv [the Jewish community in Palestine], the terrorists sought to push Britain to the limits of endurance."
The strategy of terror worked.
When the U.N. General Assembly took over trying to determine the fate of Palestine and its Jewish and Arab residents, it passed a resolution endorsing partition into two states, one Arab and one Jewish.
The Arab states rejected the U.N.'s solution, but nonetheless the British withdrew in May 1948 and the first war - Israel's war to prove it could be independent - began. The results are familiar to many: The state survived, and Palestinian refugees were created.
Hoffman does not deal with this period, only the events leading up to the war, which fills in a large gap in the understanding of how the British decided to abandon its plan to govern Palestine.
---
‘Anonymous Soldiers: The Struggle for Israel, 1917-1947' By Bruce Hoffman Published by Knopf, 616 pages, $35

Notes

   Nonfiction 

Load-Date: March 2, 2015


End of Document