Terrorists' next deadly tool: Viruses Delivery made easier by new technology
USA TODAY
September 12, 2000, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;; HEALTH AND BEHAVIOR
Length: 633 words
Byline: Anita Manning
Body


When Michael Osterholm speaks of "the perfect storm," he's not
talking about the weather. He's talking about what would happen
if smallpox virus were let loose in an American city.
Nearly everyone in the world is susceptible, and supplies of vaccine
are inadequate, so "even an accidental release of this virus
into civilian populations would result in catastrophe," he writes
in Living Terrors: What America Needs to Know to Survive the
Coming Bioterrorist Catastrophe (Delacorte Press, $ 24.95).
Osterholm, a national expert on infectious disease and bioterrorism,
says would-be terrorists have the means, motive and countless
opportunities to inflict devastation on the world using any of
dozens of dreaded biological threats: smallpox, anthrax, botulism
and hemorrhagic fever viruses like Ebola, to name the most likely.
He cites the coming together of three factors:
* People who will do this. With the end of the Cold War
has come an increase in extremist groups, religious cults and
terrorists motivated by religious or political extremism.
* Available infectious agents. Osterholm points to the
ease with which scientists can obtain microorganisms from repositories
that keep them for sale for research purposes.
* The ability to deliver those agents. Until recently,
such technology didn't exist.
Baker Spring, a research fellow at the Heritage Foundation, hasn't
read Osterholm's book yet, but he agrees "there clearly are vulnerabilities"
relating to the potential of biological attack.
But, Spring says, "it's important to keep in mind that while
it's extremely easy to produce basic biological diseases, the
germs and so forth, putting them in a deliverable form is not
quite so easy."
Osterholm, a former state epidemiologist for Minnesota, says that's
no longer true. Advances in aerosol technology and delivery systems
make the tools of the terror trade widely available, from the
corner drugstore to the Internet, he says.
Ivan Eland of the Cato Institute says incidents of terrorism are
relatively rare. Since 1994, 11 Americans a year are killed, on
average, in such events, most of them outside North America.
"Terrorism as a problem itself is going down," he says. "However,
catastrophic terrorism, the incidents we've seen," such as the
World Trade Center bombing and Tokyo subway attack, "were designed
to kill a lot of people."
The potential for such incidents, Eland says, "is our top security
threat."
Osterholm and co-author John Schwartz, a Washington Post reporter,
present fictional scenarios for biological attack, such as an
airplane dispersing microscopic anthrax spores over a football
stadium or a former Soviet scientist who unleashes smallpox in
a shopping mall during the Christmas rush. They then describe
the chaos that would follow, as hospitals try to cope with thousands
of sick people and not enough antibiotics or vaccine to go around.
Current defense policies, Osterholm argues, are focused on a military
or police response to terrorism. That is appropriate for a chemical
or bomb attack, he says, but in a biological attack, the first
responders will be medical personnel, and there is no place in
the USA that is fully prepared.
He urges that funding in defense programs be redirected toward
bioterrorism planning, training and monitoring. And, he says,
we need a stockpile of vaccines and antibiotics effective against
the microbes most likely to be used in an attack.
The public health system needs to be built up so that it won't
collapse under the first hint of trouble. While there is no way
to completely guard against attack, he says, there is much that
can be done to mitigate disaster. "If I didn't think we could
do something about it, I'd have packed up and moved to northern
Minnesota," he says. "This is not a book to frighten people
out of their wits. It's a book to frighten people into their wits."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Ican Inc.; Osterholm: Catastrophes looming.

Load-Date: September 12, 2000


End of Document