TERRORISM AND IMPERIALISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 8, 2002 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL ; Pg. B2; EDITORIAL
Length: 735 words
Body


SEPT. 11, 2001
A YEAR AGO, the United States was a wounded giant whose president was leading an international charge in a bold, global war against terrorism. Today, the United States is an aggressive superpower whose president has angered erstwhile allies with his threat to attack "evil" regimes.
Even as a new normalcy has settled over everyday life in America, President George W. Bush has significantly altered U.S. foreign policy. After a century of defending the world against aggression, the United States is now proposing first-strike attacks against countries with weapons of mass destruction. After half a century of building international organizations and alliances, the United States has claimed the prerogative to decide on its own which nations should be attacked.
The result is a watershed moment in foreign policy, on the order of the Truman administration's adoption of the policy of containment, and the decisions to engage and disengage in Vietnam.
Hawks within the Bush administration argue that the end of Cold War-era policies of deterrence and mutually assured destruction makes international alliances less necessary. Seeking a balance of power among blocs of nations is irrelevant in a world with one superpower whose most imminent threat is invisible networks of terrorists. Mr. Bush argues that our unsurpassed U.S. military might allows the United States to make its own decisions on its own timetable, rather than waiting for the consensus of recalcitrant allies.
THE Bush doctrine, the president argues, is a preventive and pragmatic approach to fighting terrorism. Rogue nations with deadly weapons could give them to terrorists for delivery to a U.S. city. Since rogue states are easier to find than elusive terrorists, the best way to guard against a weapon of mass destruction is to strike at evil regimes.
This is misguided imperialism for the 21st century. It is Theodore Roosevelt's gunboat diplomacy gone global -- except Mr. Bush speaks loudly while carrying a big stick.
In key ways, the doctrine is confusing. Among the three states named as Mr. Bush's "axis of evil," -- Iraq, Iran and North Korea -- Iraq is furthest from having a nuclear bomb. Yet it is the first target. If Islamic terrorists were to obtain a nuclear bomb, the most likely source would not be the axis of evil, but renegade elements in Pakistan, our ally. Also, if the Bush doctrine really means that the United States has the prerogative to attack anti-democratic states that kill their own people and already possess weapons of mass destruction, China would be the most logical target. Moreover, the Bush doctrine is a dangerous model. Couldn't India use it to attack Pakistan, or China to attack Taiwan?
Nor does the doctrine, as applied to Iraq, require convincing proof of an imminent threat. Iraq has not been involved in a terrorist attack against the United States in a decade, and it may be years away from a nuclear bomb. Absurdly, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld has resorted to talking about "unknown unknowns" to justify an attack.
IN some ways, the unilateralist penchant of the Bush hawks is as American as George Washington's farewell address about avoiding permanent alliances. But Sept. 11, at least briefly, created an imperative for international action. Every nation wanted to sign on to the war against terrorism. Mr. Bush has frittered away this good will by moving on to Iraq while Afghanistan remains in turmoil.
Finally, there are the unintended consequences that an attack on Iraq could unleash in the volatile, unpredictable Middle East. Perhaps U.S. forces will be hailed in Baghdad and victory will encourage peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians, as the Gulf War did. More likely, conquering Baghdad will deepen the feeling in the Arab street that the United States is the enemy. Nor does Mr. Bush have a workable plan for melding Iraq's ethnic groups into a democratic state.
An attack on Iraq still may be justified if Mr. Bush has the evidence to convince Congress and our allies that Saddam Hussein is an immediate threat. But we should remember lessons from Vietnam: that wars have unforeseen consequences, that presidents shouldn't strain to justify intervention, and that the United States should avoid wars with an imperialist cast. Those are reasons to hesitate on Iraq and to wonder if the axis of evil is any more real than the dominoes of yesteryear.

Load-Date: November 19, 2002


End of Document