Terrorism makes Americans think twice about travel
University Wire
August 31, 1998


Copyright 1998 Iowa State Daily via U-Wire
Length: 357 words
Byline: By Brian Klein, Iowa State Daily
Dateline: Ames, Iowa
Body


Recent strikes by the United States on terrorist organizations are affecting more than just the leaders of this country.
Americans traveling abroad also are being cautious and are trying to avoid being caught in the middle of a terrorist attack.
Gary Salmon, manager of Travel and Transport, Inc., 213 Duff Ave., said that recent terrorist acts have not caused a reduced number of international flights with his company, but he thinks people are dubious about whether it is safe to travel.
Iowa State U.
"People are questioning if they should make the trip," he said. "But there have been no cancellations [at Travel and Transport] as far as I'm aware of."
Many travelers worry about security, but Sanjeev Agarwal, international studies professor for the College of Business, said security is usually pretty tight, even in times of peace.
"[Overseas airport security will usually] not let non-passengers into the airport, will inspect automobiles 1/4 mile before the airport, have x-ray inspections and have [luggage identification]," he said.
Even with the recent terrorist acts, most of the security actions are kept out of the public eye.
"Most security measures are done behind the scenes, where it's not noticeable to the public," Salmon said.
There are measures that travelers do notice, however.
"There are many more uniformed policeman [than usual] … more bomb-sniffing dogs … and they remove mail boxes and garbage cans, anything large enough to place a bomb in," Agarwal said.
He said there is no reason to panic because these terrorism attacks are very sporadic, but he would avoid places the U.S. State Department has cautioned against.
The U. S. State Department has identified Afghanistan, Kenya, Sudan and South Africa as high-risk travel areas on its Web page because of recent terrorist attacks.
"The truth of the matter is, you can't worry about terrorism … you'll go crazy," said Steffen Schmitt, program chairman of International Studies. "People who are worried about traveling shouldn't travel. Terrorism is random, and there is nothing you can do about it."
(C) 1999 Iowa State Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 2, 1999


End of Document