TERRORISM LINK SEEN IN ONLY A HANDFUL OF DETAINEES
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
November 30, 2001 Friday City Edition


Copyright 2001 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-19
Length: 419 words
Byline: Copyright New York Times News Service
Body


The nationwide search for terrorists after Sept. 11 has resulted in the arrests of more than 1,200 people, but law enforcement officials say only a small number of those detained are believed to have any links to terrorism.
A review of documents and interviews with law enforcement officials and defense lawyers indicate that the detentions have yielded a collection of fairly routine immigration violators, speeders and petty criminals who got caught up in a dragnet prompted by fears of further terrorist attacks.
Of the 104 people charged with federal crimes as announced by Attorney General Ashcroft on Tuesday, almost all were accused of crimes unrelated to terrorism. Senior law enforcement officials said Wednesday that of that group, only about 10 or 11 are believed to have any relationship to the terrorist group al-Qaida.
Of another group of 548 people, all unnamed, who Ashcroft said were being held on immigration charges across the country, only about a dozen are believed to have terrorist ties, the senior law enforcement officials said.
Those officials, who are involved in the investigation, said Wednesday that they were skeptical of Ashcroft's characterization that the detentions were having a profound effect on interrupting terrorist activity in the United States.
One former senior FBI official described the investigation this way: "When you send a whole lot of agents out after a whole lot of people, they're going to find some who committed various crimes. It's just inevitable. And when they find criminal activity, even if it's not the crime they were looking for, they're going to make an arrest."
The cloud of terrorism no longer remains over many of those in custody, however. A large number of those still in detention are fighting the garden-variety criminal and immigration charges that the government used to arrest them. The FBI has lost interest in them as possible terrorists, but local authorities and immigration officials feel obliged to continue their pursuit of the original charges.
Administration officials said they see nothing wrong in using the terrorist roundup to arrest or deport immigrants for unrelated charges, even after any connection to terrorism is disproved.
"There are people who are . . . being detained pursuant to immigration violations, and let's be clear, those are people who have essentially overstayed their welcome in this country," Assistant Attorney General Michael Chertoff told the Senate Judiciary Committee on Wednesday. "They don't belong here."

Load-Date: December 4, 2001


End of Document