Terrorism Leaves French Undaunted
The New York Times
September 9, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk  
Section: Section 1;  ; Section 1;   Page 5;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk  ; Column 4;  
Length: 750 words
Byline: By ALAN RIDING  

By ALAN RIDING  
Dateline: PARIS, Sept. 8
Body


It was the sixth terrorist action in France in just six weeks, but the car bomb that wounded 14 people outside a Jewish school in Lyons on Thursday was somehow different. Suddenly, the French are realizing they must once again learn to live in the shadow of terrorism.
Eager to reassure a nervous public, the Government ordered a maximum security alert today, stepping up protection of the country's 75,000 schools, tightening vigilance at borders, airports and railroad stations and placing the Eiffel Tower and the Arc de Triomphe under military guard.
Yet, while the bombs in crowded public places, suspected to be the work of Algerian Islamic militants, have now prompted even ordinary French to be alert to strange packages and suspicious behavior, the terrorists have so far failed to achieve their immediate objective of throwing France into a panic.
Instead, reminded of a similar bombing campaign that shook Paris in the mid-1980's, many French are reacting with considerable sang-froid, adjusting quickly to both the inconveniences of greater security and the knowledge that no amount of Government measures can provide absolute security.
"Change my habits?" declared a woman in her mid-60's as she emerged from a subway station in central Paris. "Never. It's fate. If I am there, I am there. I've taken the same subway route ever since the first bomb and I don't think about it. Well, yes, I do think about it. I look out for abandoned packages."
Yaffa Assouline, a French publisher and mother of two small children, said security measures can never be enough. "Everything possible is being done, but there are always crazy people around," she said. "The only other thing would be to keep the children out of school, but I won't do that. I'm not going to become a prisoner of fear."
The Government, which put into effect a crisis security plan last night, has also urged people to remain calm. "We won't give in to hysteria," Education Minister Francois Bayrou said today. "It's obvious what the bombers want. They want to create public panic by taking further steps of horror every day."
A bank employee, who refused to give his name, said he refused to be intimidated. "I remember the 1986 bombings," he said. "I have the same reaction today. If you change your habits, the terrorists win."
Still, with no evidence that police are close to capturing those behind the bombings, even Interior Minister Jean-Louis Debre, who is in charge of internal security, conceded today that "the battle will be long and difficult."
The Government's main problem, however, is that it has still not properly identified its enemy. It believes that Algeria's Armed Islamic Group is behind the bombings, but it has no definitive proof.
The group is the most radical of the Islamic militant factions that have been fighting since 1992 to topple the Algerian Government.
The Lyons bombing nonetheless marked an increase in terrorism, not only because a car bomb was used for the first time, but also because its target was a school. Through a "miracle," the word on everyone's lips today, the bomb exploded just minutes before some 700 children were scheduled to end classes for the day.
Today's new security measures centered on schools. Even before Thursday's bombing, parents needed special permission to enter the grounds of their children's schools. Now, the authorities have banned all parked cars near schools, while principals have been ordered to let children out of school in small groups. Jewish schools have been given additional protection.
Many other security measures are already in place in Paris. After the first -- and bloodiest -- bombing on July 25, police sealed trash cans in the subway system and increased patrols on trains. After a second bomb exploded in a trash can near the Arc de Triomphe on Aug. 17, most city trash cans were sealed.
Security guards now also routinely check the bags of people entering department stores and Government buildings. Tonight, the Government said 500 soldiers would be mobilized to guard major sites in France.
Police investigations into the bombing, in contrast, have focused on the large Algerian immigrant communities in Paris, Lyons, Marseilles and other major French cities, prompting charges that the police are discriminating against Arabs by singling out darker-skinned men and women for stepped-up identity checks. Today, the National Council of French Muslims called on all Muslims to condemn the "cowardly" bombing of the Jewish school in Lyons on Thursday.

Graphic

 
Photo: Soldiers with submachine guns jumped from a truck at the Eiffel Tower yesterday as part of a reinforcement called by the Government after a series of bombings. The Arc de Triomphe is also under military guard. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: September 9, 1995


End of Document