Terrorists attacks increase worldwide
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
April 28, 2007 Saturday


Copyright 2007 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 5
Length: 440 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON (MCT) - A State Department report on terrorism due out next week will show a nearly 30 percent increase in terrorist attacks worldwide in 2006 to more than 14,000, almost all of the boost due to growing violence in Iraq and Afghanistan, U.S. officials said Friday. 
The annual report's release comes amid a bitter feud between the White House and Congress over funding for U.S. troops in Iraq and a deadline favored by Democrats to begin a U.S. troop withdrawal. 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and her top aides earlier this week had considered postponing or downplaying the release of this year's edition of the terrorism report, officials in several agencies and on Capitol Hill said. 
Ultimately, they decided to issue the report on or near the congressionally mandated deadline of Monday, the officials said. 
"We're proceeding in normal fashion with the final review of this and expect it to be released early next week," State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey said. 
A half-dozen U.S. officials with knowledge of the report's contents or the debate surrounding it agreed to discuss those topics on the condition they not be identified because of the extreme political sensitivities surrounding the war and the report. 
Based on data compiled by the U.S. intelligence community's National Counterterrorism Center, the report says there were 14,338 terrorist attacks last year, up 29 percent from 11,111 attacks in 2005. Forty-five percent of the attacks were in Iraq. 
Worldwide, there were about 5,800 terrorist attacks that resulted in at least one fatality, also up from 2005. 
The figures for Iraq and elsewhere are limited to attacks on noncombatants and don't include strikes against U.S. troops. 
Even after this year's report was largely completed and approved, Rice and her aides this week called for a further round of review, in part to avoid repeating embarrassing missteps of recent years in the report's release, officials said. The review process is being led by Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte, formerly the nation's intelligence czar. 
The U.S. intelligence community is said to be preparing a separate, classified report on terrorist "safe havens" worldwide, and officials have debated whether Iraq meets that definition. 
The report can be expected to be used as ammunition for both sides in the domestic battle over the Iraq war. 
President Bush calls Iraq the "central front" in Bush's war on terrorism and likely will say that the preponderance of attacks there and in Afghanistan prove their point. 
But critics say the U.S. invasion and occupation of Iraq have worsened the terrorist threat. 

Load-Date: July 19, 2007


End of Document