Terrorism bill has foes - 
Brock Press: Brock University
July 15, 2020 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS-AND-LIFE; Pg. 1
Length: 489 words
Byline: Emma Kirwin
Body


On Oct. 15, bill C-36, Canada's attempt to combat terrorism, was introduced into the House of Commons, but some Canadians are worried the bill may violate the rights it is intended to protect.The bill is designed to "[create] measures to identify, prosecute, convict and punish terrorist groups; provide new investigative tools to law enforcement and national security agencies; and ensure that Canadian values of respect and fairness are preserved and the root causes of hatred are addressed through stronger laws against hate crimes and propaganda," according to a Department of Justice press release.
The bill includes a new, broader definition of terrorist activity. Amongst the activities included in the bill are "knowingly providing or collecting money in order to fund terrorist crimes" and "knowingly harbouring or concealing a terrorist."
"The horrific events of Sept. 11 remind us that we must continue to work with other nations to confront terrorism and ensure the full force of Canadian law is brought to bear against those who support, plan and carry out acts of terror. We will cut off their money, find them and punish them," said Justice Minister Anne McLellan in a department media release.
"As a nation, we must be prepared to ensure our safety and security. This legislation will provide our law enforcement and national security agencies with additional tools to identify and dismantle terrorist organizations and prevent terrorist acts," said Solicitor General Lawrence MacAuley in the same release.
But some groups, particularly the Canadian Islamic Congress feel that the bill will encroach on Canadian civil liberties. Prof. Mohammed Elmasry, CIC president, feels the bill will infringe upon civil liberties, and unfairly target Canadian Muslims and other Canadians of Middle Eastern decent.
"The bill itself is a comprehensive bill, it's 170 pages long and rushing it through would affect the life of many Canadians," said Elmasry.
The bill includes sections that give the police the power to make "preventative arrests," of suspected terrorists. Also, one section would eliminate the need for demonstrating that electronic surveillance is a last resort in the investigation of terrorists. It is these sections of the bill that make Elmasry nervous.
"[We must] not rush the bill. If a comprehensive bill like that is rushed through it could be damaging to all those living in Canada, even if the bill is revisited in three years."
"It takes away many civil liberties. Many groups, such as the Canadian Bar Association are voicing the same concerns. Certain groups are vulnerable at this point. We [the CIC] are at the front lines of protecting Canadian civil liberties ... Protection of groups is through our laws, so if we can make a good law it protects our citizens. We are asking that a third party, the Supreme Court, review the law," said Elmasry. "A bad law before Sept. 11 is still a bad law after Sept. 11."

Load-Date: July 16, 2020


End of Document