Terrorism experts say they don't see Iraq link
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 22, 2001 Saturday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A05
Length: 821 words
Byline: Warren P. Strobel INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


While President Bush's top advisers debate whether to target Iraq for devastating bombardment as part of the U.S.-led war on terrorism, U.S. officials and terrorism experts say there is little evidence Saddam Hussein's regime played a role in the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
The issue of who - if anyone - helped suspect Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda network plan and execute the Sept. 11 terrorist tragedy has taken on new urgency as Bush decides how and where to retaliate with a growing military arsenal being deployed overseas.
In fact, the administration is preparing a "white paper" laying out its evidence against the Saudi exile in connection with Sept. 11 and other terrorist attacks on U.S. interests, to be released in connection with military action.
In the hours after the attacks, U.S. intelligence obtained congratulatory messages from bin Laden operatives that seemed to confirm the Afghan-based bin Laden's culpability. Members of groups allied with al-Qaeda, such as the Egyptian Jihad organization and Algeria's Armed Islamic Group, may have played a role, too, said a U.S. official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
But because of the size and elaborate planning of the events of last week, suspicions persist that bin Laden had a sponsoring nation, possibly Iraq.
A senior U.S. intelligence official said "little bits and pieces of information" are being pursued that suggest links between foreign governments and the terrorists who hijacked four jetliners. But there is no hard evidence, the official said.
The CIA and other intelligence agencies have declined to disclose many specifics of what they know about who is behind the attacks, reluctant to give away anything that would endanger their sources.
Among the hints of a link to Iraq is a meeting last year between Mohammed Atta, a hijacker on one of the planes that hit the World Trade Center towers, and an Iraqi intelligence agent in Europe. While interesting, it is hardly evidence that Iraq backed the attacks, the official said.
Bin Laden himself met with Iraqi intelligence agents in Afghanistan after he fled there from Sudan in 1996, another official said yesterday, confirming a Wall Street Journal report.
Al-Qaeda and the Iraqi government reached an understanding "that al-Qaeda would not work against that government and that on particular projects, specifically including weapons development, al-Qaeda would work cooperatively with the government of Iraq," according to the 1998 indictment of bin Laden associates for the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Yet beyond their shared hatred for the United States, the Islamic extremist bin Laden and Hussein's secular state have little in common.
"I have never seen any evidence that Iraq is heavily involved in al-Qaeda," said Kenneth Katzman, a Middle East specialist at the Congressional Research Service.
Bin Laden's network is made up of so-called Afghan Arabs who went to Afghanistan in the 1980s to fight the occupying Soviets. Few Iraqis went because Iraq was consumed by its own war with Iran, Katzman said. "If you're not in that milieu, you're not in al-Qaeda," he said.
The first suggestions that Iraq was behind last week's attacks surfaced in reports attributed to Israel's intelligence services. One of the reports contained a factual error that raised doubts about its veracity.
Israel has long viewed Iraq as its most fearsome Arab opponent because of Baghdad's huge conventional army and programs to develop nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
Proponents of Iraq's complicity also cite the theory that Hussein was behind the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center.
Last week's attack "was the biggest terrorist event in history. . . . It takes a state to carry off something" of that scope, said Laurie Mylroie, author of a book that argued the 1993 bombing was Hussein's revenge for the Persian Gulf war. "The only state that comes to mind is Iraq."
But Mylroie acknowledged that she has no "evidence as understood in the legal sense."
The civilian Pentagon officials arguing for Iraq's inclusion as a target for U.S. retaliation include Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz and senior adviser Richard Perle.
Others within the administration, led by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, have strongly objected to military operations against Islamic countries other than Afghanistan. A broader attack would shatter the antiterrorism coalition, they argue.
Yet Gary Richter of the Energy Department's Sandia National Laboratories, who has written classified reports on bin Laden, said there were governments besides Afghanistan and Sudan, where he lived until 1996, that share culpability.
"When the administration looks around for who's to blame for this guy being who he is," it will find plenty of countries who provided support, Richter said, declining to be specific.
Warren P. Strobel's e-mail address is wstrobel@krwashington.com.  

Notes

America in the Aftermath

Load-Date: October 31, 2001


End of Document