TERRORISM FORUM SET AT EDISON;
3 perspectives to be analyzed tonight
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
March 21, 2002 Thursday MIAMI COUNTY EDITION


Copyright 2002 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBORS; Pg. Z9-10
Length: 302 words
Byline: Dayton Daily News
Body


PIQUA - Edison Community College will host a National Issues Forum, Responding to Terrorism, at 6:30 p.m. today .
The forum will be in the North Hall on the Edison campus, 1973 Edison Drive, Piqua.
The forum will examine three perspectives on the cause of terrorist attacks and the ways to minimize such future terrorism.
The three approaches are removing cancer with radical surgery, homeland security and a powder keg of grievances.
Participants will learn that the "powder keg" perspective mandates that the United States stop pursuing strategic interests narrowly in the Middle East and establishes dialogue with moderate Muslim leaders to address their grievances with the United States.
The stance described as "homeland security" accepts on a permanent basis "high alert" security measures and consistently enforces routine video surveillance, random searches and a national identification card.
The most militaristic perspective requires the destruction of terrorists responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks and acceptance of the loss of lives in ground combat.
Dana Warner, health education program planner for the Columbus Health Department, will facilitate Thursday's forum.
About 200 community colleges in the country are hosting the forum.
The NIF program brings together west central Ohio residents several times a year to talk about social and political issues.
The NIF works in connection with the Kettering Foundation in Montgomery County in preparing a report on the views of the public regarding critical topics.
"The terrorism issue discussed at today's forum may tie in with the curriculum of high school students and serve as an out-of-class assignment," said Kathleen O'Brien, Edison spokeswoman for the forum.
Booklets on the NIF topic will be available.
For more information, call (800) 922-3722, Ext. 368.

Load-Date: April 4, 2002


End of Document