TERRORISM ELSEWHERE SPURS HAWAII TOURISM
The New York Times
August 19, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 622 words
Byline: By ROBERT TRUMBULL, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: HONOLULU, Aug. 18
Body


Vacation travel, the principal industry of Hawaii, is setting new records this year, and industry analysts attribute the surge to tourists' fear of terrorism in Europe and the Middle East.
''Europe will stay where it is, and I can put off my trip there till a less risky time,'' said a 32-year-old visitor from Illinois who was sunbathing recently on Honolulu's popular Waikiki Beach and who asked not to be quoted by name.
''Bigger crowds make Hawaii more fun,'' Eiko Okumura, a Tokyo stenographer making her second holiday trip to Honolulu, said between dips in the warm Waikiki surf.
Hawaii's closely monitored visitor count, which reached a record figure of nearly 4.6 million last year in spite of a strike of more than a month by pilots of United Airlines, which serves Hawaii, is expected to reach a new high of 5.6 million this year, according to Stanley Hong, president of the Hawaii Visitors Bureau, the state industry organization. Business sources anticipate a corresponding rise in the $5 billion earned by the tourist industry here last year.
 
A Cosmopolitan Appeal
Casual observation of Waikiki Beach suggests the increasingly cosmopolitan appeal of Hawaii more forcefully than tourism statistics can. Among a recent crowd, a Swedish couple were making their first trip to the Pacific. ''We didn't know the ocean water could be so warm,'' the woman said.
But analysts of Hawaii tourism agree that these islands have a special appeal to Japanese visitors. One reason is that about a quarter of a million of Hawaii's citizens, or approximately one-fourth of the state's population, are of Japanese ancestry. Many, perhaps most, have at least some knowledge of their ancestral language.
''It's easier for a Japanese to get around in Honolulu than in any other foreign city,'' Goro Watanabe, a widely traveled steward with a Japanese airline, declared recently. ''Many Japanese like to think that something in their ancestry gives them a special feeling for tropical places,'' he added, alluding to the fondness of many Japanese for the semitropical southern islands of their homeland.
Tourism officials here surmise that such feelings account, in part at least, for the influx last year of more than 850,000 Japanese visitors, by far the largest foreign group.
The presence of so many visitors from Japan and other Asian lands helps make Hawaii an especially exotic destination for vacationers from the mainland United States, many American visitors say.
''If you can't make it to the real Orient or the South Pacific, Hawaii must be the best available compromise,'' said a Middle Westerner dining in one of the many Oriental restaurants in Waikiki.
 
Tourism Leads State's Economy
For years now the income from enterprises associated with tourism have been the single most lucrative element in the Hawaiian economy, exceeding military spending, the longtime leader, as well as earnings from sugar and pineapples, the state's major agricultural products.
''One out of every three civilian jobs is visitor-related,'' Mr. Hong said in an interview.
Hawaii has slightly more than a million residents, including approximately 120,000 military personnel and their dependents stationed at such installations as the Navy base at Pearl Harbor, and the large Army establishment at Schofield Barracks.
Thoughtful islanders are concerned over Hawaii's overwhelming dependence on tourism, a notably fragile resource because of its reliance on such unpredictable factors as public taste. Among the things these Hawaiians worry about is possible overdevelopment of tourist facilities, already a visible prospect in areas on several islands that are popular with visitors.
''At what point do we have enough?'' Mr. Hong of the Visitors Bureau said recently.


End of Document