Terrorism coverage to be limited
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
December 22, 2001 Saturday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A10
Length: 306 words
Byline: Bert Caldwell Staff writer
Body


Damage to commercial property from terrorist acts will be only partially
 covered by insurance after Dec. 31, Washington Insurance Commissioner Mike
 Kreidler said Friday.
 He said his office has sent letters to insurers permitting them to exempt
 damage in excess of $25million, or when there may be liability in the death or
 serious injury of more than 50 people.
By comparison, he noted, damage from the World Trade Center attack could
 reach $70 billion.
 Idaho will also permit exemptions.
 Personal lines of insurance such as homeowner coverage and auto policies
 will not be subject to exemptions.
 Kreidler and other state insurance commissioners had pressured Congress to
 pass a bill that would have made the federal government responsible for damage
 in excess of a pre-set amount.
 The House of Representatives last month approved legislation that would
 commit taxpayers to covering 90 percent of losses from another major terror
 attack. Insurance companies would pay the rest, and later reimburse the
 government for its assistance.
 That bill died in the Senate after Republicans sought to include provisions
 limiting terrorism lawsuits. Democrats, major beneficiaries of trial lawyer
 contributions, balked.
 Kreidler said the damage threshold set in Washington and many other states
 is a stopgap. ''Congress still needs to act," he said.
 Washington law forbids life insurers from exempting deaths for terrorist
 acts. Nor can damage from fires be excluded.
 Kreidler said more than 100 insurance companies have applied for terrorist
 exemptions.
 Credit-rating agencies and other segments of the financial and real estate
 industries have warned that the absence of adequate insurance for property
 losses stemming from terrorism could impede development.
 Insurers have increased premiums substantially to cover their losses and
 build reserves.

Load-Date: December 25, 2001


End of Document