Terrorism will never end
University Wire
September 27, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Daily Campus via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 717 words
Byline: By John Levinson, The Daily Campus
Dateline: Storrs, Conn.
Body


Sept. 11, 2001, is a day that will live in infamy.
That day, a tragedy occurred. Although it is impossible to ascertain how many are dead yet, the number is approaching 6,000.
The real tragedy here, however, is the way we reacted. I am in no way defending the actions taken by these cowardly men who would harm innocent civilians in order to damage our country.
U. Connecticut
It didn't take long for our President (the same man, mind you, who received less votes but still won the election) to come onto national television and declare a war on terrorism.
Let's think about that for a moment: a War on Terrorism.
Sounds like more Poli-Talk from the men who are so good at it: politicians. Fighter jets were sent overseas, Americans flags were raised at half-mast, and everyone felt a little better about the Greatness of the United States of America.
Just today, I witnessed a car on campus with a printed out American flag and the words "Hang Bin Laden."
Now here's a question that I pose to all you who claim to be so moral, such fine upstanding citizens, those of you who are willing to go to war for your country: How do you weigh the lives of those we murder against those who died in New York City that day?
Even Dan Rather, who lost his composure several times on the David Letterman show, has said that we are not fighting normal men; that these men are simply evil.
The only reason anyone even cares at all about what happened is the fact that in happened here, on our soil, in the good ol' US of A.
Every day, atrocities are committed in the name of God, Holy Wars are declared and people in Ethiopia are ravaged by civil war, droughts and epidemics.
Yet, how much television coverage has it been given? How much thought have you given it? How much thought have I given it?
Not nearly enough.
But enough of those people: they don't count because they're not Americans, right?
Nevermind that the bulk of soldiers have nothing to do with the actual war and the politics surrounding that war.
How many of those people do you think will fight willfully? Or, perhaps I should ask, how many of those people do you think had to fight for their government or risk being thrown in jail or worse?
After the terrorist attacks on New York, I saw more American flags in the next week than I had seen in the previous five years. What a sparkling symbol of our country -- that it took something of this magnitude to celebrate our country.
The real problem here is the politics surrounding this tragedy. Bush comes on the television and talks about the safety of our country and how the United States will lead a united front against terrorism from all countries.
This is all nice and wonderful, but the likelihood of getting rid of terrorism is about the same likelihood of getting rid of all bad things that happen in the world: zero.
Terms like "War on Terrorism" and "Attacks on Freedom" are simply buzzwords used to make us feel safe. The government actually wants you to believe that, despite our complete inability to rid the world of terrorism, that we will somehow persevere.
The fact of the matter is that you can no more rid the world of terrorism than you can force democracy down people's throats, though Lord knows we will try, won't we?
How many innocent people has the government killed? What if we count slaves and Japanese in internment camps? What if we count the entire cities of people decimated by our nuclear weapons? What if we count every innocent man we sent to the death chambers?
The President can talk about attacks on freedom all he wants, but these men are not attacking freedom. These men do not see America as the home of the beautiful.
These men see America as a breeding ground of laziness and apathy, and worse yet, a total lack of spirituality. In fact, they may be right. Was murdering thousands of innocent people the way to deal with it? Certainly not.
But until we can look at what happened and realize why it happened, instead of simply labeling these terrorists as "evil" and seeking only vengeance on them, we will only further the cycle of violence.
America, is appears, has declared a war on humanity. Because there's only one way to get rid of terrorism and evil: get rid of humanity. Why not start here?
(C) 2001 The Daily Campus via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 27, 2001


End of Document