Terrorism's menace intensifies worldwide
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 7, 2016 Thursday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2016 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 8A
Length: 517 words
Body


Terrorism's toll during the month of Ramadan includes 49 gunned down in Orlando, 45 killed in a triple suicide bombing in Istanbul, 22 slaughtered in a Dhaka cafe and more than 150 murdered by a car bomb in Baghdad. The ferocity and velocity of terrorism attributed to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (which is also suspected of causing carnage in Yemen, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan and elsewhere) shows that the radical Islamists are increasingly turning toward asymmetric tactics as they lose ground in conventional warfare.
In fact, recent setbacks such as ISIL's loss of Fallujah might be behind the Baghdad blast, which not only rocked parts of the capital but also shook confidence in the Iraqi government itself. That leaves the Obama administration, which backs Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, with yet another political challenge to add to the military difficulties it faces in trying to support, but not lead, Iraq's anti-ISIL campaign.
It's understandable that many might call for a more muscular U.S. response to ISIL tactics. But reality argues otherwise, especially considering ISIL's reach. In addition to controlling broad swaths of Iraq, Syria and Libya, other terrorist groups in Africa, the Mideast and beyond have aligned with ISIL. And suicide bombings and lone-wolf attacks can and seemingly do happen anywhere.
The American people, let alone Obama and even many Republicans, have not expressed readiness to exponentially expand anti-ISIL efforts abroad. This doesn't mean U.S. forces should not continue to play a significant military role in Obama's stated goal of "degrading and ultimately destroying" ISIL. Obama's Wednesday announcement that about 8,400 U.S. troops will indefinitely remain in Afghanistan is an appropriate response to the comeback mounted by another Islamist terror group, the Taliban.
But because the fight against ISIL can only be won through a global effort, it's essential that the U.S. work with allies within the Mideast, with NATO nations, and beyond. Obama should strengthen these ties in his remaining months in office. And voters should carefully consider which presidential candidate stands the best chance of rallying, not alienating, allies.
Obama and his successor should also intensify homeland security efforts. ISIL and other terrorists undoubtedly would like to replicate the recent nihilism in America. And disturbingly both the San Bernardino and Orlando attacks weren't the result of orders from the caliphate but rather from homegrown, self-radicalized perpetrators.
Bipartisan consensus is elusive these days, especially during a deeply divisive election season. But it's baffling that Congress and the Department of Homeland Security have granted only scant federal funding for community organizations working with young people at risk for radicalization. Even in gridlocked Minnesota, the Legislature took some action this year. The same should happen at the federal level.
As evidenced by this past bloody month alone, every effort needs to be made at home while at the same time the U.S. solidifies its efforts abroad.

Load-Date: July 7, 2016


End of Document