TERROR PLOTTER PADILLA'S SENTENCE TOO LENIENT, APPEALS COURT RULES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 20, 2011 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 433 words
Byline: Curt Anderson, Associated Press
Body


MIAMI -- The 17-year prison sentence imposed on convicted terrorism plotter Jose Padilla is far too lenient for someone who trained to kill at an al-Qaida camp and also has a long, violent criminal history, a federal appeals court ruled Monday, as it threw out the sentence.
A divided three-judge panel of the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ordered a new sentencing hearing for Mr. Padilla, a U.S. citizen and Muslim convert convicted in 2007 along with two co-conspirators of several terrorism-related charges. Mr. Padilla, 40, was held for more than three years without charge as an enemy combatant before he was added to the Miami terror support case.
The ruling affirmed the convictions of Mr. Padilla, Adham Hassoun and Kifah Jayyousi on terrorism support and conspiracy charges. The sentences of Mr. Hassoun and Mr. Jayyousi -- more than 15 years and more than 12 years, respectively -- were also upheld.
Federal prosecutors objected in 2008 to Mr. Padilla's sentence, and the appeals panel's majority agreed that U.S. District Judge Marcia Cooke, who presided over the four-month trial, made several errors in essentially discounting his sentence by 12 years. Among the mistakes, the appeals court found, was not taking into account Mr. Padilla's training at the al-Qaida camp in Afghanistan.
"Padilla poses a heightened risk of future dangerousness due to his al-Qaida training," the judges ruled in a 73-page order. "He is far more sophisticated than an individual convicted of an ordinary street crime."
The judges also noted Mr. Padilla's 17 prior arrests, including involvement in a deadly fight as a juvenile, and ruled that it was wrong for Judge Cooke to use as a reference point several other terrorism cases in which defendants got relatively light sentences. The appeals panel also found error in Judge Cooke's decision to reduce Mr. Padilla's sentence to account for his three-plus years at a South Carolina military brig as an enemy combatant.
"Although some downward variance is allowed in this circumstance, the district court abused its discretion," said the ruling written by the 11th Circuit Chief Judge, Joel F. Dubina, who was joined by Circuit Judge William H. Pryor.
Dissenting was Circuit Judge Rosemary Barkett, who found some problems with an FBI agent's testimony during trial and said Mr. Padilla was not informed of his Miranda rights when he was arrested at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport in 2002.
Mr. Padilla was initially suspected of plotting to detonate a radioactive "dirty bomb" in the United States, but that allegation was discarded long before the trial.

Load-Date: September 20, 2011


End of Document