Terror strikes the heart of London transit; Attacks kill dozens, injure hundreds, but claims unlikely to burden insurers
Business Insurance
July 11, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1165 words
Byline: SARAH VEYSEY
Body


LONDON-Insurance losses from the bomb attacks last week in London are not expected to be severe and any large-scale losses will likely be covered by the United Kingdom's terrorism insurance pool.
Four bombs ripped through London's transportation system during the Thursday morning rush hour, killing at least 49 and injuring about 700, according to preliminary estimates, and officials expect the death toll to rise.
Three of the bombs exploded on separate London Underground subway trains, and the fourth detonated on a double-decker bus. The subway bombings occurred within 30 minutes of each other, while the bus explosion came nearly an hour after the first train bombing.
A group calling itself the Secret Organization Group of al Qaeda of Jihad Organization in Europe claimed responsibility for the attacks, but U.K. government officials said Friday that that claim could not yet be verified.
In the wake of the attacks, security on mass transportation systems was tightened in many European countries, as well as in the United States (see related story).
Insurance market sources said that insured losses from the attacks are likely to be low and could be partly absorbed by the United Kingdom's government-backed mutual insurance pool for terrorism risks.
That program, Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd., is a voluntary fund financed by premiums charged to participating insurers that underwrite commercial property insurance in the United Kingdom. Pool Re's coverage is triggered after participating insurers pay over £75 million per event ($132.8 million), up to £150 million ($265.6 million) per year.
The fund was set up in 1993 after many U.K. risk managers said they could not purchase terrorism insurance in the wake of several attacks by the Irish Republican Army. Pool Re covers property damage and business interruption from terrorist attacks, including losses from contamination, impact from an aircraft or flood damage.
Under the Pool Re arrangement, standard commercial property policies in the United Kingdom provide up to £100,000 ($177,080) in limits for terrorism property and business interruption risks. Policyholders can buy coverage above that limit from their insurers, which are reinsured by Pool Re.
In order for the pool to pay out, the Treasury must certify that an insured event was an act of terrorism, a spokesman for Pool Re said.
He said it was too early to determine whether losses from Thursday's attacks would tap the pool. In addition, he was unable to comment on whether Transport for London, which operates subway trains and the bus network in London, is reinsured by the pool.
Market sources said that Transport for London operates a Guernsey-based captive, London Transport Insurance (Guernsey) Ltd., that underwrites some of the government-backed organization's property risks.
Representatives of Transport for London could not be reached for comment.
Several insurers last week noted that it was too early to ascertain the extent of insured losses from the bombings, though losses generally are expected to be low.
In addition to the train cars and bus damaged by the bombs, significant property damage was reported in the subway tunnel between King's Cross and Russell Square.
A spokeswoman for Lloyd's of London said: ``We expect there to be a limited loss to the Lloyd's market. Exposure is likely to be mainly limited to business interruption costs and property damage. Reports suggest that property damage is minimal.''
A spokesman for Munich, Germany-based Allianz A.G. Holding, which participates in Pool Re, noted that Allianz's exposure would not exceed the ``single digit'' millions of euros.
Frank O'Halloran, chief executive officer of Sydney, Australia-based QBE Insurance Group, said: ``From an insurance perspective, incurred losses from this event are expected to be relatively small and, for QBE, well within our substantial allowances for large losses and catastrophes.''
A spokeswoman for Swiss Reinsurance Co. said that insurers' and reinsurers' losses would likely be limited because of Pool Re and that, since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, insurers and reinsurers have reassessed the way they underwrite terrorism and, as such, are likely to have limited exposures.
Paul Bassett, executive director of the special risks/counterterrorism team at Aon Ltd. in London, said that property losses from the blasts are likely to be low, with much of the claims burden borne by insurers reinsured by Pool Re. He added that a knee-jerk rate increase by insurers was unlikely.
Mr. Bassett also said that while it is difficult to estimate casualty claims-which are not covered by Pool Re-they could potentially be higher than property losses, depending on the extent of injuries suffered, he noted.
Government help urged
The bombings in London came just days after the Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development issued a report on terrorism insurance that concluded that the insurance market worldwide may not be able to cover fully losses that could arise from a large-scale terrorism attack.
In its report, the Paris-based OECD said that while OECD member countries should, as far as possible, rely on private-sector insurance to cover terrorism risk, government intervention may be necessary to increase or maintain cover at an affordable price when there is a lack of capacity.
One day after the London attacks, Germany announced that it would extend its backing of a terrorism pool for German risks for two years beyond its scheduled Dec. 31 expiration (see story page 21).
In addition to Germany, the United Kingdom and United States, other OECD member countries, including Australia, France, and Spain, have some form of government terrorism coverage backstop.
David Snyder, vp and assistant general counsel at the Washington-based American Insurance Assn. and a contributor to the OECD taskforce, said that the attacks in London ``validate the OECD report's urgency for continuing the public-private partnerships involving government and insurers that are essential to dealing with the financial results of a terrorist attack.''
Thierry Van Santen, president of the Federation of European Risk Management Assns., said that FERMA has promoted the idea of a Europewide terrorism insurance pool. ``Terrorism risk does not stop at countries' boundaries,'' said Mr. Van Santen, who is executive vp in the corporate risk management department at Groupe Danone in Paris.
Brad Greer, president of the Sydney-based Risk Management Institution of Australasia and risk and compliance manager for Brisbane Airport Corp. Pty. Ltd., also said that terrorism backstops were necessary to provide cover.
Commenting on the OECD report, David Gamble, executive director of the London-based Assn. of Insurance & Risk Managers, said that the economic impact of a large-scale terrorist attack, such as a so-called ``dirty bomb'' involving radiological material, could only be borne by a government.
The OECD report is available at www.oecd.org.

Graphic

 
Art Caption: London terrorist attack: A series of bomb blasts that appears to have been a coordinated attack hit the transportation network last week
Art Credit: 2005 KRT Graphic: Jutta Scheibe, Isabel Sondergaard, Morten Lyhne

Load-Date: July 15, 2005


End of Document