TERRORISM TRIAL BEGINS TODAY
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 30, 1995, Monday


Copyright 1995 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. A1
Length: 483 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK (AP) The largest terrorism trial in U.S. history gets underway today with opening statements and a judge's warning that religion is not on trial.
Prosecutors will try to show that Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and 11 other Muslims planned a "war of urban terrorism" that could have killed hundreds if not thousands of people.
Lawyers for Abdel-Rahman, the 56-year-old blind cleric alleged to have headed the conspiracy, charge that he's being prosecuted for his beliefs. If convicted, he could face life in prison.
After the attorneys speak, the judge has his own statements for the jury.
"There is no religion on trial here," U.S. District Judge Michael Mukasey said in a preliminary draft of instructions he would make to the jury.
If someone breaks the law, "the fact that it is undertaken in the name of religion is no defense whatsoever," the draft states.
The trial is the second chapter in the prosecution of a group allegedly responsible for the 1990 assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the founder of the Jewish Defense League, and the Feb. 26, 1993 World Trade Center bombing, which killed six people and injured hundreds more.
Three followers of Abdel-Rahman and a fourth man were convicted in the trade center bombing last year and were sentenced to life in prison without parole.
Prosecutors said the motive was to punish the United States for supporting Israel.
The judge in the first trial said the bomb was meant to topple the 110-story towers, a symbol of America's economic might, and kill tens of thousands of people.
One defendant in the current trial, El Sayyid Nosair, was acquitted in the 1990 assassination of Kahane. He was convicted on related weapons charges.
Four months after the trade center bombing, the FBI raided a safehouse in Queens where five defendants now on trial allegedly were mixing explosives to blow up the United Nations, two tunnels connecting Manhattan and New Jersey and FBI headquarters in New York.
They also allegedly plotted to assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and kidnap President Nixon and Henry Kissinger.
Most of the proof to be offered by prosecutors about the plots consists of transcripts of secretly taped conversations between defendants and a former Egyptian Army officer who became an FBI informant and infiltrated the group.
The informant, Emad Salem, is expected to testify but will face intense scrutiny by defense lawyers who have transcripts of his conversations with FBI agents as he negotiated his million-dollar fee.
Some defense lawyers say their clients were entrapped by Salem while others say their clients had no knowledge of the plots.
In one transcript, one defendant can be heard imagining the mayhem that would result with three Manhattan bombings in a 10-minute span.
"Boom! What the heck. That's it. This will drive the whole world crazy! This will make all America on stand by," he says, according to the transcripts.

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document