Terror bill may curb dissenters
University Wire
November 30, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 The Lariat via U-Wire
Section: EDITORIAL
Length: 564 words
Byline: Staff Editorial, The Lariat; SOURCE: Baylor U.
Dateline: WACO, Texas 
Body


It seems Congress just doesn't get it. Even after the backlash resulting from the passage of the Patriot Act, you would think they would have learned their lesson. But it seems a new bill, the Violent Radicalization and Homegrown Terrorism Prevention Act, seeks to redefine who a terrorist is and act on threats that largely don't exist.
The act was passed with an overwhelming 400-6 vote in the House in October and is currently on tap in the Senate. It carries the facade of fighting terrorism on our own turf, but critics claim its extremely broad wording would allow the targeting of activists and violate civil liberties under the guise of federal law.
The elusive wording in the act begins with definitions, where "homegrown terrorism" is defined as "the use, planned use, or threatened use, of force or violence by a group or individual... to intimidate or coerce the United States government, the civilian population of the United States, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives."
Assuming the purpose is to merely fight terrorism within the U.S., this definition is much too vague and potentially too encompassing to be able to serve its desired purpose. What is considered intimidation or coercion, for instance, can only be left up to the imagination.
Rep. Jane Harman, D-Calif., who authored the bill, cited the threats of homegrown terrorism in Western Europe, especially Britain, where violent radical Muslim terrorists pose a threat to national security. Sponsors also cited the growing specter of Internet propaganda being used to recruit and advance violent ideologies.
The reality of this legislation, however, is that it does little other than recognize a potential threat, establish two government-appointed bodies to study and monitor homegrown terrorism and set up the potential for abusive application of the law to target dissent.
Though we do support efforts to curtail extremism when it comes to violence, we feel this bill covers too large an area to effectively combat it. If the government is focused on such a wide array of groups and individuals who might fall under this category of thought crime, how could it truly devote the appropriate amount of attention to those who could be capable of terrorist acts of violence?
If Congress really aims to crack down on homegrown terrorism, the act needs to be revised to include more specifics. The act's definition of ideologically based violence, "the use, planned use, or threatened use of force or violence by a group or individual to promote the group or individual's political, religious, or social beliefs," is one such instance.
What exactly is meant by "force"? If it is left open to interpretation, civil libertarians worry that "force" or "coercion" could be used to mean a march or sit-in, or the blocking of military shipments as a form of terrorism. By this application, many activist groups today could charged with a federal crime.
Obviously, the vagueness of the act lends itself to absurd possibilities, which much of the American public would agree are not considered terrorism.
The bill was passed through a provision called "suspension of the rules" that allows bills to be fast-tracked through the legislative process. But maybe if the bill was examined with a little more precision, its obvious shortcomings could have been prevented.
(C) 2007 The Lariat via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 3, 2007


End of Document