Terror Case Is Broadened As Defendant Is Added
The New York Times
February 9, 2006 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 466 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal prosecutors added a new defendant yesterday to a case charging a New York jazz musician with aiding terrorism, as it became clear that the government's main informer in the case is a troubled man from Yemen who set himself on fire in front of the White House in November 2004.
  New information spilled out from the prosecutors and the defense during the arraignment of the new defendant, Abdulrahman Farhane, 52, a Moroccan-American who runs a bookstore in Brooklyn.
A prosecutor, Assistant United States Attorney Victor L. Hou, said that Mr. Farhane met in the bookstore with the undercover informer in late 2001, and that they discussed ways to send money overseas to purchase weapons for Muslim fighters in Afghanistan.
  Mr. Farhane's defense lawyer, Michael Hueston, said the informer was Mohamed Alanssi, a Yemeni who was a central witness in the 2004 trial of a Yemeni sheik, Mohammed Ali Hassan al-Moayad. The sheik was convicted of financing terrorism, and a critical part of the evidence was videotapes of his meetings in Germany with an F.B.I. agent and Mr. Alanssi. 
  Mr. Alanssi, an informer on dozens of cases for the F.B.I. after Sept. 11, had a history of bad loans and failed business enterprises in Yemen and New York. 
  After months of disputes over money with his F.B.I. handlers, he set his coat on fire in front of the White House on Nov. 15, 2004, and was burned on 30 percent of his body. 
  Mr. Farhane is charged with conspiring to aid terrorism along with the jazz musician, Tarik Shah, 43, who has been accused of plotting to teach martial arts to Qaeda followers. 
  Also charged are Rafiq Sabir, a medical doctor from Florida, and Mahmud Faruq Brent, a paramedical worker from Washington, D.C. 
  ''I'm not guilty, I didn't do anything,'' Mr. Farhane said yesterday, entering his plea before Judge Loretta A. Preska in Federal District Court in Manhattan. ''This is my country, I love this country, I work hard,'' he added. 
  Mr. Farhane runs the House of Knowledge bookstore on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, his lawyer, Mr. Hueston, said. 
  Mr. Hou, the prosecutor, argued that Mr. Farhane was too dangerous to release on bail. 
  When the World Trade Center was ''still smoldering,'' Mr. Hou said, Mr. Farhane met in his store with Mr. Shah and Mr. Alanssi. They discussed various means of sending hundreds of thousand of dollars overseas to buy ''sophisticated weapons'' for the mujahedeen in Afghanistan, Mr. Hou said. He acknowledged that no money had ever been transferred. 
  Mr. Farhane was first arrested in November on charges of making false statements to the F.B.I. 
  Yesterday the prosecutors added terror conspiracy charges against him, and new terror financing charges against Mr. Shah.
  ''My client is not involved with terrorism,'' Mr. Hueston said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 9, 2006


End of Document