Terrorism threat boosts business for companies providing homeland security services
The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD)
February 9, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 Dolan Media Newswires
Section: NEWS; New business
Length: 368 words
Byline: Chet Dembeck
Body


If you don't mind spending time responding to mock terrorist attacks, then you might be at home as a member of one of General Physics Corp.'s homeland security support teams.
The Elkridge-based company's 17 teams are training first responders such as firemen, police and hospital workers to operate equipment for detecting, decontaminating and cleaning up chemical, radiological and biological weapons.
"We train people for difficult job assignments," said Jerome I. Feldman, the chairman and chief executive of General Physics' parent company, GP Strategies Corp.
Founded in the 1960s, General Physics' disaster-training business got its first big boost in 1979 when the Three Mile Island nuclear plant accident occurred, showing the need for training employees in how to react to a disaster.
Since Sept 11, the company's training contracts have skyrocketed. Last week, it was awarded a $15 million deal from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to expand its training of first responders throughout the country.
So far, General Physics has trained 28,000 first responders in 150 jurisdictions including Boston, Miami and Seattle, said Tom Davis, a General Physics executive vice president.
While this number appears impressive, it's just scratching the surface of the thousands that still need to be trained.
Part of the problem has been funding.
Despite the Department of Homeland Security's $40.2 billion budget request for fiscal 2005, the National League of Cities says the amount is inadequate. The organization argues the current budget is $800 million less than what's needed to pay for municipalities' first responder programs.
The U.S. Conference of Mayors and the National League of Cities estimate that more than $3 billion has been spent by cities on terrorism preparedness.
In addition, federal grants already approved for such training are commonly distributed slowly rather than all at once, local officials claim.
A lack of funding at a time when state and local budgets are tight makes it difficult for many cities to justify budgeting for an attack that may never come, Feldman said.
"I wish the threat of terrorist attacks would just go away," he said. "But it won't, so we have to be prepared."

Load-Date: February 9, 2004


End of Document