Terrorism fight tops Bush agenda in Asia
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
October 12, 2003 Sunday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: News;
Length: 880 words
Byline: BOB DEANS
Body


Washington --- President Bush leaves Wednesday on a Pacific trip that combines a summit of regional leaders with the most extensive swing through Southeast Asia that a U.S. leader has made since the Vietnam War.
The timing is no coincidence. With visits to the Philippines, Thailand, Singapore and Indonesia, Bush will sweep through a region that trails only Iraq and Afghanistan as a U.S. priority in the global anti-terrorism campaign.
"This is the second front in the war on terrorism," said Derek Mitchell, senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank. "It's not in the spotlight, but it's in the wings," Mitchell said, "because of its large Muslim population, its porous borders and its failed societies and weak institutions."
Cox Washington Bureau
Southeast Asia --- which also includes countries such as Malaysia and Brunei that are not on Bush's itinerary --- is home to nearly 300 million Muslims, almost one-third of the world's Islamic population. A small number have joined ranks with al-Qaida and other militant organizations in the cross hairs of U.S.-led counterterrorism activities.
Bush has looked to the region's leaders for help in ferreting out, prosecuting and interrogating the ringleaders of a movement that has long set a goal of carving out an independent Islamic state. Some have helped more than others, but all have seen it as largely in their interest to join forces with Bush in his anti-terrorism campaign.
"These are all countries that are seen as threatened by extremists and cooperating with us," said a U.S. diplomat. "Obviously they have different agendas and their own political inhibitions."
Tokyo, then Manila
Bush will arrive in Tokyo on Friday, then journey Saturday to Manila for an eight--hour stay hosted by Philippine President Gloria Arroyo, a stalwart partner in the anti-terrorism campaign.
Shortly after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the Bush administration marked the southern islands of the Philippine archipelago as a hotbed of militant Islamic groups loosely aligned with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist organization.
More than 1,200 U.S. troops, including about 150 members of special operations forces, have operated off and on there, helping train and equip Philippine forces to combat militant organizations such as the Abu Sayyaf group. The operations assisted Arroyo in combating an insurgency movement based on the islands of Mindanao and Basilan.
The Philippine Constitution, however, prohibits foreign forces from fighting on the country's soil. In part, it's a reaction to the country's tortured colonial history. One of Bush's aims will be to press Arroyo to expand the potential role that U.S. forces might play in efforts to root out terrorist groups, said Mitchell, who served as special assistant for Asian affairs in the Pentagon during the Clinton administration.
From the Philippines, Bush will travel Saturday to Bangkok, Thailand, to attend the annual summit of leaders of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, or APEC. The group brings together the United States and 20 other countries, including Russia, China, Mexico and nations of East Asia.
APEC was formed in 1989 as a forum for addressing economic issues amid the rapid growth of East Asian economies. One such issue expected to be high on Bush's agenda is a devaluation of China's currency, which the administration hopes will tame its widening trade surplus with the United States.
Bush is also sure to talk with his Asian counterparts about efforts to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons program, and he will doubtless raise, with at least some leaders, efforts to win further international assistance for Iraqi reconstruction.
At the core of his diplomacy, however, will be Bush's efforts to knit regional players more closely into the fabric of his global anti-terrorism drive.
After three nights in Bangkok, Bush will travel to Singapore, where authorities are credited with heading off a major terrorist operation shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks. U.S. officials believe terrorists were set to target four or five U.S. embassies and military positions abroad for bombings.
Next stop: Indonesia
On Oct. 22, Bush will visit Indonesia, which --- with a population of 210 million --- is the fourth most populous nation in the world. Nearly nine in every 10 Indonesians are Muslim, making it the home of the world's largest Islamic population.
Cautious about not aligning her nation too closely with a U.S.-led operation seen by some Muslims as a 21st-century anti-Muslim crusade, Indonesia's president, Megawati Sokarnoputri, was a reluctant convert to Bush's anti-terror campaign. For more than a year, she resisted his appeals for increased scrutiny of Islamic militants and intelligence sharing with U.S. agents.
What changed that, administration officials say, was the terrorist bombing a year ago of a discotheque in the Indonesian resort of Bali. More than 200 people were killed.
"We're getting very good cooperation from the Indonesians," said White House spokesman Sean McCormack. "There's always more to be done."
From Bali, Bush will travel to Australia for a brief visit with Prime Minister John Howard. On Oct. 23, he will stop in Honolulu before returning to Washington.

Graphic

 
Photo: Outside the White House, President Bush heads for his helicopter Friday as he departed for Camp David for the weekend. On Wednesday, the president will leave for an extensive Pacific trip expected to include discussions of anti-terrorism efforts, trade and North Korea./ SUSAN WALSH / Associated Press

Load-Date: October 12, 2003


End of Document