TERRORISM'S NEW AGE: THE NEXT GENERATION OF ARABS;
He's skeptical about America's intentions;
Amro Farag works among professors who are afraid to discuss politics openly.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
October 23, 2005, Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; TERRORISM'S NEW AGE; Pg. 17A
Length: 710 words
Byline: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer
Body


As one of America's closest allies in the Arab world, Egypt is a linchpin for the United States' bold push for democratic reform.
"The great and proud nation of Egypt, which showed the way toward peace in the Middle East, can now show the way toward democracy," President Bush said in his State of the Union address this year.
The Egyptian government made one move by allowing candidates to openly challenge President Hosni Mubarak in the September elections, which he won handily to no one's surprise.
Many young Muslims remain wary of politics, struggling to reconcile the notion of American-style democracy with the authoritarian governments they have known and with their own mixed feelings about America.
"No way," said Amro Farag, 24, a dentist who lives in Cairo. "Here in Egypt it is better not to be involved."
Government enforcers are everywhere on Egypt's streets, and Muslims who challenge Mubarak are a prime target. Though the country is 90 percent Muslim, religious tension crackles below a facade of political stability.
At Cairo University where Farag recently landed a faculty position in oral medicine, some professors won't discuss politics openly because they know thousands of Muslim intellectuals and dissidents have been dragged from their homes and imprisoned.
The Muslim Brotherhood, linked in the past with radical revolt, is officially banned. Still, it is alive and active - widely respected for moral leadership through its medical clinics for the poor and other community service. A few prominent "brothers" have won seats in parliament by running under the banners of legal parties, but many hide their affiliation.
"You cannot count the number of brothers, but you can be sure they are a significant power in this country where they are supposedly forbidden," said one sympathizer.
It is in that context of political intrigue that Egyptians process the notion of American-style democracy.
Farag would like to believe his uncle in San Francisco who touts the American way. Farag devours Western news and culture as it comes to him in Cairo: He watches CNN and the BBC. He sees movies at the same time they're in their first run in Minneapolis.
But he's not convinced America has the best intentions for Egypt's future - for reasons not linked to politics. Farag is deeply offended by the "big lies" he says Western reporters relay.
"Some people when they come here to Egypt are expecting to see camels walking on the streets," he said. "They see us as backwards, vulgar, tough and aggressive.   They ridicule the way we treat our women.   This is our religion. The hijab [scarf for women] is one of our traditions."
American soldiers appear to "look at Muslims as sub-human," he said. "I wish I could ask some of them what they are fighting for and why they are killing Muslims.   Sometimes I feel that they are creating war in other countries to prevent another attack on the United States. This will not work. It will not prevent another attack."
The United States has moved to build bridges toward democracy in Egypt by shifting its aid focus from basics such as health care and agricultural assistance. Now, one focus is "good governance," according to the State Department, with pilot projects on judicial reform, legislative training and other foundations for democracy.
Farag has another idea for building bridges. He wants to see a sincere showing of the mutual respect that could build trust.
"I want them to know that we are civilized people," he said. "We have the oldest culture ever. I want them to discover how decent we are and generous. I want them to know the true ethics of the Egyptian people, the Middle Eastern people and the Muslims as a whole."
.
EGYPT'S EVOLVING ELECTION PROCESS
In September, President Hosni Mubarak won a fifth term with 88 percent of the vote in an election with 23 percent voter turnout. It was the country's first presidential election with a multicandidate popular vote. Egyptians previously voted on one candidate nominated by parliament. The new election law requiring political parties to have 5 percent representation in parliament to nominate a presidential candidate has made the Nov. 9 parliamentary elections crucial to opposition groups hoping for a stronger voice in the 2011 presidential vote.

Load-Date: October 25, 2005


End of Document