Terrorism suspect believed killed in Pakistan airstrike U.S. missile attack said to hit fugitive of airline bomb plot
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 23, 2008, Sunday


Copyright 2008 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P11A
Length: 575 words
Byline: Munir Ahmad, The Associated Press
Body


ISLAMABAD, Pakistan - A suspected U.S. missile strike Saturday may have killed a fugitive British citizen linked to a plot to blow up trans-Atlantic jetliners, Pakistani officials said.
Three Pakistani intelligence officials said they believed Rashid Rauf, who escaped from Pakistani custody last year, was among five militants killed in a stronghold of the Taliban and al-Qaida in the country's northwest.
Rauf was accused of having contact with a group in Britain plotting to smuggle liquid explosives onto trans-Atlantic flights. The plot's detection in August 2006 prompted security alerts at airports worldwide and increased restrictions on carry-on items. A London jury convicted three men in the case in September.
The Taliban claimed all those killed in Saturday's pre-dawn attack in the village of Ali Khel were civilians. "None was a foreigner," Taliban spokesman Ahmedullah Ahmedi said in a statement delivered to reporters in Miran Shah, the region's main town. Three children were injured, he added.
A burst of U.S. cross-border attacks into Pakistan has killed dozens of suspected militants since August but has drawn angry protests from Pakistan's government, an uneasy but key ally in the war against terrorist groups that is itself facing a wave of violence that is destabilizing the country.
Saturday's attack occurred in the North Waziristan region, part of the tribal belt where militants are supporting the insurgency in neighboring Afghanistan and a possible hiding place for al-Qaida chief Osama bin Laden.
The intelligence officials, citing reports from field agents as well as intercepted militant communications, also said an Egyptian was killed.
Two of the officials said the targeted house in the village of Ali Khel belonged to a Pakistani Taliban commander named Khaliq Noor who was known to shelter foreign fighters.
Militants quickly cordoned off the area and one of the intelligence officials cautioned that government spies in the area had not seen any of the bodies.
In London, a Foreign Office spokesman said British officials were investigating the reports that Rauf was dead but could not confirm it.
Rauf, who is of Pakitani origin, has been on the run since December 2007, when he escaped from police escorting him back to jail after an extradition hearing at a court in Islamabad.
After his arrest in August 2006, Britain had sought his extradition as a suspect in the 2002 killing of his uncle there.
U.S. forces are thought to have carried out about 20 missile attacks since August into northwestern Pakistan, a sharply increased pace that reflects frustration at Islamabad's efforts to tackle militants operating from within its borders.
Only six missile strikes were reported in Pakistan in the first seven months of the year, according to an Associated Press tally.
American authorities rarely confirm or deny individual attacks, which are apparently launched from unmanned aircraft patrolling over the mountainous, cave-ridden border region.
Still, senior U.S. officials have defended the tactic and said it has eliminated several top al-Qaida operatives in recent months.
The strikes have continued despite Pakistani complaints that they are illegal and deepen anti-American sentiment, feeding Islamic extremism in the country.
However, President Asif Ali Zardari has made it clear that he will not break off cooperation - and has raised hopes that President-elect Barack Obama will soften U.S. policy after taking office.

Load-Date: November 24, 2008


End of Document