Terrorists in the making
Daily News (New York)
May 25, 2014 Sunday
SPORTS FINAL REPLATE EDITION


Copyright 2014 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 34
Length: 337 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


Nearly 10,000 foreign fighters have found their way to Syria in the course of the three-year-old civil war there. Most joined the jihadists who have replaced secular groups at the head of the opposition. Their journey recalls the one Saudi-born Osama Bin Laden made to Afghanistan to join the fight against the Russians there.
The Al-Qaeda aligned killers who took the lead rebel role in Syria - as the Obama administration dragged its feet on providing even miminal support to the secular Free Syrian Army - now control swaths of the country where they've declared Sharia law "the sole source of legislation." And they intend to extend the battlefield to the West.
For now, Syria has become the "destination of choice for foreign fighters," according to the EU Terrorism Situation and Trend Report, attracting lost souls looking to "fight alongside groups associated with religiously inspired terrorism."
Dozens of these foreign fighters - who have learned to fight, bomb and kill - are Americans, and hundreds more hail from European countries whose citizens usually enjoy easy travel to the States. The graduates of this school have already tasted blood, and some of its members are looking for new fronts for their religious battle - including here. They are also models and a source of expertise for others angry with the West.
Now, the U.S. is beginning a serious and overdue effort to watch them, with the Justice Department assigning a veteran prosecutor to track the returning fighters and the FBI forming a team to find and probe American citizens looking to join the conflict there. Earlier this year, the State Department tasked a veteran diplomat, Robert Bradtke, with "engaging foreign partners to prevent and interdict foreign extremist travel to Syria."
European officials have already uncovered plots from returning fighters, and a few people here have been indicted for providing material support to the jihadists.
We'd better track these killers well as they try to return, and keep more from joining their ranks.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: May 25, 2014


End of Document