Terrorism hearings to raise Chambliss' profile
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 24, 2001 Monday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;; On Politics; Column
Length: 936 words
Byline: TOM BAXTER
Body


Washington --- This week, Rep. Saxby Chambliss, one of the most soft-spoken members of the flamboyant Republican "Class of '94," steps center-stage into the biggest role of his congressional career.
As chairman of the newly formed House Intelligence Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security, the South Georgia lawmaker will begin hearings Wednesday into the intelligence deficiencies that might have led up to the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
The hearings will not be a criminal investigation into the attacks, the former prosecutor said, but they will serve as a clearinghouse for information as Congress attempts to streamline its approach to the problem of domestic terrorism.
"We've got, depending who counts, 10 to 12 committees on the House side that have some jurisdiction over the terrorism issue," Chambliss said. "Nobody's coordinating with anybody else about what they're doing, who the witnesses are. Every federal agency has some terrorist turf."
AJC
He said, "There's got to be some method of centralizing all this information and making sure it gets in the right hands."
Exactly how the House panel will coordinate with the new Cabinet-level agency to be headed by Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge is not yet clear, but it will be a focal point for new legislation in the House arising from the terrorist attacks.
The fallout from the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon should affect Americans in many ways, Chambliss said, from longer lines at airports to footing the bill for more law enforcement at the local level. Officials such as Gary McConnell, director of the Georgia Emergency Management Authority, will become a more important part of people's lives.
Americans also will have to become more actively involved in assisting the government in locating potential terrorists, Chambliss said.
"When a private flight school gets someone who isn't interested in takeoffs and landings [as was the case with one of the Sept. 11 hijackers], that's got to make a bell go off in somebody's head," he said.
Chambliss is one of many people in Washington who believe the country has to rebuild its strength in "humint," for "human intelligence," meaning spies as opposed to high-tech surveillance, and he favors rescinding the directive that prohibits paying people who have criminal records to spy for the United States.
"Obviously, if you're going to deal with the [Osama] bin Ladens of the world, you can't send straight-arrow type guys down there. You've got to have some truly bad guys who've done some terrible things. Otherwise, they are not going to be accepted into that community and we're not going to be getting any information from them," he said.
Balancing these new security concerns with the Constitution's protection of privacy involves a "delicate balance," he said. His biggest privacy concern is in the area of cyberterrorism, which he said has the potential to wreak havoc on the nation's economy and law enforcement.
Banks and other institutions have been rightly protective of those who use the Internet to do business, Chambliss said, but they have to develop "some level of confidence" to assist the government in combating the threat.
"These terrorists are very smart, and they deal in the stock market," he said. "We've got to strike at these folks any way we can, and I think one of the biggest ways is to strike at their pocketbooks."
Chambliss became involved in the subject after being appointed to a terrorism panel on the House Armed Services Committee. He also has a special interest in yet another aspect of the threat: agricultural terrorism.
"I hate to say it's easy, because I don't want to give anybody any ideas," he said last week. "But putting some sort of foreign substance into the agricultural pipeline is a real possibility and something we've got to be on guard against."
Alarmed by several incidents involving the so-called "earth liberation movement," Chambliss and two West Coast Republicans --- George Nethercutt of Washington and Duke Cunningham of California --- introduced the Agroterrorism Act, which would increase penalties and widen the FBI's role in investigating sabotage of timber and agricultural facilities.
Chambliss also has a connection to some of the New York City personnel he visited on a trip to the World Trade Center site on Wednesday. Before entering law school, he worked for a while as a fireman for the city of Thomasville.
Chambliss' political profile is being raised at an interesting time in his career. His election in 1994 was hailed as the Republicans' deepest inroad into the rural South, and he has had a couple of tough re-election battles. His district, which stretches from Macon south to the Florida line, has been targeted by Democrats in the ongoing redistricting session.
Chambliss reportedly sent a warning to Gov. Roy Barnes last week that he might consider returning home to run for governor or oppose Sen. Max Cleland in next year's election.
Because of changes in the congressional map drawn in mid-decade by a federal panel, Chambliss resides in the district represented by a Democratic colleague on the Intelligence Committee, Rep. Sanford Bishop.
Although most of the talk since the attacks has been about regaining expertise in human intelligence, Bishop said the Technical and Tactical subcommittee, on which he is the ranking Democrat, also will be looking at what improvements are needed in high-tech spying.
"We're now faced with a totally different world," Bishop said. "We've got to have the best real-time information for our policy-makers and war-makers so they can make the best decisions."
 
tbaxter@ajc.com  

Graphic

 
Photo:
Rep. Saxby Chambliss

Load-Date: September 24, 2001


End of Document