TERRORISM THREAT MORE 'HOME-GROWN'
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 11, 2010 Saturday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 469 words
Byline: David Lightman, McClatchy Newspapers
Body


WASHINGTON -- The United States faces a more home-grown, hard-to-predict terrorist threat today than it did nine years ago, and the U.S. government isn't well-equipped to understand it, an expert panel said Friday.
Terrorism today is more likely to come as small-scale attacks, such as November's shootings at Fort Hood military base in Texas, where a gunman killed 13 people, or the failed attempt May 1 to set off explosives in Times Square.
"Today, America faces a dynamic threat that has diversified to a broad array of attacks, from shootings to car bombs to simultaneous suicide attacks to attempted in-flight bombings of passenger aircraft," says a 42-page report from the Bipartisan Policy Center's National Security Preparedness Group, a Washington research group.
Lee Hamilton, a vice chairman of the Sept. 11 Commission, which urged the government six years ago to be vigilant and nimble, warned Friday that the new report shows that "the American people just have to get a more realistic sense of what they're confronted with."
So does the government. "There are a lot of things that still need to be done to make our country safer," said Mr. Hamilton, a former Indiana Democratic congressman, who co-chairs the group that produced Friday's report.
Last year proved to be a "watershed" in domestic terrorist attacks and plots, the report says. "In the past year alone," it says, "the United States has seen affluent suburban Americans and the progeny of hard-working immigrants gravitate to terrorism. Persons of color and Caucasians have done so. Women along with men. Good students and well-educated individuals and high school dropouts and jailbirds."
The only common denominator, it said, "appears to be a newfound hatred for their native or adopted country, a degree of dangerous malleability and a religious fervor" that they think justifies their violence.
The group said "al-Qaida is believed to lack the capability to launch a mass-casualty attack sufficiently deadly in scope to re- orient American foreign policy, as the 9-11 attacks did," but its influence remained substantial.
An Obama administration spokesman said the government well understood the evolving threat. "This administration has taken unprecedented and robust action to counter the threat of home-grown extremism, said Ben Rhodes, deputy national security adviser for strategic communications.
The study found the Times Square incident particularly troubling. Faisal Shahzad, a financial analyst and Connecticut resident who pleaded guilty to terrorism-related charges in June, "refuted" the stereotype that terrorists are poor, uneducated, provincial loners "and can be readily identified."
The botched attack was also a reminder of the government's vulnerability. The device was found not by law enforcement, but by a T-shirt vendor.

Load-Date: September 11, 2010


End of Document