TERRORISM FACEOFF. Protesters call King hearings a witch hunt. Threat 'more from within,' pol replies. Celebs get in on act; it's 'bigger than Charlie'
Daily News (New York)
March 7, 2011 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2011 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 514 words
Byline: BY MICHAEL McAULIFF, LORE CROGHAN and RICHARD SISK DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS With Erin Durkin
Body


PROCLAIMING "TODAY I am a Muslim too," about 1,000 protesters gathered yesterday in Times Square to decry Rep. Pete King's upcoming hearings into homegrown radical Islam.
"Today, they're targeting Muslims. Tomorrow, it will be Jews. Tomorrow, they'll close a synagogue," said Abu Abdullah, 57, a perfumer from Bay Shore, L.I., who stood in the rain at the interfaith rally.
"Peter King is trying to divide us - to make it like shark eat shark," he said of the Long Island Republican, who heads the House Homeland Security Committee. "It shouldn't be that way."
Christians, Jews and Muslims branded the hearings a witch hunt, waved signs and chanted, "Shame, shame Pete King!"
Celebrities from boxing legend Mike Tyson to reality show darling Kim Kardashian added their support online.
"We are bigger than Charlie Sheen - we are the No. 1 trending topic on Twitter," hip-hop icon Russell Simmons told the rain-drenched crowd.
Magdy Salama, 50, a limo company owner from Astoria, Queens, who held a small American flag on a stick, said he worried his three Muslim kids will grow up facing religious bigotry.
"We're a free country. There should be freedom of religion," Salama said.
In an interview with the Daily News, King denied he was on a witch hunt and cited recent homegrown plots to bomb the subways and Times Square, saying the threat of terrorism "is now more from within" than from abroad.
In defending the hearings, which kick off Thursday, he said targeting one community has plenty of precedent.
Jihadists are "being recruited from within the Muslim community, just like the Mafia came from the Italian community, the Westies came from the Irish community," King said.
"It's important we find out the extent to which they are being radicalized, and how it's being done."
On CNN's "State of the Union," King upped the ante by charging that New York's Muslim community has stiffed the NYPD.
"I'm aware of a number of cases in New York where the community has not been cooperative," he said.
"Certainly, my dealings with the police in New York and FBI and others say they do not . . . get the level of cooperation that they need," he said.
King cited the example of a young man captured in Afghanistan who he said "went to two mosques in Suffolk County in Long Island, [and] said he wanted to engage in jihad."
Mosque officials, King said, discouraged the young man but never alerted the police.
The NYPD had no comment.
In Washington, Denis McDonough, the White House deputy national security adviser, sought to counter King in an address at a Virginia mosque known for its cooperation with the FBI.
"We must resolve that, in our determination to protect our nation, we will not stigmatize or demonize entire communities because of the actions of a few," McDonough said. "In the United States of America, we don't practice guilt by association."
King's hearings also brought supporters out to another rally, at Seventh Ave. and 38th St. "This is about protecting the Constitution and that's why Pete King's doing what he's doing," said construction worker Andy Sullivan.
mmcauliff@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
Demonstrators in Times Square yesterday lashed out at Rep. Pete King, charging that he is "targeting" Muslims. Photo by Norman Y. Lono Pete King

Load-Date: March 8, 2011


End of Document