Terrorism frightens wealthiest
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
November 21, 2003


Copyright 2003 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 628 words
Byline: Ben Abelson
Body


The country's wealthiest citizens are getting nervous about the economic impact of terrorism and how it will affect their personal fortunes.
According to a recent poll by U.S. Trust, 86 percent of the wealthy said they were at least somewhat worried about foreign or domestic terrorism dragging on the economy and the
securities markets, up from 76 percent last year.
Prior to last year the wealthy were most concerned about the financial condition of the next generation. But that worry fell to second place behind fears of economic fallout from terrorism, according to U.S. Trust's semi-annual Survey of Affluent Americans.
The concerns of the affluent generally serve as a bellwether to emerging feelings among the general public, according to William Porter, managing director of U.S. Trust's Long Island office.
The survey polled 150 of the wealthiest 1 percent of the nation in September. Those questioned either had an adjusted gross income above $350,000 or a net worth above $5.9 million. U.S. Trust said the survey had a 6 percent margin of error.
Other issues identified in the survey include fears that the state of the U.S. economy will hurt personal finances (71 percent) and concerns over personal security in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks (77 percent).
"The survey portends things for the general public at large - the concerns around personal safety and around terrorism and its affects on the market [are issues] that pervade society," he added.
Brian Keeney, executive trust officer with the First National Bank of Long Island, agreed that "the geo-political situation is something that people continue to talk about" in relation to its effects on the world economy.
Another area of concern for the rich is the U.S. equity markets. Although 34 percent of the affluent said the stock market is less risky now than in 2002 (versus 23 percent calling it more risky), the group as a whole has still expressed significant concerns about the state of U.S. equities.
Jack Leahy, managing director of Citigroup's Private Bank Long Island office, said that his clients remained very conservative about equity markets in general.
"They're generally concerned about the economy and are not willing to take very big risks in redistributing their current asset allocation. " While his clients have grown more positive over the past sixth months, Leahy said, "people lost substantial money in the equities markets over the past several years, and they're reluctant to give it back. "
While 69 percent of those surveyed have seen their investment portfolios grow over the year, the group on average held only 35 percent of their investable assets in domestic equities as of September 2003 - despite the much-ballyhooed market rise over the previous six months.
On average, the wealthy held 18 percent of their funds in cash or cash equivalents, 21 percent in various types of bonds and 11 percent in real estate investments.
Only 21 percent of those surveyed said they were moving money from other investments into the domestic stock market, while 64 percent said they were taking a 'wait and see' stance. Conversely, 13 percent said they were moving money out of the U.S. equity markets into other investments.
The group also expressed little confidence in Wall Street's ability to self-govern - with 83 percent believing investment bankers have a conflict of interest, 79 percent questioning the reliability of corporate financial statements, 79 percent not trusting the stock recommendations of equity analysts and 74 percent seeing the need for tighter regulation of public companies.
As a whole, the group continued to see the healthcare, pharmaceutical and biotechnology sectors as the most attractive for investment, closely followed by defense and aerospace.

Load-Date: July 28, 2006


End of Document