Terrorism, debts threaten the nation
The Brunswick News (Georgia)
December 26, 2015 Saturday


Copyright 2015 The Brunswick News
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL NEWS
Length: 631 words
Byline: Hank Rowland, The Brunswick News, Ga.
Body


Dec. 26--National and economic security are two main issues the nation is facing as it heads into 2016, members of Coastal Georgia's delegation of Washington say.
With the recent rise of the Islamic State, terrorists have shown they will strike at anyone, anything and at anytime. There is no such word as noncombatants in their strategy to incite fear in the free world.
It is a call for vigilance and action, say Sen. David Perdue, R-Georgia, and Rep. Buddy Carter, both Republicans who are completing their first year in Congress.
Carter calls national security the top issue for 2016, but to date, as far as he can tell, upper level leadership is showing little eagerness to put up an effective defense or offense.
"The No. 1 responsibility of the federal government is to provide for the common defense, and the threat of radical Islamic terrorism is real," Carter said. "As our commander-in-chief continues to flounder on a strategy to destroy ISIS, I am working diligently and aggressively with my colleagues on the House Committee on Homeland Security to address this situation and ensure threats are kept out of our homeland."
In 2015 Carter's committee approved legislation to establish an office within the Department of Homeland Security to support efforts to counter violent extremism.
"I also worked to halt admissions of refugees from the conflict areas and passed legislation to strengthen the Visa Waiver Program to prevent terrorists from infiltrating our homeland with the program," he said. "Additionally, I supported the year-end funding bill to provide the resources and training necessary for our troops in the field.
"We will continue this fight in the new year to ensure the safety of the American people."
Terrorism isn't the only major issue awaiting the nation's departure from 2015. There's also the dark clouds of the national debt.
In terms of threats, it is the biggest to America's national security in the eyes of Carter. He said Congress and its new members are already working on it.
"Left unchecked, the national debt threatens to leave future generations to a life indebted to other countries," Carter said. "Congress passed a joint budget agreement in 2015 that cuts $5.5 trillion in wasteful spending, balances the budget, begins paying down the debt in less than 10 years and provides real solutions to grow our economy."
It will take a real commitment to do that, he said. Carter counts himself among the committed members of the House of Representatives.
The national debt is $19 trillion and rising.
"I will continue the battle to rein in Washington's out-of- control spending and balance the budget in the new year," Carter said.
To Sen. Perdue, the national debt threatens America's ability to act when necessary, even when threatened.
"I will continue working to get Washington focused on securing our economic and global security," Perdue told The News. "Too often, Washington gets distracted by the crisis of the day instead of tackling our debt directly and solving the underlying problem created by the federal government's excessive spending habits.
"We can definitely solve this debt crisis and save Social Security and Medicare for our kids and grandkids."
Now is the time to do something constructive about the debt to ensure national and global security, he said.
"We simply have to get our nation's finances in order to ensure our economic security, but also to guarantee our country's security," Perdue said. "The United States must have the financial resources available to invest in a strong military, support our allies, and secure our nation from foreign threats now and in the future."
___ (c)2015 The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) Visit The Brunswick News (Brunswick, Ga.) at www.thebrunswicknews.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: December 26, 2015


End of Document