Terrorism's Real Locale
The New York Times
May 8, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 23; Column 2; Editorial Desk ; Column 2; ; Op-Ed
Length: 674 words
Byline: By Ali Abunimah; 

Ali Abunimah is vice president of the Arab American Action Network.

By Ali Abunimah;  Ali Abunimah is vice president of the Arab American Action Network.
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


Global terrorism has a new face: its practitioners are less the well-organized, state-sponsored groups of old and increasingly part of "far-flung and loosely structured webs of terror." So said Secretary of State Madeleine Albright last week as she released a report on global terrorism.
The report also had two other major conclusions: that there has been a shift from politically motivated terrorism to a brand driven by religion and ideology, and that the primary terrorist threats to the United States emanate from the Middle East and South Asia.
All of this may seem like conventional wisdom, but a closer look at the government's own data reveals a reality at odds with it. And policies built on flawed conclusions could do more harm than good.
Contrary to popular perceptions, most terrorist attacks against American targets do not emanate from the Middle East or South Asia. Of the 169 specifically anti-American attacks on foreign soil in 1999, 96 were in Latin America, 30 were in Western Europe (many of these committed by groups opposed to the war in Kosovo), nine in the countries of the former Soviet Union and 16 in Africa. Only 11 were in the Middle East, and just 6 in Asia. The proportions have been similar since at least 1996.
Much of the terrorism in Latin America, which includes bombings and kidnappings, is committed in Colombia and Peru by leftist rebels and right-wing paramilitary groups. American citizens and commercial interests have been attacked partly for ransom money to help finance insurgencies and partly to undermine national economies.
But these groups, which commit most of the attacks against Americans and their property abroad, get less attention than groups with Arab or Muslim orientations.
In the Middle East and South Asia, the terrorist attacks against Americans that do take place usually arise from a perception that the United States has taken sides in local political conflicts, like those between Turkey's government and the Kurds or between Israel and the Palestinians. Most terrorism in South Asia is linked to conflicts in Kashmir and Sri Lanka. The United States continues to list some countries in these regions -- most notably Iran, Iraq, Libya and Syria -- as "state sponsors" of terrorism, but acknowledges that they are generally far less active today than in the past.
We must not be complacent about terrorism and should continue trying to identify dangerous groups. But we must also be conscious of overreacting to a phenomenon that typically claims fewer American lives in a year than domestic handgun violence claims in a single day.
Arab-Americans and Muslims living in the United States have too often borne the brunt of government suspicion and media stereotyping. After many in the media rushed to blame Middle Eastern terror groups for the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 -- erroneously, as they soon learned -- several Arab-American groups reported an increase in hate crimes and harassment. Last December, there were reports of increased and sometimes abusive scrutiny of Arab-American travelers after the State Department linked a threat of terrorism around New Year's Day with the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, without giving any specific grounds for such a connection.
Arabs and Muslims, almost exclusively among immigrant groups, have also been subjected to the use of secret evidence in deportation proceedings -- which, in opposition to American traditions of open justice, has been legal since 1996.
The cruelest paradox is that many of the people suspected of having connections to terrorism actually came to America to escape conflict and injustice in their homelands and could be important allies in the most effective long-term antiterrorist strategy of all: improving relations with their home countries and bringing just solutions to conflicts there. The worst thing the United States could do on the home front is to make them, and the American public, feel that these people are strangers who bring danger to this country, rather than would-be citizens who strengthen it.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 8, 2000


End of Document