TERROR'S NEXT MOVE;
   COUNTER-TERRORISM EXPERT DOESN'T EXPECT A REPEAT OF SEPT. 11 BUT WARNS AGAINST THE RESUMPTION OF SMALLER ATTACKS ON AMERICAN ESTABLISHMENTS OVERSEAS.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
January 13, 2002 Sunday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: FORUM; Pg. F1
Length: 841 words
Byline: Thomas W. Still Associate editor
Body


The war on terrorism isn't over. It's just entering a new and potentially more frustrating phase.
That's the assessment of Glenn Schoen, a counter-terrorism expert who advises Fortune 500 companies that do business around the world.
"What's coming next will be more diffuse, with more
smaller incidents in spread-out areas," said Schoen, the director of analytical services for TranSecur, a firm based near Washington, D.C. "There will be new security threats in parts of Asia and Africa where we haven't necessarily seen such problems before. There will be new challenges thrust upon us as (terrorists) try to spread the threat around."
If that sounds unsettling, it is. However, Schoen added there are reasons to believe another Sept. 11-style attack on America is unlikely and that terrorist organizations such as al-Qaida and its two-dozen "farm teams" will shift their focus to overseas targets that are easier to hit.
Schoen, 38, was interviewed during a recent visit to Wisconsin. A native of the Netherlands, he speaks a handful of languages, has worked in corporate intelligence since the mid-1980s, and has met face-to-face with members of terrorist groups. His company, TranSecur, was founded by Noel Koch, a former Reagan administration counter-terrorism director in the Pentagon.
"The security picture worldwide will begin to look more like it did 15 years ago, but the main threat will remain conventional," Schoen predicted.
"Conventional" ranges from shootings and car bombings to planes piloted by suicidal maniacs but not biological or chemical weapons, which are harder for terrorists to use than most people imagine.
"For as horrible and unprecedented as it was, Sept. 11 was conventional," Schoen said. "What we've learned from the anthrax experience and the (1995) sarin attacks in Japan is that it's not so easy for the bad guys to use those types of materials. Even if you have these lethal materials, it's not all that easy to carry out a mass casualty attack."
Health-care systems in the United States and elsewhere are building "surge capacity" for such attacks, correcting procedures and modernizing technologies that are impediments to mobilization. In time, Schoen said, those security steps will make it tougher for terrorists to strike close to home.
Instead, they may look for vulnerable U.S. or Western targets overseas.
Africa is ripe for terrorism because of the combination of political unrest and corruption, economic despair and the corrosive effects of the AIDS epidemic. Also, Schoen noted, there are sizable Muslim populations in some African nations -- including pockets of Islamic militants. He mentioned South Africa, Nigeria, Kenya as emerging trouble spots, along with Algeria, Sudan and Somalia. For example, the recently released movie "Black Hawk Down" is based on the story of U.S. Marines who were ambushed by Somali rebels in 1993.
"Proportionately, most of the threats are going to be overseas," Schoen said. "The terrorists are there. The weapons are there. They know the targets. They know the neighborhoods. It's much easier for them to stay home than to come to America."
Other nations to watch for signs of increased terrorist activity are Yemen, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Indonesia and Bangladesh, Schoen said. If there are more outbreaks in a mix of locations, Schoen said, the West may find it harder to sustain anti-terrorism alliances. "When there's no clear focal point, it's harder to respond, and incidents are more likely to create friction among allies," he said.
Some Americans may ask: If al-Qaida has been routed in Afghanistan, why is the threat of terrorism on the rise elsewhere?
In large part, that's due to the organizational success of Osama bin Laden, the al-Qaida leader who continues to elude captors searching for him in Afghanistan, Pakistan and elsewhere. Whether he's caught or not, Schoen noted, bin Laden has left others in his place.
"Osama bin Laden is the first major terrorist figure to come out of an engineering and business background," Schoen said. "He's been more efficient. He knows how to work with expatriates. He has a meticulous, engineering mind, which allowed him to be patient and wait for us to let our guard down."
Bin Laden had a "different tactical wrinkle" for each of his major operations, adjusting his attacks -- beginning in 1995 in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia -- to overcome counter-terrorism security measures. "He evolves and improves upon his work," Schoen said.
"But the biggest legacy of bin Laden is not what he did as a tactician, unfortunately. It's what he did to set up schools for terrorists. He's been an inspirer of terrorists, and was the first person to bring his struggle to America." Enough of his lieutenants remain, Schoen warned, for al-Qaida to tap into terrorist "talent pools" that remain active worldwide.
Americans may think the war against terrorism is all but over because of military successes in Afghanistan, Schoen said, but the reality is different. "We must recognize that we're in this for a while. It will take time and patience."

Graphic

 
KRT illustration
 Associated Press
The United States Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, was the site of a terrorist bombing on Aug. 8, 1998. Bombs in Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, killed 130 and injured thousands. Counter-terrorism expert Glenn Schoen expects terrorists will shift their focus back to attacks at American targets overseas, instead of another attack on the United States.

Load-Date: January 15, 2002


End of Document