Terror suspect facing conspiracy charges files for his release again; Assistant DA sister would be custodian of Asif Ahmed Salim.; TERRORISM
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
April 13, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. B2
Length: 313 words
Byline: ByJennifer Feehan
Body


One of four men charged with providing financial support to terrorists has renewed his request to get out of jail pending trial.
An attorney for Asif Ahmed Salim filed a renewed motion for pretrial release Saturday in U.S. District Court in Toledo, where Salim, 35, is charged with conspiracy to provide material support and resources to terrorists, providing material support and resources to terrorists, and conspiracy to obstruct justice.
In January, Judge Jack Zouhary denied Salim's first request to be released on a $500,000 property bond, citing his "loose ties" to this country and risk for failing to return to court to face the charges.
Salim most recently lived in the United Arab Emirates with his wife and four children, returning to the United States after a federal indictment against him and three others, including his brother, Sultane Roome Salim, 41, of Columbus, was filed charging them with giving money to Anwar al-Awlaki in 2009.
Sultane Roome Salim is the only one of the four to be out of jail. In November, he was released on a $500,000 property bond posted by his mother.
Attorney Linda Moreno of Tampa, Fla., wrote in her renewed motion for release that Asif Ahmed Salim would live with his wife and children at the home of his mother-in-law and father-in-law in Gwinnett County, Ga. In addition to Salim's wife and mother-in-law, his sister-in-law, Sabrina Nizam, also would serve as his custodian, the motion states. Nizam works as an assistant district attorney in Gwinnett County.
"Ms. Nizam has a personal abiding self-interest in making sure Mr. Salim complies with all conditions of release this Court would set, given that her family home, built by her parents, is at stake," the motion states.
He is being held in the Lucas County jail.
A pretrial hearing for all four defendants is set for May 4. Their trial is expected to be held in January, 2017.

Load-Date: April 13, 2016


End of Document