TERRORISM CHANGES THE WAY WORLD'S LEADERS LIVE
The New York Times
November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1822 words
Byline: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, Nov. 3
Body


When Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher attended the funeral of Indira Gandhi in New Delhi today, she was accompanied by armed guards who had flown to India with her.
 In Paris, tourists are no longer permitted to stand on the sidewalk in the Rue du Faubourg St. Honore and gaze into the courtyard of Elysee Palace to watch the official comings and goings at the presidential residence. The heavy green doors of the palace, which used to be open, are now chained closed at all times.
A few hours before Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, the Italian Interior Minister, held a news conference in Rome last week, two plainclothesmen minutely inspected the meeting room. Mr. Scalfaro arrived for the session with five or six bodyguards.
 
No Longer in Doubt
As those three episodes suggest, world political leaders are finding it more and more necessary to adopt rigorous measures to protect themselves against terrorists and assassins. Some European security people still think the United States Secret Service is heavy-handed and occasionally almost hysterical - the Irish police were appalled by some of the measures taken during President Reagan's European trip last summer - but they no longer question the need for elaborate protective arrangements.
''We used to laugh at the Secret Service,'' a retired Scotland Yard official said. ''They reminded us of gangster films when they came over here with their arsenal of heavy weapons. Now all of us are having to employ far more stringent methods than ever before.''
Inevitably, tighter security precautions mean greater distances between those who govern and those who are governed. On the day of the assassination of Mrs. Gandhi, Mrs. Thatcher spoke of the need for political leaders to continue to move freely among their own people. If they cower in their offices, she said, the terrorists will have achieved one of their goals.
 
The British Have Changed
''One is no longer concerned with one's security,'' the Prime Minister declared as she boarded her plane for the trip to India.
But those responsible for Mrs. Thatcher's safety - and that of prime ministers and ministers in other countries - are very concerned. After the Irish Republican Army's unsuccessful attempt to blow up the entire Cabinet in Brighton last month, even the British, with their long and perhaps unmatched tradition of public civility, have had to make major changes in security arrangements.
The armed guards who flew to India with Mrs. Thatcher; the barricades across the mouth of Downing Street, where she works and lives; the policemen seen wandering through the grounds of Chequers, her country residence, on weekends, and the near certainty that the Cabinet will never again assemble for the night in a single hotel - all of that is new.
The Prime Minister used to move about the country with only a detective or two, picking up a few local policemen at her destination if big crowds or demonstrations appeared likely, and members of the public used to be able to walk right to the door of 10 Downing Street and state their business to the single bobby on duty.
 
What Changed the French
If the Brighton bomb changed things here, the attacks on the international peacekeeping force in Beirut changed things in France. It was immediately evident that someone could drive an explosive-laden truck through that big green door at Elysee, so it was closed, and individual visitors are screened far more thoroughly than before.
French politicians, including President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister Laurent Fabius, continue to plunge into crowds, even in such relatively dangerous places as Corsica and the Basque country, both of which have separatist movements. The police prepare for such visits by confining known troublemakers to their homes or sending them on short ''vacations'' in other parts of France, but senior officers still seem tense about the leaders' desire to mingle with voters.
 
Red Brigades and Mafia
For the Italians, the key event was the rise of the Red Brigades and the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro in 1978. Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti drives around Rome in an armored car, with another one following him, and on his way to the airport the other day he was accompanied by two motorcycles and four cars carrying policemen.
The Mafia also presents a problem, especially in Sicily, but security has apparently been lax on some occasions. Pio la Torre, the Communist regional secretary for Sicily, had no bodyguard when he was slain on April 30, 1982, along with his driver, even though the Interior Ministry says all public officials have bodyguards.
Sandro Pertini, the 88-year-old President, is less restrained than most Italian politicians in mixing with the public - perhaps because of his natural exuberance, perhaps because his longevity has made him less fearful than some others.
Even Pope John Paul II has had to yield to the entreaties of his security people since the attempt on his life. Instead of reaching out to touch people as he rides through crowded streets on his foreign trips, he now tends to wave and bless them from behind a shield of bulletproof glass or plastic. But sometimes he rebels. When his plane made an unscheduled stop at Yellowknife, Northern Territories, during his Canadian tour, he insisted on plunging into the crowd that gathered.
 
Security Cuts Crowds
Often security arrangements are so severe that crowds are much smaller than expected. That was the case, journalists accompanying the Pope said, when he stopped at Flatrock, a fishing village in Newfoundland, and it was also the case during President Reagan's visits to Galway and Ballyporeen when he was in Ireland.
Several old-timers in Galway contrasted the President's visit, with its high-speed motorcade through semideserted streets, Mr. Reagan barely visible through the closed windows of his limousine, with that of John F. Kennedy two decades ago, when he moved at a walking pace in an open car through huge throngs.
The freedom of movement of American politicians has, of course, been heavily restricted in the aftermath of the assasinations of two Kennedys and of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and unsuccessful attempts on the lives of President Gerald R. Ford and Mr. Reagan.
Only 25 years ago, John Kennedy made his first, pre-primary trip accompanied by one staff man, two bodyguards and no security detail; a week or so ago, former Senator George S. McGovern, the South Dakotan who was the Democratic nominee for President in 1972 and who is no longer a candidate for anything, was accompanied by bodyguards as he went shopping at Loewe, the leather goods store, during a visit to Barcelona.
In most parts of Latin America, the Middle East and Africa, security has been a way of life considerably longer.
 
Beirut's Long Tradition
Beirut, which has a long tradition of violence, bristles with firearms; factional leaders are accompanied everywhere by squads of men with big pistols tucked into their belts. Sometimes the rival teams of guards get into gunfights with one another. In Lebanon and throughout the region, the houses of influential men are sealed off with sandbags and iron pipes as a defense against car bombs.
No inconvenience to the public or to journalists is too great. In Iraq, cameras and tape recorders must be left with security officers for examination 24 hours before news conferences, and in Iran, photographers must take pictures of themselves to prove that their cameras are not disguised weapons. During a recent conference at Aqaba in Jordan, lines of trucks were kept out of the area and wind surfing and snorkeling were banned.
Few Moslem leaders have ever made a habit of appearing before crowds, and there has been no October parade in Egypt since the assasination of President Anwar el-Sadat. But in Israel, despite its intense preoccupation with terrorism, political leaders mix freely with the public during campaigns and at other times, even in Arab villages, with negligible security screens.
A reporter who visited the office of Prime Minister Shimon Peres noticed that there was no metal detector; he was asked whether he had a gun and, having said that he did not, was permitted to pass. Mr. Peres lives in a small house in Tel Aviv that has no dogs, searchlights or electric fences. The Israelis appear to believe that their domestic intelligence is good enough to identify all potential assassins and to keep them well away from political personalities.
 
Democracy and Dictatorship
In El Salvador, political leaders almost never meet the public, which makes consensus-building difficult and tends to reduce politics to a private affair conducted in well-guarded homes, offices and embassies. President Jose Napoleon Duarte and other officials travel in bulletproof trucks, accompanied by convoys of police cars with machine guns and sawed-off shotguns sticking out the windows.
A contrast between the attitudes of democratic and dictatorial regimes in South America could be seen at the inauguration last week of the huge Itaipu Dam across the Parana River between Paraguay and Brazil. Gen. Joao Baptista Figueiredo, who is returning his country to democracy, got by with minimal protection, but President Alfredo Stroessner of Paraguay, who has held office since 1954 and takes security very seriously indeed, made it impossible for anyone to move on his side of the river.
President Belisario Betancur of Colombia, a populist dependent on showing himself to the masses, began by driving himself to work and shopping for books on weekends in downtown Bogota. He has more security protection now, but it remains relatively unobtrusive.
 
In Africa, Fear of Coups
For African politicians, the threat is not from political extremists or from the deranged. In their politically unstable continent, the threat is the coup d'etat, and they take elaborate precautions. In Zambia, Zimbabwe and Kenya, among other places, the law requires motorists to pull over for official motorcades.
Few leaders mingle freely, waving their fly whisks as symbols of authority, the way Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya often did; one who preserves that pattern is President H. Kamuzu Banda of Malawi.
Most others, convinced that chiefly tradition requires them to face their publics as a display of courage and confidence, rely on carefully controlled rituals. President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, for example, tends to limit his appearances to small events - tree-planting ceremonies or celebrations at schools - and to leave it to newspapers and television stations to publicize them nationally.
Often the result is a national leader surrounded by an ossified elite whose job is to protect and to display unswerving loyalty. That frequently leads, according to observers of African politics, to the leaders losing touch with the needs and wants of their societies, and that, in turn, leads to putsches by those who feel closed out.
An obssession with security, in other words, can defeat itself.

Graphic

 
photo of Nikolai Tikhonov and Imelda Marcos


End of Document