Terrorism is threat to companies overseas
Business Insurance
October 9, 1989


Copyright 1989 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: SPOTLIGHT REPORT; Pg. 52
Length: 2015 words
Byline: By MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


Risk managers of U.S. multinational companies with operations in terrorist-ridden countries need to do more than just kidnap and ransom insurance to protect foreign-based executives, international security consultants warn.
They also should take steps to prevent the sometimes "innocent mistakes" that could trigger incidents, especially as the type of terrorism that has plagued other countries strikes closer to home, the consultants stress.
"The corporate sector is the principle target of terrorist activity," said Gene Mastrangelo, manager of the Arlington, Va.-based Risk Assessment Information Service provided to clients of Nashville, Tenn.-based Business Risks International, a security consulting firm.
"Terrorists go for soft targets.  The business sector is what I call 'the Salisbury steak.' It satisfies their appetite," he said, even though kidnapping a corporate executive may not be as ideologically satisfying as capturing a foreign embassy's military attache.
"The whole thing boils down to common sense," said Benno Friedman, vp and department head-financing services for Alexander & Alexander of New York Inc.
"It's far more satisfactory not to have a client snatched than to get one back," said Hugh Bicheno, chief consultant for Key Biscayne, Fla.-based Security Management Associates and a former member of Great Britain's MI6 intelligence service.
Security Management Associates is on retainer to KRI Corp., a Washington, D.C.-based broker and consultant that deals exclusively in kidnap and ransom insurance.
One of the best ways multinational risk managers can shield their companies from the impact of terrorism is to purchase kidnap and ransom insurance, said A&A's Mr. Freidman, who points out that the coverage provides a dual benefit: Not only does it provide indemnification in the case a ransom must be paid, but it also provides instant access to consulting services.
Executives doing business overseas should carry kidnap, ransom and extortion insurance, agreed Carol Odinet Godfrey, manager of the political risk division of FG Special Risks Inc. in Houston.
In addition to kidnap and ransom coverage, risk managers can also purchase broad-form terrorist coverage that covers physical damage to property risks, Ms. Godfrey said, adding that the coverage is "sort of an extension" of the riots, strikes and civil commotions coverage offered by political risk insurers.
However, the terrorist coverage specifically excludes civil war, rebellion and hostile or warlike actions, she said.
While risk managers don't like to talk about anti-terrorism preparations for obvious security reasons and because a kidnap and ransom policy can be voided if a policyholder reveals its existence, risk managers can't leave security planning strictly to corporate security professionals, consultants say.
"The security manager's and the risk manager's role are very complimentary," said David Samuel, president of Argen Inc., the New York-based unit of London-based Argen Ltd. that is on retainer to New York-based American International Group Inc.
Although the risk manager does what he called the "pre-work" by setting up insurance programs while security officials are called in to deal with a terrorist act as it occurs, both must take a lead in educating their colleagues about how to reduce the company's exposure to terrorist acts, he said.
This educational role is becoming more and more important, agreed Jon Harkavy, who until last month was director of government affairs and general counsel for the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.
"With extremely attractive opportunities available for American business on the international front comes a concomitant exposure of terrorism and kidnap and ransom," said Mr. Harkavy.
"Just as RIMS has always said that it is imperative that the risk manager get involved with mergers and acquisitions, the same involvement is absolutely essential on international ventures.  Kidnap, ransom and terrorism are just another aspect to the sophistication required to adequately protect the corporate human resources of an entity doing business globally," he said.
"We think it's very important" to be prepared, concurred Richard C. Heydinger, risk management director for Hallmark Cards Inc. of Kansas City, Mo., and a former RIMS president.
Mr. Heydinger said that he could not release specific details of Hallmark's anti-terrorism strategy other than to say it involves education, training and preparedness.
But important as precaution is, consultants warn that preparation for dealing with terrorism should not be allowed to degenerate into paranoia.
"It's a state of mind, not a state of siege," said Herb Clough, vp-international operations and director of the international response team for Beverly Hills, Calif.-based Paul Chamberlin International, which is on retainer to the Professional Indemnity Agency of New York as its international response team to assist PIA clients who must deal with kidnapping or extortion threats.
Perhaps the most important component of a successful anti-terrorism strategy is to recognize security mistakes and correct them immediately, the experts say.
"Virtually all of the mistakes are innocent.  When people make a mistake, they're doing so because they don't have the background, information or knowledge" necessary to avoid it, said Steve Van Cleave, Atlanta-based manager of international operations for Business Risks International.
Mr. Van Cleave cited the experience of an American executive in a Latin American country as an example of the consequences of an innocent mistake that led to a terrorist act.
Every day for nine months, the man's driver picked him at precisely the same time from the same hotel and then proceeded to his place of business by the same route.  That predictability made him as easy mark for kidnappers, who seized him for ransom, Mr. Van Cleave said.
Had the American's driver picked him up at a different time each day and had alternate routes to his workplace been chosen, the executive's company might not have had to pay ransom to secure his release, Mr. Van Cleave said.  Simply consulting the nearest American consulate can help prevent trouble, but U.S. corporations sometimes overlook doing so, Mr. Van Cleave said.  Companies send people to a hot spot for a temporary assignment, decline to register those workers with the consulate and then find that the consulate can't locate the unregistered people to warn them of trouble, he said.
"There's sometimes an unresponsiveness to security concerns," said E. C. "Mike" Ackerman, principal in Ackerman & Palumbo, a Miami-based security consulting firm that is on retainer to the policyholders of Warren, N.J.-based Chubb Corp.
"Where mistakes are made, it's where undue weight is given to the economic situation.  Columbia is a perfect example of that," said Mr. Ackerman, who spent more than a decade in the Central Intelligence Agency's clandestine service.
"Columbia's been on our front burner for some time," said Mr. Ackerman, whose firm has been investing in the country because of political and drug-related violence.  But some U.S. business ignored the firm's advice until the Aug. 18 assassination of Sen. Luis Carlos Galan, the Liberal Party leader thought likely to be Colombia's next president, by killers allegedly tied to the so-called Medellin drug cartel.
American managers tended to focus on the fact that the Columbian economy was vibrant while the rest of Latin America had slumped into a recession, Mr. Ackerman explained.
"We do see some avoidable mistakes," said Christopher Groce, president of the Bethesda, Md.-based North American division of Control Risks Ltd. of London, which is on retainer to Lloyd's of London syndicates that underwrite kidnap and ransom insurance.
Mr. Groce, a former British military officer, said that while most countries are "perfectly safe to visit," business travelers are often not told about areas in a specific country to avoid.  This is particularly true if the person in question is considered an experienced traveler by his or her employer.
"There's a tremendous tendency for people to ascribe to the travelers a greater familiarity than they really have," Mr. Groce said.  Even if a traveler has visited a particular country, changes is the country's political situation that occurred since his or her most recent visit could render previous experience a less-than-perfect guide, he said.  "A lot of people go off very unprepared," he added.
"Good security is basically being aware of where there are dangers," said Mr. Groce.
Argen's Mr. Samuel, a former federal Drug Enforcement Agency agent, cited "a lack of understanding of certain common-sense do's and don't's" as one of the biggest mistakes U.S. citizens make abroad.
For example, "people still go to Colombia dove-hunting" despite that nation's drug war, he said.
And, corporate executives often fail to notify their security managers when they are about to take a foreign trip, he added.
One of the biggest mistakes managers can make is to engage in "magical thinking," said Mr. Bicheno of Security Management Associates.  Magical thinking, he said, centers around one misconception: "It won't happen to me."
"The worst possible thing is for top management to feel it can't happen to them" agreed Paul Chamberlain's Mr. Clough.  "There's frequently an inability to comprehend" how serious a threat terrorism presents because bombs simply don't explode that often in the streets of New York or Chicago, said Argen'a Mr. Samuel.
Jack Willyard, vp-financial products group for New York-based Fred S. James & Co. Inc., explained that executives often grow complacent because they have no idea how common kidnapping for ransom is.  Perhaps as many as 90% of all kidnappings go unreported in the press, Mr. Willyard estimated.
Managers with a "macho attitude" -- who think that preparing for possible terrorist acts is a sign of weakness -- ought to think twice about the possible legal consequences of their attitude, said Mr. Clough, who was special agent in charge of the FBI's Los Angeles office before his retirement.
If a corporation is considered negligent in protecting its personnel, it could find itself facing a liability lawsuit filed by the executive or their estates, he said.
Having a contingency plan to deal with a terrorist situation could help shield a company from litigation, Mr. Groce agreed.
Another problem corporations face involves the tendency of managers to think in business rather than security terms, Mr. Groce said.  "Security problems are usually different from business problems," he said.
The coolest, most rational executive might respond emotionally to a threat of a bombing, he said.
"The intelligent corporate executive understands that security is as much a part of today's business activity as marketing or accounting is," said Mr. Clough.
Security managers must have access to top decision-makers, Mr. Clough pointed out.  A security director without immediate access to the chairman of the board isn't going to be very effective in a terrorist situation, he said.
Managers also need to know who provides contracted services to their companies' installations, he said.  "Nobody knows who the contract cleaning crew is," Mr. Clough said, yet contract cleaners may have access to the corporate secrets -- including itineraries overseas -- simply by looking over the papers absentmindedly left on a desktop, he said.
In addition, corporations should perform a risk analysis, weighing the risks vs. rewards of foreign operations very carefully before committing to a foreign venture, according to Mr. Ackerman.  "You just don't go helter-skelter into overseas operations," he said.
Also, to deter terrorist acts from originating inside a company, an organization must screen potential employees, Mr. Cough said.
"Pre-employment screening is the single most intelligent, cost-effective measure anyone can undertake in the United States or overseas," he said.  Thorough background investigations can uncover serious security concerns such as an applicant's use of drugs, he said.


End of Document