TERRORISM WARNINGS INEFFECTIVE, HEAD OF PANEL SAYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 20, 1989, MONDAY, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1A
Length: 618 words
Body


WASHINGTON (AP) - Terrorism warnings issued by the Federal Aviation Administration before the bombing of Pan American Flight 103 over Scotland were largely ineffective and sometimes ''dangerously inaccurate,'' the head of a House subcommittee said Sunday.  Rep. Cardiss Collins, D-Ill., chairwoman of the House Government Operations subcommittee on government activities and transportation, voiced the criticism in making public an analysis of 33 security bulletins that the FAA issued between Jan. 1, 1988 and Feb. 16 of this year.  The panel found that at least six of the security bulletins contained information that may be linked to the bombing that killed 270 people aboard a Pan Am plane on Dec. 21, 1988. Investigators have concluded that the jet was blown up by plastic explosive hidden in a radio-casette player.  ''Regrettably, these and other FAA bulletins were sometimes untimely, sometimes dangerously inaccurate and almost completely devoid of effective and specific instructions for countering possible threats,'' Collins said.  ''Some bulletins recommended actions that were pointless or even absurd.'' She added: ''Taken as a group, the FAA bulletins failed to provide meaningful guidance to airlines faced with the risk of terrorist attack.'' The subcommittee focused particular attention on a warning written on Nov.  17, following the arrest in West Germany three weeks earlier of members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command.  The bulletin described a bomb found in the raids - plastic explosive secreted inside a radio-cassette player, with a barometric-pressure detonator designed to explode the device at a preset altitude.
According to the subcommittee, that bulletin mistakenly advised that the PFLP-GC ''has not been known to undertake terrorist attacks in Europe.'' A recent Defense Department study said the Palestinian group had machine-gunned an airliner in Zurich, hijacked two other airliners bound for European cities and warned in 1986 that ''there will be no safety for any traveler'' on a U.S. airliner.  The FAA bulletin said its information about the bomb was based on ''preliminary analyses by West German authorities.'' ''It is difficult to understand why explosive experts needed more than three weeks to complete an urgently needed analysis of this device,'' the subcommittee said. ''Either the West Germans lacked the required technical skills (which is unlikely), or West German-FAA communications had serious flaws.'' Pan Am's response to this and two other security bulletins prompted by the West German arrests was limited to examination and X-raying of selected passengers' carry-on baggage containing electronic devices.  But the subcommittee noted that ''the bomb that destroyed Flight 103 reportedly was carried as checked baggage and, if it resembled the PFLP-GC version, was specifically designed to thwart normal X-ray inspection.'' Another FAA security bulletin, dated Dec. 7, reported that an unidentified caller had phoned the U.S. Embassy in Helsinki, Finland, and said a bombing attempt would be made against a Pan Am airliner flying from Frankfurt, West Germany, to the United States.  Flight 103 originated in Frankfurt, going from there to London, where it changed planes before heading to the United States.  The subcommittee report noted that ''at least three FAA security bulletins . . . contained disquieting information involving West Germany.'' ''Yet despite the Helsinki warning of a Frankfurt bombing, the discovery of a radio-casette player bomb and two attempts to test Frankfurt airport security, the FAA failed to order U.S. airlines to take any security measures beyond those already in place,'' it said.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document