Terrorism muddles debate on gun laws
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 7, 2010 Thursday
Main Edition


Copyright 2010 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: METRO NEWS; Pg. 1B
Length: 766 words
Byline: Jim Galloway

Staff
Body


This morning, Republican state lawmakers will gather at the Capitol to take another crack at expanding the list of places where licensed, concealed weaponry can be carried in Georgia.
Over the next several months, we will have arguments --- some quite heated --- over whether a church pew is the proper place for a .38 stowed under the armpit. Or whether your daughter should be able to pack her princess .22 in a book bag for a walk across the university campus.
We have been here before. But this year, at least one flash point --- Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport --- is likely to be off the table.
For that you can thank Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the 23-year-old Nigerian who tried to bring down Northwest Airlines Flight 253 over Detroit on Christmas Day. With explosive underwear.
In 2008, the last time the Legislature tinkered with the state's concealed-carry laws, MARTA buses and restaurants that serve alcohol were added to the list of places where you are allowed to pack licensed heat.
The measure permitted guns on "public transportation," which --- according to the bill's author, state Rep. Tim Bearden (R-Villa Rica) --- included public spaces within the Atlanta airport. Right up to the security check-in point, where a federal prohibition on firearms takes over.
A judge disagreed. Licensed or not, civilians aren't allowed to carry at the Atlanta airport.
Since then, the question for Second Amendment advocates has been whether to pursue the battle. The attempted bombing of that Detroit-bound airliner may have put the matter out of reach, at least for now.
Much of the resulting furor over the intelligence failure --- the young Nigerian's father had warned the U.S. that his son was hanging with unsavory friends --- has focused on the need for airport technology capable of looking past your underwear.
The Transportation Security Administration is using $25 million in stimulus cash to purchase and install 150 body scanners as quickly as they can be churned out.
Less publicity has been given to secondary recommendations, particularly from the U.S. Government Accountability Office, that call for major airports to beef up their security perimeters well beyond crowded passenger screening areas.
Ben DeCosta, who oversees Hartsfield-Jackson for the city of Atlanta, insists that the airport will remain a "gun-free zone," according to a spokesman.
For Republicans, the issue is delicate. It is difficult to characterize Democrats as soft on airport security, while codifying the increased presence of concealed weaponry --- however licensed --- on the very same turf.
State lawmakers acknowledge the dilemma posed by a conflict between personal and national security.
"I do understand some of the concerns," said Bearden, whose gun bill comes up Thursday before the House Judiciary Committee.
"We will not try to go past what the TSA does. If they've got the mall of the airport, we'll limit ourselves to [the] pick-up and drop-off area," Bearden said. But to bar firearms completely from airport ground is to disarm citizens en route to and from their homes --- which Bearden thinks is unacceptable.
In the state Senate, Mitch Seabaugh (R-Sharpsburg) is expected to drop similar legislation next week. The lawmaker says he wants to clarify Georgia's tangle of gun laws. "I'm not looking to do anything that would undermine [airport] security in any way," he said.
Both Bearden and Seabaugh, as well as the National Rifle Association, point out that licenses for concealed weapons require criminal background checks. Holders of such permits rarely engage in crime.
It is a legitimate point.
But airport security experts might argue that terrorism, in both the U.S. and Britain, has largely been a high-brow, middle-class activity.
The rabble who produce our street crime aren't seduced by foreign affairs. Ask the parents of those five young Muslim men from northern Virginia, arrested in Pakistan while in search of jihad --- all of whom could qualify for concealed weapons permits in Georgia.
The prospects for new gun legislation are uncertain. Gov. Sonny Perdue has previously expressed his doubts about concealed weapons in church. David Ralston of Blue Ridge, all but certain to be elected House speaker on Monday, has thus far declined to weigh in.
Past fights over gun rights have been the most bitter in the Senate, presided over by Lt. Gov. Casey Cagle. But Majority Leader Chip Rogers of Woodstock said Wednesday he's not sure whether gun legislation will pass this session.
In its own complicated way, the situation is as explosive --- and ticklish --- as anyone's underwear.

Load-Date: January 7, 2010


End of Document