Terror on a New York City Bike Path; Letters
The New York Times 
November 1, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 574 words
Highlight: Readers discuss how to combat homegrown terrorism and truck attacks.
Body


To the Editor:
Re “Mile-Long Manhattan Truck Attack Kills 8” (front page, Nov. 1):
The carnage aimed for by a well-structured terror plan, painstakingly formulated to factor in method, timing and contingencies, can now be realized with breathtaking simplicity: possession of an ignition key. That and an utter disregard for the sanctity of human life are all that are needed to wreak havoc on the innocent.
ROBERT WAGNER, NEW YORK
To the Editor:
Re “Trump Blames Schumer and Immigration Policies Hours After New York Terrorist Attack” (news article, nytimes.com, Nov. 1):
I was born in Manhattan. I was in Manhattan when the towers fell. I was in Manhattan on Tuesday. I know the grit and goodness of New Yorkers.
The day after the Las Vegas massacre, eager to avoid an honest discussion of this nation’s gun control policy, President Trump argued that it was not the time for politics. Yet not 24 hours after the horror in his hometown, Mr. Trump essentially blamed this attack on Senator Chuck Schumer, who supported the diversity visa program under which the suspect entered the United States from Uzbekistan.
Now we know the president’s heart. A childhood in Queens and a career in Manhattan do not a New Yorker make. From behind double-paned glass, from the plush remove of a Fifth Avenue aerie, and from the gold-plated confines of his private plane, this president failed to pick up on what makes us us. We’re in this together. We look out for one another. This morning, I ache for a president who reflects those values.
DAVID D. TURNER, NEW YORK
To the Editor: 
None of President Trump’s anti-Muslim, anti-immigrant policies would have prevented this tragedy: not the wall, not the travel ban, which did not include Uzbekistan, not extreme vetting. Instead, Mr. Trump is threatening to cut antiterrorism funds.
President Barack Obama had a much more effective program to stem this sort of homegrown, self-radicalized terrorism — working in immigrant communities, making people feel secure and a member of American society with a stake in it, so they report suspicious behavior and do not fall under the spell of radicalism.
But in the end, no society, and especially not one that values freedom, liberty and democracy, can completely stop such acts of terror. It is mind-blowing the speed with which the authorities are looking to harden communities against such attacks, and yet completely ignore the pervasive terror of gun violence that takes 33,000 lives and maims thousands more each year.
KAREN RUBIN, GREAT NECK, N.Y.
To the Editor:
It is impossible to prevent all instances of terrorism that use vehicles as weapons to kill innocent people. However, technology, much of it is already available, could help.
An integrated system that uses video cameras to see and analyze what’s around a vehicle (such as an airport, parade, school, marathon route), combined with a GPS device that identifies the vehicle’s precise location and a computer that controls the vehicle’s speed (perhaps no more than 15 miles per hour in such locations), could help reduce or deter the use of vehicles as weapons to create terror.
Rental trucks and vans could be a good starting point for deployment of such technology. Any technology can, of course, be defeated and is never foolproof, but this may be one way to begin to address this threat.
PRADEEP FULAY, WEXFORD, PA.
The writer is the associate dean for research at Statler College of Engineering and Mineral Resources. 

Load-Date: November 3, 2017


End of Document