Terrorism included in disaster plan;
 Local act of terrorism no less likely than flood, wildfire or severe storm, analysis concludes
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
October 20, 2001 Saturday Spokane Edition


Copyright 2001 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: MAIN NEWS; Pg.A1
Length: 986 words
Byline: Bill Morlin, Staff writer
Body


The probability of a terrorism incident in Spokane is equal to the
 likelihood of a flood, wildfire or severe winter storm, a vulnerability
 analysis concludes.
 The analysis is part of the Spokane City-County Comprehensive Emergency
 Management Plan, which includes a newly drafted section dealing exclusively
 with terrorism.
 The terrorism plan outlines the responsibilities of various government
 agencies if there was an incident involving ''weapons of mass destruction."
 By definition, that means a terrorist attack involving nuclear, biological or
 chemical weapons.
''A terrorist incident (in Spokane) will create a need for special response
 considerations unlike other emergencies," the plan says.
 Spokane and Tacoma now have specific terrorism response plans, but Seattle
 does not. The state of Washington is in the final stages of reviewing its own
 terrorism response plan.
 Spokane's terrorism plan was published in draft form last December, and now
 is getting increased scrutiny, said David Byrnes, deputy director of the
 city-county Department of Emergency Management.
 The terrorism plan's chief author, Bill Edstrom, said the vulnerability
 assessments for natural and manmade disasters are historically based.
 ''We have a fairly decent history in Spokane of terrorist incidents, but
 certainly not of the magnitude of what's going on right now elsewhere in the
 United States," he said.
 Pipe bombs detonated by white supremecists in Spokane and the Valley in
 1996 were terrorist acts, said Edstrom.
 Police and firefighters referred to the plan in the past week as they
 responded to 16 suspicious powder incidents, reported as possible anthrax.
 None involved the potentially deadly bacteria.
 The plan has gotten enough use that a ''table-top" mock terrorism
 exercise, planned for next month, has been indefinitely postponed, Edstrom
 said.
 ''We're basically in an exercise right now," said Edstrom, an
 epidemiologist and bioterrorism coordinator for the Spokane Regional Health
 District.
 False anthrax scares ''are teaching us how we should or shouldn't respond
 to issues," he said.
 The terrorism plan is broken down into sections dealing with immediate
 management of the crisis and followup or so-called consequence management.
 It addresses such issues as communications, decontamination, how to deal
 with mass casualties and death scenes. It also outlines responsibilities
 assumed by more than two dozen local, state and federal agencies.
 ''The federal government exercises primary authority to prevent, preempt
 and terminate threats or acts of terrorism, and to apprehend and prosecute the
 perpetrators," the plan says. But, it adds, state and local governments must
 be ready to provide assistance.
 The plan lays out how the agencies should repond ''to prevent, minimize or
 mitigate a threat to public health, welfare or the environment."
 It also includes a caveat: ''There is no guarantee implied by this (plan)
 that a perfect response to a terrorism attack involving weapons of mass
 destruction will be practical or possible."
 For public health workers, responding to a terrorist incident is similar to
 responding to an outbreak of hepatitis A or pertussis, Edstrom said.
 ''Our job all along has been planning for an unexpected impact on public
 health," he said. ''What's different about bioterrorism is it's purposefully
 done rather than unintentionally done."
 But significantly, terrorism is a crime, encompassing the need for law
 enforcement involvement.
 The FBI is the lead federal agency for terrorism investigation. Since the
 Oklahoma City federal building bombing in 1995, more than 1,000 new FBI agents
 have been hired and trained for terrorism. Some of those agents now are
 assigned to Spokane and Coeur d'Alene.
 The Spokane city-county terrorism plan was modeled after one drafted by the
 state of Washington's Emergency Management Division. Edstrom also participated
 in that state drafting process.
 The state's terrorism plan is now under final review by the governor's
 office and the state attorney general, said Glen Woodbury, director of the
 state's Emergency Management Division.
 ''I think it's a very complete plan that speaks to the specific and unique
 circumstances of a terrorist event," he said.
 The state plan looks at vulnerable targets for terrorism in Washington, but
 Woodbury declined to discuss that topic.
 ''I'm not going to discuss specific vulnerabilities or our response plans
 to those vulnerabilities," he said.
 Portions of the state plan detailing with risks and vulnerabilities may not
 be released because state law was amended in July, blocking public disclosure,
 Woodbury said.
 ''Planning and preparation for a terrorist event in the State of Washington
 didn't begin on Sept. 11," he said.  ''We've been working on this specific
 hazard for several years."
 Jim Mullen, Seattle's emergency management director, said he believes his
 city's basic emergency response plan is adequate to cover a terrorist
 incident.
 ''Do our current plans and procedures adequately cover the subject?" he
 asked. '' I believe they do.
 ''We would do the same generic things following an act of terrorism that we
 would do for an earthquake," Mullen said.
 If an emergency is declared, as occurred during last February's earthquake
 in Seattle, nine emergency support groups are mobilized. They include
 emergency management, law enforcement, public works, fire departments, public
 information, human services, logistics, public health and long term recovery.
 ''I don't think anybody really knows what the next terrorist incident will
 be like," Mullen said.
 In contrast, the Tacoma area has a detailed terrorism response plan, said
 Ed Reed, program manager for Pierce County's Emergency Management.
 The Pierce County plan, finalized in December 1998, is now undergoing
 review by a Terrorism Early Warning and Response Task Force that was just
 formed, Reed said. The group holds its first meeting on Tuesday.

Notes

Bill Morlin can be reached at (509) 459-5444 or by e-mail at billm@spokesman.com.  

Graphic

 
Color Photo; Graphic: Potential disasters in SpokaneCounty; Spokane International Airport police and the Spokane haz-mat team respond to the report of a suspicious powder at the airport earlier this week. Photo by Colin Mulvany, The Spokesman-Review

Load-Date: October 23, 2001


End of Document