Terrorism fear reaches into rural town
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 04, 2001, Sunday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1B
Length: 814 words
Byline: Gavin McCormick The Associated Press
Body


RAINELLE - Tucked deep in the Appalachian Mountains, this one-stoplight town of 1,545 residents along the Meadow River has always seemed far removed from what's happening in the rest of the world.
Some people even called recently from Washington, D.C. - four hours east - to ask about the availability of second homes here where they could escape should terrorism spiral into chaos.
But even in this town, where the phrase "a great place to raise children" is heard so often it could be its motto, anxiety over the Sept. 11 attacks, anthrax deaths and the threat of more terrorism has started to take hold.
"People are scared - I hear it every day," says Deb McGhee, whose bar business has dropped in half, as regulars spend Social Security checks on canned goods instead of Bud Lights.
"People just don't want to participate in normal stuff. Nobody knows what to expect," she says.
After a minor school bus accident recently, 9-year-old Chance Harris says his first thought was: "They done bombed us."
Eighty-two-year-old Hester Hayden wonders if she'll find the courage to open that box of curtains she ordered.
When a helicopter buzzed low over McGhee's house recently, she "hit the dirt. It terrified me. I thought, 'They've come to get us.'"
Kim Thompson, who co-owns Linda's Family Restaurant on Main Street, says living in a place like Rainelle has always made her feel more secure. "But this makes you want to lock your doors and not come back out," she says.
Yet, Rainelle's three police officers have responded to no anthrax scares. The post office's 10 workers have altered no routines. Pharmacies have had no runs on antibiotics. Residents say they know they rank low on any list of likely terrorist targets.
Robin Wagner-Pacifici, sociology professor at Swarthmore College, who has studied responses to terrorism, says the unpredictable nature of recent events makes increased fear, even in remote places, perfectly understandable.
In emergencies, people seek to re-establish psychological boundaries inside of which they feel safe, Wagner-Pacifici says. "But these attacks have no obvious time or space boundaries, which makes it difficult to re-establish a zone of safety."
The contradictory messages that Americans have heard from their government - "Go out" while Vice President Dick Cheney remains mostly in secure locations; "Stay calm" while congressional representatives abruptly leave the Capitol - are reflected in some Rainelle citizens' comments.
"Jesus says 'Fear not,' and I'm not going to live my life in fear," says Barbara Dawson, an Annapolis, Md., resident who visits Rainelle on annual treks through her native West Virginia. "But you really have to watch your back. That's changed America for good."
In a town where registered Democrats outnumber Republicans 4-to-1, support for the government and President Bush is high.
"I'm no Republican, but I'll take up for my country," says Bill Foley, a 62-year-old retired coal miner. "I didn't vote for Bush, but I think he's doing a good job."
The tight-knit nature of Rainelle, which is 97.2 percent white, is exemplified by Parmod and Hemleta Patel, a Fiji-born couple whose parents came from India.
Nine years ago, the Patels bought the town's lone motel. The practicing Hindus occasionally attend First Baptist Church, and a "Jesus Loves You" sign sits beside the registry window.
Hemleta Patel says the couple and their daughters, Krupa, 8, and Disha, 5, "really feel part of the community here." Any threat they feel comes not from fellow residents, only "outsiders who may not know much about us and might have a bad impression."
In a town with more than a dozen churches, residents repeatedly say the attacks have caused them to strengthen their religious faith.
"I think people are realizing they need the Lord," says Linda Boggs, who attends Sewell Valley Baptist Church.
"My husband is not a Christian, but after all this, he's opened up more with me. In due time, I think he will become a Christian."
Several referred to the New Testament book of Revelations, which predicts an apocalyptic struggle that will bring the second coming of Jesus.
"No one knows how long until the end of time," says Carolyn Hunter, office manager of Rainelle Real Estate and wife of the pastor of Big Sewell Missionary Baptist Church. "But this might have moved us from the eleventh hour into the midnight hour. It's pitiful that it took 6,000 deaths to get people to sing 'God Bless America.'"
Many residents reject the notion that terrorism can change their way of life. Those acknowledging changes express stoicism, both as a way to rebuff perceived terrorist "victories" and as a way to return to normalcy.
"I used to love that junk mail, but now I throw it right in the trash," says Dodie Bishoff, 48. "But to me, this is something you've just got to live through. Look at all the stuff that gives you cancer. This is just another thing."

Load-Date: November 6, 2001


End of Document