TERRORISM ALERT EFFORT CAN'T AVOID RIDICULE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
February 24, 2003 Monday CITY EDITION


Copyright 2003 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8A
Length: 488 words
Body


The federal government's new home-land Security Department does not seem to be making any serious effort to minimize ridicule.
Whatever government official came up with the idea of mentioning duct tape and peanut butter must have known that the words would go directly from his or her mouth to the ears of the nation's comedians.
Radio entertainer Garrison Keillor was doing duct tape jokes - actually, one long, running joke - even before the government ever spoke the phrase. There's just something inherently funny about duct tape and its multitudinous uses.
But if everybody's laughing, everybody can probably agree on one thing, too: Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge has an impossible job.
He's trying to figure out how to make people secure in a world in which an apolitical former mental patient in South Korea is able to kill more than 100 people by buying $6 worth of gasoline and bringing it into the subway.
If some sort of terrible terrorist attack succeeds in this country, Mr. Ridge's agency stands to become a focus of criticism almost immediately. But if nothing terrible happens, the incessant talk of orange and yellow and purple alerts, the harping on the need for family precautions, and the resorting to funny words like duct tape will exact a price on the agency.
The specific dilemmas the agency faces have no perfect resolution. If terror alerts keep being issued - on the basis of inherently sketchy information - don't they lose their force? Maybe. But if the government thinks something may be up, shouldn't it let people know?
A week or so after the first mentions of duct tape, the new department rolled out a new, improved message on terror. The headlines said people should be cautious, but not scared.
This seems unlikely to change the direction of the nation's comedians.
Bravely, the department leaves the phrase "duct tape" in its new presentation. At the Web site  http://www.ready.gov , it offers guidance on putting together an emergency kit and emergency plan. The advice also will be featured in advertisements.
The site has useful stuff. The notion that, in an emergency, people might find it easier to make a long-distance call than a local one - and that, therefore, arrangements should be made to use out-of-town contacts to facilitate communication among family members who might get separated - is something that won't occur to everybody.
People will just have to decide for themselves what precautions to take and what jokes to make. All the government can do is gather what expert advise is available and pass it along.
When President George W. Bush was looking for a homeland security director, he got himself a former Marine who was also then a governor, who would know something about how states and local communities work. Hopefully, he also got someone with a skin thick enough to ward off, not chemical and biological contaminants, but a lot of ridicule. It comes with the territory.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Tom Ridge

Load-Date: February 26, 2003


End of Document