Terrorism 101;
Local schools are quickly learning what to do if a biological, chemical or nuclear attack occurs. But it's hard to plan for the unknown.
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
February 26, 2003, Wednesday


Copyright 2003 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 1122 words
Byline: Susan Baldrige
Body


Fire drills, air-raid drills, intruder drills and now what …  terrorism drills?
It might happen.
School districts are being told by the state to update their emergency plans to keep students and staff safe in the event of biological, chemical or nuclear terrorism.
The state Department of Education has released a terrorism emergency plan to schools called "Guidance and Resources to Help Plan for Terroristic Threats or Acts of Terrorism" on the department's Web site.
#TERROR.BAL6On#
The document reads: " … schools need to know that they are prepared for the worst case scenario."
Although most schools in Lancaster County update their emergency plans every year, without knowing what threats will arise, it has made the job more difficult.
"We have plans for some kind of catastrophic event," said Conestoga Valley Superintendent Gerald Huesken. "But to plan for every single thing that can possibly happen is difficult."
In the 1950s and '60s, schools held air-raid drills in which students took cover in the hallways or under desks. Of course, there were fire drills and sometimes tornado and hurricane drills. School shootings brought on intruder drills with codes, walkie-talkies and high security.
Nowadays, there are orange alerts, terror reports, duct tape and plastic sheeting.
What should schools do about this, if anything, officials wonder.
"Naturally it's difficult," said Allan Thrush, superintendent of Elizabethtown School District. "You never know what is going to happen. You hope nothing, but you do the best you can."
In the case of Elizabethtown schools, so close to the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant, the emergency plan includes potassium iodide pills and evacuation locations on their Web site.
According to Elizabethtown High School nurse Cindy Witman, the school would only dispense the potassium iodide pills on the orders of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency (PEMA), if there was radiation exposure.
During a nuclear crisis, Witman said their each teacher in Elizabethtown would be given enough tablets for the students in their classroom.
She said school officials will give parents the option of excluding their children from taking the pill, which helps prevent the thyroid gland from absorbing radiation.
"It does not prevent other types of cancers...but there's only so much you can do," Witman said. "You use the resources you have to protect the masses."
"Like so many things in education, you're trained to be a teacher or an administrator. They don't have an emergency 101 class," said Columbia School District chief Kenneth Klawitter. "You have to rely on outside experts."
In Columbia, the schools modeled their emergency plan after one crafted by a national school-emergency expert.
Columbia has devised an easy-to-read flip chart that covers everything from a bus accident to a chemical attack. It has emergency procedures and shows evacuation sites in the community.
And no one -- NO ONE -- said Klawitter, is ever without his or her emergency flip chart in the Columbia district.
"Every teacher, custodian, office person, administrator, school aide, even substitutes when they come in, has the flip chart," Klawitter said.
Klawitter said the district's plan coincides with the state recommendations on responding to a biological or chemical terrorist attack.
"There's designated areas in the building in case of an attack," Klawitter said. "We notify the county emergency officials and take students to the safe areas where we take attendance. Windows are closed and sealed and we avoid any indirect or direct contact with air or spilled materials. We shut down the ventilation system."
Don Stewart's biggest fear is disorder and panic.
The Superintendent of Penn Manor School District remembers that during the TMI accident in 1979, parents were coming into schools and demanding their kids right away.
"The best thing we can do to prepare for any emergency is have a safe and orderly pickup of students, that's where our orientation is," Stewart said.
"Can you imagine if there's some sort of national-level disaster and an early dismissal where your child is out on the road in a bus and there's traffic everywhere and parents are scrambling to get their child?"
It's enough to give a school administrator nightmares.
Stewart just sent a letter home with students that outlines emergency procedures and encourages parents to make sure they always have enough medicine on hand for their children.
But there are so many things to consider, he said.
"How about being in Millersville when (college) classes let out," Stewart said. "Add to that a terrorist attack or chemicals in the air. There's an entirely different set of complications. You have lots of kids who go to Millersville (University) without transportation of any kind."
According to the state's directive, the "key principles of emergency preparedness are planning, teamwork, and practice."
Stewart is currently formulating a new emergency plan for the district in conjunction with Millersville University and Millersville Borough Council.
CV's Huesken said the district keeps an eye on changing trends, including terrorism threats.
"The state has made resources available lately about what schools can do to prepare for terrorism events," Huesken said. "We'll be taking a look at that.
The Manheim Central School District updated their emergency plan last year.
"It was updated about how (parents) can get their children in the event there is an incident," said Manheim Central Superintendent Carol Saylor. "I think we are in a different situation now and because of it we have reevaluated our plan carefully."
The emergency plan, said Saylor, includes specific sites where children would be transported if necessary.
Stephen Iovino, superintendent of the Warwick School District, said emergency plans have been updated there, including schools and community buildings where students would be taken in the case of an emergency.
Warwick may be the only district here that doesn't publicize its evacuation sites.
"That could give someone the opportunity to do great harm there," said Iovino.
In the Donegal School District, teachers and administrators have handy emergency guidebooks with them, said Superintendent Linda Abele.
"It's in the forefront of our thoughts," Abele said. "It's a little more crucial now because the government says to be more vigilant. I don't see anyone overreacting, but our responsibility is for the safety and security of the children. We're as prepared as we can be."
PA. SCHOOL PLAN FOR BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM
Call 911.
Keep students and staff inside.
Close and lock doors and windows.
Shut down heating and cooling system.
Account for all students and staff.
Move everyone to interior rooms without windows.
Evacuate if necessary.

Graphic

 
COLOR PHOTO, Richard Hertzler , Penn Manor Superintendent Don Stewart greets students today at Manor Middle School. From left are Jimmy Woomer, Brenda Toomey and Alexa Thomas.

Load-Date: February 27, 2003


End of Document