Terrorism panels urge creation of security czar;
AMERICA'S RESPONSE
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
September 27, 2001 Thursday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News;
Length: 571 words
Byline: LARRY LIPMAN
Body


Washington --- Members of two terrorism commissions agreed Wednesday that a federal anti-terrorism office is needed desperately.
President Bush has appointed Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Ridge, a Republican, to head an anti-terrorism office in the White House. Ridge is expected to begin work in about two weeks, but some lawmakers question how much authority he will have and whether his position should be made permanent.
Cox Washington Bureau
A panel headed by Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore, also a Republican, has recommended the appointment of a Cabinet-level official who would be responsible for coordinating the nation's domestic and international anti-terrorism policy. Gilmore's panel is still operating.
Earlier this year, another panel, headed by former Sens. Warren Rudman (R-N.H.) and Gary Hart (D-Colo.), recommended the creation of a Cabinet-level agency whose director would have authority over terrorism activities related to the Customs Service, the Border Patrol, the Coast Guard and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Former Rep. Lee Hamilton (D-Ind.), a member of the Rudman-Hart panel, told the House subcommittee on terrorism that he is leery of creating a terrorism "czar" --- such as the federal drug czar --- whose role would be one of coordinating the efforts of various agencies.
"Every agency wants to protect their own turf," Hamilton said. The director "has to have the authority to say, 'The president of the United States wants it this way.' . . . He has to be to able to say that to the FBI director and the CIA director."
Gilmore told the House panel that his commission's proposal would give budgetary and coordination authority to the terrorism director and make him a Cabinet-level appointee.
Hamilton said Congress should go beyond Bush's executive order by making the terrorism director a permanent position subject to Senate confirmation.
Rep. Saxby Chambliss (R-Ga.), chairman of the terrorism subcommittee of the House Intelligence Committee, said the two commission's recommendations were in general agreement.
"I think they all said he should be a Cabinet-level official and he has to have power and authority over budgets and power and authority with respect to the administration's terrorism policy," Chambliss said.
Meanwhile, the head of a third congressional commission on terrorism urged the revocation of a CIA policy on the hiring of informants with a history of criminal or human rights abuses.
L. Paul Bremer III, former ambassador at large for counterterrorism, said a 1995 CIA directive requiring agents to get approval from headquarters before hiring informants with a dirty past has had a "chilling effect" on the agency's ability to penetrate terrorist networks.
"If you're going to get human intelligence about terrorist groups, by definition it's going to come from a terrorist," Bremer said. "This information is not going to come by wandering down to the League of Women Voters. This information is going to come from terrorists."
Chambliss said his committee will recommend lifting the regulations when the intelligence authorization bill comes to the House next week.
"What we're telling the CIA is that they should be able to hire persons with unsavory backgrounds," Chambliss said.
It would be up to the agency, he said, to adopt new guidelines that recognize a sensitivity to human rights abuses while not avoiding the need to deal with people who might have committed such abuses.

Graphic

 
Photo:
Rep. Saxby Chambliss says his terrorism panel backs lifting a ban on hiring CIA agents with dirty pasts.

Load-Date: September 27, 2001


End of Document