TERRORISM IN ISRAEL KILLS 4;
ATTACK ON BUS LEADS TO DEATHS OF 2 WOMEN, 2 PALESTINIAN GUNMEN
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
July 2, 1993, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 523 words
Byline: DAVID HOFFMAN, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


Two Israeli women and two Palestinian gunmen were killed yesterday in a rampage of violence that began when the Palestinians opened fire inside a commuter bus and ended in a clash with police at a roadblock after they had hijacked a car and its driver.
It was the most violent attack since Israel sealed off the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip in late March after several stabbings, and it shattered the relative calm that had prevailed in Israel in recent weeks.
In an apparent revenge attack, an Israeli fired randomly on five Arab workers later yesterday morning, wounding them slightly, before fleeing, witnesses said.
The bus attack set off political reverberations. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, traveling in Paris, said its goal was ''to derail the Israeli-Arab peace negotiations.''
Rafael Eitan, leader of a small nationalist party, called for suspension of peace talks. Moshe Katsav, head of the opposition Likud, said the attack was an effort to force Israel to relinquish its sovereignty over east Jerusalem, and he called for renewed deportations of Palestinian militants from the occupied territories.
Authorities said the two assailants who carried out the attack may have been members of the militant Islamic movement Hamas. They said a pistol found on one of them had a Hamas inscription. The two were not identified.
A third Arab, who authorities identified as Otman Saleh Mustafa, 22, a resident of the Jabiliya refugee camp in the Gaza Strip, was wounded in the head by gunfire in the initial bus attack and was hospitalized in serious condition.
Police said Mustafa was a member of Hamas and appeared to have been a partner of the other two.
According to police and witness accounts, the commuter bus, carrying 80 passengers, was making its way from one of Jerusalem's northernmost neighborhoods toward the center of town on the main boulevard about 7:15 a.m. when one of the two Arabs, near the front of the bus, pulled out a pistol.
The bus driver, Shem-Tov David, said he struggled to seize the weapon. The Arab fired and hit him in the legs. Pandemonium broke out as the other Arab, near the rear of the bush, opened fire with an M-16 assault rifle.
A woman identified as Olga Haichov, 42, a recent Russian immigrant, was wounded and died several hours later.
After the bus came to rest on a median strip, the two Arabs fled to a Jewish neighborhood nearby and seized a rental car being driven by Janette Kadoush Dayan, 39, a mother of four children, according to the police.
Sharon Buhbut, a border policeman, told Israeli Army Radio he saw the car as it approached a roadblock in Bethlehem in the West Bank.
''The young woman tried to motion to me something. She moved the steering wheel,'' Buhbut said, and then the Arab seated next to her shot at her legs.
While the car was still moving, the woman either jumped or was thrown from the vehicle, police said.
Buhbut said moments after Dayan rolled from the car, he spotted a grenade being thrown from the vehicle and yelled ''grenade'' at the other policemen, who opened fire, killing the two Arabs. Other explosives in the automobile detonated and it was consumed in flames.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, David Silverman/Reuters: The elder brother of Janette Kadoush Dayan, killed at an Israeli army roadblock in Bethlehem, West Bank, after being taken hostage by two Palestinian gunmen, is restrained during her funeral yesterday.

Load-Date: September 20, 1995


End of Document