TERRORISM-INSURANCE BILL PASSED BY SENATE
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
June 19, 2002 Wednesday City Edition


Copyright 2002 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C-7
Length: 440 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Senate approved a bill yesterday to help allay the costs of terrorism insurance, setting up a showdown with the House over how to help businesses survive possible future disasters.
The Democratic-controlled Senate approved the bill, 84-14. The House last year approved its own version of the bill. Now a House-Senate conference committee will try to hammer out their differences.
Democrats say there is room for compromise with House Republicans. "The president wants this bill, the House wants this bill, we want this bill," said Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev.
President Bush showed his desire for the bill earlier yesterday, making calls to some senators to help twist arms on a vote to speed the bill's passage.
After Sept. 11, many insurers limited or dropped coverage for casualty and property losses to terrorism because insurance companies faced record payouts of $30 billion to $50 billion.
The president of the American Insurance Association praised the Senate's action, saying it "sends a strong signal to businesses of all sizes, in all economic sectors, and in every state that Congress will secure the American economy by putting a terrorism reinsurance backstop in place."
The House has passed legislation under which the government would help insurers continue to offer terror insurance by agreeing to pick up, for at least one year, 90 percent of losses in any major attack.
Under the Senate bill, the insurance industry would have to pay $10 billion of insurance costs for terror attacks for two years. Beyond that level, the government would cover 90 percent with the insurance industry paying the remaining 10 percent.
There would be a $100 billion cap; the Treasury secretary would have to go to Congress if costs exceeded that.
The Treasury secretary could extend the program for a third year, in which case the industry would be responsible for the first $20 billion in costs.
The bill also would help some individual companies well before the $10 billion threshold kicks in, said Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas.
Republicans also want to shield companies from punitive damages and say Bush probably would veto the bill if it reached his desk without the protection.
The Senate earlier yesterday voted 65-31 to limit debate on the terrorism insurance bill, a maneuver that forbids introduction of unrelated amendments and forces a quick vote.
That move knocked out an amendment filed by Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., that would have banned issuing patents for cloning technology. The amendment was not allowed because it was unrelated to the terrorism bill, and its approval would have dimmed the legislation's chances of passing, Democrats said.

Load-Date: June 20, 2002


End of Document