Terrorism analysis center would merge information
USA TODAY
January 30, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 424 words
Byline: Kevin Johnson and Toni Locy
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body

WASHINGTON -- President Bush's plan for a new government center that would analyze potential terrorist threats could take months to develop, U.S. officials said Wednesday. But civil libertarians already are questioning the appointment of the CIA director to oversee the center's work with foreign and domestic intelligence.
As outlined in Bush's State of the Union address Tuesday, the Terrorist Threat Integration Center would become a repository for all terrorist-related intelligence. The information would be analyzed by officers from the CIA, the FBI and the departments of Homeland Security and Defense.
Administration officials say consolidating such information collected by various U.S. agents will ensure that material is shared across the government, and will provide a more accurate picture of threats against the government. Such information generally has been investigated separately, with the FBI handling domestic issues and the CIA focused on foreign intelligence.
The first calls for a centralized analysis operation came after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, when U.S. lawmakers accused the CIA and FBI of not recognizing signs that an attack on the USA could be coming. Among the signs was a warning from an FBI field office agent who had noticed an influx of Middle Eastern students at U.S. flight schools. After the attacks, the FBI and CIA began to lower the bureaucratic barriers that traditionally have separated them, but Bush's planned for shared intelligence analysis appears to go well beyond that.
Congress members generally called Bush's plan a good idea, but said it lacked detail. The White House acknowledged that there is no estimate for how much the analysis center would cost, where it would be or when it might open.
Sen. John Edwards, a North Carolina Democrat who is running for president, favors stripping the FBI of all intelligence work. He said Bush's plan "does nothing to improve intelligence-gathering."
The ACLU objects to the administration's decision to have CIA Director George Tenet oversee the analysis center. The CIA generally has been restricted from gathering intelligence on U.S. soil, in part because it was widely seen as abusing its spying authority while scrutinizing the anti-war movement and civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. in the 1960s. But after Sept. 11, Congress allowed the CIA to see domestic intelligence, mostly collected by the FBI. "The president must ensure that appropriate curbs on (the CIA's) authority are imposed," ACLU legislative counsel Timothy Edgar said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Stephan Jaffe, Agence France-Presse; Tenet: Bush administration wants the CIA director to head intelligence center.

Load-Date: January 30, 2003


End of Document