Terrorism trial against father, son reveals murky picture
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 12, 2006 Sunday
0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A
Length: 637 words
Dateline: SACRAMENTO, Calif.; ALBANY, N.Y. 
Body


SACRAMENTO, Calif. - The government painted an ominous portrait of Hamid Hayat and his father after arresting them nearly 10 months ago and charging them with lying about whether Hamid attended a terrorists' training camp in Pakistan.
The accusations depicted Hamid Hayat as so mesmerized by terrorist ideology that he sought to carry out a holy war against hospitals and grocery stores.
But four weeks into their trial, the picture is far murkier.
While prosecutors have played portions of videotaped interrogations showing them confessing to FBI agents, their lawyers played the same tapes, arguing that the confessions in broken English were little more than parroted responses to leading questions.
The government says Hamid Hayat was a pawn in a network of al-Qaida-trained operatives awaiting orders to strike U.S. targets. His lawyer says Hamid was merely a directionless 23-year-old who last worked in a fruit-packing shed and was prodded into talk of jihad by a paid informant. Part of his father's purported confession sounds oddly like an episode of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
This week, midway through the prosecution case, the Hayats' separate juries will be brought together for the first time to hear expert testimony that will attempt to put the trial into the context of global terrorism.
It's an important case despite the lack of hard evidence of a confirmed terrorist plot, said security consultant Howard Safir, a former New York City police commissioner. "We can't minimize the fact that al-Qaida was trying to set up cells in the United States," said Safir, who also held posts with the U.S. Marshall's Service and the Drug Enforcement Administration. "I think al-Qaida is like the Statue of Liberty: "Send me your hungry, your poor . . .' They'll take anybody and see if they're useful."
Prosecutors allege that Hamid Hayat attended an al-Qaida training camp in Pakistan in 2003 and returned last May to his home in Lodi, a wine-growing center 35 miles south of the state capital. According to trial transcripts, he was awaiting orders to attack targets that included hospitals, banks and grocery stores.
Hayat's father, Umer, 48, is charged with lying when he denied knowing about the camps or his son's attendance. During his interrogation, Umer Hayat said potential targets included federal buildings such as the White House and Pentagon. The Hayats' answers often were inconsistent and frequently show the men simply agreeing in broken English with incriminating statements made by FBI agents.
Hamid Hayat is charged with three counts of making false statements to the FBI and with providing material support to terrorists. He faces up to 39 years in prison if convicted. His father is charged with two counts of making false statements and faces 16 years in prison. Both men pleaded not guilty.
Judge rejects illegal wiretap claim
ALBANY, N.Y. - A federal judge refused to dismiss charges against two Muslims arrested in an FBI anti-terrorism sting, rejecting claims that evidence was tainted by use of illegal warrantless wiretaps.
U.S. District Judge Thomas McAvoy's "classified" order leaves secret his reasons for also turning down defense requests to suppress any evidence acquired from warrantless wiretaps or force authorities to disclose whether they were used in the Albany case. His three-sentence public order was issued Friday.
Yassin Aref, 35, an imam at Masjid as-Salam in Albany, and Mohammed Hossain, 50, are accused of laundering money in 2003-2004 for an FBI informant, a Pakistani businessman posing as an arms dealer. Neither is accused of actual violence. Both deny charges that they conspired to provide support to Jaish-e-Mohammed, a Pakistan-based group listed by the federal government as a terrorist organization. Aref remains in jail awaiting trial, while Hossain is free on bond.

Load-Date: March 12, 2006


End of Document