Terrorism unacceptable anywhere on the planet

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
September 24, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A11
Length: 311 words
Body


My mother was a teen when the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor, which hurled the United States into World War II. My father wept after learning an assassin's bullet snuffed out John F. Kennedy's life. I was still in diapers when a great man died.
Now Americans will ask people what they were doing when they heard the news on 9-11.
I was seated with a group of people, many of us strangers, for an employer-sponsored course. We gathered around a television set in an adjoining conference room to watch in shock and despair as the second plane struck the World Trade Center.
I watched with profound sadness as the towers crumbled and unimaginable human suffering began. Those images will haunt me for the rest of my life.
Hijackers that President Bush describes as "faceless cowards" commandeered four American planes to destroy the World Trade Center and part of the Pentagon. I find it difficult to comprehend that attacks of this magnitude happened on American soil.
How did these evil people, armed with knives and box-cutters, get past the metal detectors and airport security?  How did they gain control of those planes?
What can we do to ensure the safety of our citizens? Can we round up Arab-Americans and segregate them from the rest of society as we did during World War II with our citizens of Japanese descent? That isn't an option. We can't persecute a class of people,
most of them law-abiding citizens, for the actions of a small minority.
The answer is to eradicate terrorism from this world. We're in for a long, difficult battle. Like most peace-loving Americans, I don't want to see our country go to war. But we can't tolerate extremists who compromise our sense of well-being.
It grieves me to contemplate living in fear of what terrorists may do next.
No matter the fate of this great nation, I am proud to be an American. Let freedom ring.
Sarah Glenwright
Normal

Load-Date: September 25, 2001


End of Document