Terrorism Fears Conceive Baby Theories
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
December 9, 2001, Sunday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 1247 words
Byline: BRAD SMITH , bsmith@tampatrib.com; Staff writers Donna Koehn and John Wing contributed to this story. Reporter Brad Smith can be reached at (813) 259-7365.  
Body


EXPERTS LINK CRISIS, BABY BOOM
TAMPA - As songwriter Cole Porter famously noted, birds, bees and even "educated fleas do it."
Since Sept. 11, apparently so are more Floridians.
War, it seems, breeds a lot more than contempt for the enemy. Some experts say they're seeing a rise in both casual sex - "disaster sex," some are calling it - and pregnancies.
It could be just another urban myth; it's too soon to tell for sure. But if it's true, by next summer Tampa Bay area delivery rooms may be popping.
"We did think about how it would affect us," said Christina Shuster, 25. She and her husband, Daniel, 28, a U.S. Coast Guard technician in St. Petersburg, had been talking about starting a family before Sept. 11.
Then he was put on high alert, and briefly they had second thoughts.
"This changed his whole routine because he has to be out [at sea] a lot more," Christina said. "We hesitated because he wouldn't be here for most of it." And also because Daniel's military service suddenly seemed more dangerous.
Now, they are nervous parents-to-be, expecting in July and hoping for a boy.
"It just happened," Christina said. "Some friends asked if we wanted to bring a baby into this world. I said I guess it doesn't really matter."
Pregnancies Rise During Holidays
Some experts say more women are showing an increased desire to get pregnant as couples re-evaluate their futures in a world some see as going all wrong.
"What I had heard right after [Sept. 11] was just from people being intimate more often, soon thereafter," said Steve Greenberg, an obstetrician in Tampa. "I will say we had perhaps our busiest "new obstetrics' month ever in October. It definitely seems like we've seen a whole lot more new patients. I don't know if it's related or coincidental."
John Ferlita, a Dade City obstetrician who runs the Women's Center for Health, leans toward the latter. He said couples getting pregnant now may just be doing what millions always do around this time.
"I've noted a slight increase [in pregnancies]," Ferlita said. "But, looking back on all the years I've practiced, historically, we see a rise during the holiday season."
Mark Mather, a policy analyst with the Population Reference Bureau in Washington, said seasonal fluctuations in birthrates are common. Typically, late summer busy streaks in maternity wards are seen nine months after the Thanksgiving through New Year's holidays, when some couples get cozier than usual.
Something similar could follow this fall's rise in terrorism anxiety - if it really brought many couples closer.
"My personal theory is there may be a blip, but it will just be a blip," Mather said. "Then, the … recession may cause a downward [birth] trend."
Mather said some regions may turn out to be more fecund than others, particularly New York, Washington and Boston, where the terrorist attacks were felt most intensely, making more people ponder the future.
"It's a very hard thing to attribute this rise to Sept. 11," Ferlita said. "There may be an underlying psychological reason, but I think it will be years before we can evaluate the impact on different aspects of our lives. Overall, I'm seeing more people interested in having families, but it may be coincidental. I don't think Sept. 11 is the absolute reason behind it."
"Why Not Have Another One?'
Gabrielle Howle might illustrate that viewpoint. Howle, a Seffner mother of three, said terrorism has not dampened her desire for a fourth child.
"If Sept. 11 has done anything, it has made us say, "Why not have another one?' " she said.
But she and her husband, James, will not take that step until the time is right.
"I'm not going to let a small group of crazy individuals influence that decision," Howle said. "I believe that things are going to happen when they need to happen. Sept. 11 has set that deeper in my brain. Life is too short to put things off."
Reverse Effect Noted
Not all doctors are seeing a pregnancy boom.
David Ashley Hill, an obstetrician in Orlando, said some patients were scared away from family-building in the first weeks after Sept. 11.
"I saw many women who were contemplating pregnancy and were postponing those plans," Hill said. "In my case, I'd say probably six of 10 of those patients talked about this and were holding off."
A common theme: " "I don't know if I want to bring a baby into this kind of world.' That's exactly the words they used," Hill said. "No question about it. When patients [came] in for what we call a preconceptual visit, there was a lot of reticence, reluctance to have a kid. They expressed concern about bringing a baby into a world where random acts of violence were coming, I guess."
But there is evidence that others were apparently willing to gamble on the future.
"I see people with miscarriages, stillbirths," Hill said. "The anthrax scare and terrorism were important but not the primary focus of their lives."
Others have seen neither a surge or decline in baby-making.
Lynn Dupree, office manager at the Fertility and Gynecology Center of Tampa, said she hasn't noticed much change in the attitudes of the 60 patients who have come in daily since Sept. 11.
"We've had a few who've gotten pregnant in the last month, but we don't have that big a rate of pregnancy here," Dupree said.
Jackie Bruce, a midwife with Focus Women's Care in Plant City, has noticed no pregnancy boom since Sept. 11. But she says terrorism forced some to adjust priorities.
"Definitely, they were affected by it, and it seems to have made them more aware that anything can happen at any time," she said. "They're saying, "We don't want to wait, just in case something should happen.' "
Bruce was prepared to quiet the concerns of expectant mothers about bioterrorism, but that hasn't been necessary.
"I'm seeing a little bit of concern about anthrax and smallpox, but not as much as I had expected," she said. "They're not coming in with that on their minds."
Mirrors Other Urban Legends
There are also those who say all the talk of "disaster sex" and a rise in pregnancies is most likely one part media hype, one part modern-day fable - and maybe a little wishful thinking, too, like the exaggerated reports of a Manhattan baby boom nine months after the blackout that darkened the Northeast in 1965.
"After blizzards, earthquakes, erupting volcanoes, ice storms, and even strikes by professional football players - reports about "baby booms' in local hospitals invariably appear in the media," reports Snopes.com, an Internet site devoted to debunking urban legends. "However, these "booms' always turn out to be nothing more than natural fluctuations in the birthrate."
Attacks Won't Spark Love
Finally, whatever the impact of Sept. 11 on conception, the terrorist attacks won't help warring spouses in troubled marriages overcome their differences, therapists say.
David Weir, a Tampa sex therapist and relationship counselor, said Sept. 11 had virtually no lasting impact on the couples he sees. Many were slightly depressed for a few days, but that was it.
"I haven't seen anxiety creating more problems in a relationship," Weir said. "I haven't seen anxiety bringing people closer together. I've seen nothing."
Rather than repairing marriages on the rocks, even the threat of terrorism pales beside whatever problems are ailing a relationship, Weir has found.
"When we've got something right in front of us that we're concerned about, that's what we want to deal with," Weir said. "It tends to overshadow other things like world events, even a death in the family."

Graphic

 
PHOTO (2C)
Tribune photo by KATHY MOORE-LENGELL
(C) Gabrielle Howle, left, and husband James read to their children: Anna, 2, left; Victoria, 5; and Benjamin, 1. The events of Sept. 11 did not change their minds about wanting another child.
Tribune photo by KATHY MOORE-LENGELL
(C) Gabrielle Howle says she and her husband are not going to let "crazy individuals" influence the decision to have another child.

Load-Date: December 10, 2001


End of Document