Terrorism to be topic of Israeli's address
Chicago Daily Herald
October 11, 2002, Friday D1,D2,D4,D5,D6


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEIGHBOR;
Length: 421 words
Byline: Deborah Kadin Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


The Israeli government's perspective on the Middle East crisis will be heard Sunday when that country's highest ranking representative in the Chicago area addresses Congregation Etz Chaim in Lombard.  
Moshe Ram, Israel's consul general, will talk about terrorism inside Israel, the military situation in the West Bank and Gaza, and the status of the peace process. He will speak at 10:30 a.m. at the congregation, 1710 S. Highland Ave., Lombard.  
His appearance is coordinated by the synagogue's Social Action Committee. The speech is closed to the public.  
"We're looking forward to having him here. He'll give us an insider's perspective of what's happening there, from someone who's in touch with the government regularly," said Garry Gardner, co- chairman of the committee.  
Ram has been consul general in Chicago for more than a year and has served in the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs since 1975.  
That historical perspective may be a big part of his speech, he said, for he will remind his audience that terrorism has played a role in the Middle East for decades. A peaceful, not a military, solution is the road Israel wants to take, he said.  
"From the minute it was established, Israel has seen that the only way to co-exist in the Middle East is to live in peace with our neighbors," Ram said. "We feel a political solution is the only path to co-existence."  
Instead, Ram said, Israel has been embroiled in a deadly fight for its life. In two years, terrorist bombings have killed 600 people, most of them civilians, and injured more than 4,500.  
During this period of violence, Israelis have shown tremendous stamina and resilience as they try to carry out their daily lives. Ram said he saw evidence of that when he was in Israel just this last month and plans to provide details during the talk.  
"I was very proud to see how determined Israelis are to challenge terror," he said.  
Until that campaign stops and there is a period of calm, the peace process cannot resume, he said. When it does, negotiations would contain the same flexibility that Israel has always shown during negotiations, he said. His nation is willing to compromise, but cannot compromise its critical security interests.  
"As much as we need to fight terror, and we are doing that constantly, we would attempt to find every single avenue to advance the peace process," he said.  
One area Ram said he probably would not touch on is the possible war between the United States and Iraq, only because Israel is not directly involved in it.

Graphic

 
Moshe Ram

Load-Date: October 15, 2002


End of Document