Terrorism expert speaks at U. Oregon, says we misconceive suicide bombers
University Wire
March 10, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Oregon Daily Emerald via U-Wire
Length: 555 words
Byline: By Ed Oser, Oregon Daily Emerald; SOURCE: U. Oregon
Dateline: EUGENE, Ore. 
Body


Terrorism expert Robert Pape said a stereotypical suicide bomber is a poor, uneducated, Middle Eastern man brainwashed by Osama bin Laden to kill in the name of Allah.
And that's exactly what most suicide bombers are not like, the University of Chicago political science professor said.
Pape, who spoke at the University of Oregon Thursday evening in PLC 180, said that image is not only inaccurate, but it also provided a "faulty premise" for the invasion of Iraq.
His presentation, part of a one-day whirlwind tour of Eugene and Corvallis, Ore., to promote his new book "Dying to Win: the Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism," aimed to prove that Islamic fundamentalism does not cause suicide terrorism, but that suicide attacks are part of a greater strategy used by terrorist organizations to drive foreign militaries from occupied areas.
The most common perpetrator of suicide terrorism, Pape said, is not an Islamic fundamentalist group, but is a member of the Tamil Tigers, a secular Marxist group funded by Hindus and operating in Sri Lanka, a small country in Southeast Asia.
As part of his presentation, Pape showed a photo of a smiling woman hugging Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1992. The photo, taken from a video made by the Tamil Tigers, showed the last second of Gandhi's life. The woman blew up herself, Gandhi and several bystanders, not as an act of Islamic zealotry, but as part of an organized political campaign.
"Fifty percent of suicide attacks are not affiliated with Islamic terrorism," Pape said.
If Islamic fundamentalism were truly the cause of suicide terrorism, Pape said, we should see terrorists "hopping out of Iran, hopping out of Sudan, hopping out of Pakistan," three of the countries with the largest populations of Muslims.
Of them, Iran and Sudan have produced no suicide terrorists, and Pakistan has produced only two, Pape said. The majority of terrorists in Iraq, Pape said, are Iraqi Sunnis, Saudis, Syrians and Kuwaitis, or people from the surrounding countries on the Arabian Peninsula, where U.S. troop levels have risen from 12,000 in 1990 to more than 140,000 today.
As part of his research, which has been used by the Central Intelligence Agency, Federal Bureau of Investigation and the National Security Agency , Pape has compiled the first complete database of all suicide terrorist attacks from 1980 to 2004. He shows the number of suicide attacks to be rising dramatically in recent years, from three per year in the 1980s, to 10 per year in the 1990s, to more than 25 per year in 2000 and 2001 and more than 50 per year in 2002 and 2003.
"Al Qaeda is stronger today than before 9/11," Pape said.
"Rightly or wrongly," Pape said, "democracies are viewed as especially soft, or vulnerable to suicide terrorism."
The individual terrorists are often more highly educated than most of their countrymen and are often working or middle-class, Pape said.
"Many are people who would go on to lead productive lives if they didn't choose to participate in terrorist attacks," Pape said.
Pape argued that to protect our troops and access to Iraqi oil, we need to transfer control of the Iraqi military to the Iraqi government and gradually withdraw our troops.
"Our enemies have been dying to win," Pape said. "But it is America that is poised for victory."
(C) 2006 Oregon Daily Emerald via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 10, 2006


End of Document