TERRORISM TESTS WEAKENED ARAFAT'S METTLE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
August 1, 1997, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD,
Length: 749 words
Byline: NICOLAS B. TATRO, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: JERUSALEM
Body


Yasser Arafat, already weakened by a corruption scandal in his Cabinet, is losing credibility over the failing peace process. Now, Israel is demanding that he crack down on Palestinian militants in the wake of the Jerusalem market bombing.
The question: Is Arafat strong enough to do it?
Arafat today is considerably weaker than he was last year. In March 1996, he jailed leaders of militant groups that killed more than 60 people in a series of suicide bombings.
Back then, though, the peace process was robust, and Arafat and his supporters had just won resounding backing in the first Palestinian elections.
Arafat also had been strengthened by Israeli troop withdrawals in the West Bank and wanted to help the then-Israeli Labor government of Shimon Peres to win re-election.
The hard-line government that beat Peres at the polls would like to see Arafat fall.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is pressing Arafat to rein in the militants and threatens to send his forces to do the job if the Palestinian police fail to deliver.
President Clinton, with $ 100 million a year in U.S. aid under his control, is demanding ''concrete steps'' and Palestinian cooperation with Israeli security forces.
But Arafat may not be in any position to mobilize against the militants.
He has been losing credibility among Palestinians because he hasn't been able to do anything about controversial steps taken by his sometime peace partner, Netanyahu. Foremost is the building of a Jewish housing project in Jerusalem on land Palestinians regard as their own.
He also was seen as ineffective in responding to Netanyahu's decision to open a new entrance to the Western Wall tunnel near Islamic holy sites, a dispute in which 79 people were killed.
At the same time, Arafat's government is under attack for widespread corruption - with criticism coming even from a Parliament filled with members of his Fatah party. By a 51-1 vote yesterday, a parliamentary panel demanded the resignation of his entire 18-member Cabinet for mismanaging funds.
The legislative council has no legal power to enforce its decision and Arafat's aides say he planned to reshuffle his government anyway.
A state comptroller reported in May that $ 326 million - nearly half of the Palestinian autonomy government's annual budget - had been squandered through corruption or mismanagement. Legislators say that figure is too high, but cite numerous examples of questionable expenses.
Suspicions of waste, graft and nepotism, and brazen shows of wealth by some of Arafat's officials - living in posh villas and riding around the poverty-stricken Gaza Strip in luxury cars - have raised resentment among ordinary Palestinians and concern among international donors.
On top of the scandal, economic conditions are worse, the legitimacy of the Palestinian Authority is threatened by allegations of human rights violations, and the peace process is dangerously deadlocked.
''If the Israelis and Americans expect Arafat to produce miracles, they are mistaken. He can't. He's too weak and too discredited,'' said Khalil Shakaki, head of the Center for Palestine Research and Studies, an independent think tank in the West Bank.
That's especially true, he said, when Israel is imposing a travel ban that keeps Palestinians from going to jobs in Israel or even from moving between autonomous towns in the West Bank.
''During the past year, Arafat's credibility and popular standing have weakened in the Palestinian street,'' Shakaki said.
As a result, Arafat may round up some militants to blunt the threat to his own rule but would stop short of the kind of crackdown that Netanyahu is demanding.
Arafat can only take ''limited measures,'' said Ghassan Khatib, a Palestinian leftist politician. ''He can't do more because the general atmosphere is against him.''
If that is not enough, Netanyahu may carry out a spectacular mission in areas under Palestinian control to show he is more effective than the previous Labor government.
''Things like that could backfire and result in more violence in the street between Israeli soldiers and Palestinian police,'' Shahaki said.
In fact, Arafat's West Bank security chief, Jibril Rajoub, issued a stern warning yesterday.
''We don't take orders from Israel and Netanyahu, and the Israeli government is responsible for the attack because of its crazy and irresponsible policies,'' Rajoub said on the Voice of Palestine.
If Israel sent forces to the West Bank, he warned, ''we will protect ourselves and our dignity.''

Graphic

 
PHOTO, PHOTO: Eyal WarshavskyAssociated Press: Mourners at the Israeli-Arab; village of Abu Gosh carry the casket of Otman Muhi Otman, a victim of the; double-suicide bombing attack.

Load-Date: August 4, 1997


End of Document