Terrorism isn't foreign to United States
University Wire
February 5, 1999


Copyright 1999 The Lantern via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 603 words
Byline: By Kevin Quinn, The Lantern
Dateline: Columbus, Ohio
Body


Welcome to Ohio State, located in the heart of Ohio, the state capitol of Columbus. OSU is one of the largest public universities in the world, offering an education to more than 50,000 eager young minds, and employing enough people to populate a small town.
The university is known around the country for its outstanding, nationally-ranked sports teams and around the world for cutting edge research and academics. OSU is the home to students from many areas of the country and the world. Sprawled across a major metropolitan area, the university offers easy access to major roads and to three major expressways.
Ohio State U.
Are you scared yet? You should be.
Each reason listed above is a reason why this university, and therefore most people reading this essay, stand as an easy target for terrorism. "Terrorism? But that happens to other people" is what you say, until other people happen to become your friends and classmates.
"But we have no enemies!" some say, but who is we? The United States most certainly has enemies, domestic groups who mistrust their government's motives, as well as foreign groups who resent U.S. involvement and forced imperialism.
Like it or not, boys and girls, your beloved university IS owned and controlled by the government. (What do you think it means to be a state school?). You think car bombings only happen in other countries, don't you? Ask the residents of Oklahoma City if they believe that.
Some might say: "But we are just students, most of us not even full adults yet. Why attack us?" You are the future. The next wave of government involvement or foreign imperialism. If you are killed, or even just scared away, maybe the government machine will grind to a halt.
Do you think that just because you aren't old enough to drink, that you will be spared the wrath of the righteous terrorist? Terrorists have shown a distinct lack of compassion when it comes to choosing bombing sights. If they will bomb buildings with nurseries and day-cares, what makes you think your physics lecture is safe?
Please don't misunderstand me. I'm not a terrorist. I belong to no paramilitary group or terrorist camp. I know of no plans, thoughts, or desires to visit violence upon this campus, or any other in the nation. My personal feeling is that you would have to be a pretty sick person to attack a school. But then it's the sick ones we should be afraid of, isn't it?
Right now, as you sit there reading this, a group of people who look a lot like you could decide that the best way to get the U.S. government off of their backs is to scare the next generation. Make us not want an education. Kill those who might actually be hired by the CIA or the FBI. Eliminate a ROTC site. Just create terror.
Is this a real threat? Do I stay up all night fearing the worst? No. It crosses my mind from time to time, but mostly I pass from day-to-day, content to let others worry. Do others worry? That's the big question. How easy is it to get a truck full of explosives onto campus? I don't know, but I'm pretty sure the answer would frighten me.
Why, you might ask, are you bringing this up now? Is there anything that we can do about it? Cities practice disaster drills, treating mass injuries at sports arenas or in government buildings. Is there a disaster plan in case something should happen here? Is thought given to destruction on campus, any more than just blowing the air-raid siren every Wednesday? Should there be?
Kevin Quinn is junior English major from Akron, Ohio, who demanded that "nothing cute" be written in this space.
(C) 1999 The Lantern via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 23, 1999


End of Document