Terrorism with an absurd side
The New York Times
October 7, 2017 Saturday
The International New York Times


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. ; LONDON THEATER REVIEWS
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By MATT WOLF
Body


A comedy about terrorism might sound like a contradiction in terms, but in the new Royal Court play ''B,'' you may find that absurdism offers an entirely legitimate response to our anxious times. The play, by the Chilean playwright Guillermo Calderón and translated by William Gregory, opened Monday on the Court main stage, where it runs in repertory with Chris Thorpe's ''Victory Condition'' through Oct. 21.
''B'' has been several years in development at this theater, which is devoted to new writing and has always offered international artists an important perch. (One of the Court's banner successes remains the 1991 premiere of ''Death and the Maiden,'' from the Chilean-American writer Ariel Dorfman.) 
  But where one might anticipate political hectoring or, at the very least, agitation, ''B'' continually catches us off guard for much of its uninterrupted 80 minutes. Barely, for instance, has Marcela (Aimée-Ffion Edwards) agreed with her kindly neighbor, Carmen (Sarah Niles), that terrorists ''are terrible'' than Marcela herself is revealed to be one -- albeit one belonging to a covert political cell that is awaiting the arrival of a more seasoned activist, José Miguel (Paul Kaye), who has rabid intentions of his own.
  Factor in the linguistic substitution whereby the B word, bomb, is mostly referred to by such anodyne euphemisms as ''cow'' or ''cheese,'' and you find a playful approach to language that one associates with such veteran Court writers as Caryl Churchill (''Blue Heart,'' ''Top Girls''), who was in the audience on opening night.
  That's not to say that Mr. Calderón or his able director, Sam Pritchard, are in any way flippant or glib about one of the more continually pressing issues of our time. But ''B'' largely works by stealth and by a sidelong, off-kilter sense of humor. A more feral approach to the same subject can and surely will have its say another day.
  Explosions of a different sort animate the triangular landscape of ''Ramona Tells Jim,'' which is running at the smaller Bush Theater auditorium through Oct. 21. The script from the actress-turned-playwright Sophie Wu casts the English actor Joe Bannister as a Scotsman, Jim, who has a dalliance with one teenager, Ramona (Ruby Bentall), only in later life to father a child by a second, Pocahontas (Amy Lennox), who is all of 19. And, yes, that is her character's real name.
  Will Pocahontas readily tolerate the lingering presence in Jim's affections of his former lover, Ramona? The question is complicated by a troubling plot point -- not to be revealed here -- that sets Jim on a collision course between present and past that results in the long-absent Ramona's paying Jim a visit some 15 years after they first danced to Enya together on a Scottish beach.
  Stories of onetime romances returning perhaps to seek another day abound onstage: the National Theater's current revival of the Stephen Sondheim-James Goldman musical ''Follies'' mines that precise topic to wounding effect. And as her play flits between 1998 and 2013, Ms. Wu forces the sort of conversation across the years that we have with ourselves, and with one another, at our peril.
  If ''Ramona Tells Jim'' sometimes loses its way, that has more to do with the wearing, staccato-style speech of the young Jim and Ramona, who give off the air of two woodpeckers embroiled in an uneasy mating dance. Ms. Bentall's saucer-eyed Ramona, in particular, is never quite as charming as Jim, or the audience, is clearly meant to find her; the director, Mel Hillyard, might have muted all three performances just a touch for so enclosed a space.
  That said, Ms. Lennox, an alumna of the London versions of such musicals as ''Lazarus'' and ''Kinky Boots,'' sustains an impressively jagged quality as Pocahontas that allows anger and adoration to conjoin. The excellent Mr. Bannister makes Jim a poignant man-child who may be able to deliver a seal bark on cue but is by no means as confident when it comes to the slithery byways of the heart.
  A more sinister erotic gavotte -- that's to say, one that couples come-ons with the occasional brandishing of knives -- can be found in the intimate downstairs space of Trafalgar Studios, where Stephen Clark's ''Le Grand Mort'' is running through Oct. 28. (As with ''B'' and ''Ramona Tells Jim,'' the play is told straight through, with no intermission.)
  Are we watching the finished product that everyone intended? That is difficult to say, given that Mr. Clark, who died last October at 55, has a diverse list of credits that includes the 2010 West End musical version of ''Love Story,'' which he co-wrote with the composer Howard Goodall.
  One wonders, then, what nips and tucks the playwright might have made to an overextended two-hander that conceals whatever provocations it may genuinely possess beneath a lot of rhetorical bluff and bluster. The first third or so finds the play's main attraction, the comedian Julian Clary, in a rare acting role, cooking up a tasty-smelling Italian meal while musing aloud on all manner of topics -- sex, death and necrophilia heading the list. Among the many people floated for consideration are Princess Diana, Rasputin and Jesus Christ.
  Playing a failed architect named Michael with an apparent gift for pickups, Mr. Clary soon leaves off pondering the sexual suggestiveness of the Passion to be joined by his dinner guest, Tim (James Nelson-Joyce). Scarcely have the two men ceased rehashing the flirtatious lunchtime encounter in a pub that led to this, um, cosier invite before Tim sheds his clothes like some sort of human incarnation of Michelangelo's David. (In fact, it's Leonardo and not his Renaissance colleague who is specifically referenced in Justin Nardella's gleaming set, Michael's stainless steel kitchen the last word in spotlessness.)
  As directed by Christopher Renshaw, a 1996 Tony nominee for ''The King and I,'' the verbal byplay between the men gives way to a physical entanglement inhabiting that dangerous netherworld -- hinted at in the play's title -- where libido gives way to potential loss of life. That the result fails to generate much charge is due in part to the galloping excesses of the writing and to one's impression that neither actor seems entirely comfortable with the tonal changes required.
  As the monologuist on view at the start, Michael is drawn to language that comes in threes: ''defiled, desecrated, devoured,'' to cite but one example, or, with reference to the puttanesca sauce he is busy tasting, ''oh yes yes yes.'' I admit to losing patience with ''Le Grand Mort'' well before its apparent move toward grand guignol. On the other hand, were Mr. Clary to invite anyone I know to dinner, I'd encourage them to say yes.
  B. Directed by Sam Pritchard. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Downstairs, through Oct. 21. Ramona Tells Jim. Directed by Mel Hillyard. Bush Theater, through Oct. 21. Le Grand Mort. Directed by Christopher Renshaw. Trafalgar Studios 2, through Oct. 28.        

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/06/arts/london-theater-b-ramona-tells-jim-le-grand-mort.html

Graphic

 
Clockwise from top: Danusia Samal, Sarah Niles and Aimée-Ffion Edwards, left to right, in ''B,'' at the Royal Court
Julian Clary as Michael in ''Le Grand Mort'' at Trafalgar Studios
 and Joe Bannister, left, and Ruby Bentall in ''Ramona Tells Jim'' at the Bush Theater. HELEN MURRAY SAMUEL TAYLOR SCOTT RYLANDER       

Load-Date: October 7, 2017


End of Document