Terrorism hits home // The work of 'evil cowards' shakes a nation
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
April 20, 1995, Thursday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 16A; EDITORIAL
Length: 472 words
Body


Terrorism is terrorism, whether it is perpetrated by organized cults of  religious fanatics or by lone assailants driven by personal demons. So  whatever the motivations of the murderer or murderers responsible for the  bombing of a federal office building in Oklahoma City, the crime was a  particularly despicable act of terrorism.
The indiscriminate killing of children and other innocents breeds terror  and revulsion in any circumstance, but such a brazen attack in America's  heartland leaves an even deeper chill.
BLAST
We may have become almost inured to such crimes in Beirut or Belfast. Some  of us may even have managed to create the illusion of a comfortable psychic  distance from the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City.
But a terrorist bombing in Oklahoma City is a brutal reminder that we are  all vulnerable. If it can happen in Oklahoma City, it can happen anywhere -  even in those places where we carry out the most mundane activities of our  public lives.
The immediate task in Oklahoma City is to tend to the dead and injured and  offer whatever possible consolation to those whose families and friends were  among the victims.
Beyond that, though, the federal government must use this horrendous crime  as an occasion to redouble its efforts in performing its most essential task:  assuring our citizens' security.
Wednesday's response from President Clinton and Attorney General Janet Reno  was reassuring and appropriate. The president said he will not let Americans  be "intimidated by evil cowards." But there is a long-term problem U.S.  officials must deal with.
  The United States is still far behind much of the rest of the world in  developing coherent anti-terrorist strategies. Security at federal facilities  such as the office building in Oklahoma City generally is not nearly as strict  as at comparable sites overseas.
For example, authorities are only now, after several recent security  breaches, in the process of placing more sensible restrictions on public  access to the area around the White House. Less crucial federal buildings  obviously receive far less attention.
Washington also can do much more to cooperate with other governments in  monitoring and bringing to justice the terrorist groups and deranged  individuals responsible for such cowardly crimes.
Any remaining illusion that Americans are somehow less vulnerable to  terrorism, and therefore less responsible for helping to lead international  anti-terrorism efforts, was demolished this week.
Our hearts go out to those in Oklahoma City whose lives have been shattered  by an act of terrorism that defies human comprehension.
Our minds also turn to our own loved ones, and the terrible realization  that their own well-being is not nearly as snugly insulated from the world's  horrors as we would like to pretend. 

Load-Date: April 20, 1995


End of Document