Terrorism touches Atlanta: Small men stop a big heart
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
August 14, 1998, Friday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18A; John Head
Length: 570 words
Byline: John Head
Series: Metro Final
Body


When we watch scenes of the handiwork of international terrorists, it is difficult to fathom what they think they will accomplish by it. We have a hard time applying rational thoughts to such irrational acts. That difficult task becomes impossible when we are forced to try to understand these acts not with our heads, but with our hearts. That's the way many people in Atlanta must look at last week's bombings of the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Among the hundreds killed was one of our own. I knew Louise Martin, one of the victims. I first met her at a party at a friend's house. She was friendly and funny. She and her husband, Doug Klaucke, hosted my family at their home several times. I can't say that I got to know Louise really well, but you didn't have to know her very well or for very long to see that she was an extraordinary and good person. Louise spent most of her professional career doing public health work that helped others, especially children. She spent a lot of her spare time doing volunteer work. When I heard that Doug, Louise and their three children were going to live in Kenya for a few years, I was excited for them. Doug was to be on assignment for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention working on polio eradication. Louise, who also had worked at the CDC, would go to work for the Task Force for Child Survival and Development, fighting an outbreak of Rift Valley fever that had already claimed many lives.
The couple would be doing the kind of work they had devoted their lives to. And they and their children could have a lifetime of adventures during their stay in Africa. But then came the news of the bombings and word that Louise was among those killed. I felt shock. I thought of those who would be grieving --- those who knew Louise well and loved her. And I thought of three children whose mother had been taken away from them.
The circle of suspects for such attacks is ever-widening. It seems some new group with a grudge and the ability to make bombs emerges daily. Experts say the bombings in Africa bear the earmarks of a highly sophisticated, well-established terrorist group. Such groups see bombings as means to an end. But how will taking innocent lives achieve anything? If terrorists believe they are bending our leaders to their will, they are wrong. They only put pressure on those who wield power in our behalf to become more like them: ruthless, vengeful, violent.
They are also wrong if they believe these attacks will somehow limit the reach of a powerful nation. People will not cower in fear. They will continue to do what Louise Martin did. They will go out into the world, not to project American power or spread an ideology. They will go where they are needed to help ease suffering. It will be difficult to catch the bombers and their patrons and to bring them to justice. They are the smallest of small men, able to commit their horrors and then hide in the shadows and under rocks until they find another vulnerable target where more innocent people will die. They will be able to claim the world's attention for a short time, to step from the shadows to center stage and shout, "Look at what we have done!" Yes. Look at what they have done. E-mail: jhead@ajc.com What do terrorists in Africa have to show for their work? Atlantan Louise Martin, among others, says John Head, a Constitution editorial writer. His column appears Fridays.  

Graphic

 
Photo :
 Dr. Lousise Martin with her husband, Doug Klaucke

Load-Date: August 15, 1998


End of Document