Terrorism trap
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
October 3, 2007 Wednesday
All Editions


Copyright 2007 Bangor Daily News
Section: Pg. A6
Length: 331 words
Body


The ads supporting the Iraq catastrophe that imply we are fighting terrorism are particularly offensive since Congress tumbled into another swift-boat trap by sanctioning MoveOn.org. The Republicans gave us the new verb "swift-boat," which means unscrupulous, false and immoral attacks, such as those on veterans, such as John Kerry, who actually faced enemy fire.
MoveOn posed an in-your-face question about Gen. David Petraeus' motives to provoke us to be skeptical listeners. The White House gang had first said they would send their own spokesperson. Of course, Gen. William Westmoreland lowered the bar for military "authorities" with his persistent lies to support the government's position in Vietnam.
Petraeus possibly was forced to be more candid because of the high skepticism that preceded his speeches. Two other reports disagreed with him. While Petraeus may not have been deceitful, he deleted pertinent information. Heavy doses of cash bought off warring sheiks in Anbar to coincide with our soldiers' efforts.  Some congressmen noted the U.S. is writing the Iraqi oil-sharing deal.
Patraeus stated that he wrote his own speech, but his clear rehearsal prompted a cheerful lilt to his voice each time he mentioned that Iraq would spend up to $1.8 billion purchasing U.S. armaments. He admitted that no good end to the war was in sight. What might Petraeus say if he were sent back to Iraq with a different mission?
The next president must ask new questions. How quickly can we get out? How can we get our world reputation back? How can we reduce our war debt and still afford health care for kids? How can we reduce oil dependency? How can we restore morality instead of attacking our real heroes? How can we restore our rights to protest, yet sensibly prevent terrorism? How can we protect the First Amendment?
MoveOn's question implied all those other questions. The Republican's answer is to swift-boat the messenger and stay the course over the cliff.
Leslie Woods
Montville

Load-Date: October 3, 2007


End of Document