Terrorism isn't a solution
Central Florida Future: University of Central Florida
July 6, 2016 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 562 words
Body


role="main" itemprop="articleBody">
A Palestinian demonstrator uses an axe to try and destroy a part of the Israeli separation wall between the West Bank city of Abu Dis and east Jerusalem, during clashes with Israeli security forces in November 2015.(Photo: Ahmad Gharabli, AFP/Getty Images)
Enough is enough. I shouldn't dread the 'ding' of a news alert on my phone, and yet, I do.
On the morning of June 30, Palestinian terrorist Muhammad Tarayrah, 17, infiltrated the West Bank settlement of Kiryat Arba, sounding the security alarm. He then crept into Hallel Yaffa Ariel's bedroom through an open window and stabbed the 13-year-old Israeli to death.
Paramedics fought to keep her alive as she was rushed to Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem, but Hallel was pronounced dead shortly after she arrived.
The following day, a Palestinian gunman killed 48-year-old Rabbi Michael 'Miki' Mark as he drove on Route 60 in the South Hebron Hills. The rain of bullets caused the vehicle to overturn, injuring his wife and two of the couple's children.
Why were they callously murdered? They were Israeli Jews. That's all there is to it.
CENTRAL FLORIDA FUTURE
UCF Jews react to Palestinian terror attacks
The global Jewish community is reeling over the deaths Hallel and Michael while hordes of Palestinians are unabashedly glorifying the terrorists. There is no moral equivalency between a murderer and a martyr. The fact that people are rejoicing over the deaths of a sleeping child and a father of 10 is sickening in itself.
Throngs of Palestinians claim that resistance isn't a crime, pointing fingers at "Zionism," "occupation" and "apartheid" as catalysts for their actions.
Stabbing a pregnant woman is a crime. Wielding a knife at unsuspecting bus passengers is a crime. Ramming a vehicle into pedestrians is a crime. Murdering a mother in front of her children is a crime. Slaying a 13-year-old girl is a crime. Shooting and killing a father is a crime.
Although he has been contacted by world leaders and the media, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas has refused to condemn the recent wave of Palestinian violence. His decision to keep silent does just as much harm as praising the slew of terrorist attacks.
CENTRAL FLORIDA FUTURE
Protest leads to Israeli-Palestinian discourse at UCF
In a public Facebook video, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu stated: "You don't murder a sleeping child for peace. You don't slit a little girl's throat to protest a policy you don't like.
You do this because you've been brainwashed. You've been brainwashed by a warped ideology that teaches you that this child isn't human."
Terrorism isn't the solution to the Arab-Israeli Conflict - it perpetuates a cycle of violence. Terrorism is not a means to an end, and it never will be.
As a Jew and a staunch supporter of the State of Israel, I cannot stand idly by as innocents are murdered in the name of Palestinian resistance. It's my responsibility and the community's responsibility to denounce heinous acts of violence, whether it's the Pulse massacre in Orlando or terrorist attacks in the West Bank.
-----
Shana Medel is a Digital Producer for the Central Florida Future. Email her at ShanaM@CentralFloridaFuture.com 4 CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORERead or Share this story: http://www.centralfloridafuture.com/story/opinion/2016/07/06/terrorism-isnt-solution/86765988/

Load-Date: January 6, 2017


End of Document