TERRORISM CHEST
The New York Times
June 8, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 419 words
Body


To the Editor:
 There is something illogical in your editorial condemning the Surrogate's Court hearing on the capacity of the Palestine Liberation Organization to receive a deceased American's bequest. Since you concede that the case deals with questions of great ''legal interest,'' why accuse the ones who raise those questions of ''distorting American justice''?
he editorial admits that ''the issues are fascinating and unsettled,'' but its assertion that the Anti-Defamation League and the World Jewish Congress ''relish the chance to discredit the P.L.O.'' resonates as a non sequitur.
Nathan Perlmutter letter responds to June 2 editorial concerning Fred Sparks's bequeathal to the Palestine Liberation Organization
It is universally accepted that the right to receive money under a will is not absolute, but is a privilege granted by the state under such restrictions as it chooses to impose. Acting through the court, the state examines all bequests to determine whether they are or are not valid. (An example: when challenged, racially discriminatory conditions in wills have been struck down.)
In the present case, the court will decide whether a bequest to a terrorist organization violates the longstanding legal principle that bequests contrary to public policy are invalid.
The editorial misstates the nature of the case and our position when it denounces the hearing as a ''political inquisition.'' The right of free speech and association is not an issue here. Rather, the issue is whether the state can be used as a vehicle for providing monetary support for terrorist acts.
The P.L.O. has admitted responsibility for the killing and maiming of innocent civilians, including many Americans. In fact, the P.L.O.  representative to the United Nations, Zehdi Terzi, has stated under oath in this very case that the P.L.O. follows ''no set rules'' in its violent terrorist campaign to destroy the State of Israel.
American courts must not be used as a pipeline for funds earmarked for terrorism. Toward what new acts of barbarism would this bequest be put by the perpetrators of the Munich Olympics massacre and of the slaughter of children in the schoolhouse at Maalot?
Given your acknowledgment of ''the P.L.O.'s history of wretched terrorism'' and the ''unsettled'' legal issues here raised, we are mystified by your criticism of those who resort to the law in order to frustrate those who flaunt lawlessness.  NATHAN PERLMUTTER National Director, Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith New York, June 3, 1982


End of Document