Terrorism hot topic on college campuses Professors say waragainst terror isn't going to go away
Chicago Daily Herald
February 9, 2002, Saturday DuPage,Cook,Lake


Copyright 2002 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 940 words
Byline: Robert Sanchez Daily Herald Staff Writer
Body


Growing up near O'Hare International Airport, the fear of a terrorist attack always lingered in the back of Dan Banfield's mind.  
"I can't help but think O'Hare is a pretty big target," the 23- year-old Des Plaines resident said.  
So when the senior at Elmhurst College learned the school offered a class on how terrorists can employ such biological weapons as viruses to accomplish their goals, he signed up - even though it had nothing to do with his major.  
"I don't know much about biology," admits Banfield, a business major. "But I figured it would be a good way to get some information about something that affects me as opposed to taking a class just to get a credit."  
Since the Sept. 11 attacks, colleges and universities across Illinois have expanded or created classes about terrorism to meet a growing student demand. Northern Illinois University has seen enrollment double to 100 students in its Political Violence class.  
"If we weren't short on staff, we could have offered two or three more sections of the class," said Ladd Thomas, a political science professor at the university in DeKalb. "The student interest is very great."  
Some colleges, such as North Central College in Naperville, are incorporating terrorism-related topics into existing classes. Other institutions that didn't teach classes about terrorism before Sept. 11 are offering them now.  
Scott Levi, a professor at Eastern Illinois University in Charleston, was supposed to be teaching a class this spring about the history of India. Instead, he is teaching about the history of terrorism.  
"The war on terrorism is going to take a long time," Levi said. "We thought it would be appropriate to offer our students some kind of historical insight into the factors leading up to this point."  
As part of Thomas' class, students are taught how terrorist organizations are structured, operated and funded. They also learn counterterrorism tactics.  
Thomas said there is a genuine desire among his students to learn about the subject. He said it's a level of interest he has never seen before.  
"In the past, the threat has always been in some far away country," Thomas said. "So it was easy to ignore it and say it won't happen here. Now, for the first time, the threat is close to home. And it's very real."  
Thomas said the threats of anthrax, the fighting in Afghanistan and continued speculation about terrorist acts have only fueled that interest. "It's pretty sobering," he said.  
Professor Frank Mittermeyer, the chairman of Elmhurst College's biology department, said he was bombarded with so many questions from students and fellow educators about bioterrorism that he thought it would make a great subject for a class.  
The result was a one-month course Mittermeyer taught in January. As part of the class, the 24 students heard lectures on various topics from infection control to the psychological consequences of terrorism.  
Mittermeyer said he designed the class so that biology and nonbiology majors could take it.  
"I specifically didn't want it to be for bio majors because it's a subject that impacts all of us," he said. "We all need to be aware of it, so I wanted to keep it open for everybody."  
Justin Millner, a senior communications major, said he heard about the Elmhurst College class through word-of-mouth. What motivated him to take the class is the same thing that motivated others.  
"Most people want to know about this topic because they want to be prepared," the Highland Park native said.  
James C. Hagen, deputy executive director of the DuPage County Health Department, said he applauds colleges and universities for helping to raise public awareness. He said the best defense against terrorism is education.  
"When you are talking about college-age students … you are talking about people that are soon inheriting what we have done here," he said. "So I think it's great that they are learning about this in the classroom."  
Peter Neuleib, 21, a senior music business major at Elmhurst College, said learning about terrorism is a far cry from some of the courses offered in college.  
"There are so many college classes that are just so off the point that they don't even help your life at all," said Neuleib, a Geneseo native.  
Hagen said he is pleased there is interest among students to take terrorism-related courses because he doesn't see terrorism going away.  
"Those of us in government and social services are seeing a greater need for more coordination," he said. "More work must be done that brings together the medical, public health and criminal justice communities."  
As long as there are critics who believe the country is under- prepared to handle man-made disasters and bioterrorism, Thomas said, he doesn't see the enrollment in his terrorism class waning anytime soon.  
"The interest will last as long as there are threats and some of the threats are carried out," he said.  
GRAPHIC: Protecting America  
10 priorities for making the United States safe  
- Postal delivery: mail irradiation, training  
- Public places: surveillance and training in evacuation procedures  
- Nuclear power plants: security, no-fly zones, background checks of workers  
- Chemical plants: security and training for shutdowns  
- Air travel: employee training, security, inspections  
- Skyscrapers: security, seal air intake units  
- Mass transit: surveillance, security  
- Computer networks: cyber-security, monitoring  
- Food supplies: security, thorough washing and cooking  
- Water supplies: filtration, surveillance  
Source: James C. Hagan, deputy executive director, DuPage County Health Department in an Elmhurst College lecture

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC: (text at bottom of article)

Load-Date: February 11, 2002


End of Document