TERRORISM COURTS ASSAILED IN ULSTER
The New York Times
September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 720 words
Byline: By WILLIAM BORDERS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BELFAST, Northern Ireland, Sept. 9
Body


The judge, resplendent in a scarlet robe, sits facing the defendant, who is guarded by two policemen. The lawyers wear curly gray wigs and starchy white dickeys, and the crier opens the trial by intoning, ''God Save the Queen!''
In short, it looks just like any other courtroom in Britain with one major exception - the jury box is always empty.  These are Northern Ireland's antiterrorism courts, where bombers and gunmen are tried, without juries.  Long an object of concern among civil libertarians, the courts are central to the Northern Ireland conflict and to the prison hunger strike in which 10 men have died since May.
Civil libertarians in Northern Ireland assail Government judicial policy of refusing accused terrorists right to jury trials
''These special courts with their conveyor-belt justice are a poison in this society,'' said Paschal J. O'Hare, a lawyer with experience in defending nationalists. ''It's long past time to bring the jury trial back to Northern Ireland.''
 
Special Status Is at Issue
Mr. O'Hare and other Irish republicans maintain that the very existence of the nonjury courts constitutes special political status, which is the basic demand of the prison hunger strike. All of the protesting prisoners were convicted and sentenced in these special courts, which they say disproves Prime Minister Margare t Thatcher's contention that they are simply co mmon criminals.
The use of juries was abolished as a temporary, emergency measure nearly 10 years ago on the ground that jurors were subject to intimidation and threats.
''This was not just supposition,'' said Humphrey Atkins, the Cabinet Minister responsible for the province. ''There are too many well-documented cases of it.''
The legislation that brought about the change also gave the police greater powers in searching homes and detaining suspects. A policeman may arrest a suspected terrorrist without warrant and hold him for 72 hours.
 
Some Britons Are Critical
The Government, acknowledging that it is uncomfortable with these abridgments of civil liberties, says that they are still necessary, but some Britons disagree. The Haldane Society of Socialist Lawyers, in a review of the legislation and the operation of the courts, came to this conclusion this month:
''If Northern Ireland's problems are susceptible of a political solution, then civil and political liberties must be restored to its people. So long as the courts continue to play a clearly political role, so long will a political solution be impossible.''
A criminal trial without a jury lacks drama, because ''you're not putting on a show for anyone,'' one of the lawyers said. Instead, it consists of reasoned arguments by lawyers and judges who usually know one another well, with the judge often speeding the process along with a remark such as, ''You already told me that.''
Disposition of Cases Is Swift
Even serious cases can be completed in a day or two, and the pace is particularly brisk if the defendant chooses not to take part, as many do. In the first six months of 1981, the nonjury courts convicted 292 people. Twenty-eight of them were sentenced to life imprisonment, t he maximum sentence, and 35 others received sentences of 10 years o r more.
As a safeguard, the Northern Ireland emergency legislation must be renewed every six months, giving Parliament a regular opportunity to debate the situation. The most recent of these debates, held last July just a week before the death of the fifth hunger striker, was particularly charged, with one member after another rising to demand change.
''The emergency powers for Northern Ireland are in urgent need of review,'' said John Concannon, the Labor Party spokesman on the subject. ''It does not mean that we must weaken our fight against terrorism, but rather that we should look into the working of the system of justice to see whether it is not now counterproductive.''
 
----
Off-Duty Soldier Is Killed
BELFAST, Northern Ireland (AP) -Gunmen in a passing car shot and fatally wounded an off-duty soldier today as he walked along a street in Maghera, the police said.
The soldier, Alan Clark, 20 years old, a part-time member of the locally recruited Ulster Defense Regiment, was taken to Mid-Ulster Hospital in Magherafelt, where he died. He was the 35th member of the security forces to be killed this year.


End of Document