TERRORISTS LEAD TO PRECAUTIONS IN THE SUBURBS
The New York Times
January 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 756 words
Byline: By LINDSEY GRUSON
Body


Law enforcement officials say that recent incidents of terrorism in the suburbs around New York City are prompting many corporations and even some suburban police departments to increase security.
 ''Terrorism is something we have to be prepared for,'' said Thomas J. Sweeney, deputy commissioner of the Westchester County Police Department.
Law enforcement officials and security specialists said the new measures at the public and private buildings were a response to a number of recent bombings in the suburbs.
Last month, after two bombs exploded at an office building housing a Navy recruiting office in East Meadow, L.I., the Federal Bureau of Investigation advised security officials at all Federal buildings to take additional precautions.
Corporations and police departments increase security measures at facilities in NYC met area suburbs in reaction to recent terrorist incidents in region; illustrations; 4 bombs have exploded in Nassau County in past 13 months, after decade with no known terrorist activity (S)Police Buildings Called Targets
Several private security officials said the suburbs had become targets for terrorists because many symbols of American capitalism - corporate headquarters and Federal agencies - had moved their offices out of cities into the suburban areas.
''Federal bomb experts told us suburban police departments surrounding metropolitan areas will be the next targets of terrorists,'' said Kenneth Cynar, a spokesman for the Nassau County Police Department.
The department is one of several suburban law enforcement agencies in the metropolitan area that have recently purchased a remote-controlled robot to assist with bomb disposal.
After more than a decade without any known terrorist activity, four bombs have exploded in Nassau County in the last 13 months.
 
Variety of Precautions Taken
Corporate and government security officials have begun taking a variety of precautions. The Grumman Corporation, for instance, is building a three- foot concrete wall in front of its Bethpage plant. Some corporations are installing bulletproof windows. Still others have put in night-vision devices and optic systems for 24-hour surveillance.
''Beautiful, new corporate headquarters that look like college campuses are not nearly as defenseless as they appear,'' said Steven Van Cleave, the head of Security Inter-American, a consultant on security affairs to many of the country's largest concerns. ''Most modern corporations have incorporated the most up-to-date security technology into their facilities.''
Mr. Sweeney of Westchester said, ''With many corporate headquarters and the fact that we have an airport, we have to assume we're a potential target.'' The International Business Machines office in Westchester was bombed on Dec. 18, 1982.
 
Importance of Training Cited
The F.B.I. now includes training against terrorism and counterterrorism in its courses for chiefs of medium- sized police departments. As part of its work in counterespionage, the F.B.I. has also stepped up its efforts to make corporations aware of the possible threat and to encourage them to take all possible precautions.
''It's imperative that industry have trained security personnel,'' said Lane Bonner, a spokesman for the F.B.I.
''We're aware of an increase in terrorism and that we might become a target because we're a military contractor,'' said Weyman B. Jones, a vice president of Grumman Corporation.
He said the concrete wall now being installed ''will provide a barrier against somebody who wants to drive a truck into our lobby.'' He declined to give details of other security steps being taken.
 
Robots Bought to Remove Bombs
County and municipal police departments have also taken a variety of steps to improve their ability to respond to terrorism and bombings. Several area police departments have recently bought bomb-disposal robots, similar to those purchased by the New York police, and have increased the training they provide their bomb-disposal squads.
In addition to ordering a robot, Commissioner Sweeney of Westchester said his department has stepped up its efforts to teach security officers from area corporations how to handle bomb threats and suspicious packages.
''We're not sandbagging the buildings, but we are taking a little tighter security precautions,'' said Sgt. Raymond Marcheschi, a spokesman for the Suffolk County Police Department, which has increased security at the entrances to its Yaphank headquarters. ''We have more businesses, more industry, more government buildings and more targets.''

Graphic

 
Photo of construction at Grumman Corporation; Photo of robot picking up simulated pipe bomb


End of Document