TERRORISM BEING INVESTIGATED  IN CAR, KNIFE ATTACK AT OHIO STATE; SUSPECT, BELIEVED TO BE FROM SOMALIA, KILLED AFTER 11 INJURED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 29, 2016 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2016 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-1
Length: 992 words
Byline: Jim Provance, Block News Alliance
Body


COLUMBUS, Ohio - A first-year student at the Ohio State University plowed his car into pedestrians on campus and then stepped out to slash others with a butcher knife before being shot and killed within minutes by a campus police officer.
None of the 11 unidentified victims' injuries were considered life-threatening, but the attack, coupled with the immediate warning to students to seek shelter, induced panic across campus.
Investigators were looking into whether the attack was an act of terrorism
The attack began about 9:52 a.m. and ended about three minutes later as Officer Alan Horujko shot and killed Abdul Razak Ali Artan of Columbus, believed to have been born in Somalia. The investigation continues, and motive remains unclear. But authorities said video captured the assailant's vehicle as it entered and drove through campus.
"By tracking this vehicle down, we could tell the suspect was in the car by himself," university police Chief Craig Stone said. Investigations of possible other threats turned up nothing, and the campus started to try to return to normal.
Colleen Matthews, a St. Ursula Academy Graduate and Ohio State freshman, witnessed a police officer mowed down by a speeding car and then heard gunshots before she ran back to her dormitory.
"I was walking to class, and I saw there were fire trucks and police already there . and I was seeing if they were letting people through," Miss Matthews, 18, said. "One student started through and then this car did a [U-turn] and started heading toward this police officer [who] had his back to [the car], and the car started picking up speed, and he told him to stop, and he hit the police officer, and he went flying into another car, and everyone started screaming."
Miss Matthews said the car then "barreled through" more people.
"I was just standing with the police officer and I didn't know what do to," she said. "The police officer [said] 'is the driver still in the car,' and we started to approach it and another one waved us off."
At that point, Miss Matthews, who called 911 from the scene to report the injured police officer, heard gunshots from a distance away.
"I didn't know where they were coming from," she said.
Eleven victims were transported or went themselves to three local hospitals. Six people were hit by the car, and five had stab wounds or lacerations, doctors said. All are expected to fully recover.
Representatives of Muslim mosques and organizations gathered near Columbus to unanimously condemn the "horrific" and "senseless" actions of Artan while urging fellow Ohioans not to jump to conclusions and lash out at other Muslims or Somalis.
No evidence has emerged that Artan had any connection or allegiance to radical ideology. Though no terrorist group had claimed responsibility for the attack, the Islamic State group was updating its online audiences on the rampage Monday. IS and al-Qaida have publicly called for supporters to use vehicles as weapons, as an attacker who killed dozens in Nice over the summer did.
The university remained officially open afterward once the immediate danger had passed, but classes were canceled for the rest of the day. Some local K-12 schools were also locked down as a precaution.
Last summer the student newspaper, The Lantern, published an interview with Artan in which he complained about being afraid to pray in public as a Muslim, because of people's negative perceptions of the religion.
"I was kind of scared with everything going on in the media. I'm a Muslim, it's not what media portrays me to be," he told the newspaper. "If people look at me, a Muslim praying, I don't know what they're going to think, what's going to happen. But I don't blame them. It's the media that put that picture in their heads."
In the interview, Artan said he had transferred from Columbus State Community College. He had no records of behavioral or disciplinary issues while enrolled there, the school said.
His family reportedly had lived in Pakistan prior to coming to Columbus.
Neighbors say Artan was always polite and attended daily prayer services at a mosque on the city's west side.
Rep. Adam Schiff of California, the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said that while the bloodshed is still under investigation, it "bears all of the hallmarks of a terror attack carried out by someone who may have been self-radicalized."
Artan used a car to run into pedestrians outside of Watts Hall on campus shortly after students had been evacuated for a gas leak.
Authorities said they believe the evacuation was a coincidence and not part of a master plan to line up potential victims for the car.
President-elect Donald Trump posted on Facebook: "Our thoughts and prayers are with all of the students and administration."
Monday's violence followed a machete attack in February at a Mediterranean restaurant in Columbus, which also ended with the police killing the suspect. The restaurant's owner told reporters that he believed he had been targeted because of his Israeli heritage.
The attack on Monday was the latest mass-casualty episode over the last decade on an American college campus. Shootings at Virginia Tech, Northern Illinois University and Oikos University in California, among others, have led colleges nationwide to plan how to respond to an attack. Monday's instruction to "Run Hide Fight" came from a training program used by Ohio State and other groups for reacting to active shootings.
As Ohio State officials took stock of the attack and made plans for classes to resume today, they said they were thankful the injuries were not more severe and were optimistic that students would come together even if investigators discovered a link to terrorism.
"Our campus community is extremely tolerant," Mr. Drake, the university president, said in an interview. "The concept of branding a whole community for the act of a few leads to an intolerance that can make the world a more difficult place for all of us."

Notes

The Block News Alliance consists of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and The Blade of Toledo, Ohio. Jim Provance is a reporter for The Blade. The New York Times, The Washington Post and The Associated Press contributed.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Adam Cairns/The Columbus Dispatch via AP: Student Nicholas Flores reacts as police respond to an attack Monday on the campus of Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio.

Load-Date: November 29, 2016


End of Document