TERROR SUSPECTS SEEK TO CLEAR THEIR NAMES
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
March 27, 2011 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-8
Length: 856 words
Byline: Chris Hawley and John Curran, Associated Press\
Body


NEW YORK -- As the U.S. ramps up efforts to root out homegrown terrorism, hundreds of people who have fallen under suspicion are in a state of limbo: Many say they have been singled out unfairly for scrutiny but have been neither charged nor cleared.
Some of them, mostly Muslims, have spent weeks in jail; others find it impossible to travel freely. Some say they have had their reputations destroyed by the news coverage. Many were questioned or tracked, and say they felt violated and fearful.
Lawsuits filed by suspects since 2006 have pried millions of dollars in settlements from the government.
Many plaintiffs say they recognize the security challenges the government faces after Sept. 11, but in many cases, they complain, the government refuses to reveal why someone has attracted attention. Without that information, they argue, it is impossible to clear their names.
"It's a runaround," said Ayman Latif, an American who was stranded in Egypt for six months and questioned by U.S. agents last year after his name appeared on a no-fly list. "Maybe they had a hunch about something and my name came up and they were investigating it. But they wouldn't tell me what that hunch was."
The FBI says it needs secrecy to protect sensitive investigations and to avoid giving terrorists clues for avoiding detection.
The government does not disclose how many people it investigates, but an Associated Press analysis gives a glimpse of how the number has grown. Federal terrorism referrals -- cases in which investigators have contacted prosecutors for guidance -- have risen 44 percent since 2002, from 864 to 1,249 in 2010, according to the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, a research program at Syracuse University.
At the same time, the number of people on the FBI's consolidated terrorist watch list stands at 450,000, despite efforts since 2006 to winnow it down. Of those, 18,000 have been flagged for extra screening at airports. About 10,000 people are on the no-fly list, 500 to 1,000 of them U.S. citizens.
Some law enforcement experts say agents are simply doing their jobs by investigating leads, some of which pan out and some of which don't.
Moreover, police work is full of instances in which investigators know someone is up to no good, but they don't have enough evidence to make an arrest. Charles Strozier, director of the Center on Terrorism at New York's John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said the nature of counterterrorism work means investigators must monitor people for long periods even though they have committed no crime.
"Counterterrorism work completely reverses the familiar process of police work, which is, you have a crime, you collect forensic evidence and then you go after the bad guy," Mr. Strozier said. "In counterterrorism, everything must come before the crime is committed or you've completely failed at your task."
The House held hearings this month examining whether American Muslims are becoming "radicalized" to attack the United States. The government has warned that homegrown terrorism plots are on the rise and has redoubled efforts to root them out. Federal investigators note that "lone wolf" attacks such as in the 2009 Fort Hood shooting and the Times Square bombing attempt in May have put a new emphasis on finding radicals before they act.
"Beyond the sheer number of disruptions and arrests that have come to light, homegrown extremists are increasingly more savvy, harder to detect and able to connect with other extremists overseas," the Justice Department said in a statement to the AP.
But human rights groups say some of the government's favorite investigative tools are prone to abuse: warrantless surveillance, aggressive searches at the border, secretive watch lists, and laws that allow investigators to detain people as "material witnesses" -- people they want to testify at a trial or before a grand jury. In other cases, investigators find immigration violations that allow them to hold suspects for months or years.
Pakistani immigrant Pir Khan spent 76 days in solitary confinement last year after investigators detained him in the wake of the Times Square bombing attempt. Mr. Khan's nephew, who was living with him, had once sent money home to Pakistan using a money-transfer system common among Middle Eastern immigrants, in which payments are passed along until they reach an immigrant's family back home, according to investigators and Mr. Khan's own lawyer. Attempted bomber Faisal Shahzad was one link in the chain.
In jail, other inmates yelled, "Terrorist!" at him, Mr. Khan said. His American-born wife received death threats. Reporters interviewed his neighbors, scoured his wife's Facebook page for information and speculated on whether his marriage was a sham.
Mr. Khan said his credit rating was ruined after bills and other mail started disappearing, and he lost his taxi. No terrorism charges were ever brought against him. But now he is fighting deportation as an illegal immigrant. He is living in a Boston suburb and working as a mechanic.
"I lost a lot of things," Mr. Khan said. "I have to put it behind my back and just get on with my life."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Steven Senne/Associated Press: Pir Khan, a former suspect in the Times Square bombing, displays letters he received from people he met in jail, at an apartment where Mr. Khan is staying in Watertown, Mass. Mr. Khan, who says he spent 76 days in solitary confinement, is one of a number of people found innocent who were swept up in the war on terror.

Load-Date: March 29, 2011


End of Document