Terrorism heightens concern for Internet security
Long Island Business News (Long Island, NY)
September 28, 2001 Friday


Copyright 2001 Dolan Media Newswires     All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; General news
Length: 1112 words
Byline: Jenn Abelson
Body


Barry Shorten says it's time for his company to get serious about security. Internet security, that is.
Shorten is president of Alcott Group in Farmingdale, a human resource management company that heavily relies on the Internet to communicate with its 3,000 staff members about payroll, benefits and other employee services.
And in light of the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, Shorten said he's come to the conclusion that a firewall isn't enough protection against cyber assaults. "I'm ready to upgrade," he said.
As U.S. troops head to the Middle East on a mission to wipe out terrorists, and the government coordinates a homeland defense strategy, Internet security experts say they hope government agencies and corporations join Shorten in beefing up their armor against cyber attacks.
"In winning the war against terrorists, we should not and cannot disassociate cyber terrorism from terrorism," said John Thomas, a retired army colonel and information security consultant.
Although virtual assaults may not directly produce the chilling, horrific effects of the devastation on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, cyber terrorism could magnify and extend the destruction.
For example, Thomas said a cyber attack on New York's 911 system could have interfered with, or even prevented police response to the World Trade Center disaster. Or, a cyber terrorist could have attacked the Federal Aviation Administration network and prevented the execution of orders, such as the grounding of all planes.
"It's unbelievable how poorly protected government agencies are," said Robert Seiden, president of Crimedia, an Internet crime-fighting company based in Melville. "We've seen hackers get into NASA, the Department of Defense and FBI Web sites."
But lax Internet security is rampant in corporate America as well. Whether they're efforts of international terrorists or joyriding hackers, viruses and worms have infected thousands of corporate systems in recent months.
"America's corporate systems are very, very vulnerable as evidenced by the number of corporations hit by Nimda and Code Red (viruses)," said Thomas, who commanded the Department of Defense organization that monitors and responds to computer attacks. "It's highly probable that a corporate system can be used unwittingly as a haven and launching platform for hackers."
With the FBI's cyber security agency warning that cyber attacks on corporations will likely follow the World Trade Center attacks, securing systems means more than protecting a company's corporate assets and shareholder equities.
It could mean the survival of the e-business world.
A sixth annual computer crime and security survey released earlier this year by the Computer Security Institute and the FBI found that 85 percent of 538 security practitioners in U.S. corporations detected security breaches in the prior 12-month period. Seventy percent cited their Internet connection as a frequent point of attack.
Survey respondents reported a wide range of attacks and abuses: 94 percent detected computer viruses (up 9 percent from 2000), 40 percent found system penetration from the outside (up 15 percent from 2000), and 38 percent encountered denial of service attacks (up 11 percent from 2000).
The "I Love You" virus alone caused an estimated $8.7 billion in damage last year.
"It's scary," said Peter Goldsmith, president of the Long Island Software and Technology Network. "Terrorists can get into our systems and destroy them - or create misinformation. We really need to beef up corporate protection."
Internet security experts say businesses, large and small, need to expand on firewall and antivirus products as a defense strategy. Denial of service attacks and assaults on mail systems require proactive and comprehensive security.
Ian Hameroff, business manager of security solutions at Computer Associates, said he expects companies will revisit their policies and focus on implementing new Internet security strategies.
One of CA's products, eTrust Defense Solutions, combines firewall, antivirus and intrusion detection products to detect, analyze, warn, prevent and cure cyber attacks.
Seiden said Crimedia is releasing a new intrusion detection system next week that prioritizes all suspicious intrusions by color and has a rapid alert monitor to instantly notify a technician by phone when a red alert attack occurs.
Using a phone tree, this Internet burglar alarm makes as many calls as needed until someone answers, and then provides the Internet Protocol address of the attack and its target.
Seiden, a former Manhattan district attorney who started Melville-based Crimedia with former FBI agents, said Internet detection systems already on the market fail to deliver quick notification of attacks.
But regardless of products businesses do or don't use, Seiden believes the Sept. 11 devastation will compel company executives to "take their head out of the sand" concerning security. Attacks, whether physical or virtual, can produce devastating results."
In the CSI/FBI survey, 78 percent acknowledged financial losses because of computer crime, but only 37 percent could quantify the losses. The recognized annual loss totaled about $378 million.
Beyond financial damages, computer crime and security breaches can be costly due to lost productivity and civil liability damages, among other losses.
"A lot of people were convinced that security was a discretionary purchase," Seiden said. "We're finding now that people are realizing the need for security."
Other cyber defense technology, such as biometrics, use fingerprint and iris authentication to enhance protection against hackers. A Plainview-based venture group, NextLevel Venture Partners, just made an investment in a Virginia company that manufactures biometrics software for Internet security.
Joe Heller, a managing partner at NextLevel, said NextLevel was part of a group that made a $16 million investment in Biometrix, but declined to say how much NextLevel committed.
Although Heller made the investment prior to Sept. 11, he said the terrorist attack will "no question, heighten interest in security."
Local business organizations have also taken up the issue of rethinking Internet security.
LISTnet's new security special interest group is sponsoring an info-security forum on Oct. 16, "Information Security in Light of Recent Events." A former high-level FBI agent will deliver the keynote address and a panel discussion will follow.
"Internet security has taken on a needed new tenor," Thomas said. "Corporate America has a stake in fighting terrorism and the responsibility to participate in the defense of our society against cyber-born threats."

Load-Date: May 26, 2005


End of Document