Terror alert broadened
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 23, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 304 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


NEW YORK — The government expanded a terrorism warning from transit systems to stadiums, hotels and entertainment complexes as investigators searched for more suspects Tuesday in a possible al-Qaida plot to set off hydrogen-peroxide bombs hidden in backpacks. 
Police bolstered their presence at high-profile locations. Extra officers with bulletproof vests, rifles and dogs were assigned to spots such as Grand Central Terminal in New York. Plainclothes officers handed out fliers at a nearby hotel with a warning in large block letters: "If you suspect terrorism, call the NYPD." 
The warnings occur amid an investigation centering on Najibullah Zazi, a 24-year-old Denver airport shuttle driver who authorities say received al-Qaida explosives training in Pakistan and was found entering New York City two weeks ago with bomb-making instructions on his computer. 
Zazi's arrest in Colorado last week touched off the most intense flurry of government terror warnings and advisories to come to light since President Obama took office. 
Although Zazi is charged only with lying to the government, law enforcement officials said he may have been plotting with others to detonate backpack bombs on New York trains in a scheme similar to the attacks on the London subway and Madrid's rail system. Backpacks and cell phones were seized in raids on apartments Zazi visited in New York. 
Two law enforcement officials speaking on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss details of the investigation said more than a half-dozen people were being scrutinized in the alleged plot. The FBI said "several individuals in the United States, Pakistan and elsewhere" are being investigated. 
"There's a lot more work to be done," said Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly, cautioning that the probe was in its early stages. 

Load-Date: September 23, 2009


End of Document