TERRORISM THREATENS PALESTINIAN 'DREAM';
BOMBERS KILL NOT ONLY PEOPLE BUT HOPES IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
March 9, 1996, Saturday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 405 words
Body


It could have been a crowning achievement for the Palestinian people. The convening of the first Palestinian legislative council on Thursday was the moment many had long worked for, ''the birth of a new democracy in the Middle East,'' as Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, called it.
Yet what should have been a day of promise was a day of apprehension instead, as terrorists bent on destroying Israel, the peace accord and, if need be, Palestine itself lurked outside the assembly. Palestinian police spent the day arresting Palestinians, while Israel spoke of its army returning to the self-rule areas. It would do that, Israeli Foreign Minister Ehud Barak said, if the Palestinian Authority didn't find and remove Hamas terrorist leaders. So far, the authority has arrested five of the 13 terrorists on Israel's ''most wanted'' list, but not Hamas' top commanders.
It is against that backdrop that President Clinton and other world leaders will travel to Sharm el-Sheik in the Sinai next week for an anti-terrorism summit. With Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, King Hussein, Clinton and other heads of state standing side by side, the message will be clear: The terrorists can do what they will, but they never will be allowed to replace the rule of law with bombs.
The summit also will be a tribute to those 57 innocent people who lost their lives in four suicide bombings in Israel in the past two weeks. As both Peres and Arafat have said, the Hamas leaders who sent the suicide bombers to do their dirty work took no chances, suffered no harm, made no sacrifices. They merely used those who believed them when they said the bombers would be doing God's will, and would be heroes in the eyes of Palestinians.
In fact, the bombings were an abomination to any religion, and did more to harm the Palestinian cause than any other recent event. Those who planned them were out, says Arafat, to ''kill the Palestinian dream.''
Whether they succeed will be determined largely by the resolve that comes out of the Sinai next week. Arafat, for his part, must put his words into action by convening the new legislative council as quickly as possible. The first order of business should be striking from the Palestinian covenant the awful clause calling for Israel's destruction.
One cannot talk peace and act war, whether a political leader or a ''mule'' with explosives strapped to his body.

Load-Date: March 11, 1996


End of Document