TERRORISM DEFENDANT FIRES LAWYER
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
May 30, 1996, Thursday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Region/Nation/World; Pg. A4
Length: 283 words
Byline: By LARRY NEUMEISTER ; Associated Press writer
Body


NEW YORK -- An Islamic militant accused of terrorism dumped his lawyer this morning and opted to represent himself on charges that he and two co-defendants plotted to blow up 11 U.S. airliners.
The judge had told him he was "guaranteeing your own conviction."
Ramzi Yousef, the alleged mastermind of the World Trade Center attack, decided to act as his own attorney despite the stern warning from U.S. District Court Judge Kevin Duffy.
In court today, Duffy told defense attorney Roy Kulcsar that Yousef was "trying to manipulate everybody in the place, including you and me, and he's trying to manipulate the system.
"It's not going to happen," Duffy concluded. "He either goes with you, or he goes alone. It's that simple. Which is it?"
Kulscar, after conferring with his client, responded, "Mr. Yousef has indicated he'd like to make his opening statement."
On Wednesday, Yousef announced that he wanted to be the architect of his own trial defense.
The request surprised Duffy and seemed to catch even Kulscar off guard.
"What you're doing most likely is guaranteeing your own conviction," the judge told Yousef.
"I have no intent on permitting this courtroom to be turned into a circus just to permit you to preen your ego."
In its opening statement Wednesday, the government promised a huge arsenal of evidence against Yousef and his two codefendants.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Michael Garcia said Yousef was plotting to blow up 11 jumbo jets carrying 4,000 Americans during 48 hours in January 1995.
Yousef's aim, the prosecutor said, was to pressure the United States to stop supporting Israel.
If convicted, Yousef and his co-defendants, Abdul Hakim Murad and Wali Khan Amin Shah, each face life in prison.

Load-Date: May 31, 1996


End of Document