Terrorism warning has Radnor Twp. on the alert
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
DECEMBER 17, 2003 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL NEWS PHILADELPHIA & ITS SUBURBS; Pg. B01
Length: 514 words
Byline: Marc Schogol INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


Officials in Radnor Township were still on alert yesterday after the FBI warned that there was a "credible threat" of terrorist activity against a downtown Wayne site, even though the target organization reportedly moved out six months ago.
A Lancaster Avenue merchant familiar with the target group said it was called SAT-7, an international organization that describes itself as "a satellite television service for Christians of the Middle East."
However, the Lexington (Ky.) Area Muslim Network, in an online December 1999 article, said SAT-7 was an evangelistic organization "engaged in a massive worldwide, well-planned, organized onslaught against Hindus and Muslims in an effort to convert them to Christianity."
Radnor police would not comment on the case, and the FBI was unavailable for comment.
Exactly when SAT-7 first got to Wayne was not immediately known, but the merchant, who did not want to be identified, said it was gone. "If anybody had been looking at the place for the last six months, scoping it out, they would have realized there was nobody there," he said.
The merchant said he had been cautioned by police and the FBI "to be careful about what I say. . . . This organization [SAT-7] has people at risk all over the world."
In a letter sent Monday to middle school parents and staff, officials of the Radnor School District said: "On Friday, Dec. 12, at approximately 2:35 p.m., middle school principal Bill Laffey received word from the Radnor Township Police Department that a warning had been issued by the FBI that a 'credible threat' of terrorist activity existed against a business office located on Lancaster Avenue in Wayne. The nature of the activity was unknown."
The letter said the FBI and Radnor police were closely monitoring the situation: "There is an increased police presence in the area surrounding the [former SAT-7] office."
The middle school, a block south of Lancaster Avenue, has remained open, and extracurricular activities have gone on as scheduled.
SAT-7 officials could not be reached yesterday. But in an Inquirer Commentary Page article last year,, J.B. Kump, a regional director for SAT-7, said the Wayne office, "situated in a two-story suite above an insurance office, sends Bible-based television programs via satellite to studios in Beirut, Lebanon, and Cairo, Egypt. All of the shows are in Arabic."
Kump said that thanks to the "nonprofit ministry," Middle Eastern Christians - "many of whom are isolated from other believers - have been encouraged, and are better equipped to live out their faith more publicly. Non-Christian viewers now see Christians without the filter of rumor and distortion. Christianity is, therefore, no longer viewed as a Western religion with all of its political and cultural connotations."
The letter, signed by Laffey and acting Superintendent George H. Slick, said, "We will take every reasonable precaution to insure the safety of our children. Our staff will remain vigilant and alert to any unusual activity in the area."
Contact staff writer Marc Schogol at 610-313-8112 or mschogol@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: August 19, 2005


End of Document