TERRORISTS STILL PERIL, ALBRIGHT, RENO SAY;
MUCH WORK REMAINS AS OVERSEAS OUTPOSTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 5, 1999, Friday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 413 words
Byline: TOM RAUM, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Despite progress in combating terrorism, the United States remains vulnerable to bombing attacks, both at home and at its far-flung outposts, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Attorney General Janet Reno told Congress yesterday.
Only about 10 percent of the planned work has been performed on upgrading U.S. embassies since last August's twin bombings in Africa, Albright told a Senate hearing on anti-terrorism.
"I think from our perspective we don't need any more legislative authority, but we do need . . . money," she testified.
Reno said there had been much progress in foiling would-be terrorist plots and in improving coordination among agencies. Still, she said, "we're not going to be able to prevent them all. There is no way we can do that. And we have got to be prepared."
Of particular concern the attorney general said, was "the threat of a cyberattack."
"Just now in this past year, we have been able to see instances in which 17- and 18-year-old hackers can intrude into sensitive computers across this country. If they can do that, our cybersystem, our cyberinfrastructure, is at risk," she said.
Reno said government agencies were working together "with personnel and technology that can match the wits of the smartest criminals and the smartest terrorist." But she said states and the private sector needed to do more to fight this new brand of terrorism.
Albright said security at U.S. embassies around the world had been beefed up considerably since simultaneous bombings last Aug. 7 at the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania killed 224 people, including 12 Americans. She said the administration's five-year plan for combating terrorism was progressing.
But, she said, there is much to be done. "Our strategy must be long-term. The five-year plan is only the beginning. Certainly no single arrest or shutdown of a terrorist operation will be sufficient."
"The advance of technology has given us new means to counter terrorists, but it has also enabled terrorists to develop more powerful weapons and to travel, communicate, recruit and raise funds on a global basis," Albright said.
She, Reno and FBI Director Louis Freeh testified before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee that oversees the budgets of their agencies.
Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., the subcommittee chairman, said President Clinton's budget request for $ 300 million to upgrade embassy security next year fell about $ 700 million short of what he said an interagency study panel said was needed.

Load-Date: February 5, 1999


End of Document