Terrorism and the Libya crisis
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
April 22, 1986, Tuesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Editorial; Pg. 17
Length: 300 words
Body


Harsch's prescription is, as always, simple: Indict Israel; exculpate the aggressor (''Terrorism,'' April 8).
Far from being chiefly the outgrowth of Israeli policies, terrorism is actually a global phenomenon, a political disease that seeks to subvert Western democracy.
Hardly any Western nation has been immune to it.
Harsch ignores the fact that terrorism in the Middle East is rooted in the culture of violence native to that region. In terms of the number of wars, duration of hostilities, and the number of soldiers and civilians killed, the Arab-Israeli conflict is overshadowed by intra-Arab and intra-Muslim violence. It has little to do with Israel, and will not disappear after a resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The roots of Arab terrorism (he prefers to call it Palestinian ''activism'') are in the refugee camps. He neglects to mention that the oil-rich Arab states have contributed little to relieve this miserable condition. The Arab refugee question is unique, for it is the only one where nations willfully reject their own kin.
The Arab states have conspired to make camps squalid breeding grounds of resentment that could be exploited against Israel by funding, arming, training, and providing political and diplomatic support to terrorists.
All over the world there are groups - ethnic, religious, tribal, social, political - with grievances. If ''understanding'' were extended to their ''root causes,'' they would have carte blanche to murder innocents in order to gain redress. But murder is murder, and no grievance can justify it nor will ''understanding'' avert or eliminate terrorism.
Michael Shiloh, Boston Consul General of Israel
 
Letters are welcome. Only a selection can be published, subject to condensation, and none acknowledged. Please address to ''readers write.''


End of Document