Terrorism charges mostly dealt with test cheating, report says
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
March 3, 2003, Monday,
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Bismarck Tribune,  a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 614 words
Body


NEWARK, N.J. (AP) -- Nearly all charges filed last year in what federal prosecutors in New Jersey labeled 'international terrorism' cases dealt with Middle Eastern students paying impostors to take English proficiency tests, a newspaper report says.
 One case involved a University of North Dakota student.
 Of 62 indictments issued in the 2002 fiscal year, all but two stemmed from English tests required for many colleges and graduate schools, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported.
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Nearly all of the students are free on bond, and most of the nine students already convicted have been fined between $ 250 and $ 1,000 and sent back to their own countries.
 'There is not one whit of evidence that connects any of these people to terrorism,' said Lawrence S. Lustberg, who represents 25 Saudi students charged with hiring others to take their tests.
 New Jersey's 62 international terrorism cases led the nation that fiscal year, according to the U.S. Justice Department.
 Michael Drewniak, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office in Newark, said people may question how the testing cases were approached.
 'But there are very reasonable factors behind the investigation that compelled us and the Department of Justice to look very closely at these individuals,' Drewniak said.
 Some students found to have cheated on the test were pilots, among them, Mohammed Al-Masari, who pleaded guilty to wire fraud. The employee of the Saudi-based Aramco oil company was learning to fly helicopters at the University of North Dakota last year.
 Although U.S. Magistrate Richard Goldberg ordered Al-Masari deported, the judge was sympathetic at sentencing.
 'I wish I could do something different than what I'm going to do, but I have no choice,' he said. 'Mr. Al-Masari, the court wishes you luck.'
 The cases were listed as international terrorism from the beginning, and prosecutors typically do not go back and change them, Drewniak said. He said there was no attempt to mislead anyone.
 The testing cases were handled by federal prosecutors in New Jersey because Educational Testing Service, which administers the Test of English as a Foreign Language, is based in Princeton.
 ETS suspected a number of Middle Eastern students had used stand-ins to take the exam months before Sept. 11, 2001. After attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, the FBI and immigration authorities scoured the firm's records.
 Of the other two indictments, one charged Ahmad Omar Saeed Sheikh with kidnapping Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl. Pearl's employer, Dow Jones & Co., is based in New Jersey.
 Saeed was sentenced to death by a Pakistani court and probably will not be tried in the United States.
 In the last case, a Middle Eastern man pleaded guilty to using a false visa. He was sentenced to the time he already served, and turned over to the Immigration and Naturalization Service for possible deportation.
 The General Accounting Office, a nonpartisan congressional watchdog agency, has reported that three-fourths of 174 convictions last year were incorrectly listed by the Justice Department as international terrorism.
 Nail Al-Juberi, a spokesman for Saudi Arabia's embassy in Washington, called that 'an issue of credibility.'
 'If you have someone who cheated on a test and there was no linkage to terrorism, let's not play the numbers game,' Al-Juberi said. 'To label them as terrorists, I have a concern with that.'
 Drewniak said anyone who says prosecutors targeted the students because of their ethnicity or national origins should remember 'the fact that they, as a group, chose to associate with one another and form their own knot of individuals who violated the law.'

Load-Date: March 6, 2003


End of Document