Terrorism Jolts a Prospering Chile
The New York Times
April 9, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk; Column 3;
Length: 1209 words
Byline: By NATHANIEL C. NASH,

By NATHANIEL C. NASH,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: SANTIAGO, Chile, April 5
Body


A new nervousness has gripped the business community in Chile this week over whether the recent spate of terrorist actions will upset the political stability of the country and threaten the Chilean economic miracle.
Chile has built the most successful economy in Latin America, and one of the vital underpinnings of that growth was the open economic environment created by the former military dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet. In the year since the country's transition to a democratic Government the economy has continued to grow and foreign investment has continued to pour in.
But the killing on Monday of one of the country's most prominent senators, the fourth killing in the last six weeks, is raising questions about the ability of the country -- and the economy -- to stay on course.
 
Executives Fearful
 "Chile has a prosperous economy," the country's Treasury Minister, Alejandro Foxley, said this week, "but the point of vulnerability is terrorism and the problem of personal security."
Businessmen are loath to speak publicly about the problem, out of fear of offending the Government. But privately they express concerns that foreign investors will pull out of the country, to avoid attacks on themselves and their property. And foreign investment is a critical ingredient of the economy's growth.
Some say they believe that the Government of President Patricio Aylwin has finally decided to take harsh steps against terrorism, but that it will take time to see whether the battle against political violence has been won. "I think it's just too early to tell," said one American banker who insisted that neither his name nor his bank's be used. "We're rooting for Aylwin to come down strong on the terrorists."
The violence is one of the few clouds on Chile's economic horizon. While there had been some doubts about whether President Aylwin would continue the open market policies that had fostered the growth, the last 12 months have been reassuring to the business community.
It is not that President Aylwyn has left the Pinochet economy untouched. He cut the central bank free from the rest of the Government. He raised taxes on business to help pay for more social programs. He lifted the minimum wage, raising the cost of labor.
Although some of these adjustments tilt away from the Pinochet Government's fixation with free markets and to a new emphasis on social programs, so far the basic thrust of the open economy -- one with little regulation and equal treatment of foreign investors -- has been maintained. And most analysts say the economy continues to function well.
 
'A Very Interesting Time'
 "The private sector is almost starting to move into a boom phase now," said Eduardo Aninat, chief negotiator for Chile in its recent re-entry into the Euromarkets. "Business has a stability it has not seen in years. This is a very interesting time for this country."
The numbers reflect the continued strength in Chile's economy. Inflation over the last four months has averaged less than 6 percent. Economic growth is projected to be almost 5 percent this year. The savings rate is more than twice that of the United States. Foreign exchange reserves have doubled in the last 15 months. And the country's stock market has almost doubled since last fall.
Foreign investment, too, is booming again after a lull last year as businessmen waited to see what the Aylwin Government would do. Investment has been running at almost a $2 billion annual rate, close to a record.
 
Copper Developments
 The Phelps Dodge Corporation is planning a $300 million copper mine in the north. Australian, Spanish and Japanese backers have poured $1 billion into Chile's copper belt to create the world's third-largest copper mine, La Escondida, which just started operations. The Simpson Paper Company of San Francisco, together with one of Chile's largest forestry companies, is building a $400 million pulp and paper plant near Concepcion. Shell Oil also has a plant of similar size about to go into operation.
Though perhaps small by United States standards, these projects are large for a country of 15 million people that had a gross domestic product last year of $26.5 billion.
Though Chileans seem to enjoy the image of an orderly economy and the praise it brings, they cannot escape a complex mix of emotions. The economic progress has come at a high price. The human rights violations attributed to the Pinochet Government continue to haunt the country. Furthermore, an estimated five million Chileans -- one-third of the population -- still live in poverty conditions.
But at least for now, the central question of whether Mr. Aylwin would steer a different course has been answered.
"I'm sleeping much, much better than I did a year ago," said Andres Bianchi, president of the central bank.
From a business point of view, things are still going well, too. Foreign businessmen traveling in Latin America say they breathe a sigh of relief when they get to Chile.
 
'Less Corruption'
 "The costs are lower than in other Latin American countries," said one businessman, Don J. Harris. "There is less corruption, more respect for law, and all of this spills over into our software business." Mr. Harris, marketng director in Latin America for the Wordperfect Corporation, a computer software company based in Orem, Utah, said that in his two years in Chile he has had far fewer problems with pirating of software than in any other Latin country.
Jose Antonio Rivero, president of Iansa, a foreign-owned sugar company, added: "Frankly, in 10 years working here we haven't had one single occasion when we have had to pay a bribe to anybody. That is not the norm in Latin America. For business, the rules have been very defined and the Government has stuck to them."
Businessmen remark that the phones work in Chile. They can repatriate profits from an investment after the first business year and can take their capital out of the country after three years. And they say they find no discrimination against their companies by Government officials.
But bankers here warn of potential problems, too. The recent rise in political assassinations is one. Others include the economy's dependence on foreign capital and on oil imports, which leave it vulnerable to interest rate fluctuations and world oil prices.
"The worst thing for us is a big recession in the United States," said Mr. Aninat, the debt negotiator.
Still, business executives find much to praise here.
At the signing ceremony last month for Chile's $320 million Eurobond, bankers celebrated the financing, noting that it represented the voluntary purchase of Chilean debt by investors, rather than a repudiation of debt or a restructuring. They also pointed out that the issue was so popular that Chile had raised more than originally planned, and at interest rates well below what Mexico and Venezuela were paying at the same time.
"This transaction sets an important example for emerging democracies in Latin America, Europe and Asia," said Donald McCouch, executive vice president of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, the lad bank in the Chile debt offering. "Countries with debt problems which apply sound economic policies do get well," said Mr. McCouch, who heads the bank's lending to developing countries.

Graphic

 
Graphs: 'Coming Back: Chile's Economy' shows gross domestic product, consumer price increases and foreign investment in Chile from '86 to '91 (Source: Central Bank of Chile)

Load-Date: April 9, 1991


End of Document