Terrorism on Two Continents;
In New York, a Catastrophe Averted
The New York Times
June 25, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Editorial
Length: 430 words
Body


New Yorkers are grateful for the story they didn't have to read in their newspapers or experience firsthand. Bomb attacks on the Hudson River tunnels, the United Nations and F.B.I. headquarters . . . assassinations of local and international public figures . . . mayhem, chaos, terror. The city owes thanks to Federal and local antiterrorist units for yesterday's pre-emptive arrests of eight suspects.
Thirteen years of close cooperation between Federal and local antiterrorism units paid off yesterday morning. Using an informant, authorities had patiently tracked these suspects for months as they allegedly discussed targets, carried out reconnaissance and acquired a safe house, vehicles and bomb ingredients. When the agents heard that the suspects had begun to mix diesel fuel and fertilizer in 55-gallon drums and that several were preparing to flee the U.S., they quickly moved in.
New Yorkers and other Americans rightly ask why authorities can't erect more systematic defenses against international terrorism. Most of the suspects are originally from the Middle East, and are followers of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the fundamentalist Egyptian preacher.
Senator Alfonse D'Amato, reportedly an assassination target, calls for tougher border enforcement, making terrorism a capital crime and launching military strikes against terrorist nations. Those sound like satisfying steps, but they don't fit the facts.
Strict and consistent enforcement of existing immigration and asylum rules is clearly desirable, and not just to stop terrorism. Sheik Abdel Rahman should not have been let into this country, given his record of deadly incitement in Egypt. But his links to the terrorists arrested yesterday, and to the World Trade Center case, are indirect. And most of those arrested yesterday are legal U.S. residents.
Capital punishment is unlikely to deter people who willingly accept martyrdom and suicide missions. There's not yet enough evidence of complicity by foreign governments to justify hasty counterattacks. Bombing innocent civilians elsewhere scarcely repays threats to innocent civilians here. And Mayor David Dinkins was right to caution New Yorkers against directing their fear and anger at Middle Easterners or Muslims as a group.
That leaves basic law enforcement, which showed its worth yesterday morning. No city can be immune to fanatics who would kill innocent people to advance a political cause. But city residents need not be helpless victims. New Yorkers now know they aren't defenseless. By going about their normal lives, they defeat terrorism every day.

Load-Date: June 25, 1993


End of Document