Terrorism has little to do with need for food safety

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
November 5, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A10
Length: 486 words
Body


The United States needs to upgrade its food protection systems to respond more quickly to disease outbreaks and to make use of new technology to prevent contamination.
That's not because of any new or increased threat of terrorism.
Those recommendations were made more than three years ago in a report to Congress by the National Academy of Sciences.
Some people recently became alarmed when the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said the nation's food supply is vulnerable to terrorist attack.
But others have tried to sound the alarm for years about the nation's vulnerability to food contamination caused by laxity in inspection/enforcement and misdirected resources.
Sen. Richard Durbin of Illinois is among the few who has been outspoken on this issue for years.
In 1998, Durbin, a Democrat, introduced a bill to create a single agency to manage federal food safety enforcement. But the legislation went nowhere.
"Maybe the events of Sept. 11 will give us some impetus to change," Durbin said recently.
Durbin should continue to speak out responsibly on this issue.
In a nation where people are already jittery about flying and even opening their mail, we don't need to fray more nerves with alarmist talk about terrorists tampering with the food supply.
However, we do need to address an antiquated system with overlapping responsibilities and potential gaps resulting from poor coordination.
Among shortcomings cited in the 1998 report were use of outdated inspection procedures, slow response to dangers from new distribution systems and failure to commit the most resources to the largest risks.
For example, meat inspectors conduct time-consuming visual inspection of meat even though such inspections cannot detect invisible bacterial contamination.
Another example: Testing for pesticide residues consumes a lot of money and manpower while bacterial infections is a greater risk.
Beef and poultry receive more thorough review than produce. That's chiefly because the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which checks meat and poultry, has about 7,500 inspectors while the Food and Drug Administration, responsible for all other foods, has 750 inspectors.
These problems and others noted in recent years must be addressed.
More than $100 million in emergency spending is being sought for food and agriculture security. Throwing more money into a system with existing problems is, at best, a small bandage on a gaping wound - or, worse, a waste of money that will do little to limit the danger from terrorist-linked or accidental food contamination.
The 1998 report estimated that 9,000 Americans die each year from food poisoning and another 81 million become ill. That's without terrorist involvement.
Now that food security is being considered part of national security, perhaps this problem will get the attention it deserves.
Just be sure it is a well-reasoned response and not one bred from panic.

Load-Date: November 9, 2001


End of Document