TERRORISM MUST END, NETANYAHU TELLS CLINTON
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
July 10, 1996, Wednesday, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 4A
Length: 357 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told President Bill Clinton on Tuesday that he would give no ground in Middle East peacemaking unless terrorism was halted and Israel's security was bolstered.
"Those who are on the side of peace must show complete dedication to the fight against terrorism," Netanyahu said after 2 1/2 hours of talks with Clinton. "Anything less will simply not do. Israel is eager to make peace, but we cannot do so alone."
Netanyahu made clear that he was not ready to meet with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. HpE And he would not commit to withdrawing Israeli troops from Hebron, where 450 Israelis live among 94,000 Arabs.
On another sensitive point, Netanyahu refused to lift restrictions that have prevented thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip from working in Israel. "As soon as I deem the security conditions will allow it, I will ease the closure," Netanyahu said at a joint news conference with Clinton.
On Syria, Netanyahu said he would reopen negotiations only if Syria stopped supporting terrorists. "I think that it's peculiar to have peace talks that are progressing while you have a terror campaign parallel to it," he said.
Despite Netanyahu's generally tough words in public, he privately assu red Clinton that he wanted to move ahead in negotiations with Palestinians and find a formula soon for a Hebron solution, a senior U.S. official said.
For his part, Clinton tried to accentuate the positive, saying that he believed the peace process will go forward and that U.S.-Israeli ties remain as strong as ever despite a need for "adjustment" between the two sides.
"I think that we're going to have, necessarily, a period of adjustment, " he said. "And those of us who care about it need to try to mi nimize the negative and maximize the positive."
But he said it would be a "bad mistake" to turn back the clock in the Middle East peace process, adding, "I believe that the tide of history cannot be turned into going back."
Netanyahu seconded Clinton's upbeat remarks about the bilateral relationship, but there was a clear disagreement on the issue of the land-for-peace principle.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo From AP - Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu (left) meets with President Bill Clinton Tuesday at the White House to discuss peace in the Middle East.

Load-Date: July 11, 1996


End of Document