Terrorism Suspect Charges Toward Judge, but Is Tackled
The New York Times
June 23, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 749 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


A defendant in a Federal terrorism case leaped out of his chair in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday and raced toward the judge, causing chaos before he was tackled and subdued by a United States marshal.
The accused terrorist, Wadih el-Hage, got to within about 10 feet of the judge, Leonard B. Sand, who had moved behind his chair, as marshals swept into the well of the courtroom. Some of them threw themselves on top of a second defendant, seated in the jury box.
One of the five defendants shouted "Allah akhbar!" -- Arabic for "God is great." The defendants, charged in connection with terrorism against Americans, had been placed in the jury box for the pretrial hearing before the judge because there was not enough room at the crowded defense table.
The defendants, with Mr. el-Hage bleeding from his forehead, were removed from the courtroom after the incident. They all were escorted back about 20 minutes later, with Mr. el-Hage and one other prisoner in leg shackles and hands cuffed behind their back.
As he took his seat in the jury box, surrounded by marshals, he shouted out again, saying he was angry that Judge Sand had refused to read aloud a letter he had sent to him.
"Too many restrictions, too many restrictions," Mr. el Hage called out. "I've never been part of any violent acts in my life." He added: "This is the first time I do this because of so many restrictions. Keep on doing this and you turn this country into a police country."
Judge Sand said he would not read Mr. el-Hage's letter out loud because the courtroom was not a "vehicle for public declarations" by the defendants. He also cited the highly restrictive conditions under which they are being held, barred from communicating with virtually all outsiders. Federal rules allow prison officials to limit an inmate's communications to prevent "acts of violence and terrorism."
The judge said he was concerned that the letter might contain coded language, and he would therefore only summarize it. He said Mr. el-Hage had contended that officials of the United States Government could have acted sooner, based on information they had, to prevent the bombings of the United States Embassy in Kenya last August.
Judge Sand, asked by Mr. el-Hage's lawyer to release the letter, said prosecutors would first have to review it to determine whether its contents posed a threat.
The late-morning incident occurred during legal arguments after a routine arraignment of Mr. el-Hage and the four other defendants on a new indictment in the Government's investigation into the embassy bombings and other acts of terrorism that prosecutors say were orchestrated by the Saudi exile Osama bin Laden.
The Government has described Mr. el-Hage, of Arlington, Tex., as Mr. bin Laden's former secretary.
The other defendants sat quietly during the incident, with one, Ali A. Mohamed, a former sergeant in the United States Army, shaking his head and looking disgusted.
Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, said that her office was reviewing the incident. He refused to comment further.
Prosecutors may be weighing additional charges against Mr. el-Hage and Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, who was accused by marshals of grabbing at one of the marshals, tearing his suit jacket, to prevent him from reaching Mr. el-Hage.
Mr. el-Hage's lawyer, Sam A. Schmidt, said after the court session that he could not conceive of his client intending to attack the judge, saying it would be "totally inconsistent with what I know of him and what others have told me."
"He's obviously very upset and under great stress," Mr. Schmidt said, "and I'm hopeful that in two days everybody will see the letter and how innocuous the letter is that has caused this brouhaha."
Leonard F. Joy, the lawyer for Mr. al-'Owhali, had no comment.
When Mr. el-Hage bolted from his seat he was not far from an exit door. But the United States Marshal in Manhattan, Martin J. Burke, said his deputies concluded that Mr. el-Hage was running in the direction of the judge's bench before he was tackled by Deputy James Howard.
Jane Rosenberg, a courtroom artist seated close to where Mr. el-Hage was tackled, said: "I was scared. I was shaking. I saw him jump over the rail. He leaped like Tarzan." She grabbed her pastel box, she said, and ducked behind her chair.
Judge Sand issued a statement through his secretary late yesterday, expressing "admiration for how swiftly and ably the United States marshals dealt with the incident."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 23, 1999


End of Document