TERRORISM ON U.S. SOIL
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
April 16, 2020 Thursday
Main Edition


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 007
Length: 1324 words
Byline: Charles Apple The Spokesman-Review
Body


FURTHER REVIEW
 Twenty-five years ago Sunday, a truck bomb killed 168 people in a federal building in Oklahoma City.
 Among the victims: 19 children in the building's day-care center. The bomber said he disliked the U.S. government. Here are 14 times political hate or discrimination resulted in deadly terrorist acts in the United States.
CHICAGO
May 4, 1886
Police fire on protesters striking at the McCormick Reaper Works, killing one and injuring several others. The next day, labor leaders organize an even larger protest in Chicago's Haymarket Square. The event goes peacefully until police move to break up the demonstration. An unidentified attacker throws a dynamite bomb at police. Police and demonstrators then exhange gunfire. Seven protesters would be sentenced to death on very little evidence.
DEAD   11+
INJURED    130+
LOS ANGELES
Oct. 1, 1910
A disgruntled union member - angry at the anti-union stance of the Los Angeles Times - sets off an explosive consisting of 16 sticks of dynamite in an alley behind the newspaper offices. The explosive goes off just after 1 a.m., but 115 employees are still at work, preparing a special edition for the next day. The blast ignites a natural gas line which takes down half the building, plus much of the printing plant next door.
DEAD   21
INJURED    100+
TULSA, OKLA.
May 31-June 1, 1921
A black teenager, accused of assaulting a white elevator operator, is arrested and jailed. Word gets out of a possible lynching, so a group of black men offers to help guard the teen but is turned away by the sheriff. Rumors of a black uprising inflame the white community. Mobs of white residents rampage through the black section of the city, shooting unarmed bystanders and setting fire to their homes and businesses. All charges against the teenager would be dismissed.
DEAD    36
INJURED    183+
NEW YORK CITY
Sept. 16, 1920
A bomb hidden in a horse-drawn wagon is detonated outside the headquarters of the J.P. Morgan bank in the heart of Wall Street. The explosive consists of 100 pounds of dynamite wrapped with 500 pounds of cast-iron weights. Most of the fatalities are messengers, clerks and brokers. The bomb causes $2 million in damage to the Morgan building - $25.8 million in 2020 dollars. The stock market is closed to prevent panic selling. Officials never learned who is responsible for the attack.
DEAD    38
INJURED    143+
BATH TOWNSHIP, MICH.
May 18, 1927
A school board treasurer, frustrated office seeker and tax protester kills his wife and burns down his farm. Then he detonates a bomb that destroys a wing of the local consolidated school building - while school was in session. After rescuers arrive, the man then drives by the school and detonats a bomb in his truck, killing himself and several bystanders. Investigators later find more explosives in the other wing of the school - explosives that hadn't gone off.
DEAD    44
INJURED    58
NEW YORK CITY
Feb. 26, 1993
A team of Al Qaeda operatives parks a rental truck filled with explosives in a deck beneath the North Tower of the World Trade Center. The blast knocks out primary and backup lighting systems and causes smoke to be drawn up into both towers through elevator shafts. The explosion also leaves much of Lower Manhattan without telephone service. Most of New York's radio and TV stations are off the air for a week. 
DEAD    6
INJURED    1,000+
OKLAHOMA CITY
April 19, 1995
A bomb made of more than 4,800 pounds of ammonium nitrate fertilizer hidden in a rental truck parked in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Buidling in Oklahoma City destroys much of the building and damaging others within a four-block radius. Nineteen of the victims are children in the building's day-care center. The FBI tracks down the bomber and his accomplice, who admit to disliking the U.S. government. The attack had been timed to the two-year anniversary of an FBI seige at the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas.
DEAD    168
INJURED     680+
ATLANTA
July 27, 1996
An anonymous caller warns Atlanta police that a bomb will go off in Centennial Olympic Park in downtown Atlanta, during the Olympic games. A security guard notices a suspicious knapsack near a concert venue and begins clearing the area. Twenty minutes after the call, a bomb in the bag goes off. Investigators suspect the guard of planting the bomb himself but he is later cleared. The actual bomber would turn out to be a man who had bombed abortion clinics and a gay nightclub.
DEAD    1
INJURED     100+
NEW YORK CITY,
ARLINGTON, VA.,
SHANKSVILLE, PA.
 Sept. 11, 2001
Nineteen Al Qaeda operatives hijack two airliners flying out of Boston, one flying out of Newark, New Jersey and one flying from Washington's Dulles. Two are flown into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York. One is crashed into the Pentagon across the Potomac from Washington, D.C. The fourth crashes into a Pennsylvania field when passengers - aware of what had happened to the other planes - attempt to overtake the hijackers. The U.S. would respond by invading Afghanistan.
DEAD    2,977
INJURED    25,000+
BOSTON
April 15, 2013
Two bombs - each packed into pressure cookers along with pellets and nails, hidden in backpacks placed about 200 yards from each other - go off within 12 seconds near the finish line of the Boston Marathon. Police determine two Chechen Kyrgystani-born brothers are responsible for the bombing. Three days later, the brothers kill a campus police officer at MIT and have a shootout with police in a Boston suburb. One brother is killed when the other runs over him. The second brother is captured the next day.
DEAD    3
INJURED     264
SAN BERNARDINO
Dec. 2, 2015
A married couple open fire on a holiday party at the Inland Regional Center, where the husband worked in the county's health department. They then flee in a rented SUV. Four hours later, police track then down and kill them in a shootout. The husband was a U.S.-born son of Pakistani immigrants. The wife had immigrated from Saudi Arabia. Police would say the couple had become radicalized over years and had amassed an enormous stockpile of guns, ammo and bomb-making equipment.
DEAD    14
INJURED    24
ORLANDO
June 12, 2016
An American-born son of Afghan immigrants - who worked as a security guard - shoots up a gay nightclub on Latin Night. During the incident, the shooter calls 911 and tells police he's acting to retaliate for the U.S. bombing strike in Iraq the previous month that killed the leader of the Islamic State. After a three-hour standoff - with hostages hiding in the restrooms - police storm the club, distract the shooter with flash grenades and shoot him dead.
DEAD    49
INJURED      53
NEW YORK CITY
Oct. 31, 2017
A man who had immigrated from Uzbekistan in 2010 drives a rental pickup truck through the Hudson River Greenway, a protected bike lane in a park along the river. He strikes a number of cyclists and pedestrians before he crashes into a school bus. The man exits the truck, brandishing guns and shouting "Allahu Akbar." Police shoot him in the abdomen and then find the guns were a pellet gun and a paintball gun.
DEAD    8
INJURED     11
EL PASO, TEXAS
Aug. 3, 2019
A gunman opens fire in a Walmart on the heavily Latino east side of El Paso. A number of employees helps customers escape or hide. Police later find documents posted online by the gunman shortly before the shooting, expressing racist, white nationalist and anti-immigrant views. The gunman tells officers he was intentionally targeting Mexicans. Officials would declare the incident to be domestic terrorism.
DEAD    22
INJURED    24
Sources: CNN, The Orlando Sentinel The Los Angeles Times, The Washington Post, The Boston Globe, The Associated Press, Reuters, NPR, BBC, Politifact, History.com, the FBI, Chicago Historical Society, InfoPlease.com
NOTE: The photo at the top of this page - firefighter Chris Fields holding a mortally wounded infant shortly after the Oklahoma City bombing - won the Pulitzer Prize for photography in 1996.

Load-Date: April 21, 2021


End of Document