Terrorism and the Portland Stabbing
The Vermilion: University of Louisiana-Lafayette
July 12, 2017 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 590 words
Byline: Dawn Darbonne
Body


Jeremy Joseph Christian had multiple outbursts during his time in court, stating his continued "patriotism." Photo via CNN.
The problem with discussing terrorism in this country is that it always inspires images of dark-skinned people shouting in foreign languages before blowing themselves up. And while that's one form of terrorism, it's not the only one. Political violence is not limited to any one group of people, as we saw in Portland, Oregon.
On May 26, a man on a train began verbally abusing Muslim women on a train, including one in a hijab. Bystanders intervened, attempting to de-escalate the situation - exactly as we have been told: speak up, act as allies, have strength in numbers. The man then killed two of the bystanders by slashing their throats. His victims were Ricky John Best, a 53-year-old veteran and father to four children, and Taliesin Myrddin Namkai-Meche, a recent 23-year-old college graduate.
This sad situation represents the best and worst of the U.S. These two different men gave their lives trying to help someone who was the victim of discrimination. One was a veteran, one was a college student and neither thought they would die that day. However, the attacker represents the fear, ignorance and hatred that has always existed beneath the surface.
This isn't the only recent attack motivated by bigotry. In California, Anthony Hammond began yelling racial slurs at a black man and tried to kill him with a machete before police arrested him. And in Seattle, police are searching for some who intentionally ran over and killed a 20-year-old father of twins for being Native American. This is all within the past week or so. We've all seen an increase in reports like these on the news.
Portland officials are further worried about an upcoming rally called the "Trump Rally for Free Speech." It's expected to attract white supremacists, and in fact, the killer from the train was photographed giving the Nazi salute at an April rally held by the same organizers.
What the two men did on the train is truly heroic. They saw a victim and her attacker, and they stepped in to help her at the cost of their own lives. This is the moral, compassionate, ethical thing to do. It shouldn't matter what religion someone is. The humanist attitude is that people should live and let live when possible, but the increase in political violence from far-right groups makes this ideal harder to achieve.
We are told to help people in need, but how many of us are now less likely to help someone for fear that we might be killed? This is how terrorism works - random acts of violence that make people afraid to oppose the terrorists. The fundamentalism and tribalism that these people are exploiting will tear the country apart if we let it. It doesn't matter what religion you are or the religion of the victims - living peacefully is possible, and we must convince those who can be convinced and fight those who can't.
You don't even need to believe in any god to understand this. It's about recognizing the basic dignity and autonomy that people desire and deserve. We have to see each other as human first - not some lesser being because of different beliefs, skin color, or language.
The rise of authoritarianism is completely opposed to this. Instead, it seeks to subjugate and oppress for the benefit of a narrowly-defined type of person. The longer this fight lasts, the harder it will be to reverse. So think of the lives already lost in this fight, and be willing to stand together to make sure it doesn't happen again.

Load-Date: July 12, 2017


End of Document