Terrorism Expert Drops Defamation Claim Against 2nd Journalist
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
September 18, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: METRO,
Length: 277 words
Byline: THOMAS W. KRAUSE , tkrause@tampatrib.com; Reporter Thomas W. Krause can be reached at (813) 259-7698.  
Body


PLAINTIFF SAYS SUIT WAS WASTE OF MONEY
TAMPA - After nearly 41/2 years, the final portion of a defamation lawsuit filed by Washington journalist Steven Emerson was dropped.
In 1999, Emerson sued the Tampa-based Weekly Planet, its senior editor John Sugg and Associated Press reporter Richard Cole.
The weekly newspaper and Sugg, who now works in Atlanta, were dropped from the lawsuit in May. Last week, Cole was dropped.
"I was wasting my money in this lawsuit at this point," Emerson said Wednesday. "I think [Sugg and Cole] demonstrated their lack of credibility a long time ago."
The defendants said Emerson's withdrawal of the lawsuit proves he would have lost had it gone to trial.
"I never had any doubt, nor did my attorneys, nor did anyone else," Cole said. "I knew we would win."
In 1998, the Weekly Planet published a story written by Sugg that criticized The Tampa Tribune's terrorism coverage, saying it relied too heavily on Emerson as a source. Emerson had produced a PBS documentary on the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
In Sugg's article, Cole said Emerson was unreliable. Cole had written a series of articles on terrorism for The Associated Press. He said Emerson offered him a terrorism document purported to be from the FBI. When Cole received it, the information seemed to be procured by Emerson and others who worked with him, not the FBI, Cole said.
After the article was published, Emerson filed the defamation lawsuit and sought $33 million in damages. In the lawsuit, he denied misleading Cole.
Wednesday, Emerson said the dropped lawsuit does not mean Sugg and Cole were justified. Restraints on his time and money were his only considerations, he said.

Notes

TAMPA BAY AREA

Load-Date: September 19, 2003


End of Document