Terrorism in rural mailboxes;
Vague note: Bombs are 'attention-getter'
 Philadelphia Daily News
May 6, 2002 Monday


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: N; news
Length: 284 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


OHIOWA, Neb. - Rural carriers planned to deliver mail as scheduled today, despite the discovery of 14 mailbox pipe bombs across the Midwest in recent days.
But postal officials warned customers that the doors of roadside mailboxes must somehow be kept open. Affected are customers in Nebraska, Iowa and northwest Illinois' 612 zip code.
"We are instructing our carriers not to deliver to any closed receptacles," Mike Matuzek, U.S. Postal Service district manager for the area said yesterday.
Matuzek called it a temporary precaution while the investigation into who is leaving the bombs, and why, continues. Officials yesterday renewed pleas that whoever planted the bombs contact them and make their grievances clear.
Six people were injured by explosions in Illinois and Iowa on Friday. None of the six bombs found Saturday in rural areas of Nebraska went off. They were later detonated harmlessly by authorities.
A vague, anti-government note found with the bombs warned of more "attention getters," and federal authorities described the bombs as an act of domestic terrorism.
Among the six people injured Friday, only a 61-year-old woman remained hospitalized yesterday. Doris Zimmerman, who lives near Anamosa, Iowa, was listed in fair condition.
Mail carrier Lyle Bartels of Ohiowa said he'll be cautious when he returns to his route. Two of the pipe bombs found Saturday were in his delivery area.
"I'm just going to try to look the boxes over a little bit before I open them," Bartels said. "It's kind of scary."
"Thayer County is just a rural, farming community, and I think that's just showing that these kind of acts are going to reach everyone - not just large metropolitan areas," said Sheriff David Lee.

Load-Date: May 6, 2002


End of Document