Terrorism now a focus at Penn;
The criminology center plans to add to its program, citing changes wrought by the Sept. 11 attacks.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 16, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B03
Length: 448 words
Byline: Robert Moran INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body


As a result of the attacks on Sept. 11, a new criminology center at the University of Pennsylvania will refocus its mission to include the study of terrorism, the center's director said yesterday.
"Before Sept. 11, terrorism was basically off the map of criminology," said Lawrence Sherman, director of the Jerry Lee Center of Criminology.
"I think 6,000 murders in one day clearly turned the field upside down."
The center will be looking at how to prevent terrorism and how law-enforcement agencies around the world can better share information to fight terrorist activity, Sherman said.
Sherman made the comments after a dedication ceremony at the university for the criminology center, which was established a year ago.
The center was named after Jerry Lee, president of B101-FM Radio, who donated $5 million through his Jerry Lee Foundation. The center also has garnered an additional $7 million from government and private sources.
Former Attorney General Janet Reno and Philadelphia Police Commissioner John F. Timoney received awards from the center yesterday for their work in research-based crime prevention.
"Our job in the long run is made easier if we can deal with the root causes of crime," Timoney said after accepting his award.
Sherman, also the director of the university's Fels Center of Government, is noted for research on what works and what does not work in crime prevention.
His research has found that politically popular initiatives such as gun buy-backs, town watches, and Drug Abuse Resistance Education did not measurably reduce crime or drug use.
Additional police patrols in high-crime areas, anti-bullying programs, and drug treatment programs in prisons do make a difference, according to Sherman.
Among the current projects at the new criminology center is a $3.5 million contract with the British government to analyze "restorative justice" for adult criminals.
The program involves meetings among crime victims, confessed offenders, and their friends and families to discuss the harm the crime caused and how the offender might repair that harm.
The criminology center's associate director, Jeffrey Roth, is leading a $2 million U.S. Justice Department study of youth violence and why it declined in the late 1990s.
In 1998, Sherman, who was then with the University of Maryland, was appointed by Timoney to lead an independent panel working to improve the accuracy of the Philadelphia Police Department's crime data. Sherman was named director of the criminology center last year.
The Jerry Lee Center, which offers a doctorate program in criminology, is located in the Fels Mansion at 38th and Walnut Streets.
Robert Moran's e-mail address is bmoran@phillynews.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
CHARLES FOX, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Former Attorney General Janet Reno signs autographs for Tayo Akingbe (center) and Viviana Acosta
after the criminology center dedication, at which Reno was awarded for her work in crime prevention.
Police Commissioner John F. Timoney accepts an award for crime prevention from Jerry Lee (center) and Lawrence Sherman (right).

Load-Date: November 15, 2001


End of Document