Terrorism war affects three college pranksters
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
May 16, 2002 Thursday,
Home Edition


Copyright 2002 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: DeKalb;
Length: 502 words
Byline: BEN SMITH
Body


The United States' war on terrorism has led to the detention of thousands of suspected terrorists and the overthrow of the regime in Afghanistan that harbored Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist organization.
In DeKalb County, it's led to the arrest of three college-age pranksters for slipping baby powder under the door of a fellow student.
Those arrested in the fake anthrax incident at Oglethorpe University were students Joel Garrison, Jessica Saulson and Steven Morgan.
AJC
Each was released from jail last week on unusual $27,550 cash-only bonds. That's five times more than Patrick Cuffy, a self-confessed participant in the murder of Sheriff-elect Derwin Brown, paid to get out of jail on charges stemming from a shootout at his home.
Two of the fake anthrax suspects spent at least one night in jail.
"We mainly here want to send a message that any type of terroristic activity, whether real or unreal, is going to be investigated or prosecuted to the fullest," said Moses Ector, director of DeKalb's 5-month-old Office of Homeland Security.
The incident forced the evacuation of a dormitory and a response by the county's hazardous materials unit, which can cost county taxpayers thousands of dollars each time it's called out.
It also marked the first arrests by the new Homeland Security office since its creation last fall, believed to be the first such office at the local level in the nation.
It's been relatively quiet for the new unit since then, but Ector said the four officers assigned full time to the office have been keeping busy gathering intelligence, running drills and developing response plans with other agencies in case of a terroristic attack.
Two of the four officers are working exclusively outside DeKalb on anti-terrorism task forces created by the state of Georgia and the FBI. Another serves as an administrator for the office and a fourth is an investigator working in DeKalb.
DeKalb taxpayers aren't paying any more than they would have if the office had never been created, county officials say. Ector's $75,764 salary comes from the public information officer post that was wiped out to provide for his job.
The section's other four officers are being paid what they earned elsewhere in the department. Ector, meanwhile, is hoping for approval of his two federal grant requests for $2 million to hire 25 additional officers and create an all-volunteer disaster response unit.
There has been some grumbling within the county's public safety department about diverting officers from units that investigate actual crimes to an office preparing for a terroristic event that may never happen.
But Ector says the threat of terrorism is real.
"I sincerely believe, based on all the information we're getting from all of our sources, that something else is going to happen eventually," Ector said. "All we can do is try to prevent it with whatever information we receive in advance, and to be prepared and respond as a first responder in the event we have a terroristic act in DeKalb County."

Load-Date: May 16, 2002


End of Document