Terror not back burner for Bam
Daily News (New York)
November 28, 2008 Friday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 286 words
Byline: BY THOMAS M. DeFRANK DAILY NEWS WASHINGTON BUREAU CHIEF
Body


WASHINGTON - The Mumbai carnage is a grim reminder to a President-elect determined to make economic recovery his first mission: The scourge of terror doesn't rest for Thanksgiving turkey or presidential transitions.
As Barack Obama sat down to celebrate a holiday dinner yesterday at his Chicago home, he had already spoken to Secretary of State Rice for an update on the terror attacks in India. He'd also received an intelligence briefing from U.S. analysts and telephoned the Indian ambassador Wednesday evening to express his sorrow.
Obama frequently reminds the country there's only one President at a time. Yet his predecessor, President Bush, has ordered full cooperation with the government-in-waiting given the unyielding threat of global terror.
"The President-elect is also receiving regular situational updates from the State Department Ops Center and the National Counter Terrorism Center," Obama spokesman Tommy Vietor said.
The Mumbai attacks are even more incendiary because they ratchet up tensions between archenemies India and Pakistan, who both have nuclear weapons and no use for each other. With Indian officials darkly asserting the attackers came from Pakistan - already a haven for Al Qaeda, Taliban fighters and other evildoers - Obama confronts an even more difficult time managing the discord in the world's most volatile region.
Obama and Bush aren't alone among world leaders on guard.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said the "outrageous" attacks in India would be met with a "vigorous response."
And Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni condemned the attacks, saying it was "painful testimony that terrorism is the main challenge" for the international community.
tdefrank@nydailynews.com

Load-Date: November 28, 2008


End of Document