Terror expert talks jihad, Middle East at U. South Carolina
University Wire
February 22, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 The Gamecock via U-Wire
Length: 635 words
Byline: By Ashleigh Orthen, The Gamecock; SOURCE: U. South Carolina
Dateline: COLUMBIA, S.C. 
Body


University of South Carolina students united last night in the Lumpkin Auditorium to hear a certain view on what will make or break the war on terror, which caught most students in complete bewilderment.
Walid Phares, author of "Future Jihad" and a terrorism and Middle East expert with MSNBC, CNBC and NBC, spoke Tuesday night on the difference between terrorism and jihadism.
"Mr. Phares gave his strong opinion on what the distinct difference between terrorism and jihadism actually is," said Kristen Pounds, a first-year elementary education student. "I would definitely call him an expert. He knows what is going on in this world."
Phares reiterated the distinguishing difference to be that terrorism is a strategy, a business and a policy. It crosses all nationalities and ethnicities. On the contrary, jihadism is a religion, a certain way of life in a country.
"Take Europe for example. Right now Europe is trying to figure out how to turn a believer into a suicide bomber," Phares said. "Terrorism is a prime example of this. It is a rational and planned procedure. It is not random killing, but rather systematic killing."
Phares told students the actual ways in which terrorists plan their killings. He said they plan according to politics, ideologies and confrontations.
"I was surprised when Mr. Phares told us that terrorism is systematic killing," Pounds said. "I have always heard that Sept. 11, 2001, was planned by terrorists, but I never actually believed it until Mr. Phares told us that it was planned years in advance."
"Terrorists are part of a movement that read and keep up with their international relations," Phares said. "They project and plan their policy. They are smart men who are part of an international movement. They are enemies of our enemies."
Phares said many Americans have misread jihadism because they are not educated about it. He said one misconception Americans have is that the jihads are under the terrorist movement.
"The 9/11 commission said 9/11 happened because of a failure of imagination. I disagree because it was a failure of education," he said.
Anthony Busch, a second-year business student and treasurer of Students Defending Democracy -- the group that brought Phares to campus -- felt strongly about how the Sept. 11 attacks on America happened because Americans were uneducated.
"I think (Phares) hit a very important concept because prior to 9/11, if you asked the average American on what is the thinking behind jihadism, the average American could not answer because they were uneducated," Busch said.
Busch thought it would be beneficial if Americans had someone to tell them the truth so they can better prepare for what might happen and work on changing the status quo and promoting more peaceful relations between different cultures.
"There are so many misconceptions in America and in the Middle East about one another," Busch said. "Part of the problem is misunderstanding. If we can understand what is going on and how it is defined, then taking the next step would be much easier. For a long time, we have been running around blind. There has been so much concentration on 'let's go in there and get them,' but we need to make sure these kinds of tactics are considered illegitimate."
To conclude his visit, Phares deemed it necessary that the students understood that it will take time for the war of terror to end and for Americans to become educated on jihadism.
"The Muslims are going to be the ones to make or break the war on terror," Phares said. "The education of Americans is going to start on the campuses. That is where everything is brewing."
Phares is a senior fellow with the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies in Washington, D.C.
For more information, visit www.walidphares.com or            www.futurejihad.com.
(C) 2006 The Gamecock via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 22, 2006


End of Document