TERROR THUGS' SICKO MESSAGE Graphic hints to more attacks on city
Daily News (New York)
April 3, 2012 Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 5
Length: 466 words
Byline: BY ROCCO PARASCANDOLA and SARAH ARMAGHAN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


A GRAPHIC featuring the New York skyline
and posted on terrorism websites blares a chilling message in bold letters: "Al Qaeda coming soon again in New York."
The NYPD and the FBI are scrambling to locate the source of the message and to figure out whether it's a credible threat or a sick taunt.
The 3-D images spotted on Al Qaeda Internet forums Monday show the letters scrawled across a city street, as a father and son stroll by in amazement.
"It's something we're looking into," said NYPD spokesman Paul Browne. "We're trying to determine the origins of it. We take all things like this seriously."
The graphic appeared on several Arabic-language sites including gulfup.com, Browne said.
Cops believe that it was posted by an Egyptian writer who regularly uses the
Internet to spread propaganda about the terror network. The logo was posted in the "artwork and design" section on that particular Web page, Browne said.
"We've done an analysis. He's not an American. We
're leaning toward (him being) an Egyptian, using Arabic, to create communications on this site," said Browne.
The feds are looking into the graphic as well.
"The FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force is aware of the posting and investigating its authenticity and origin," the bureau said in a statement. "The FBI takes all threats seriously, and there is no specific or credible threat to New York at this time."
The NYPD Intelligence Division's cyberunit is working to find the origin of the photo and if it is considered to be a credible threat.
Browne said there is no chatter or intel to suggest N.Y.C. is going to be hit, but the "obvious implications" of that logo raised concerns.
Police officials have said New York remains the top target of terrorists around the globe.
Cops have held off taking any active steps until they determine the intent behind the chilling message.
"Because we haven't found any link to anything operational, we're not changing our posture as a result of this," Browne said.
Authorities have kept watch of all modes of communication since the 9/11 attacks on the city and Washington.
In 2011, FBI Director Robert Mueller told Congress the terror network has become adept at spreading propaganda over the web.
"In the past 10 years, Al Qaeda's online presence has become just as detrimental as its physical presence," Mueller said. "Extremists are not limiting their use of the Internet to recruitment or radicalization; they are using it to incite terrorism."
Faisal Shahzad, a Connecticut man trained by
Al Qaeda overseas, parked a bomb-laden Nissan Pathfinder in Times Square, hoping to kill hundreds of people.
Shahzad told authorities that he was drawn to the cause by radical Muslim Anwar al-Awlaki.
Awlaki used the Internet to spread his hate speech and communicate with his followers.
rparascandola@nydailynews.com

Graphic

 
The NYPD Intelligence Division cyberunit is investigating whether photo posted on the Internet is a credible threat or just a sick taunt.

Load-Date: April 3, 2012


End of Document