Terrorism has no religion
Anchor: Rhode Island College
November 25, 2015 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SPORTS-3; Pg. 1
Length: 390 words
Body


Mary Fernandez
Anchor Staff
The past few years have been a tremendously horrific battle against terrorism for the country of France. Nearly a year after the mass shooting at the headquarters of Charlie Hebdo, a satirical French newspaper, several devastating attacks have rocked Paris to it's very core. In a time of such distress, it is most important that we remain understanding and refuse to punish those who aren't at fault for these attacks.
The Islamic extremist group, ISIS, is without a doubt one of the largest threats to France and many other countries, including the United States. This group hides behind it's religion to target innocent people and commit heinous acts of violence in the most extreme way. However, let us not confuse ISIS with the practicing Muslims of the world.
Shortly after the attacks, the internet ran amok with anti-Islamic propaganda. Fortunately, this only led to an outpouring of support for the Muslim community, and the slogan "Terrorism Has No Race," began to pop up everywhere in reply to all of the hateful comments.
While these acts of hatred are trying to bring down the world, it is important that we as a people remain humane. We stood behind the satirical cartoonists of Charlie Hebdo as they stood for the freedom of the press and freedom of speech, so shouldn't we stand behind freedom of religion as well? While we keep in mind that the terrorists who choose to cause harm to people are using their religion as an excuse, it should also go without saying that many practicing Muslims do not fall into that category. It is important that we do not infringe upon people who are practicing their religion in a non-violent and morally correct way.
Our faith in humanity is tested every day. When random acts of violence befall good people, it is weakened a little more each time. It's hard to understand why and how these things happen; some people may look to the news for answers, some to experts on these issues, and some to their religion, whatever they may believe.
Let us not blame an entire religious community for the actions of a few. They are not the ones committing these acts of pure evil. Instead, we should look to the future, and help heal a wounded country, and protect other innocent people from being harmed, including those who peacefully practice their religion.Follow and like us:

Load-Date: November 25, 2015


End of Document