TERRORISM VERDICT TIGHTENS AIRPORT SECURITY
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 03, 1995, Tuesday


Copyright 1995 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P2A
Length: 591 words
Body


NEW YORK (AP) - Americans paid for the terrorist convictions of 10
Muslim radicals with tighter security at airports nationwide Monday.
In the toughest measures since the Persian Gulf War, cars left
unattended at curbside were immediately towed, airline passengers had to
present picture identification with their tickets and security officials
were ordered to search suspicious cars.
James Kallstrom, chief of the FBI's New York office, was unsure about
the likelihood of an attack in retaliation for Sunday's convictions. But
he "absolutely" expected terrorist threats to increase.
"We're planning for the worst," he said.
Security also was tightened outside the White House, with pedestrians
blocked from Pennsylvania Avenue.
Transportation Secretary Federico Pena ordered the heightened airport
security hours after Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine others were
convicted of conspiring to blow up the United Nations, a federal
building in Manhattan, two tunnels and a bridge. They also planned to
assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
"Based on several current and future events, more security measures are
now warranted," Pena said.
He apparently was also referring to Pope John Paul II's visit to the
United States this week and the United Nations' 50th anniversary
celebration later this month. Security was boosted Monday at the United
Nations, said spokesman Joe Sills. He refused to give details.
Pena had already ordered a "heightened state of alert" on Aug. 9 for
transportation facilities nationwide after President Clinton called for
a review of airport security procedures.
At Newark International Airport, where the pope will arrive on
Wednesday, increased security was barely noticeable. But tighter
measures have been in effect there since Aug. 13, when federal officials
warned that Islamic radicals might be planning a car bombing at Kennedy
International Airport in New York City.
Security was perhaps tightest at Kennedy, where people without tickets
were barred from food concourses and newsstands. Outside the Korean
Airlines terminal, employees checked passports before allowing
passengers to enter.
"For the safety, it's good," said one passenger, Young Kum of New York
City. "For me, it's inconvenient."
At Dulles International Airport outside Washington, travelers on a New
York-bound flight had to produce picture identification when checking
bags at the curb and again when they picked up their seat assignments.
Dallas-Fort Worth Airport barricaded 1,600 one-hour parking spaces close
to the terminal. Sacramento Airport took the same steps and also asked
travelers to check in 90 minutes before their flights.
While the measures were stiff, they were not as stringent as during the
gulf war, when airports halted curbside check-in and barred people
without tickets beyond the metal detectors that lead to flight gates.
And the effort didn't even come close to normal security at other
airports around the world. In Britain, Italy and France, for example,
there is a military presence at airports and it is routine to search
passengers and luggage and require picture identification.
Despite the World Trade Center and Oklahoma City bombings, "Americans
still believe they are fairly immune to attacks," said Harvey Kushner,
a terrorism expert and chairman of the Department of Criminal Justice
and Security Administration at Long Island University.
Change has been slow because airlines are afraid of worrying passengers
and tighter security costs more money, he said.
"We're starting to join the rest of the Western world," he said, "but
we have a long way to go."

Load-Date: October 3, 1995


End of Document