TERRORISM? ACCIDENT?
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
July 19, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: A section; Pg. A1
Length: 688 words
Byline: By TED ANTHONY ; Associated Press writer
Body


EAST MORICHES, N.Y. -- The top federal safety official investigating the explosion of a TWA jumbo jet conceded today that the plane carrying 230 people may have been brought down by a criminal act.
Rain, wind and fog hampered efforts to recover more bodies, and relatives helped identify their loved ones.
At midmorning, the Coast Guard said divers trained to salvage the airliner had not yet gone down, but Gov. George Pataki said state and city police divers were in the water.
"Sonar has detected some large pieces of wreckage on the ocean floor and they're down there attaching hooks so it could be brought to the surface," Pataki told CNN. "Over the night they were able to check the radar records and identify more precisely the exact spot where the plane went down."
He also said there was new hope for a quick recovery of the plane's black boxes, which record the pilots' voices and information about the plane's operations.
A member of the National Transportation Safety Board met privately with grieving relatives of victims at a hotel near Kennedy Airport.
Dr. Leah Blumberg Lapidus, a Red Cross worker with disaster mental-health services team, said families spent the morning filling out forms and giving detailed information that will hopefully help identify their loved ones.
Richard Penzer, whose sister was on the flight, turned over dental records.
"Now we're getting to the real nitty-gritty," Lapidus said. "The concrete reality is extremely difficult. Having to fill out forms for family members brings the pain back."
Speculation about the cause of the crash kept returning to one word: terrorism.
"We will get to the bottom of this, whatever the bottom of this is," said James Kallstrom, assistant FBI director in New York.
"The possibility of a criminal act is a distinct one," Robert Francis, vice chairman of the NTSB, told CNN.
But appearing earlier on the NBC "Today" show, Francis said "there's no evidence of a crime yet."
Paris-bound Flight 800 exploded in a fireball Wednesday night about 14,000 feet above the Atlantic. All 212 passengers and 18 crew members aboard the Boeing 747 were killed in the nation's second deadliest air disaster.
The Coast Guard continued to search for bodies today; more than 100 -- some of them charred or mutilated -- had already been recovered.
Suffolk County Medical Examiner Charles Wetli said some victims showed evidence of drowning, which means they could have been alive when they hit the water. But the same victims were probably unconscious, or near death from the blast, he said.
Most victims died instantly from the "massive blunt force" of the explosion, Wetli said. "Death literally occurred in a heartbeat."
Divers with sonar equipment were trying to locate the plane's flight data recorders, which are equipped to emit a sonic beacon after exposure to salt water, Pataki said.
A joint terrorism task force of the FBI and New York Police Department was investigating, but officials insisted that implied nothing about the crash's cause.
There was some speculation that a surface-to-air missile, perhaps fired from a boat off the coast of Long Island, could have brought the plane down. But some officials sought to dispel that possibility.
"There's no American official with half a brain who ought to be speculating on anything of that nature," said White House spokesman Mike McCurry. "There's no concrete information that would lead any of us in the United States government to draw that kind of conclusion."
There were reports that radar detected a blip merging with the jet shortly before the explosion, something that could indicate a missile hit. But Pentagon officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said government analysts have studied several radar reports of the area and the blip was found to be a spurious signal.
President Clinton warned against jumping to conclusions. "I'm determined that we will find out what happened," he said, "but I want to urge all the American people not to jump to unwarranted conclusions about the tragedy."
The crash turned East Moriches, an eastern Long Island fishing town, into a jungle of emergency vehicles and TV trailers.

Graphic

 
ERIC SCHULTZ / The Associated Press * Lost friends: Young people hug after a prayer vigil Thursday at North Jackson High School in Stevenson, Ala., for five local residents killed in the crash of TWA Flight 800.

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document