TERRORISM BILL REVIVES MCCARTHY-ERA DANGER TO CIVIL LIBERTIES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 6, 1995, Monday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 7B; ANTHONY LEWIS COLUMN
Length: 689 words
Byline: Anthony Lewis Copyright New York Times News Service
Dateline: BOSTON
Body


One of the worst times for freedom in this country's turbulent history was the 1950s. Sen. Joe McCarthy, running wild, smeared Americans as guilty by association. The Truman administration, not to be outdone in Red-hunting, adopted a loyalty program in which people lost their jobs without knowing who had accused them of what.
The Clinton administration last month proposed a piece of legislation that in important respects would take us back to those times.
The legislation is called the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995. It is a massive bill, and it is possible to mention only a few provisions that raise concerns for civil liberties.
(1) It is a federal crime, today, for anyone in this country to supply funds for terrorist actions anywhere in the world. The new bill would greatly broaden the definition of the crime. It would be unlawful to give money for peaceful activities, such as running a hospital, to a group that has also committed violent acts.
The change is highly significant, as an example will indicate. During the years that Nelson Mandela was in prison, his African National Congress conducted sporadic guerrilla operations. The ANC was often called a terrorist group. But thousands of Americans gave money to support its political activities, which in the end have seen Mandela become South Africa's president. Such support would now be punishable by 10 years in prison.
Under the bill, the president could designate foreign organizations as "terrorist." It would then be a crime to give money to them even for entirely lawful activities, political or humanitarian - unless the giver first got a license from the Treasury. To get a license he would have to produce his books and records, and the organization's.
This part of the bill imposes guilt by association. Its mechanism is reminiscent of two ill-starred ventures of the 1950s: the attorney general's list of subversive organizations and the Subversive Activities Control Act, which was passed over President Harry S. Truman's veto and eventually was held to be unconstitutional.
(2) Present law calls for deportation of aliens who support any group "in conducting a terrorist act." That language would be broadened to cover support of lawful activities by a group that has committed terrorism.
The bill would then create a new procedure to deport "alien terrorists." The government could go to a special court, show probable cause to believe that an alien has supported "terrorism" as newly defined and ask the court to order his deportation on secret evidence not shown to him or his lawyer.
The government would offer a summary of the secret material, which would be given to the alien if the judge found it adequately informative. If the judge ruled that it was not, the government could go to an appeals court - which would decide the appeal without hearing from the alien's lawyer. Alternatively, the government could proceed without giving the alien even a summary if it said that a summary alone, or the alien's continued presence here, would "likely cause serious and irreparable harm to the national security."
Government lawyers to whom I spoke defended that one-sided procedure as necessary to protect secret sources inside terrorist groups. They noted that judges, not immigration officials, would make the final decisions.
The Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel found the bill constitutional. Its chief, Walter Dellinger, told me that it "incorporates significant due process protections that were not included in earlier versions of the legislation."
Lawyers sensitive to civil liberties, as Dellinger is, could only make such arguments, I believe, because they did not know the 1950s. Officials then often insisted that they denied a fair process to the accused because the national security was at stake - but in time, case after case was shown to have been built on lies. And judges, far from being vigilant, usually deferred to the executive's supposed expertise.
The bottom line of this bill reads, to me: "Trust us." That is the opposite of what the Framers of our Constitution thought they were creating: a government of laws, not men.

Load-Date: March 7, 1995


End of Document