TERRORISM FEARED FROM JAPANESE SECT; MEMBER SAYS GROUP CAN BE 'VERY VIOLENT'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 26, 1995, Sunday, THREE STAR Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 657 words
Byline: Charles Radin 1995, Boston Globe
Dateline: TOKYO
Body


The secretive sect being investigated in the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system is a potent addition to the ranks of international extremist groups.
While investigators are still trying to pull together thorough information about the group known as Aum Shinri Kyo, or Supreme Truth, many observers note ominous similarities between the Buddhist group and the Branch Davidians.
The latter is the Christian group whose holdout in a compound in Waco, Texas, ended in a fatal confrontation with federal authorities in April 1993.
"The (Supreme Truth) is similar to that one in Texas," said Hiroshi Takagi, professor emeritus of religious sociology at Toyo University. He compared the Supreme Truth's leader, Shoko Asahara, to David Koresh, the Davidians' self-proclaimed messiah.
"Shoko Asahara's blessing is a must," Takagi said. "It is a one-to-one relationship between each member and Asahara."
In a radio message broadcast from Vladivostok, Russia, on Thursday, Asahara called on Supreme Truth members to become his arms and legs and face death to implement the group's salvation plan.
A Western diplomat said the broadcast "set off all kinds of alarms" among countries concerned with international terrorism. The concern is heightened because the whereabouts of the Supreme Truth leadership is not known.
As the diplomat and other observers noted, Supreme Truth members are more numerous than the Davidians, have access to large sums of money and have branches in at least four major countries - Japan, Russia, Germany and the United States.
In addition, as massive raids on the group's facilities in Japan last week showed, Supreme Truth has stockpiled large amounts of chemicals, and may have the know-how to make them into dangerous weapons.
"The Supreme Truth is capable of being very violent," said one member, who insisted on anonymity out of fear of reprisals from other members. "In their thinking, it is possible to believe that people of high virtue are allowed to cause suffering to people of low virtue . . . because they believe that the worse they suffer, the better reincarnation they get."
The member said that, if Supreme Truth was involved in the subway attack, "it is possible that they will repeat it. And I would not be at all surprised, if Asahara died, if cult members would follow him by mass suicide."
In 1984, Asahara founded a yoga group that gradually became more religiously oriented over the next three years as the guru traveled to India and met with Hindu and Buddhist leaders. In 1989, it became a registered religious group in Japan, with the name Supreme Truth.
The group worships Shiva, the Hindu god of destruction and reproduction, and Asahara. They buy Asahara's hair to brew tea, and his bath water to pour over their rice.
"The basic theory is that if one engages in religious austerities, one should be able to attain absolute happiness in this lifetime," the Supreme Truth member said. "If one cannot make it, at least he can have a better reincarnation in the next life."
Asahara tells his followers that Armageddon, the final, decisive battle between the forces of good and evil, will take place in 1997, and urges followers to train themselves well enough to survive a disaster in that year. The member said such talk was used to drive adherents to ever greater austerities, which include hitting themselves and going without food.
The extent of membership and activities in the United States and Germany are not well-known; they are not believed to be great. But Supreme Truth seems to have broader appeal in Russia, where it claims 30,000 members.
Takagi, the Toyo University specialist on religious societies, said that both the strong emphasis on personal austerity among believers and the harsh publicity now being directed at the group could increase their unity and extremism.
"Because they live in a community, the more severe the austerities become, the more fanatic people become," Takagi said.

Load-Date: March 27, 1995


End of Document