TERRORISM FIGHT PITS PRIVACY, SAFETY: NEW X-RAY GUN CAN 'SEE' THROUGH CLOTHES, EVEN IN A CROWD
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
August 12, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P5A
Length: 592 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


SANTA MONICA, Calif. - The latest weapon against terrorism can see
right through you.
The Passive Millimeter Wave Imager can X-ray through clothing to
"see" a concealed weapon, plastic explosives or drugs. A police
officer can surreptitiously aim it into a crowd from as far away as 90
feet.
The new X-ray gun is becoming a symbol for an unlikely alliance of
civil libertarians and gun owners who fear the fight against crime and
terrorism may be waged at the expense of personal freedoms.
"I'm incredibly concerned," said John Henry Hingson, a past president
of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, meeting here
this past week. "The entire nation could become a victim of illegal
searches and seizures and the law is powerless to protect them from
these police abuses."
But in these nervous times following the the crash of TWA Fight 800
and bombings at the Olympics, Oklahoma City and the World Trade
Center, many Americans are now willing to trade some of their privacy
and civil liberties for greater security.
A poll last week by the Los Angeles Times found that a majority of
people - 58 percent - said they would curtail some civil liberties if
it would help thwart terrorism. Thirteen percent said it would depend
on what rights were at stake. The poll didn't ask people to single out
any rights.
The Clinton administration has proposed increased wiretapping and
other anti-terrorism steps, and is doling out research grants for
cutting edge anti-crime technology that once may have been intended
for only military use.
Last year, the National Institute of Justice awarded $ 2.1 million to
three companies to develop weapon detectors for airports, stores and
public buildings.
Two models are being developed of the Passive Millimeter Wave Imager,
a creation of Massachusetts-based Millimetrix Corp.
The larger one, about the size of a shoebox, is mounted on a patrol
car and pointed at the unsuspecting person. The gadget doesn't send
out X-rays; instead, it picks up electromagnetic waves emitted by
human flesh.
Anything that stands in the way of those waves - like a gun - or
anything that emits weaker waves - like a bag of cocaine or a plastic
explosive - will show up on a little screen in the patrol car.
Clothes emit no waves. Neither do walls, allowing the device to be
used from even outside a room.
A second model is a smaller, battery-operated version that an officer
can operate by hand, like a radar gun.
Millimetrix hopes to field test the larger model soon at a police
agency. Hingson argues the device runs roughshod over bans against
illegal searches and seizures. The law says police can stop and frisk
a person only when an officer has a "reasonable suspicion" the person
is armed or involved in a crime.
Millimetrix points out that while the imager can see through clothing,
it still leaves people some privacy. The device's display screen, the
company says, "does not reveal intimate anatomical details of the
person."
Chip Walker, spokesman for the National Rifle Association, noted that
devices like the imager threaten the legal rights of people in 31
states who are allowed to carry concealed weapons with proper
licenses.
"We certainly support efforts to disarm criminals, but we need to be
careful that we're not painting with too broad a brush here," he
said.
Walker said that as troubling as terrorism is, people may be playing
into terrorists' hands by giving up their privacy.
"One of the broader issues is that if we start giving up certain civil
liberties, that essentially means that the terrorists are starting to
accomplish one of their goals," he said.

Load-Date: August 13, 1996


End of Document