Terrorism response plan set long ago
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
October 01, 2001, Monday


Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
Section: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; Pg. 1
Length: 787 words
Byline: CHRIS TISCH
Body


A potential terrorist attack is a lot like a hurricane.
It lurks in the distance, its path never certain, its point of impact a potential mystery. Both can be destructive and deadly.
If a terrorist attack occurred in Florida, there likely would be few places where emergency workers such as firefighters and police officers would be better prepared to help people and restore order. Hurricanes are part of the reason why.
PREPARED?
Preparing for tropical weather keeps Pinellas County emergency officials warmed up for any type of emergency, whether it be a heavy-duty hurricane slogging through the Gulf of Mexico, or a terrorist blast at a local airport or shopping center.
When terrorist attacks rattled the nation Sept. 11, Pinellas emergency managers weren't scrambling in panic to get more people trained or to develop response strategies.
Training and procedures were already there.
"Nothing changed for us on the 11th as planners," said David Bilodeau, Pinellas County's director of emergency management. "We prepared for terrorism before this."
Bilodeau said terrorism always has been in the emergency responder's lexicon, though it probably was a less-perceived threat before 1993. After the World Trade Center bombing that year, more energy was devoted to preparing for a potential terror attack.
That accelerated again after the 1995 bombing in Oklahoma City. While terrorism prevention may be getting new attention nationwide after the 11th, how to respond to an attack has been detailed in a manual called the Pinellas County Terrorism Consequence Management Plan.
Pinellas County emergency personnel also have participated in numerous terrorism-response exercises. There was a tabletop bio-terrorism exercise in February 2000, followed by a full-scale drill this year. Planners also have held workshops on terrorism and attended a state terrorism summit in 1999.
"The rest of the country has always looked to Florida as being a state that has worked hard on mitigating the consequences of a disaster and having a very good emergency management system in place," said Pinellas sheriff's Lt. Scott Stiner, the department's disaster preparedness coordinator.
"Certainly there would be confusion, certainly there would be chaos, and it would be a very tragic thing to happen," Stiner said. "But the emergency managers and emergency workers of this county are prepared to handle that."
But police and fire department officials acknowledge there is no way to prepare for an attack like the ones on New York and Washington.
"New York, which had the nation's most sophisticated terrorist plan, was not prepared. They were overwhelmed," said Wayne Shelor, spokesman for the Clearwater Police Department. "If anything of that magnitude happened, anyone would be overwhelmed. But we're prepared to deal with anything in Clearwater that could happen."
Said Bilodeau: "Until you play the cards, you can't measure the response."
But the response to a catastrophic event in Pinellas County would not be handled in a piecemeal manner. A plan would kick in that would move as a whole body, with the brain being the Emergency Operations Center in Clearwater.
"There is a system of responses in place and there are certain triggers that push certain responses," said Pat McGinley, district chief for the Largo Fire Department. "There are no boundaries in Pinellas County. We're singing off the same song sheet."
Some police and fire officials said they might review their emergency plans but only as routine after such a terrible attack.
"We will probably be reviewing what training we had," said Jim Coats, chief deputy of the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office.
Bilodeau said it is important for residents to understand that Pinellas County government takes the threat of a terrorist attack seriously, and has put a lot of time and effort into making a plan.
Terrorists want residents to distrust the government, to flee in their car during a bioterrorism attack instead of obeying orders to seal off their house by turning off the air conditioner and putting wet towels under the doors.
Bilodeau said residents should have faith that their government is well-prepared for such an event and should listen to what they are told.
In addition, residents should always have enough items in their house - nonperishable food, water and supplies - to make them self-sufficient for at least three days.
But in the meantime, even those emergency planners who have images of explosions and chemical spills swirling in their brains offer this advice: People should live their lives as they did before, prepared for a potential threat but not living in fear and isolation.
"If you do that, you're doing exactly what they (terrorists) want you to do," Bilodeau said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, SCOTT KEELER; David Bilodeau, Pinellas County's director of emergency management, shown speaking to a group in 1998

Load-Date: October 2, 2001


End of Document