TERRORISM TAPE FOUND IN SEARCH ; EX-GUARDSMAN FACES CHARGES IN MILWAUKEE
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
July 29, 2000, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 2000 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Local/Wisconsin,
Length: 436 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: MILWAUKEE
Body


Federal agents who searched Milan Mititch's apartment last week found an ''Islamic Terrorism'' videotape and a photograph taken in Serbia of anti-American graffiti, according to an FBI affidavit made public Thursday.
Agents also discovered Mititch's passport, a disposable camera, Serbian language tapes, boots, black pants, a black watch cap, a shaving kit, an itinerary for a trip to Door County, a 22-inch upright overnight suitcase, a knapsack and maps of Serbia during separate searches of his apartment and storage locker this week.
Mititch, a former National Guardsman, is accused of breaking onto the 128th Air Refueling Wing National Guard air base here July 19 and scrawling profane graffiti on two buildings and ''Free Kosova'' on a satellite dish.
The intruder dropped two pipe bombs on the grounds as a security guard chased him away, court records say. The bombs did not explode.
Mititch, 35, of Milwaukee, is being held in the Ozaukee County jail on federal charges of trying to blow up government property and attempting to place a destructive device close to aircraft.
The guard said the intruder wore black and a rolled-up black ski mask, FBI Special Agent Jack Felske said in the affidavit. The guard later identified Mititch as the suspect, Felske said in court Tuesday.
Another witness who saw a suspicious man near the 128th described the man as wearing a short dark jacket, black pants, a dark hat and carrying a dark backpack, according to the affidavit.
The intruder did not wear glasses, as Mititch does, Felske said in the affidavit.
Mititch served for more than 10 years as a pilot in the National Guard. He resigned last year after his flying privileges were revoked.
He was arrested outside his apartment July 20, a day after the intruder broke onto the base.
A search of his apartment following his arrest found no bombs or bomb-building materials. A bomb-sniffing dog hit on a black bag in the back of Mititch's car, indicating the pack may have once held an explosive, Felske testified.
Mititch told FBI agents that he went with his mother to Door County July 18 and returned July 19. He said he took several pictures there with a disposable camera, the affidavit said.
He said the two took his mother's car to Door County and left his car in her garage, according to the affidavit.
He also stated he had taken numerous trips to Serbia in recent years, including in 2000, during which he took several photographs, the affidavit said.
Federal prosecutors are expected to bring Mititch's case before a grand jury, which will decide whether to indict. He could face up to 40 years in prison if convicted.

Load-Date: July 30, 2000


End of Document