TERRORIST FEAR DRIVES BRITISH SEARCH LAW; PARLIAMENT GRANTS POLICE STOP, FRISK POWERS TO DETER TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 7, 1996, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5B
Length: 483 words
Dateline: LONDON
Body


Parliament last week gave British police unprecedented new powers to stop and frisk people on the streets.
The government rushed the legislation through in a day, citing fears of possible Irish Republican Army terrorism during the Easter holiday.
The law, among other things, allows police to search anyone anywhere they designate, without necessarily having grounds for suspicion. A person declining to be searched can be arrested, jailed or fined.
The measure extends to police throughout Britain those powers previously confined to law enforcement authorities in Northern Ireland, where the majority of terrorist acts have occurred during the province's 25 years of sectarian violence.
It is one of several laws enacted here in the past two years that have increased police powers and curtailed traditional civil liberties in the interests of fighting crime. Britain, unlike the United States, has no bill of rights restricting the government's authority in matters concerning civil liberties.
The new law was partly motivated by the possibility of renewed terrorism on the 80th anniversary of the Easter Week rebellion against British rule.
There was little resistance in Parliament to the new law, which passed its main test in the House of Commons by a 244 to 21 vote, with supporters from the ruling Conservative Party stating that anyone who voted against them would be held responsible by the public for any terrorism over Easter. The government secured the cooperation of the leaders of the opposition Labor Party after providing them with private briefings.
However, considerable protest was voiced by rank-and-file opposition members over the government's rush and the limits that were imposed on parliamentary debate.
"This is government by decree," charged Liberal Democratic legislator Alan Beith. "If this is how we are going to run this place, we might as well go home."
Asked if he knew of a precedent for such haste, Tony Newton, the Conservative leader of the House, said he could not "immediately recall a precise precedent, but then I cannot recall precisely similar circumstances. Terrorism has been resumed in this country; the police have made clear their belief that they need these additional powers in order to have the maximum scope for combating further instances of that terrorism; and we are operating within a day or so of the Easter recess."
Peter Emery, among other Conservative members of Parliament, cautioned critics that "if certain outrages were perpetrated in this country between now and when the House returns and we had not taken these measures, we should be very much to blame."
Britain's Prevention of Terrorism Act, passed in 1974 to deal with Northern Ireland terrorism, already provides extraordinary government authority for searches and detention. Home Secretary Michael Howard, who presented the bill, said the new authority was meant to fill a gap in that law.

Load-Date: April 7, 1996


End of Document