TERROR'S FREE REIN;
REAGAN'S REMARKS SEEM TO ILLUSTRATE HOW A GANG CAN FOIL A SUPERPOWER
The New York Times
January 27, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk; Analysis
Length: 1000 words
Byline: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26
Body


The Reagan Administration, which has made fighting terrorism such a visible priority, now finds itself with no attractive options in the face of the kidnappings of three Americans in Beirut over the weekend.
Tucked in among tough words of outrage and resolve to make no concessions to terrorists, President Reagan conceded today that ''there is a limit to what our Government can do for Americans in a chaotic situation such as that in Lebanon.''
It seemed an illustration of what specialists on terrorism understand as the virtual powerlessness of a superpower in the face of a few determined men, lightly armed.
The United States has improved passive security systems and intelligence-sharing with foreign police departments, and these have thwarted some bombing, assassination and kidnapping plots.
Nothing Has Worked
But every method of retaliation against terrorists has failed or, worse, has provoked further terrorism. No action reportedly being considered by the Administration in the current case looks either effective or attractive. And some specialists worry that the problem of terrorism is receiving exaggerated attention at such high levels that it has distracted the United States from international developments of greater consequence.
In the last year, the Administration has tried just about everything in its arsenal against terrorism. It has unleashed weapons in air strikes against Libya and sold weapons secretly to Iran. It has reportedly pressed Kuwait to release imprisoned terrorists in exchange for American hostages in Lebanon. It has imposed economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure. And it has sought to apply judicial due process to the complex world of terrorists, now requesting West Germany to extradite a Lebanese, Mohammed Ali Hamedei, who was arrested this month. He is accused of helping to hijack a Trans World Airlines jet in 1985 and murdering a United States marine.
The latest kidnappings, after the taking of four West German hostages in Lebanon last week, were apparently intended to neutralize this device of extradition and trial. The Bonn Government of Helmut Kohl, whose Christian Democratic Party just won a narrower election victory than expected, was reported hesitating on the extraditing of Mr. Hamadei to the United States.
The range of options that could be considered by the Administration includes a continuing request for Mr. Hamadei's extradition despite the danger of further abductions or attacks, an approach to various countries or factions to work for the release of the eight Americans now held hostage in Lebanon, and, possibly, an acquiescence in a decision by Bonn to release Mr. Hamadei, should Mr. Kohl move in that direction.
 
'Well Within Tradition'
The last step, which the Administration denies it is considering, would be ''well within the tradition of the way in which these episodes are settled,'' according to Brian Jenkins, a terrorism specialist with the Rand Corporation, a research organization.
''We may reiterate our no-concessions policies,'' he said, ''but in fact, if one looks at the history of hostage incidents, in the vast majority American hostages are taken to make demands on other governments. In the majority of those cases, those governments make concessions.''
Another specialist, Robert H. Kupperman of Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies, opposed capitulation but expressed doubt that extradition and trial would be a deterrent.
''It's not going to make much difference and may even encourage further terrorism,'' he said. ''It is a psychological exercise. I think what this does is to give us a chance at counterterror theater.''
Terrorism is theater of a sort, as Mr. Kupperman, Mr. Jenkins and others have observed. It is a small act of violence magnified by the impact of the spectacle on a large audience. Consequently, the personal involvement of President Reagan and his White House staff in responses to these small acts tends to reinforce the process.
''It is extraordinary,'' said Mr. Jenkins, ''that you have groups the size of gangs dealing with heads of powerful nations as if they were co-equal heads of respective Mafia families. But the reality is that in these episodes, if they are in the headlines, they're in the Oval Office, and there's just no way of avoiding that. It becomes such a highly visible crisis. It becomes extremely difficult for the political leadership to remain invisible.''
 
Effect of U.S. Actions
One question being asked in Washington now is whether the current round of kidnappings was encouraged by the White House in selling arms to Iran and reportedly pressing Kuwait to release 17 Shiite Moslem prisoners accused of terrorism.
''It does make it a bit easier for everybody to cut a deal,'' Mr. Jenkins observed. ''Does it automatically encourage more kidnapping? That's harder to say. Does having a no-concessions policy deter terrorists from taking American hostages? Obviously not.''
Actions by Washington cannot be viewed as encouraging or deterring terrorism across the board, he added. ''Lebanon is driven by its own dynamics,'' he said. ''A lot of these things would, in my view, be taking place in Lebanon regardless of U.S. policy. This is not a binary contest here. The terrorists are a pretty diverse bunch. There are other things going on there apart from leverage over the United States. There's a tremendous amount of animosity directed against the secular West in general and Americans in particular.''
Meanwhile, Mr. Jenkins said, ''terrorism is becoming perilously close to being the centerpiece of American foreign policy and to a certain extent dictating the rest of foreign policy, and that's inappropriate.''
''That tends to distract us from the larger developments, which could have disastrous consequences in the long run for the United States in the Middle East.''
He mentioned the Iran-Iraq war, the re-establishment of the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon and the possible spread of Islamic fundamentalism.


End of Document