Terrorism, unemployment, stimulus package, oh my
University Wire
March 12, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 OSU Daily Barometer via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 530 words
Byline: By Justin Timmons, OSU Daily Barometer
Dateline: Corvallis, Ore.
Body


More incredibly intelligent legislation came out of Washington this week (I hope you can detect my sarcasm, because I'm laying it on pretty thick). Georgie Boy signed the Economic Stimulus Bill package this last week.
So, I know you're sitting in class asking yourselves "What's the dilly-yo with economic stimulus?" No worries, folks - that's why they pay me the big bucks … riiiiiigggghhht.
Oregon State U.
Bush is hoping that by signing this bill, it will help our struggling post-Sept. 11 economy. The bill will extend the amount of time that people can receive unemployment, as well as cutting taxes for businesses.
According to the L.A. Times, Bush said "We want a recovery that is broad enough and strong enough to provide jobs for all our citizens."
Really? Is that what we want? I sure am glad you're keeping us posted there, because I thought we would want a recovery that would leave us all without jobs and struggling to pay the bills.
I'm not sure if I understand all of the logic behind this bill. If you extend unemployment by 13 more weeks, a lot of people will just stayed unemployed 13 weeks longer.
Bush said that by extending the time people can stay on unemployment, it would give them a better opportunity to pay their bills and get caught up. If you want to give them a real opportunity to pay their bills, give them a better education so they can get a better job.
The "cutting taxes for businesses thing" that republicans always think is going to work is not the answer either.
The logic is that if you cut taxes, the business will have more money to use to hire people with. That doesn't really work though, because the everyday joe still isn't buying anything, since he's broke and is trying to get by on his unemployment check (which he will be getting for an extra three months).
Since the businesses still aren't selling jack squat, they're not hiring any more people than before. What really happens is that the CEO says, "Sweet, we get to pay less taxes so I can go grab another Lexus and that cute little number I saw at the Men's Warehouse."
How do they drop taxes for businesses anymore anyway? I think that with all the great accounting technique they have, each multi-billion-dollar corporation paid about $ 14 each to the federal government last year.
There's the Economic Stimulus Bill broken down for you. Now you have something great to talk about on your next date.
On a state level, Oregon is still working on attempting to balance its all too wacky budget. Since budget balancing is pretty much to most boring topic that I could write about, and about all that was covered at our own university for so long, we'll leave it with a simple "Please learn to add, and don't buy stuff you don't need. The people of Oregon thank you."
On our campus, we had some serious political battles taking place in this last week … wait, no we didn't.
I'd like to end this column the way that Bush has ended every speech he has given in the last six months, even the entirely unrelated economic speech we discussed earlier.
Terrorism is bad. America is good. We should stop terrorism.
(C) 2002 OSU Daily Barometer via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 12, 2002


End of Document