Terrorist burnout; IRA ENDS ITS WAR: Irish terrorists choose politics over violence -- again
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
August 1, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Opinion; Pg. A6
Length: 398 words
Body


When the Irish Republican Army declared that its war is over and it will lay down its arms, you could hear a sigh of relief across all of Ireland. But you also could hear mumbled skepticism.
The Irish, after all, have been here before. The IRA declared in 2001 that it had started to dismantle its arsenal. There was momentary hope that the future of Northern Ireland would be decided by politics, not killing. But those hopes were dashed.
The legislative assembly and the executive that were established under the 1998 Good Friday agreement to bring home rule to Northern Ireland have been suspended since late 2002. In the meantime, the IRA has been blamed for new crimes, including a grisly murder in Belfast last January and a spectacular bank robbery the month before.
Many people in Ireland and abroad who are sympathetic to the republican cause nevertheless have concluded that the IRA is nothing but a gang of thugs. People long ago grew weary and disgusted with the violence that has claimed 3,500 lives over the past 36 years.
So the question now, as it was in 2001, and in 1994, when the IRA declared a cease-fire, is: Will the IRA's actions match its words?
The unionist politicians in Northern Ireland and the governments of Britain and the Irish Republic are right to take a wait-and-see attitude. If, over the next several months, the international decommissioning organization can confirm that the IRA's vast arsenals truly have been put beyond use, that will put pressure on unionist politicians to rejoin the institutions of self-government in Northern Ireland.
Any permanent progress will depend on all parties, republican and unionist alike, renouncing violence. That includes IRA splinter groups.
In the meantime, the IRA experience could tell us something about the nature of terrorism itself. In Ireland, at least, terrorism seems to be burning itself out. It has lost credibility with the general population, in part because it did not achieve its ends, and in part because the governments of Britain, the Irish Republic and the people of Northern Ireland themselves have created a political framework to address genuine grievances.
If the IRA's war is over, it is because even most extremists in Ireland see that politics offers more hope for progress than violence. Unfortunately, it took more than three decades of terrorism, and resistance to terrorism, to persuade them.

Load-Date: August 12, 2005


End of Document