Terror Charges Thrown Out Against Park Slope Ice Cream Shop Owner
New York Sun (Archive)
May 12, 2004 Wednesday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NEW YORK; Pg. 4
Length: 529 words
Byline: By DAVID HAFETZ, Staff Reporter of the Sun
Body


Abad Elfgeeh walked out of a federal courtroom in Brooklyn yesterday praising his adopted country's legal system.
Mr. Elfgeeh, a Yemen-born former owner of a Park Slope ice cream shop, had just watched a judge throw out his guilty plea to conspiring to illegally transmitting about $22 million to overseas bank accounts.
"Justice is working the right way. I think America is still good," said Mr. Elfgeeh, who still faces trial on the same charges following the judge's decision. His plea was thrown out mainly on technical legal grounds.
But the ruling is a setback for prosecutors, who, in a series of letters to the court, have described Mr. Elfgeeh as having links to a major Brooklyn terrorism case.
Although Mr. Elfgeeh is not charged with supporting terrorists, prosecutors say he assisted Sheik Mohammed Hasa Al-Moayad, a prominent Yemeni cleric awaiting trial on charges of supplying millions of dollars to Al Qaeda prior to the September 11 attacks.
The question of whether Mr. Elfgeeh supported terrorism echoes similar questions in other cases involving Arab-American men in Brooklyn who have been linked to terror suspects but are accused only of financial crimes.
Prosecutors have written that Mr. Elfgeeh denied knowing Mr. Al Moayad but spoke to him on the phone and talked about transferring money to Mr. Al-Moayad in the past.
The number for Mr. Elfgeeh's store, Carnival French Ice Cream, allegedly was found in Mr. Al-Moayad's address book.
Prosecutors also have written that Mr. Elfgeeh was secretly taped suggesting how to send money through a Yemeni sheik, Abdullah Satar, who the government believes has raised funds for Osama bin Laden.
But a government-produced sentencing report, obtained yesterday by The New York Sun, contradicts prosecutors' assertions.
"There appears to be little, if any, evidence to suggest that Elfgeeh had any role in financing terrorism or any knowledge that the money he was transmitting was used to finance terrorism," the report says.
A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Brooklyn disputed the report, which was written by the probation department, saying it gave an "incorrect rendition" of how FBI agents view the case.
Prosecutors say that from 1995 to 2003 Mr. Elfgeeh led a hawala operation, which involved the unlicensed transmission of money to Yemen, China, and other countries. Hawala networks, which are often used by Muslim immigrants, trouble prosecutors because they leave a murky paper trial.
Mr. Elfgeeh says he ran a money transfer operation out of Carnival, a business he co-owned with his family from 1982 until it was closed after his arrest, but he denies any wrongdoing or links to terrorists.
"That's in their imagination," said Mr. Elfgeeh, who is free on $5 million bail and is under house arrest. "I didn't do anything wrong."
A father of seven, Mr. Elfgeeh has lived in Brooklyn since the early 1970s. His lawyer, Frank Hancock, said Mr. Elfgeeh mistakenly was caught up in a terrorism investigation and that the entire case boils down to not having a license to transfer money.
Mr. Elfgeeh said prosecutors had told him that if he didn't plead guilty, other members of his family would be arrested.

Load-Date: May 12, 2004


End of Document