Terrorism Damage Bill Is Passed By House
The New York Times
December 19, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 553 words
Byline: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER
Body


The House approved a government insurance program on Tuesday that commits  Washington to paying for most of the damage in the event of a terrorist attack in the next seven years. The vote was 360 to 53. 
  The legislation, already passed by the Senate, is expected to be signed shortly by President Bush.
  It continues a program that was created in 2002 in response to the attacks on the World Trade Center in September 2001 and was renewed at the end of 2005. It requires insurers to pay for the first $27.5 billion in damage and then 15 percent of the remaining costs up to $100 billion. 
  The White House had initially threatened to veto extension of the terrorism insurance program, contending that the insurance industry had regained its strength after paying more than $31 billion in the World Trade Center attacks and did not need government support. But it relented after the Senate scaled back initial legislation endorsed by the House. 
  The House had sought more generous financial terms for the insurance companies and wanted the program to be extended for 15 years to  assist further long-term planning for construction and other businesses.
  The Senate met the House roughly halfway on the duration of the program; the only other expansion  it permitted was to provide coverage regardless of whether a terrorist attack was carried out by foreigners or American citizens. Previously, an attack carried out by an American was not covered. 
  The insurers had insisted that without government backing they would again refuse to sell coverage for terrorist attacks, as most of them did after the World Trade Center attacks. Banks, real estate and construction companies, hotel chains and other businesses said the economy would slow drastically if they were unable to buy terrorism insurance.
  With election campaigning well under way, neither the Democrats nor the Republicans wanted to risk being blamed for making a struggling economy worse. The economic pressure broke the impasse, 13 days before the government insurance program was to have expired. 
  Arguing for wider benefits for the insurance companies on Tuesday, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, Democrat of New York, said the House risked ''disrupting U.S. financial markets'' unless it compromised.
  The Consumer Federation of America, which often finds itself at odds with the Bush administration, agreed with it on terrorism insurance. J. Robert Hunter, director of insurance for the consumer group, said that after several years of record profits, the insurers had more than enough cash to pay for any attack short of one with nuclear or chemical weapons, which are not covered at present. 
  The insurers contend that terrorism presents too many variables for them to be able to calculate and price the risks and that some attacks could overwhelm them.
  On the House floor, Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, said insurers and victims of terrorism should not bear the expense of attacks. Providing terrorism insurance, he said, was part of national defense.  
  As for how businesses could defend themselves against terrorism, Mr. Frank responded, ''What are you going to do, put antiaircraft guns on the roof?'' This was not a case of markets' failing, he said, but ''a case of stepping up for national defense purposes.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 19, 2007


End of Document