Terror in Jerusalem
The Forward
April 1, 2011


Copyright 2011 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. 6
Length: 338 words
Body


It had been more than three years since the last terrorist  bombing targeting civilians in Israel  until a blast caused  by an explosive pipe placed next to a telephone pole near  the bus station in central Jerusalem on March 23 ended that  period of relative quiet. Suddenly, the familiar images appeared  across our screens, of shattered streets, frantic rescue efforts,  harsh denunciations. And the familiar sorrow of lives lost and  irreparably injured.
But the Middle East has changed dramatically during those  three years, something that seems to have escaped the cowards  who hold onto the discredited belief that bombing civilians in  the heart of a cherished city will serve their cause. How can they  ignore the obvious? Besides being morally wrong, this sort of  terrorism simply does not work.
As of this writing, no one has claimed responsibility for the  attack that has killed one and wounded at least 30, but whoever  the culprits, they clearly have willfully ignored the powerful  lessons from elsewhere in the region. First in Tunisia, then in  Egypt, nonviolent uprisings drove despotic leaders from office.
The efficacy of peaceful protest is not wishful thinking  but historical fact. A major study published in 2008 comparing  the outcomes of hundreds of violent insurgencies with those of  major nonviolent resistance campaigns from 1900 to 2006 found  that 53% of the nonviolent movements succeeded, compared  with only 26% of the violent insurgencies.
Maria J. Stephan and Erica Chenoweth, who conducted  the study, reason that nonviolent movements are more effective  because they are broad-based and enjoy more domestic and  international legitimacy, in part because they are perceived to  be less extreme. Violent reactions to peaceful protest, meantime,  can backfire, as former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak  learned the hard way.
The Palestinian people deserve their own, viable state. But  40 years of terrorism hasn't brought them any closer, and the  uprisings of 2011 only reinforce that message.

Load-Date: March 30, 2011


End of Document