Terrorism war spawns silence
USA TODAY
September 23, 1998, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; COVER STORY
Length: 1862 words
Byline: M.J. Zuckerman
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON -- As the specter of terrorism grows, a quiet debate
pitting the need for secrecy against public accountability is
taking on new urgency here:
Should the government take steps to inform and warn Americans
about the true nature of the terrorist threat against them? Or
should it continue to cloak what it knows to fight against what
officials predict will be a long, difficult and unconventional
war?
In fact, when President Clinton called for greater international
cooperation to fight terrorism in a speech this week at the United
Nations, it marked the first official administration comment on
the subject since Aug. 20, the day the United States unilaterally
fired $ 70 million worth of cruise missiles at a terrorist camp
in Afghanistan.
In the weeks after the strike, few details made their way into
the media to explain the action.
Today, counterterrorism experts and administration officials say,
the American public sits squarely in the cross hairs of terrorists'
death threats. But most people are uninformed.
"It's one of the inherent dilemmas in a democratic society: balancing
the needs for security against the need for public information
and liberty," says Raphael Perl, a senior analyst on terrorism
and international relations at the Congressional Research Service.
There's a growing view, however, that as the likelihood of public
sacrifice rises with U.S. action against terrorists, so does the
need to educate people.
"It certainly seems to me that we're in for something we're not
ready for as a nation," says Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn.
"Everyone's against terrorism," adds Sen. Jon Kyl, R-Ariz.,
chairman of a leading Senate subcommittee on terrorism policy.
"What you need is a strategy and part of the strategy needs to
be to explain to the American public what this is all about."
The administration, with congressional support, made counterterrorism
a priority beginning in 1995.
Since that time, FBI Director Louis Freeh recently told the Senate,
the FBI's counterterrorism budget has increased from $ 118 million
to $ 286 million, including the creation of an FBI Counterterrorism
Center to direct a vast expansion of agents -- now 2,646 -- overseas
and at home dedicated to terrorism issues.
And while the federal government acknowledges that $ 6.7 billion
will be shared by dozens of federal agencies to fight terrorism
in 1999, it remains unknown how much of the $ 28 billion intelligence
community budget is earmarked for counterterrorism efforts.
A few successes of these efforts are well-known. For example,
a plot to blow up New York City landmarks and assassinate United
Nations leaders by Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman in 1995 was foiled
before it could be carried out, as was a scheme to assassinate
former President George Bush. Authorities claim each had the backing
of terrorist warlord Osama bin Laden.
Other incidents have been averted without public notoriety.
"There is not a sufficient appreciation of the kind of threat
we face," says Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Ind., a 17-term congressman
who has seen classified intelligence and law enforcement briefings.
"There are a good many times that we've skirted a disaster. It's
not hundreds of times, but it's certainly several."
The threat of bin Laden
Lately, the United States has viewed the terrorist threat as embodied
by bin Laden.
"When you talk about a war on terrorism . . . you're talking
about a war on only one man -- Osama bin Laden," says Vincent
Cannistraro, a former director of the CIA Counterterrorism Center.
Bin Laden is the self-acknowledged terrorist financier and accused
choreographer of the Aug. 7 bombings that killed 262 people at
two U.S. embassies in East Africa. He has declared war publicly
on Americans on four occasions since 1996, and the U.S. cruise
missile strike Aug. 20 was aimed directly at a training camp where
officials expected him to be in residence.
No one doubts that bin Laden, a Saudi native stripped of his citizenship
and driven from his home for his uniquely militant reading of
Islamic faith, is a serious threat to Americans.
Ramzi Yousef, convicted mastermind of the 1993 World Trade Center
bombing, has told authorities that he is a product of bin Laden's
training camps in Afghanistan and that a failed plot directed
by Yousef to blow up a dozen U.S. jumbo jets over the Pacific
was financed by bin Laden's al Qaida organization.
A sealed federal indictment in New York charges bin Laden with
supporting plots to assassinate President Clinton, the Pope and
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Yet the administration has closely held its evidence against bin
Laden. Officials who have received classified briefings say the
evidence proved that bin Laden was plotting new assaults on Americans,
thus triggering the U.S. missile strikes.
"I don't buy that the public has a right to know everything,"
says L. Paul Bremer, who served the Reagan administration as ambassador-at-large
for counterterrorism. "That's what they hired Congress for."
Though Bremer's view is widely shared by experts on terrorism,
he and others acknowledge the need to raise the public's understanding
of its risk.
"There's always a need for government to provide information
to its citizenry," says Joseph Goldberg, an expert in terrorism
and counterterrorism at the National Defense University in Washington,
D.C. "It's a legitimate question and always a judgment call:
Is the public being provided enough information?"
In the current confrontation, the federal government has divulged
no more than absolutely necessary.
Plans for the missile strikes against bin Laden's training camps
in Afghanistan and a Sudanese pharmaceutical plant suspected of
being linked to his interest in germ warfare were kept within
an unusually tight group of six senior presidential advisers.
Secretary of Defense William Cohen says he was the only person
on his immediate staff aware of the plan.
A handful of congressional leaders and top law enforcement officials,
including Freeh and Attorney General Janet Reno, were briefed
just hours before the attack.
Only after the assault did the administration inform its allies
and begin to explain to the public the need for the attack and
the dangers inherent in a long war on terrorism.
Clinton made two televised statements on the day of the air strikes.
But details have all but dried up since then.
It's an approach that some officials say is growing increasingly
dangerous.
"You build the groundwork for action over a long period of time.
You do it by statements of policy," says Richard Kerr, deputy
director of the CIA during the Gulf War and now a consultant on
intelligence and law enforcement issues. "Just to tell people
the information in the end, after the fact . . . is never all
that successful."
Terrorism as a part of life
Striking the right balance between the need for secrecy and public
accountability is never easy.
"While they know they have to inform the public, government also
needs to maintain secrecy to be effective," says counterterrorism
expert Perl.
"Further complicating matters, there are serious questions about
how to release information without panicking the public."
For example, "The public needs to be aware of the fact that we're
moving into an era when casualties from terrorism will become
part of daily life, just like car accidents or street crime,"
he says. "And there's going to be some loss of civil liberties
as well, in the name of national security."
In Northern Ireland, Israel and many European nations, where terrorist
attacks have been part of life for decades, police have greater
powers of search and seizure than in the USA.
William Webster, former director of both the FBI and CIA, says
he supports the public's need to understand that there's a significant
threat, but argues for preserving the secrecy of methods used
to uncover terrorist plots.
"I don't think the public is out in the cold," Webster says.
"What needs to be protected is not the reality of the threat
or the extent of the threat, but our ability to anticipate it."
That would mean administration officials should be more forthcoming
with evidence to support strikes against terrorists -- but avoid
revealing how they obtained the information.
As a rule, Webster is fond of saying, "If you talk too much about
your intelligence, you lose it."
For example, he notes, many of the allies who assisted in rounding
up Iraqi terrorists during the Gulf War never would have helped
if they thought Saddam might someday learn of their role.
It's what the intelligence community calls protecting "methods
and procedures."
"It is sometimes difficult to make a case in public to support
an action based on sensitive information because of our obligation
to protect our sources and methods," says Anya Guilsher, a CIA
spokesperson. "Whenever possible, we try to share information
with the U.S. public to help them understand the basis of U.S.
government actions, while at the same time trying not to jeopardize
our ability to collect intelligence vital to U.S. interests."
It was the CIA's Counterterrorism Center that developed evidence,
examined by only that tight circle of senior administration advisers,
to justify attacking the Sudanese pharmaceutical plant last month.
Recently, however, senior intelligence officials have acknowledged
that their evidence may have been less than conclusive: Soil samples
taken from outside the plant contained traces of EMPTA, a chemical
used in nerve gas and, perhaps, some insecticides. The Sudanese
deny the plant was used to make components of chemical weapons
and say it was a pharmaceutical factory.
"Is the level of secrecy justified? Perhaps in this instance,"
says William Owens, former vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff during the Bush administration.
"This is a difficult road we're headed down," he says. "It's
easy for government to justify that the public doesn't have a
need to know: To share information would ruin the success of the
program. That was the nature of the (secret) programs during the
Cold War years that were generally successful because of the lack
of public knowledge.
"But generally, we have to find ways to share this information
and remember our commitment to a free democratic society," says
Owens, now vice chairman of Teledesic Corp., which is designing
and deploying a network of satellites to serve a future generation
of Internet services.
It's widely agreed that the burden of educating the public belongs
to the nation's political leaders, especially the president.
"Officials of both parties need to be out making the case to
the public . . . to educate the public" of the dangers and the
fights that are ahead, says Bremer, now an executive with Kissinger
Associates, a New York-based international consulting firm.
Making that case, however, is complicated by recent blunders by
the intelligence community, including failing to warn against
the imminent threat of India and Pakistan conducting nuclear weapons
tests three months ago and continuing adjustments in the explanation
for attacking the plant in Sudan.
"We need to play it close to the vest and trust those in charge
to carry out their responsibilities," says Sen. Thompson. "But
we're unfortunately in a time when people are suspicious of government.
So we may need to justify more than we're used to doing to have
the support of the American people."

Load-Date: September 23, 1998


End of Document