Terrorism prevails in war against it
University Wire
January 29, 2002


Copyright 2002 The Daily Cougar via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 473 words
Byline: By Mary Carradine, The Daily Cougar
Dateline: Houston
Body


Media coverage during the past several months has been absolutely saturated with news on the Sept. 11 attacks, the current U.S.-led war against al Qaeda, and the collapse of Enron. Even before that, we spent the entire summer reading about Gary Condit's affair with a missing D.C. intern just because the American press was that desperate for stories.
Meanwhile, it has been Sept. 11 nearly twice a week for the people of Israel. This past week saw three terrorist attacks on innocent Israeli citizens. Bat mitzvahs and typical teen-age hangouts such as nightclubs and pizzerias have even been targeted in past violence. Yet we all sleep soundly at night and turn a blind eye to the constant news of "five dead" or "12 wounded."
U. Houston
How have we managed to detach ourselves from this terrorism? Why does loss have to be our own before we notice its impact?
Admittedly, it's hard to find unbiased news sources regarding the current Middle Eastern conflict. But hypothetically, survey five of your friends and see if any of them know why the Israelis and Palestinians are even fighting.
Most of them won't, because the social norm has never been to care about the violence in the Middle East. We grew up thousands of miles away, assuming that our culture was correct in labeling the fighting parties as foolish and crazy fanatics unworthy of our interest and concern.
We are exact reflections of this country's lax policy on the Middle Eastern crisis. We don't know about it because our administration is too self-absorbed to address it.
At best, President Bush will verbally condemn Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat as we slide money and weaponry under the table to the Israelis.
He'll call our current war a "war on terrorism" but that couldn't be further from the truth.
Terrorism struck three times this past week, and this administration has done nothing but verbally warn Yasser Arafat in that same feigned melancholic tone it has used in the past.
Our current government remains stagnant in any hopeful effort to transform the idea of peace into a reality for the Middle East.
The American media doesn't want to get its hands dirty either. Our government is obviously pro-Israeli, but is it worth stirring up the beast that is public opinion? We'd rather talk about Enron, where the real tragedy is 5,000 Americans with job skills currently out of work. Sure, they're not getting paychecks, but they certainly aren't dead.
We don't have to remain uneducated. Not to even attempt to understand why the Israelis and the Palestinians are fighting is sheer vanity.
We will mourn and honor the people who lost their lives on Sept. 11, but why? Because they were U.S. citizens?
Human life and death should recognize no citizenry. We do not wave national flags in this hopeful afterlife.
(C) 2002 The Daily Cougar via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 29, 2002


End of Document