TERRORISM IN THE COURTROOM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 9, 1991, SUNDAY, LATE FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 338 words
Body


Picture a system of justice in which foreigners could be arrested and jailed indefinitely while the government tried to deport them for alleged terrorist activities. Picture a trial where defendants and their lawyers would not be allowed to hear the prosecution's evidence, and the basis of the government's case would never have to be made public.  It's not a pretty picture, but it could come true under the crime bill proposed by the Bush administration. Such a system of injustice should never become law.  In the furor over gun control, limited rights of appeal for death row inmates and an expansion of crimes that could lead to execution, the proposal for secret deportation proceedings has gained little notice. But as the plan receives more attention, its blatant unfairness becomes clear. ''There's a Kafkaesque tinge to all of this,'' said California Rep. Don Edwards, a Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights.  The Justice Department, of course, loves the plan and pledges to use it only in the most extreme cases. But the government's record of covert operations and secret machinations makes such promises ring false. The old circular argument - we know something that makes our case true, but we can't say what it is because it would jeopardize how we learned it in the first place - should work no longer.  The goal of the special tribunals is to root out terrorists and deport them, but the definition of terrorism is vague, ready to be filled in to apply to anyone who advocates positions that the government doesn't like at the time.
The Supreme Court has long held that foreigners who face deportation from the United States are entitled to the legal protections in the Constitution.  Those protections include being faced by your accuser and learning what evidence exists against you. Such bedrock principles of American justice shouldn't be smashed because of some ill-defined threat of terrorism or the obsession with secrecy that has overtaken the Justice Department.

Load-Date: October 13, 1993


End of Document