Terrorists should not go unpunished
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 5, 1989, Saturday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; COLUMNS; Pg. 19A; COLUMN
Length: 672 words
Byline: GEORGE F. WILL
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


WASHINGTON - V. S. Naipaul watched Teheran volunteers, full of    revolutionary fervor, loading hot bread on open trucks in winter for    transportation to flood victims. "It was frenziedly stuffed - as    though it was a matter of life and death - into plastic sacks and    dumped into a truck with blankets and clothes. Wouldn't this bread have    turned to stone by the time it got to Khuzistan? But the bread didn't    matter. The gesture and the excitement mattered."
 
     We are back making gestures at murderous gesturers, saying things    we do not mean to people who do not care what we say. Worse, some    American voices are sincerely deploring, with fine impartiality,    terrorism and Israel's measures against it. Robert Dole, senator from    Kansas (which is not lapped by angry waves of Islamic fanaticism),    accuses Israel of acting irresponsibly.
    One person, Samuel Lewis, former U.S. ambassador to Israel, gets it    right: "Israel is at war. We are not." Right on both counts.
 
     There are so many cameras, microphones and pens hovering over    poised notepads, that episodes like this unleash a torrent of talk. In    Washington, the intensity of talk about a problem is usually inversely    proportional to the number of ideas for doing something about the    problem.
 
     At times like this, a president must perform a cathartic function,    expressing the nation's anger. But he also must conspicuously proceed    with the normal agenda of governance, lest terrorists be magnified, and    for that reason multiply.
 
     Terrorism, the gesture of the weak, is a tragedy for individuals    but not a crisis for nations. It conquers no territory, topples no    regimes. Terrorism's goal is maximum commotion with minimal risk of    retaliation. So until the president finds a way to retaliate, he is    right to minimize the commotion: Call the pope but proceed with the    barbecue, which he did.
 
     But the Bush administration bears a burden of proving two things:    that we do not know Iran's involvement in the killing of Col. Higgins,    and that we lack the ingenuity and military assets to make Iran pay. If    we do not know and lack those assets, people should be fired by the    battalions for failures of intelligence and procurement. If we do know    and have appropriate assets and still do not retaliate, we are    violating the principle of "statistical morality." "     In an essay in Science magazine pertaining to public policy about    punishment of drunken driving, Daniel Koshland defines statistical    morality as the precept that a policy that may cause some individuals    immediate harm will result in greater benefits for more individuals in    the future. For example, when whooping-cough vaccine is given to    1-million children, about 100 will have serious reactions, some fatal.
 
 In Britain, public anxiety about this caused withdrawal of the    vaccination requirement - until whopping-cough deaths soared. The      requirement was reinstated.
 
     Or: When criminal sanctions designed to deter are not imposed by    courts, deterrence is weakened and it is a statistical certainty that    some people are thereby condemned to become crime statistics - victims.
 
     Every time terrorists go unpunished, innocent people are by that    fact condemned to death. Conversely, the U.S. raid on Libya cost lives    but probably saved more.
 
     Crude utilitarianism - the greatest benefit for the greatest number    - is often not a morally acceptable policy, even if one can predict the    allocation of the future benefits of an action. But in the lives of    nations, policies often must rest on just such crude calculations.
 
     Making such calculations is a cruel burden on a president. But no    one is compelled to be president. And too many Western leaders ignore    the warning of Trollope's crusty old Duke of Omnium: "There is such a    thing as a conscience with so fine an edge that it will allow a man to    do nothing."
 
  Washington Post Writers Group       

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document