Terror Case Has Lawyer With Several Distinctions
The New York Times
February 22, 2014 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1326 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


When the terrorism trial of Sulaiman Abu Ghaith, a son-in-law of Osama bin Laden, begins next month in Manhattan, his defense team will include one lawyer with a particularly interesting background.
Zoë J. Dolan is proficient in Arabic, has lived in the Middle East and is the only member of the defense team with a government security clearance, entitling her to review classified discovery materials in the case and attend classified hearings.
But Ms. Dolan, 36, has another distinguishing attribute: She is transgender, an aspect of her personal life that she says she has not raised with Mr. Abu Ghaith or any other client.
''I think my clients in criminal cases just want the best lawyer for their case,'' Ms. Dolan said in an interview. ''It doesn't matter whether that person is a man, woman or an alien.''
She declined to discuss any aspect of Mr. Abu Ghaith's case.
Ms. Dolan, who has a criminal and civil practice in New York and Los Angeles, has not hidden her gender transition from friends, relatives and colleagues.
She raised it in an interview last year with a women's empowerment website, which she links to on her own site, and she has mentioned it in applications to join panels from which lawyers are drawn to represent indigent defendants. She also noted it a few years ago while representing a terrorism defendant in Brooklyn, during interviews for her security clearance.
''It occurred to me in the process,'' she said, ''that they might be concerned that if I had a secret it would render me susceptible to improper foreign influence -- in other words, that I could be blackmailed.''
Ms. Dolan said she was relieved to find that her ''relationships with other lawyers, referrals and career development all seemed unaffected'' by her decision to disclose her background.
Mr. Abu Ghaith faces charges including conspiring to kill Americans and providing material support to terrorists. In May, Judge Lewis A. Kaplan of Federal District Court told the defendant that it appeared that none of his current lawyers would be able to obtain a security clearance, and thus his legal team would lack ''access to classified material that may be significant to your defense.'' The lead lawyer, Stanley L. Cohen, then brought Ms. Dolan into the case.
Though Ms. Dolan does not mention her gender transition to clients, she said, she believes that her background has helped her better represent them, particularly those who have lived on the margins.
''While I may not know specifically what it's like to be in their shoes,'' she said, ''I do understand what it means and how it feels to be marginalized.''
The number of openly transgender lawyers in the United States is perhaps in the hundreds, said M. Dru Levasseur, director of the Transgender Rights Project at Lambda Legal, who knows Ms. Dolan and calls her a ''fierce advocate.''
Other lawyers agree. ''She's a trailblazer -- she is who she is, and she doesn't dance around it,'' said Martin R. Stolar, who has defended clients with Ms. Dolan. ''It's just a wonderful attitude.''
Diversity in the bench and the bar has long been a widely held goal; in New York, for example, Senator Charles E. Schumer, whose office recommends judicial appointments to the White House, has regularly focused on adding women and minorities, including gay men and lesbians, to the federal bench.
But how diversity plays out in individual court cases is less frequently examined. Two professors of legal ethics said that Ms. Dolan had no obligation to inform her clients of her gender transition and that they had no right to know about it.
''The Constitution guarantees the effective assistance of counsel only,'' said Stephen Gillers, of New York University School of Law. ''Sexual identity, like race, ethnicity and religion, has no bearing on whether a lawyer will be effective.''
Rebecca Roiphe, of New York Law School, added that even if a client believed such information was crucial in deciding whether to retain a lawyer, ''I still don't think it's necessary to reveal that piece of information.''
''There is no requirement that you reveal everything about your personality in your representation,'' Ms. Roiphe added, ''because your personal and professional identities are distinct.''
Still, lawyers and even judges have at times chosen to raise aspects of their beliefs or identity that might otherwise remain hidden to clients or defendants.
Mr. Stolar said he once represented a defendant in Brooklyn who had been charged in a subway bomb plot and had been recorded making anti-Semitic statements.
''I told him my background was Jewish,'' Mr. Stolar said, and asked if that would be a problem in terms of their ability to communicate and mount a defense; the man said no.
One lawyer, Elizabeth M. Johnson, spoke of representing a 26-year-old man who was about to be sentenced for online sexual solicitation of a minor. She said in court that her client had been a teenager in a small, conservative town when he ''realized that he was gay,'' making him severely depressed and contributing to his first and only suicide attempt.
Judge J. Paul Oetken, one of the few openly gay federal judges in Manhattan, responded that the case was ''particularly difficult'' for him and indicated that he identified with the difficulties the defendant faced growing up.
''I grew up in a small, conservative place,'' Judge Oetken said, a transcript shows. ''I came out, or struggled with coming out, when I was going through high school and college.''
Recalling the judge's comments, Ms. Johnson, said, ''I thought that was a remarkable thing for the judge to do, and I hoped that it was something that would help my client to move forward.''
Ms. Dolan said an experience in Egypt served as a catalyst for her decision to enter law school. In 2001, she was at the scene of a notorious police raid on a floating discothèque on the Nile in Cairo, in which dozens of gay men were arrested and charged with engaging in immoral acts or religious offenses. One friend was detained, she said, and she has not heard from him since.
By the time she entered the University of California's Hastings College of the Law in 2002, Ms. Dolan had already begun the process of ''physical transition,'' she said.
''But I was still male bodied at that time and presenting as male,'' she added.
Ms. Dolan said she had a difficult first year, when she was taking hormones and felt ''deflected'' from her studies.
''She soldiered on, kept faith in herself, did what she had to do,'' said her first-year torts professor, Marsha Cohen, who is a close friend.
By graduation in 2005, Ms. Dolan said, she had ''fully transitioned to female.''
''I think my main concern was that I would lose friends and lose career prospects,'' she recalled, ''and within weeks after my transition had become public, I had more friends and more support in the law school than I'd ever experienced in my life.''
Ms. Dolan has since worked in law firms and more recently as a sole practitioner. She has represented clients in drug, racketeering, securities fraud, terrorism and other kinds of cases.
James C. Francis IV, a Manhattan federal magistrate judge for whom Ms. Dolan was an intern during law school, said he was struck by how she had become engaged in legal areas related not to transgender rights but to criminal defense, including high-profile terrorism cases.
''That's not necessarily better work in any abstract sense,'' Judge Francis said, ''but it illustrates a comfort with doing something that is outside of her political identity.''
Ms. Dolan acknowledged that as her background becomes more widely known, clients who learn about her gender transition may reject her as their lawyer. ''Based on my experiences in personal life,'' she said, ''I think it is very likely to happen at some point.''
''But,'' she added, speaking generally and not addressing any pending matter, ''I believe that standing up to be counted is more important than business, and more rewarding in the end.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/22/nyregion/terror-case-has-lawyer-with-several-distinctions.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Zoë J. Dolan (A15)
Zoë J. Dolan said she had not raised her transgender background with her client Sulaiman Abu Ghaith. His terrorism trial, in Manhattan, is scheduled to start next month. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NICOLE BENGIVENO/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (A16)       

Load-Date: February 22, 2014


End of Document