TERRORISM CHANGING ROLES OF FBI, HEALTH AGENCIES;
   CDC AND LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS WILL MEET LATER THIS MONTH TO SORT OUT THEIR FUNCTIONS.
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
September 8, 2002 Sunday, ALL Editions


Copyright 2002 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL/WISCONSIN; Pg. C1; Series
Length: 501 words
Byline: Tom Sheehan State government reporter
Series: Sept. 11: A Year Later
Body


The threat of terrorism is blurring the traditional lines between law enforcement and public health agencies, and officials are struggling to adjust.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, for example, has traditionally been a source of technical and scientific support. But the Sept. 11 terror attacks and subsequent anthrax cases changed that narrow definition, said Michael Sage, deputy director of Terrorism Preparedness and Response for the CDC.
Sage, who headed the CDC's investigation of anthrax cases in New York last year, was in Madison Wednesday to address members of a special state committee studying Wisconsin public health system's ability to respond to terrorism and public health emergencies.
Although Sage provided a federal perspective, state and local governments will have to deal with some of the same issues.
At the federal level, the CDC is becoming more an agency of first response, while the FBI is more thoroughly considering how its investigations may affect public health, particularly with bio-terrorism, Sage said.
"We've worked a lot of disasters and a lot of outbreaks in the past, obviously. But we never really thought about how to deal with something that was intentional. We really never played in that role before the last year or two, and it's changing the way we have to work and interact with law enforcement," Sage said.
Unlike a bombing, a bio-terrorism threat can evolve slowly and be difficult to discover. The FBI may have to rely on the public health community to reveal such an attack, Sage said.
"The potential with public health is that you don't know you've had an attack until people start ending up ill at the hospital are diagnosed with something," Sage said.
Because of the threat of terrorism, the FBI will have to look beyond pure law enforcement and the CDC beyond providing just technical support. In the New York anthrax investigations, CDC epidemiologists were paired with FBI agents in an unprecedented scenario, Sage said. "There were quite a few lessons learned and quite a bit of angst on some people's parts about doing that because you get into all the issues of medical privacy, and now you've got the FBI involved. These things take quite a bit of time to sort out and work through because it's a whole change in mindset for us," Sage said.
CDC and FBI officials will gather later this month in to discuss some of those issues, Sage said.
The CDC also is developing a strategy for a national public health mutual assistance network to provide quick and effective responses to a terrorism events without needlessly duplicating efforts. The agency will encourage states to plan and work together through grant formulas, Sage said. The network could function similar to mutual aid agreements used by fire departments, he said.
"One of the things that I found amazing in New York was the firefighters from all over the country participating under the direction of the New York Fire Department. That doesn't happen in public health," Sage said.

Load-Date: September 10, 2002


End of Document