Terrorism charge in hate stab
Daily News (New York)
March 28, 2017 Tuesday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 7
Length: 281 words
Byline: BY SHAYNA JACOBS AND GRAHAM RAYMAN NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


THE BALTIMORE man who admitted selecting a black man at random and stabbing him to death in Midtown was charged with murder as an act of terrorism Monday.
James Jackson, 28, emerged from a holding cell in tan jail fatigues with his pants tucked into white tube socks.
Portia Clark, who grew up with Jackson's victim Timothy Caughman, looked on with her husband, Carl Nimmons.
"Tim Caughman did not deserve to die like that," she said.
Cops say Jackson (photo) took a bus to New York from Baltimore on March 17 specifically to kill black people in a place where he thought the act would get greater media attention.
Jackson allegedly stabbed bottle-collector Caughman, 66, Monday at 36th St. and Ninth Ave., plunging a sword with an 18-inch blade into his chest.
In an exclusive interview with the Daily News on Sunday, Jackson acknowledged committing the crime, and said he wanted to discourage white women from getting romantically involved with black men.
"I didn't know he was elderly," Jackson told The News, adding he rather would have killed "a young thug" or "a successful older black man with blonds . . . people you see in Midtown. These younger guys that put white girls on the wrong path."
The former soldier, who served with the Army in Afghanistan, said he'd intended for the killing to be "a practice run" - the first step in a larger plan with many more casualties.
Jackson faces life in prison without parole if convicted of the charges filed by the Manhattan district attorney's office Monday. In addition to the terror charge, he faces illegal weapons possession charges.
He's due to be arraigned in Manhattan Supreme Court on April 13.
His lawyer Sam Talkin declined to comment.

Graphic

 
[James Jackson]

Load-Date: March 29, 2017


End of Document