Terrorism task force to expand
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 10, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P6C
Length: 293 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


WASHINGTON - A federal task force created after the 9/11 to track down and paralyze the finances of groups that bankroll terrorism will nearly double in size to stay on top of an ever-changing money trail.
Operation Green Quest, a multi-agency task force led by the U.S. Customs Service, will expand over the next couple months from about 240 agents and analysts to roughly 460, Customs Commissioner Robert Bonner said in an interview Thursday.
As terrorist financiers are forced out of the traditional banking system, they are turning to riskier ways to move money, including smuggling cash and cigarettes; trafficking of diamonds, gold and drugs; and siphoning money from charitable donations, law enforcement officials say.
Roughly $ 124.5 million in financial assets belonging to terrorists groups, including al-Qaida, have been frozen worldwide since the attacks, according to the Treasury Department, which plays a lead role in the effort.
Bonner said that as part of the task force's expansion, the number of dedicated field offices will go from one - currently in New York City - to 15 around the country. New York will get another office and Detroit will be home to two field offices.
In Washington, there will be teams to oversee investigations into specific financial methods that can used by terrorists, such as charities, bulk-cash smuggling, and hawalas, which are informal money transfer networks popular in the Middle East and other parts of the world, Bonner said.
Customs also plans to expand its overseas operations, Bonner said. The service has about 30 overseas offices and plans to add three new locations, two of which would be in the United Arab Emirates - Dubai and Abudhabi - important money-exchange centers in the Middle East, Bonner said.

Load-Date: January 10, 2003


End of Document