Terrorism's Worldwide Toll Was High in 1996, U.S. Report Says
The New York Times
May 1, 1997, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 583 words
Byline: By TIM WEINER 

By TIM WEINER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 30
Body


International terrorist attacks killed 311 people worldwide last year, one of the highest death tolls recorded, the State Department said today in its annual report on political terror.
Nearly 200 of those deaths were the work of the Tamil Tigers, a separatist group in Sri Lanka, the report said.
Once again, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, the Sudan, Syria and Cuba are on the State Department's list of nations that sponsor such attacks. But the report said that only Iran, by assassinating dissidents abroad and supporting violent groups, was directly linked to any of the terrorist bombings and killings last year.
No international terrorists struck the United States last year, the report said; it made no mention of the midair explosion of T.W.A. Flight 800 off Long Island in July, which killed 230 people. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is still not sure what caused the disaster.
And no attack anywhere in the world last year came close to the April 1995 explosion that killed 168 people at a Federal office building in Oklahoma City. A United States Army veteran with far-right views is on trial in Denver in the case.
"Domestic terrorism," the report said, "is probably a more widespread phenomenon than international terrorism today," taking a far higher toll in nations like Sri Lanka, Algeria, India and Pakistan as well as the United States.
Still, 24 American citizens died in international terrorist attacks last year. Nineteen were killed in the June 25 truck bombing at an American military base near Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. Five more died in bombings and shootings in Israel.
The Dhahran attack remains unsolved. "Eventually, we are going to get to the bottom of this," John Lewis, the F.B.I.'s assistant director for national security, said today.
The 296 international terrorist incidents recorded in 1996 represented a 25-year low, and most were minor blows against commercial targets that killed no one. The deadliest attacks were carried out by the Tamil Tigers of Sri Lanka. The group carried out the biggest bombing of 1996, an explosion in downtown Colombo, the capital, that killed 90 people in January, and it blew up a commuter train in July, killing 70.
The second-deadliest group of 1996 was the Islamic Resistance Movement, better known as Hamas, whose most militant factions want to establish an Islamic Palestinian state in place of Israel. A Hamas suicide bomber blew up a bus in Jerusalem on Feb. 25, 1996, killing 26 people, including 3 Americans. A second struck a Tel Aviv shopping mall a week later, killing 20.
By the State Department's definition, nations cannot commit acts of terrorism, only "subnational groups or clandestine agents" who carry out "politically motivated violence" against innocents. If a nation's air force bombs civilians, that is not terrorism; if civilians blow up a plane, it is.
But nations can sponsor terrorist groups and agents. The seven nations on the State Department's terrorism list are barred from receiving United States military and economic aid or importing American-made items that can be used for military purposes.
Still, the report said, there was no evidence directly linking Cuba, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, the Sudan or Syria to acts of state-sponsored international terrorism in 1996. Only a Presidential order can remove a nation from the terrorism list. Only one nation -- Iraq -- has ever been removed. That decision, in 1982, came while Iraq was at war with Iran, and it was reversed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.

Load-Date: May 1, 1997


End of Document