Terrorism; Business perspective
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
February 15, 2007, Thursday


Copyright 2007 Charleston Newspapers
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. P4A
Length: 478 words
Byline: Gzedit
Body


"WHY DO they hate us?" writes financier Richard Vague, chief of American Respect. "By and large, they don't. The very inference that all Muslims hate us is reminiscence of the mantra of the 1950s and 1960s that all communists hated us. That, too, proved to be largely false."
Vague is former chairman and CEO of FirstUSA Bank, a company he co-founded. He is also co-founder and CEO of Juniper Financial, one of America's fastest-growing credit card companies.
Vague calls himself a "pragmatic" conservative. He backed George W. Bush for president in 2000, raising a lot of cash for his campaign. By 2004, Vague opposed the Iraq war and wrote in a New York Times commentary that "the extreme poverty of most citizens of Middle Eastern countries" is the primary seed of terrorism.
These days, Vague divides his time between running his new Juniper firm and working to persuade conservatives and businessmen that the war in Iraq has already produced "increased world terrorism." On top of that, he says, it's bad for business.
He published "Terrorism: A Brief for Americans," a 48-page primer on the roots of terror tactics throughout history. It stresses the need of all people for respect and economic power, and suggests ways to make peace in parts of the world that have known only war for generations.
"Nothing can excuse the horrors of terrorism," Vague writes. "Yet terrorists are not born. They are created by external forces."
More than 50,000 printed copies of his brief have been ordered to distribute to business groups and chambers of commerce.
Vague does not oppose promoting democracy in the Middle East. "The mistake was pushing for it militarily in Iraq," he says.
He believes a fair settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is one of the "under-recognized keys to reducing global terrorism."
"We must withdraw from Iraq, where our presence fuels the insurgency. We must participate - with a greatly reduced presence - in a solution crafted by Iraq itself."
Those who promote a "vision of Islam as the Evil Power" follow in the footsteps of conservative ideologues during the McCarthy Era and the Vietnam War, he argues.
President Bush's troop surge "will only inflame the situation," he adds. U.S. funds should pay for economic development, not continuing military ventures.
Vague's American Respect group is a nonprofit organization that believes terrorists should be pursued and stopped, but that more balanced solutions would be more successful. The United States should lower its military profile and utilize more international coalitions, for example. Countries need help in building their economies and larger middle-class populations who make for stable countries.
"War will not rid the world of terrorism. Force does not subdue, it enrages," Vague concludes. This conservative, history-minded businessman has analyzed President Bush's Iraq nightmare well.

Load-Date: February 15, 2007


End of Document