Terrorist attacks will be harder to prevent
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 6, 2019 Sunday


Copyright 2019 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL WEEKLY; Pg. K13
Length: 290 words
Byline: AMANDA ERICKSON
Body


Terrorism was down in 2018 - a rare bright spot in geopolitics this year. In fact, data collected by the University of Maryland shows that the number of terrorist attacks has dropped every year since 2015.
That may not hold in 2019.
Experts attribute the decline, particularly in Europe, to the Islamic State losing its footing. The group "suffered formidable losses in Syria and neighboring Iraq," said Brian Levin, head of California State University's Center for the Study of Hate and Extremism. "They lost much of their virtual space as well." The network has struggled to recruit and train followers, and lacks the capacity to pull off large-scale attacks.
Other extremist groups haven't faded away, though - far from it. Instead of operating in large groups, extremists often gather online, connecting and affiliating with micro-causes and meeting like-minded zealots, researchers say.
These extremists are often motivated more by local or personal issues, such as Brexit or the incel movement, than by religious wars or international jihad. In 2019, those issues could lead to a global rise in the kind of attacks we've seen recently in the United States, like the killing in October of two black shoppers at a Kroger in Kentucky: violence carried out by individual domestic actors. This decentralized style of terrorism is particularly challenging for authorities to predict and stop.
"I don't expect as many attacks in the name of ISIS," said George Washington University professor Neil Johnson, who studies the behavior of extremists on social media. "But it wouldn't surprise me if there is an increase in the number of lone-wolf attacks that come seemingly out of the blue."
Erickson writes about foreign affairs for The Washington Post.

Load-Date: January 6, 2019


End of Document