Terrorism detectors net radiation patients
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 4, 2002, Wednesday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 443 words
Byline: By Al Baker New York Times News Service
Body


NEW YORK -- In one case last spring, a man being treated for an overactive thyroid gland was stopped by the authorities on two occasions while at a subway stop at Pennsylvania Station. In another case about a month ago, a woman who had undergone a diagnostic heart study was stopped while trying to drive out of Manhattan through a tunnel.
In both cases, the people involved had been treated with radioactive materials. And in both cases, doctors said, they were stopped by law enforcement officers armed with radiation detectors used to track possible terrorists.
Such reports are flowing into doctors' offices, physicians in the metropolitan region and elsewhere say.
The expanded use of radiation and metal detectors to guard against potential terrorism after Sept. 11 has prompted many unintended security stops, whether of cancer patients undergoing radiation treatment or of travelers with prosthetic limbs or pacemakers passing through airport metal detectors. Drug dealers have been known to mark their goods with radioactive material as a way of tracing it.
"This is all along the law of unintended consequences," Fred Mettler, the chairman of radiology and nuclear medicine at the University of New Mexico, said on Tuesday. "The question is, 'How does the poor patient convince the law enforcement authorities that they are truly patients and not terrorists?"'
To better prepare their patients for security episodes relating to their radioactive treatment, and to keep them from being mistaken for those who would do harm, doctors in New York are drawing up guidelines telling patients how they should react. Doctors say Police Department officials have recommended that patients carry letters from their doctors to avoid confusion, but the police said that they had issued no broad recommendations and that such letters would not suffice to resolve the matter.
Countless patients being treated for a variety of ailments may have had radioactive isotopes injected into their bodies and can therefore set off alarms at borders, bridge crossings or transportation hubs or trigger the attention of authorities who have portable radiation detectors.
The woman stopped recently near the tunnel contacted her physician, Dr. Chaitanya Divgi, an expert in nuclear medicine in the radiology department at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. "She called me from the cell phone," said Divgi, who could not identify the tunnel but added that he spoke with the officer and that the woman was later able to pass through. "Doctors are talking about patients being stopped, about security alarms going off after patients are being administered radio pharmaceuticals."

Load-Date: December 4, 2002


End of Document