Testimony: Consulate in Libya always at risk; Security chief says concerns dismissed
USA TODAY
October 11, 2012 Thursday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 1234 words
Byline: Donna Leinwand Leger, USA TODAY,
Body


A former U.S. security official in Libya testified Wednesday that the State Department withdrew security officers from the country as violence from armed militia groups grew worse over the summer.
"The security in Benghazi was a struggle and remained a struggle throughout my time there," Army Lt. Col. Andrew Wood said in testimony at a hearing of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
The Republican-led committee was meeting to investigate the deaths of U.S. Ambassador to Libya Christopher Stevens and three other Americans on Sept. 11 at the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi. Among the testimony's revelations was that Stevens had requested additional security because of the danger and, according to a former chief of security, was denied.
"The security conditions in Libya remains unpredictable, volatile and violent," Stevens wrote.
The hearing followed assertions Tuesday by the State Department that it never concluded that the attack arose from protests over an American-made video ridiculing Islam.
Even so, administration official U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice gave a series of interviews five days after the attack in which she asserted the attack was a spontaneous reaction to the film. White House spokesman Jay Carney also blamed the video days after the incident.
State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland also refused for days afterward to say the assault on the compound was a terror attack, saying the matter was still being investigated. The administration now says it was a terrorist attack.
State Department officials said that security levels at the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, were adequate but that the compound was overrun in an "unprecedented" attack by dozens of heavily armed extremists.
"We had the correct number of assets in Benghazi at the time of 9/11," said Charlene Lamb, the deputy secretary of State for diplomatic security in charge of protecting American embassies around the world.
Five security agents were on the compound Sept. 11, Lamb said.
Noting that four Americans were killed, Carney said Wednesday that in hindsight, "there is no question that the security was not enough to prevent that tragedy from happening."
According to documents made public at the hearing, Stevens sent a cable Aug. 2 to the State Department asking for 11 additional bodyguards to be added to the roster of 24 to replace temporary-duty officers who would be leaving within the next month.
"Due to the level of threat in regards to Crime, Political Violence and Terrorism, Post feels this is an appropriate number of LES security personnel needed to further Embassy diplomatic outreach missions," Stevens wrote.
"Violent security incidents continue to take place due to the lack of a coherent national Libyan security force and the strength of local militias and large numbers of armed groups," Stevens wrote. "Host national security support is lacking and cannot be depended on to provide a safe and secure environment."
Wood, the former head of a 16-member U.S. military team in Libya, testified that the attack was "instantly recognizable" to him as terrorism. A former Special Forces soldier who commanded the Site Security Team in Libya from Feb. 12 until Aug. 14, Wood said the attacks on the nearby British Embassy and International Red Cross made it apparent that "we were the last target on their list."
"The security in Benghazi was a struggle and remained a struggle throughout my time there," Wood said. "The RSO (regional security officer) struggled to obtain additional personnel there but was never able to attain the numbers he felt comfortable with."
Eric Nordstrom, the former chief security officer for U.S. diplomats in Libya, testified that it was clear when he arrived in Libya that the  government was too weak and fragmented to provide consistent diplomatic security. The State Department, he said, recognized this weakness.
"Libyans wanted to help, but they had very limited capabilities to do so," Nordstrom said, adding that his pleas for more security were ignored.
Nordstrom said his requests for more security were blocked by a department policy to "normalize operations and reduce security resources."
Nordstrom said he sent two cables to State Department headquarters in March and July requesting additional diplomatic security agents for Benghazi, but he received no responses. He said Lamb wanted to keep the number of U.S. security personnel in Benghazi artificially low even as the State Department recognized the increasing hazards.
---
Timeline of Libya attack
April-June: Several security threats occur against U.S. installations in Libya.
July: An American real estate developer releases on YouTube a 13-minute trailer for Innocence of Muslims, an anti-Islam video.
Sept. 11: Egyptians attack the U.S. Embassy in Cairo. An embassy statement condemns "the continuing efforts by misguided individuals to hurt the religious feelings of Muslims," referring to the video.
News reports say the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, has been attacked.
GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney releases a statement condemning the attacks and criticizing the Obama administration for blaming the American filmmaker instead of the attackers.
Obama campaign assails Romney for his remark. The White House repudiates the original U.S. Embassy statement.
Sept. 12: Ambassador Christopher Stevens is reported dead with three other American diplomats in the Benghazi attack.
U.S. intelligence agencies conclude internally the incident was a planned terror attack likely by al-Qaeda affiliates, several news outlets report.
Sept. 13: Victoria Nuland, spokeswoman for the State Department, says the department "determined that the security at Benghazi was appropriate for what we knew."
White House spokesman Jay Carney says, "The protests we're seeing around the region are in reaction to this movie."
Sept. 14: Carney denies the White House was aware of "any actionable intelligence indicating that an attack on the U.S. mission in Benghazi was planned or imminent."
Sept. 16: U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice says the attacks were spontaneous eruptions over the anti-Islam video, "not a pre-planned, premeditated attack."
Mohammed Magarief, president of Libya's general National Congress, says "no doubt that this (attack) was pre-planned, predetermined."
Sept. 17: Nuland declines to say when asked whether the attack was a terror attack.
Sept. 19: Director of National Intelligence Matthew Olsen describes Benghazi as "a terrorist attack on our embassy."
A diary belonging to Stevens found in the burned-out consulate indicates Stevens was concerned about security threats.
Sept. 20: Carney, when asked about Olsen's testimony, says the assault on the consulate is "self-evident" it was a terrorist attack.
In an interview with Univision, Obama is asked whether the attack was the work of terrorists. He says his administration  cannot say for certain.
Sept. 25: When asked about terrorism on ABC's "The View," Obama says, "We don't have all of the information yet."
In a speech to the United Nations, Obama condemns the attacks and the American filmmaker, saying, "A crude and disgusting video sparked outrage throughout the Muslim world."
Oct. 1: Nuland declines to address reports that embassy officials in Libya were seeking additional security in Benghazi and denied.
Oct. 2: Carney declines to discuss reports of requests from diplomats in Libya for more security. 

Load-Date: October 11, 2012


End of Document