TESTIMONY IN TERRORISM TRIAL HELPS CIGARETTE DEALER GET PROBATION/ MAN HAD PLEADED GUILTY OF TRANSPORTING COUNTERFEIT CIGARETTE TAX STAMPS - Correction Appended
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A20
Length: 511 words
Byline: Peter Shinkle/ Of The Post-Dispatch
Body


A man who admitted smuggling $700,000 worth of counterfeit cigarette tax stamps into St. Louis, then agreed to testify for the government in a terrorism trial, got a sentence of probation Thursday.
Lebanese-born businessman Haissam Nashar, 37, testified in federal court in North Carolina in 2001 against a man accused of using the illegal cigarette trade to fund Hezbollah, the group blamed for such acts as a 1981 bombing that killed 241 U.S. soldiers in Beirut, Lebanon.
On Thursday, Nashar walked into court in St. Louis to be sentenced by U.S. District Judge Charles Shaw for transporting the counterfeit cigarette tax stamps here. Prosecutors had filed a motion under seal seeking leniency.
Barry Short, Nashar's attorney, said his client got probation "because of his outstanding service to our country" for his testimony that "led to convictions of persons for funding a terrorist organization."
Short added, "He was not a part of Hezbollah, and never participated in Hezbollah activities. He just happened to know people in the illegal cigarette business who used that business to fund the organization."
Assistant U.S. Attorney David Rosen, who handled the prosecution, declined comment.
In the 2001 trial in Charlotte, N.C., Nashar testified against brothers Mohamad and Chawki Hammoud.
He testified that after a bombing in Lebanon in 1996, Chawki Hammoud asked him for money for Hezbollah. He also testified that another cigarette dealer told him that the brothers had collected money for Hezbollah.
A federal prosecutor in North Carolina described Nashar's testimony as "very powerful."
The brothers were convicted on charges including cigarette smuggling, racketeering and credit card fraud. Mohamad Hammoud was convicted of aiding Hezbollah. He was the first person convicted under a 1996 federal law that made it a crime to give material support to a foreign terrorist group. He was sentenced to 155 years in prison.
Chawki Hammoud was never formally charged with supporting Hezbollah, although five other defendants were.
Nashar acknowledged after his arrest that his involvement in the illegal cigarette trade began in about 1995.
He ran a convenience store in a Lebanese immigrant community in Charlotte, N.C. Nashar said he smuggled cigarettes from North Carolina, where the state imposed a 50-cent tax per carton, to Michigan, where the tax was $7.50. Evading taxes meant a profit of $7 per carton.
Police said that by 1999, Nashar was buying $200,000 worth of cigarettes per month. Federal law prohibits anyone except shippers or wholesalers from moving large volumes of cigarettes over state lines.
Nashar was en route to California on Oct. 5, 1999, when his plane landed at Lambert Field and a St. Louis County police officer noticed he was so nervous that he was sweating. When the officer asked to look in his luggage, he discovered 24 rolls holding a total of about 800,000 California tax stamps, each with a face value of 87 cents.
In March last year, Nashar pleaded guilty in federal court here to one count of transporting counterfeit cigarette tax stamps.

Notes

Reporter Peter Shinkle:/ E-mail: pshinkle@post-dispatch.com/ Phone: 314-621-5804  
Correction

This story about a man convicted in St. Louis of transporting counterfeit tax stamps gave the wrong year of the bombing in Beirut that killed more than 200 U.S. soldiers and sailors. It was 1983.

Correction-Date: November 19, 2003

Load-Date: November 20, 2003


End of Document