Tex. 'terrorism'
Death penalty eyed for massacre susp
Daily News (New York)
August 5, 2019 Monday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2019 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 2
Length: 481 words
Byline: David Boroff

New York Daily News
Highlight: As woman places flowers beside memorial at El Paso, Texas, Walmart, authorities vowed to seek death penalty for suspected gunman Patrick Crusius (inset below).MARK RALSTON/AFP/Getty Images
Body


It was "domestic terrorism," authorities said of the massacre of 20 people at an El Paso Walmart, and they vowed to seek the death penalty for the suspected gunman.
Patrick Crusius, 21, was charged with capital murder and was being held at the El Paso County Jail.
Authorities said during a news conference Sunday that they are treating Saturday's mass shooting as a "domestic terrorism case," and U.S. Attorney John Bash said federal hate crime charges are likely to be filed against Crusius.
At least 26 people were wounded in the shooting, one of the deadliest in U.S. history.
A law enforcement source told CBS News that Crusius told police he acted alone and that he was motivated by his anger toward Hispanic immigrants.
"El Paso is a resilient city," Mayor Dee Margo told reporters. "This will not define us."
The rifle used in the killings was purchased legally, police confirmed Sunday. The Associated Press reported that the gunman opened fire in an area that was filled with as many as 3,000 people during the back-to-school shopping season.
Police Chief Greg Allen told reporters that openly carrying a rifle in Texas is legal. "Of course, normal individuals seeing that type of weapon might be alarmed, but technically he was within the realm of the law," Allen said.
Crusius was arrested near the scene Saturday. A manifesto allegedly written by him states that he acted in response to the "Hispanic invasion of Texas," according to The Dallas Morning News. Allen told reporters Sunday that investigators are attributing the manifesto "directly" to Crusius.
The suspect lives in the Dallas area, about a nine-hour drive from El Paso.
One of the victims has been identified as Jordan Anchondo, who died saving her young child, and TV station KTSM reported that 67-year-old El Paso resident Arturo Benavides was killed.
Three Mexicans were killed and six others were wounded in the shooting, according to officials. El Paso is across the border from Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.
Jessica Garcia and her husband, Memo Garcia, were among the wounded. They were at the mall raising money for their 5-year-old son's baseball team. She was shot three times in the leg, and her husband is in critical condition after being shot in the leg and back.
"My son called me frantic saying that something happened to my daughter, and that is how we found out," Norma Coca told TV station KWCH in Kansas. "We were calling all of our family members in El Paso and they said she was shot." The family lived in Salina, Kan., before returning to El Paso about a year ago, according to the TV station.
The couple's 5-year-old son and 11-year-old daughter were caught in the rush of people running away from the gunman, according to Coca, and the boy's face was injured.
Hours later on Sunday, in Dayton, Ohio, a gunman killed nine people and wounded at least 26 others in the second mass shooting in less than 24 hours.

Load-Date: August 6, 2019


End of Document