Texas A&M professor says London attacks part of network
University Wire
July 12, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 725 words
Byline: From Staff Reports, The Battalion; SOURCE: Texas A&M
Dateline: COLLEGE STATION, Texas 
Body


The recent bombings in London were done in a professional manner by experts who had a detailed plan and stuck to it, said David McIntyre, director of the Integrative Center for Homeland Security at Texas A&M University.
McIntyre, who teaches homeland security and terrorism courses, said the available information from the London attacks, although somewhat limited, indicates that intelligent and professional terrorists who have the capacity to strike again likely carried out the bombings.
Thursday's bombings struck four different locations in the London Underground and killed at least 52 people as of Monday.
McIntyre said that because not all of the information from the attacks has been gathered, people cannot be sure that this was a Middle Eastern attack, although it has all the hallmarks of al Qaeda.
"The question that we have is whether this is an outside attack made by outsiders, like the one al Qaeda used in America on Sept. 11 or if this is a new form of attack in which al Qaeda sends in experts, but it is carried out by homegrown terrorists," he said. "My strong suspicion is that it is (the latter)."
McIntyre said because local people likely carried out the attacks, it shows that al Qaeda has been significantly weakened.
"They have lost some top leaders, and a lot of their organization is in trouble," he said.
However, McIntyre said that the attacks by locals suggest that al Qaeda has adopted a new form of terrorism which is much more difficult to address.
McIntyre said he believed al Qaeda sent experts to London to recruit and train locals in how to carry out the attacks.
"They have been working on this for a considerable amount of time trying to recruit and train," McIntyre said.
McIntyre said the experts have less of a problem recruiting local people than some may think.
"There are radical mosques all over the Western world, including England and the United States, in which people are fueling the fire of hatred and recruiting people to attack the United States," McIntyre said.
McIntyre also said that most mosques do not participate in this activity, only a small minority do.
"Moderate Muslims are fighting with al Qaeda, too," he said.
McIntyre said the terrorists were likely very smart and well organized.
"The people who carried out the attack are not what you would typically expect a terrorist to be," he said. "They are educated, technological and sophisticated people who displayed distressing professionalism."
McIntyre said that the timing of the bombings indicates that the attack was intricately planned and executed.
"One day before the attack, large crowds gathered in London to celebrate the city's winning bid to host the 2012 Olympics," he said. "That they didn't strike at opportunity to cause more fatalities indicates that they had a long-term plan and stuck with it. This way they minimized risk so they could organize and strike again. The terrorists were experienced and professional. They attacked the transportation system, which showed that they were after not just people, but Britain's economy."
McIntyre said the attacks revealed that terrorism is a long-term threat to America and the Western world. McIntyre said that the way to fight the terror is with strong overseas and domestic intelligence and public education about terrorism and its warning signs.
McIntyre said Texas A&M is emerging as a leader in homeland security issues. McIntyre said A&M's George Bush School of Government and Public Service has stepped forward to offer graduate courses in homeland security. McIntyre believes that these courses will help prepare future leaders for dealing with terrorism issues.
"Students will be able to use their training in whatever they go out to do," he said. "Homeland security education will be very valuable to the next generation of public leaders."
Josh Lake, a junior nutrition major, said he thinks there will be more terrorist acts in the future.
"I don't think that the attacks in London were a surprise at all," Lake said. "We knew that terrorism is a problem. I would say that another attack in America is likely."
Jean Claude Kayisinga, a graduate student in agribusiness, said he also believes another attack could happen.
"I think that there are still a lot of people in America who dislike America," he said. "Another attack is definitely possible."
(C) 2005 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 12, 2005


End of Document