Texas Democrats shun Trump visit; FBI probes Dayton, California attacks
Chicago Daily Herald
August 7, 2019 Wednesday
ML2 Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NATION_; Pg. 6
Length: 711 words
Byline: Associated Press
Body


DAYTON, Ohio — Some Democrats in Texas told President Donald Trump to stay away as both Ohio and Texas reeled from a pair of shootings that killed 31 people. A racist screed remained the focus of police investigating the massacre at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas, while the FBI opened an investigation into the mass shooting in Dayton, Ohio, citing the gunman's interest in violent ideology. FBI opens probe in Dayton: On Tuesday, the FBI opened an investigation into the mass shooting at a popular Dayton nightlife district to try to determine what ideologies influenced the 24-year-old gunman. Special Agent Todd Wickerham, head of the FBI's Cincinnati field office, said the agency is looking into who might have helped the shooter and why he chose his specific target. 
Wickerham didn't say whether the FBI is looking at treating the case as domestic terrorism, as it did in the Texas mass shooting earlier in the weekend. El Paso Democrats balk at Trump visit: President Donald Trump was planning visits to both cities today, an announcement that stirred some resistance in El Paso. Democratic Rep. Veronica Escobar of El Paso made clear that the president was not welcome in her hometown as it mourned. Democratic presidential candidate Beto O'Rourke, who was an El Paso congressman for six years, also said Trump should stay away. Escobar tweeted that the White House had invited her to join Trump during his visit but she'll instead attend a rally that organizers say will confront the president and white supremacy while calling for gun control. Escobar said Tuesday that victims' families were already using the city's newly opened resource center where various government and mental health services have set up booths. "There's going to be a lot of trauma in our community; a lot of children saw things that no human being should see," Escobar said. Ex says shooter had ‘dark thoughts:' A woman who briefly dated the Ohio gunman said he suffered from bipolar disorder, joked about his dark thoughts and exhibited a fascination with mass shootings. Adelia Johnson wrote in an online essay that the shooter showed her a video of the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting on their first date. She said the shooter expressed "uncontrollable urges" that she called "red flags," which eventually led her to call things off in May. Gun control, immigration? On Monday, Trump made a vague expression of openness to new gun laws, suggesting a bill to expand gun background checks could be combined with his long-sought effort to toughen the nation's immigration system but gave no rationale for the pairing. Studies have repeatedly shown that immigrants have a lower level of criminality than those born in the U.S., both shooting suspects were citizens, and federal officials are investigating anti-immigrant bias as a potential motive in the Texas massacre. In both El Paso and Dayton, a young white male was identified as the lone suspect. The suspect in the Texas shooting was booked on murder charges. The shooter in Dayton was killed as police quickly swooped in to end his ambush. FBI says Gilroy gunman had list of targets: LOS ANGELES — The FBI has opened a domestic terrorism investigation into the mass shooting at a California food festival after it discovered a "target list" compiled by the gunman, whose relatives apologized Tuesday and said they were "horrified" by his actions. The FBI disclosure came during a funeral mass for Keyla Salazar, a 13-year-old middle schooler who was one of three people killed on July 28 by a shooter at the Gilroy Garlic Festival. Thirteen others were injured. The FBI has opened domestic terrorism cases in both the Gilroy and El Paso shootings. In Gilroy, the FBI cited the 19-year-old shooter's list of targets that included religious institutions, courthouses, federal buildings and both major political parties in the U.S. In California, federal investigators and the shooter's family said they have not been able to come up with a motive for the festival attack. However, John Bennett, FBI agent in charge in San Francisco, said the agency cannot rule out white nationalism as a factor. On the day of the attack, the shooter urged his Instagram followers to read a 19th-century book popular with white supremacists.

Load-Date: August 7, 2019


End of Document