Texas fighting a 'paper terrorism'
USA TODAY
February 21, 1997, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 910 words
Byline: Mark Potok
Dateline: FORT DAVIS, Texas
Body


FORT DAVIS, Texas -- High in the canyons of the remote Davis Mountains
in west Texas, an armed man claiming Texas is an independent nation
is terrorizing neighbors and threatening federal marshals who
want to serve him with a contempt of court citation.
Richard "Rick" McLaren says he has a small army of soldiers
and says militia sympathizers in 22 states are ready to defend
him. Frightened neighbors have started carrying weapons to church.
The Postal Service has halted mail delivery in the area. And law
enforcement agents -- wary of another Waco, where 80 people died
in a 1993 standoff with federal agents -- have declined to take
immediate action. They say they'll move when they think it's safe.
"It'll get served," says Jack Dean, U.S. marshal for the Western
District of Texas. "It may not be today or tomorrow, but it will
happen."
McLaren also is charged with burglary, accused of helping a friend
break into a home in a property dispute. A pretrial hearing is
scheduled today. He says he'll defy an order to appear.
McLaren, 43, is a promoter of citizen militias and "common-law"
courts, which claim to be citizens' courts that have greater authority
than established courts. McLaren says Texas is a "captive nation"
that was annexed illegally by the United States in 1845, after
10 years as as independent country. His theories have drawn hundreds
of supporters around the state and others to join the "Republic
of Texas," of which McLaren is the "chief ambassador."
Republic officials have claimed the federal government owes them
$ 93 trillion in "war reparations." Members have tried to pass
at least $ 3 million in bogus Republic checks to individuals and
state officials. They have "ordered" Texas Gov. George W. Bush
to vacate his Austin office, say they now own the state Capitol,
and warn they'll seize officials' homes as "war prizes."
Many officials say they've been threatened by Republic backers.
Tim Hodges, clerk of Denton County north of Dallas, took his family
into hiding after receiving a threatening letter. The FBI, after
conferring with state officials, is investigating possible threats
and fraud by Republic members.
But what has been more serious is what state Attorney General
Dan Morales has called the Republic's "paper terrorism," hundreds
of fake liens members have filed against their enemies, including
judges, law officers and even Pope John Paul II. The liens filed
in local courthouses can legally tie up personal property, such
as homes. By recording a debt against a property, liens prevent
a homeowner from selling before spending thousands of dollars
on legal fees to clear the title.
Morales has advised county clerks around the state to reject liens
they suspect could be fake. Last month, a state representative
filed a bill to stiffen penalties for filing bogus liens. Gov.
Bush has asked legislators to pass it quickly. A federal judge
says McLaren's liens have cost Texans at least $ 450,000.
"If people want to say Texas is a part of Mars, that's fine,"
says Ward Tisdale, spokesman for Morales. "But once they started
violating the law with bogus liens, we took action." Morales
is suing McLaren and 27 other past and present Republic officials
to stop the liens. Contempt fines started at $ 10,000 Nov. 4 and
have doubled every day since.
The federal citation McLaren is resisting stems from a racketeering
lawsuit brought against him by a Houston property title company.
McLaren fought the company for years over ownership of land near
his Fort Davis home. In the process, he filed bogus liens against
the firm's other properties.
A judge ordered McLaren to stop filing the false liens. He was
jailed for 35 days this spring when he refused to do so. The judge
freed him after he agreed to quit. He was found in contempt when
he failed to show up for a court hearing.
Seventeen miles outside of Fort Davis, McLaren is holed up in
a former firehouse he calls his "Embassy." Sitting amid squawking
walkie-talkies and blinking police scanners, he talks in rapid-fire
sentences spiced with Latin and legal phrases. In between trips
to the copying machine, he discusses his belief in UFOs. He chats
easily about the ways he says business cartels have suppressed
a cure for AIDS and cancer-healing drugs.
Then McLaren turns defiant.
"I imagine that if they hit us, by the time the retaliations
stopped, there wouldn't be a federal judge left in Texas," McLaren
says, referring to marshals he says could come after him.
McLaren is actually from St. Louis and says he has been fascinated
by Texas ever since he wrote a report on the Alamo in the third
grade. He talks like an excited schoolboy as he discusses the
future of the Republic. He describes the "Texas Defense Forces"
he says patrol his property. Standing behind him is Chris Leonard,
"chief of security," a pistol on his hip and handcuffs on his
belt.
Down the road, neighbors are furious. Rusty Wofford, 47, says
her family is one of many here sued by McLaren over property disputes.
She says they spent $ 100,000 to defend land that had been in her
family for four generations. They won their case last fall after
a 13-year court battle.
"This is America," she says. "But it's become a mini-Libya."
Joe Rowe, president of the property owners association, says the
16 or so McLaren supporters who have moved to the area frighten
the 80 families that live there. Rowe, like others, now carries
a gun. "If (marshals) come after him, there will definitely be
a gun battle," says his wife, M.A. "Rick McLaren has said that,
and I believe him."

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, b/w, USA TODAY(Map); PHOTOS, b/w, Joel Salcido(2)

Load-Date: February 24, 1997


End of Document