Texas Bomber Unmasked
The Kaleidoscope: Kishwaukee College
March 24, 2018 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 442 words
Byline: Sophie West
Body


Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare via Email Close Modal Window
Hang on for a minute...we're trying to find some more stories you might like.
Close Close Modal Window
Email This Story
Send email to this address
Enter Your Name
Add a comment here
Verification
Send Email Cancel
From March 2 to March 21, twenty-three-year-old Mark Anthony Conditt terrorized Austin, Texas in a serial bombing spree. Vox reported at least six explosions and known explosive devices. Four explosions occurred in Austin beginning on March 2 and on March 20 a FedEx package bound for Austin exploded at a FedEx facility. Authorities intercepted another package containing an explosive device at a different Austin FedEx facility. On Wednesday, March 21, Conditt detonated a bomb in his vehicle during a confrontation with police, which killed him (Vox.com).
Authorities described the bombings as "sophisticated work." The first three bombs were left on doorsteps. Because the victims of these explosions were all black or Hispanic, authorities speculated that race might be a determining factor; however, Sunday's bombing occurred in a mostly-white neighborhood, and Conditt's motives remain unknown (Vox.com).
Conditt recorded a twenty-five-minute "confession" video on his cell phone, which did not provide any information regarding his motives. Instead, he lamented his unemployment and did not show remorse for his actions. Conditt also possessed a list of addresses but it is unknown whether these addresses were potential targets or something else (Cnn.com). Austin Police Chief Brian Manley described the video as, "the outcry of a very challenged young man talking about challenges in his personal life that led him to this point" (Latimes.com).
Mark Anthony Conditt was a home-schooled college dropout with no previous criminal record. His family gave CNN a statement saying, "We had no idea of the darkness that Mark must have been in . . . We are grieving and we are in shock." Jeremiah Jensen, a former friend of Conditt's, said that Conditt's actions probably had "more to do with loneliness and anger. . .than anything else", adding that he had known Conditt as a "very kind person," and they had not spoken in years (Latimes.com).
Although many people have said Mark Conditt should be considered a terrorist, police have not labeled Conditt as one. While his actions certainly sparked feelings of terror in the citizens of Austin, the federal government's definition of terrorism states that crimes are only classified as terrorism if they are politically motivated. Because Conditt's motives remain unknown, it may be too early to label him a terrorist (Nbcnews.com).

Load-Date: March 27, 2018


End of Document