Texas A&M to receive $ 8M for terrorism research
University Wire
July 3, 2003, Thursday


Copyright 2003 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 461 words
Byline: By Sarah Szuminski, The Battalion
Dateline: College Station, Texas
Body


A bill approved by the House Appropriations Committee last week, written by U.S. Rep. John Carter, will award Texas A&M University $ 8 million in funding for counter-terrorism research and other projects.
The Department of Defense appropriations bill is for fiscal year 2004.
"These funds will help develop the next generation of technology that will help us win the war on terrorism," Carter said.
Texas A&M U.
The money will be split between two projects: $ 5 million will go toward a quantum optical science and engineering joint project with The University of Texas and Rice University, and $ 3 million will be used for a project with UT involving systems for sampling and detecting bioaerosols.
Cathy Reiley, assistant vice chancellor for external affairs, said the field of quantum optics leads to applications of national security, including laser anthrax detectors, new kinds of submarine detectors and optical trip wires.
The bioaerosol sampling and detection developmental project will be coordinated with the needs of the U.S. Army to produce lightweight, low-power bioaerosol sampling devices that can be remotely operated for extended periods of time, she said.
Carter said that through these projects, important advancements will be made in the fields that counteract various types of terrorist attacks. He described laser technology that, when beamed through an area, would show hazardous particles in the air.
"In the event of another raid on the post office this technology can be set up, and it will 'see' any anthrax in the air," he said.
Carter also received approval of his request for additional funds for the National Emergency Response and Rescue Training Center, which was created by Congress in 1998 and is located at A&M.
Past funding has enabled the development of training programs that prepare first responders to act in response to weapons of mass destruction. The program currently consists of eight incident response courses and will increase to 17 courses thanks to the incoming funds.
"These funds will continue our important mission of preparing state and local emergency responders to prepare for, mitigate against and respond to acts of terror," said vice chancellor for engineering G. Kemble Bennett, in a press release.
The House of Representatives will vote on the Department of Defense Appropriations Bill later this summer.
As Texas legislators continue to meet during the special session called by Gov. Rick Perry to redraw congressional boundaries Carter, said the most recent redistricting map shows him still representing Brazos County and Texas A&M.
"I will always keep the University's interests as a priority," Carter said. "I have a really good relationship with A&M."
(C) 2002 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 3, 2003


End of Document