Texas A&M students protest Colombian terrorism
University Wire
February 5, 2008 Tuesday


Copyright 2008 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 416 words
Byline: By Amanda Grosgebauer, The Battalion; SOURCE: Texas A&M
Dateline: COLLEGE STATION, Texas 
Body


Dressed in white T-shirts symbolizing peace, Texas A&M University students from the Colombian Student Association filled Rudder Plaza for the international day of protest against the Colombian terrorist organization, FARC.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, FARC, grew out of turmoil between militias in the 1950s to defend autonomous communist-controlled villages with guerrilla military action. FARC gains power through drug trafficking and extortion of Colombian people by kidnapping, explained senior Economics major and Colombian Student Association president, Steven Kadoch.
Kidnapping is the worst of FARC's acts, as it is the main vehicle for financing the political party, said Kadoch, whose grandfather was kidnapped and held in the jungle for more than six months.
Monday's peace protest was organized to publicize the injustices of FARC on the Colombian people. FARC's acts can be compared to Al-Qaeda, said Andres Tobacia, a senior industrial engineering major.
Tobacia said Colombia is the U.S.'s biggest ally in South America and with the new president, the country has had success, greater foreign investment and more security for its citizens but FARC threatens this prosperity.
"We've seen how good things can be," Tobacia said.
Marisa Suhm, the adviser of the student group and assistant director of multicultural services, said she knows many of the Colombian students at A&M who have been affected by FARC.
"A few have been kidnapped themselves, or have had a family member who had been kidnapped, killed, maimed, tortured or have been the victims of extortion and intimidation. So this is very personal for many of us," she said.
The peace protest against FARC was started by a Colombian student on Facebook and has now become a worldwide march Suhm said. Millions of Colombians and their friends took to the streets dressed in white and said "No Mas FARC."
Set during the busiest time on campus, many students walked past the protest with questions.
"I had no idea what FARC was until I read their flier," said junior Whitney Marion, a renewable natural resources major.
"[The message of the peace protest] forces us to recognize what is going on in the world, in places other than just the U.S. and Middle East," Marion said.
Jeremy Dixon, a senior zoology major, said the peace protest was refreshing.
"[It reminds students that] we are a part of the global community and can bring changes by being active for the causes we believe in," he said.
(C) 2008 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 5, 2008


End of Document