Texas Gov. Perry allocates funds for anti-terrorism training
University Wire
October 11, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 449 words
Byline: By Angela Macias, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


Gov. Rick Perry awarded $ 1.2 million in grants to the Texas Department of Public Safety in an effort to expand anti-terrorism training.
"This fund will help the Department of Public Safety and our heroic firefighter, police and EMS personnel be well-trained and well-prepared for the unthinkable," Perry said.
The grant will be awarded through the Criminal Justice Division of the governor's office. The funds will be split between the Texas Department of Safety and the governor's Division of Emergency Management, a division of the DPS.
U. Texas-Austin
The funds are being set aside primarily to ensure that Texas law enforcement officers are prepared, said Gene Acuna, spokesman for the governor's office.
"This type of training has already been going on for some time," Acuna said. "The grants allow for the expansion of this type of training."
The $ 261,000 allocated for the DPS will be used to expand training to medium or small police, fire and emergency departments, said Tela Mange, DPS spokeswoman.
More than 1,100 law enforcement agencies will be eligible for training on global terrorism, counterfeit documentation, information and intelligence gathering, threat assessment and threat deterrent efforts.
Expanded training will teach the smaller agencies to recognize and gather information on potential terrorists, Mange said.
Larger police and fire departments already receive federal money for extensive training, but smaller departments have been overlooked, she said.
"Many of them may only have one or two people who have been in charge of doing criminal intelligence," Mange said. "This will give them additional tools."
Mange said the training is key in fighting terrorism. Although law enforcement officers are experts at finding criminals, they don't have the knowledge to spot terrorists, she said.
"Trying to get information on people who are potential terrorists is a little different than what they have done in the past," Mange said.
The Division of Emergency Management will receive the additional $ 1 million allocated by the grants.
The funds will be used to update the state's terrorism and risk-assessment training for local officials, state agencies and public nonprofit utilities. Part of the updating process will be the purchase of 10,000 additional copies of the Jane's Facility Security and Jane's Chem-Bio Handbook.
The handbooks are used worldwide as a global defense training source.
DEM will also provide more aggressive training throughout the state, including terrorist incident response for the State Emergency Response Team.
Mange said training programs are currently being developed and will begin soon.
(C) 2001 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 11, 2001


End of Document