Texas gov won't say 'terrorist'
Daily News (New York)
March 22, 2018 Thursday
METRO EDITION


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 11
Length: 364 words
Byline: BY MEGAN CERULLO NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Leonard Greene
Body


AUSTIN BOMBER Mark Conditt stoked fear in Texas with a string of deadly explosions in the state's capital - yet authorities are hesitating to call the 23-year-old white man a terrorist.
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott avoided the label Wednesday in an interview with Fox News.
"The definition of a terrorist is more the mindset of the person who committed the crime," said Abbott, a Republican. "Was his goal to terrorize or did he have some other type of agenda?"
Abbott acknowledged the attacks brought "terror" to Austin, but he questioned whether Conditt was "trying to achieve more than terror."
Several experts said an attack must be politically motivated to qualify as terrorism. Without an established motive, they said, Conditt's actions do not yet meet that threshold.
"There are hazards in designating something an act of terrorism prematurely, so I think officials are appropriately cautious about jumping to designate somebody as a terrorist," said Chuck Strozier, director of the Center on Terrorism at John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Gregory Vecchi, a criminal justice professor at Missouri Western State University, said terrorists don't target individuals.
"Does it terrorize people? Yes. Is it terrorism? No," Vecchi said. "Because there's a legal definition on terrorism. You're not targeting any one person, you're targeting groups of people."
But critics were outraged that the terrorism label has quickly been applied to nonwhite criminals.
"Let me get this straight, a suicide bomber murdered people then blew himself up but they're not calling him a 'terrorist' because he's white?" Airborne Toxic Event singer Mikel Jollett wrote on Twitter. "If the Austin bomber had been Muslim, the National Guard would be on the streets of Texas by now."
Public figures weighed in, too.
"If this terrorist bomber was a brown guy, my mom wouldn't be able to leave her house for a week," said Pakistani-American comedian Kumail Nanjiani.
Little is known about what led Conditt, 23, to plant at least six bombs across Austin, causing weeks of panic and fear.
The first explosions targeted prominent African-American families, but two white men were injured by another explosive linked to Conditt.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: March 24, 2018


End of Document