Texas terrorism links under investigation
University Wire
December 10, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 913 words
Byline: By Jonathan York, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


Massive and oblique, the investigation into Texas terrorism connections has continued, but its traces remain in an FBI "watch list" dating from immediately after Sept. 11, 2001. The connections spread into Houston, where links to a foreign airline and two addresses are unexplained. They haunt Dallas, where a tangle of odd business involving an Internet service provider caused the United States to shut down its largest Islamic charity.
Of about 370 suspects on the list, 24 are associated with Texas addresses.
U. Texas-Austin
"We had a watch list -- it was not called a watch list, it was called Project Lookout," FBI spokesman Steven Berry said by phone. "We exhausted it. We got all the information from individuals on the list."
Berry would not talk about current aspects of the investigation.
A form of the FBI list was published online in October 2001 by the Finnish government, which reportedly believed the United States had already released it. It details names and, in some cases, addresses and phone numbers of U.S. terrorism suspects.
The FBI appeared to have particular interest in Saudi Arabian Airlines' office in Houston. Eleven Middle-Eastern men on the list were identified with the airline's offices in Houston.
"Any people who were involved in the investigation are not here at this time," an employee at the airline office said.
News reports show that Mustafa Ahmad Adin Al-Husawi is suspected of slipping $ 500,000 from al Qaeda to the Sept. 11 hijackers. The watch list indicates that he lived, among other addresses, at a house in Sugar Land.
A phone number could not be found for the address in local phone books or online listings, and phone numbers given for him in Massachusetts and New York are not currently assigned to him.
Tareq Al-Jahini, whom the FBI watched for years, according to The (Portland) Oregonian, is listed at 147 McCue St. in Houston. But four online map search engines show that the address does not exist.
Bob Dogium of the Houston FBI field office declined comment on individuals the bureau has watched.
"There were certainly people here whose names popped up on lists," Dogium said. "The bottom line, though, is that nobody in Houston was taken into custody or arrested by the FBI because of having any connections to terrorist threats or terrorism."
But the Immigration and Naturalization Service, as well as the FBI, has handled detentions and arrests. Dogium conceded the INS had taken in suspects in Houston.
Houston previously was the base for a group of militant Islamic Web sites, including www.azzam.com, which some believe is controlled by al Qaeda.
Investigators have watched the progress of militant groups' online skills. Testifying before Congress in February, Steven Emerson, a journalist, listed nonprofit groups such as the Qatar Charitable Society and Al-Rashid Trust that used Web sites, he believed, to solicit contributions to terrorists.
One of Azzam.com's recent incarnations, which had U.S. and European components, contained narratives praising soldiers of the Taliban.
Many of the Texas sites are down, but their domain names still are registered. A search on Azzam and its alias, www.qoqaz.net, shows that both domains are listed with a Houston Internet company. The same company provided space to www.taliban-news.com and www.qassam.org. What happened to these sites remains unclear.
Starting in the 1990s, counterterrorism investigators in Dallas stepped into a circle of strange happenings involving a Richardson Internet company, a huge Islamic charity and a pro-Palestinian organization.
The FBI had kept track of the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development since at least 1993. Investigators said the HLF, which claims to be the biggest Islamic charity in the United States, has numerous and deep connections to the Palestinian terrorist group Hamas.
The foundation was a client of InfoCom, a Richardson Internet company that gives space to several Islamic sites and owns the online country code for Iraq.
The Islamic Association for Palestine was also a client of InfoCom. Its Web site operated on InfoCom space, though the site is now based in Virginia.
The North Texas Joint Terrorism Task Force raided InfoCom's offices on Sept. 6, 2001. The reasons for the search still sleep in a sealed affidavit.
Ihsan Elashi, who ran InfoCom with his brothers, is serving a four-year prison term for violating a trade restriction imposed the day of the raid.
His brother Ghassan Elashi, the company's vice president for marketing, said that he did not know why federal agents would search the offices.
But at the same time as the raid, two InfoCom bank accounts had been frozen. The reason, investigators told the company, was that those accounts contained money from Nadia Elashi Marzouk, the wife of a Hamas political leader.
Months later, President Bush announced that he had frozen HLF's assets because of links to Hamas. The foundation waded into a series of court battles, which continue.
Ghassan Dahduli, a former InfoCom technician, is now in Jordan after running afoul of FBI interrogators. They met him in a Dallas parking lot, his immigration papers in hand, according to Karen Pennington, who represented Dahduli. Eventually, they deported him.
"These people have been very much hurt. I'm a native Texan … I'm not anti-American, but our government has never shown enough evidence for why it is doing this," Pennington said.
(C) 2002 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 10, 2002


End of Document