Texas senator seeks preparation for terrorism
University Wire
August 30, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 488 words
Byline: By Robin Larson, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


Sen. Eddie Lucio, D-Brownsville, wants to start an organized terrorism preparedness program in public schools.
He recently wrote a proposal to several state officials that would require elementary, middle and high school students to be taught how to prepare for a terrorist attack. Students would learn what to do and where to evacuate in the event of an attack.
U. Texas-Austin
The letter asks state officials to put together a team of education experts to discuss procedures.
"Our kids need to know how to prepare with the effects of bioterrorism," Lucio said in the letter. "Our children are not too young to learn the effects of terrorism."
Lucio sent copies of the proposal to President Bush, U.S. Secretary of Education Rod Paige and the Texas Workforce Commission.
Lucio suggested training for a terrorism preparedness class to begin in ROTC programs or in conjunction with Fire Safety Prevention Week in public schools.
"Such a program in our public schools will enable our children to understand what they can do to help their communities in case of another attack," Lucio said. "Parents may also feel safer if their children know what to do in times of crisis."
Lucio decided to propose a terrorism preparedness program after state health officials said a majority of school children are unprepared to handle another terrorist attack.
"I was thinking of the safety of our children; that's how the proposal came about," Lucio said. "I think we will become more American if we enforce this. We are only trying to protect our freedom."
The Texas Workforce Commission also proposed a domestic crisis program for teachers, administrators and support personnel. The program would train personnel and then be applied in classrooms.
"The Texas Workforce Commission feels this is a need for our society, and it also fits in very nicely with the Governor's Task Force on Homeland Security," said Larry Jones, spokesman for the Texas Workforce Commission.
The TWC started their request for proposals six to nine months ago and are now receiving replies due to Lucio's proposal. After the proposal has been circulated, the TWC will evaluate the process and make it final.
Brownsville Independent School District added terrorism preparedness to their curriculum after the attacks, said Maggie Gutierrez, Lopez High School principal.
"We are only trying to educate our children," Gutierrez said.
Wendy Kendrick, mother of two elementary school-aged children, said she did not agree that a terrorism preparedness class should to be taught to children.
"They cannot comprehend it," Kendrick said. "I do not understand even now as an adult."
But Charles Whitney, University of Texas journalism professor and father of two, said he supports the idea.
"This is a meaningful approach and a very good idea," Whitney said. "I feel children will not be overly frightened by this proposal."
(C) 2002 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 30, 2002


End of Document