Texas A&M students protest war on terrorism
University Wire
April 11, 2002, Thursday


Copyright 2002 The Battalion via U-Wire
Length: 298 words
Byline: By Christina Hoffman, The Battalion
Dateline: College Station, Texas
Body


Even in Aggieland there are pockets of opposition to America's war on terrorism, and two students will travel to Washington, D.C., on April 20 to participate in a nationally organized protest against President Bush's foreign policy.
"Our goal is to promote full democracy.
Texas A&M U.We need to put power back into the hands of the people," said Chris Young, president of Students for a Civil Society and a sophomore political science major at Texas A&M University. "There are voices of dissent to this war. Not everyone is complacent."
Young and Joy De, a junior veterinarian medicine major, will participate in a march demanding an end to racial profiling, military recruitment, the imprisonment of immigrants and to demanding a foreign policy based on social and economic justice.
The protest aims to bring an end to racial profiling and military recruitment targeting minority and working-class youth and to end the degrading and secret imprisonment of immigrants, Young said.
Young said he is opposed to the war because he does not believe violence should be used to combat violence. Also, Young said, terrorists are merely responding to America's "exploitation of the Third World and imperialist policies."
"We believe [the Bush administration] should solve the root problems with a peaceful end," Young said. "There are reasons why people hate the U.S. It is because of inconsistent intervention and corporate global exploitation."
De said Bush needs to be more mindful and sensitive to all the perspectives of the American people,and that she is suspicious of the Bush administration's actions. While De is in Washington, she plans to participate in lobbying and activism workshops.
"We want to tell Bush our eyes are open," De said.
(C) 2002 The Battalion via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 11, 2002


End of Document