Text of U.N. Resolution Asking Libya's Help
The New York Times
January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Column 5;; Text
Length: 497 words
Byline: Special to The New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 21
Body


Following is the text of Security Council Resolution 731, approved unanimously today, which calls on Libya to turn over two of its citizens to face trial in one airliner bombing and to cooperate in the investigation of another:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
DEEPLY DISTURBED by the worldwide persistence of acts of international terrorism in all its forms, including those in which states are directly or indirectly involved, which endanger or take innocent lives, have a deleterious effect on international relations and jeopardize the security of states,
 DEEPLY CONCERNED by all illegal activities directed against international civil aviation and affirming the right of all states, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and relevant principles of international law, to protect their nationals from acts of international terrorism that constitute threats to international peace and security,
REAFFIRMING its Resolution 286 (1970) in which it called on states to take all possible legal steps to prevent any interference with international civil air travel,
REAFFIRMING also its Resolution 635 (1989) in which it condemned all acts of unlawful interference against the security of civil aviation and called upon all states to cooperate in devising and implementing measures to prevent all acts of terrorism, including those involving explosives,
RECALLING the statement made on Dec. 30, 1988, by the President of the Council on behalf of the members of the Council strongly condemning the destruction of Pan Am Flight 103 and calling on all states to assist in the apprehension and prosecution of those responsible for this criminal act,
DEEPLY CONCERNED over results of investigations which implicate officials of the Libyan Government and which are contained in Security Council documents that include the requests addressed to the Libyan authorities by France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America in connection with the legal procedures related to the attacks carried out against Pan Am Flight 103 and U.T.A. Flight 772,
DETERMINED to eliminate international terrorism,
1. CONDEMNS the destruction of Pan Am Flight 103 and U.T.A. Flight 772 and the resultant loss of hundreds of lives;
2. STRONGLY DEPLORES the fact that the Libyan Government has not yet responded effectively to the above requests to cooperate fully in establishing responsibility for the terrorist acts referred to above against Pan Am Flight 103 and U.T.A. Flight 772;
3. URGES the Libyan Government immediately to provide a full and effective response to those requests so as to contribute to the elimination of international terrorism;
4. REQUESTS the Secretary General to seek the cooperation of the Libyan Government to provide a full and effective response to those requests;
5. URGES all states individually and collectively to encourage the Libyan Government to respond fully and effectively to those requests;
6. DECIDES to remain seized of the matter.

Load-Date: January 22, 1992


End of Document