Textbooks tackle Sept. 11 attacks, Social studies books are now updated to reflect terrorist strikes on U.S.
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 10, 2004, Friday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 656 words
Byline: CHARLOTTE FERRELL SMITH, DAILY MAIL STAFF
Body


For the first time this school year, Kanawha County students will read about the Sept. 11 terror attacks in their textbooks.
New social studies textbooks are adopted every six years, said Margaret Miller, the county's social studies curriculum specialist.
Even though Sept. 11 was not included in previous textbooks, teachers at various grade levels have touched upon the subject every year since 2001 when terrorist attacks rocked the nation. Miller said teachers have used discretion to help students remember the historical event without causing too much alarm.
"Teachers want to address it but not offend anybody or be overly upsetting," she said. "Schools handle it tastefully and tactfully by remembering what happened. Teachers discuss events with students in an historical perspective."
However, this year teachers will be equipped with textbooks complete with photographs to use for reference and discussion.
In the 11th grade, students taking the American history course "U.S. and the World 20th and 21st Centuries" will see a section with pictures and text in their book called "The American Republic Since 1877." There is also a photo on the cover of firemen raising the American flag at Ground Zero.
Several middle school books will touch upon the subject.
The social studies textbook called "The World" contains a section on "Terrorism Against America" with photographs of the Twin Towers before they were hit, increased security at airlines, a funeral, and the president visiting New York City.
"Introduction to World Studies - People, Places, Change" includes a couple of pages on "An Attack on America" with pictures of smoke rising from the World Trade Center, a multifaith memorial service, and firefighters.
"West Virginia - the History of an American State" has a picture of the World Trade Center after the attack and covers topics such as homeland security and Operation Iraqi Freedom.
On the elementary level, students in grades four and five taking United States history will read about terrorism in a new book called "Horizons" as they cover history from the Civil War to the present.
Kathy Christian, a Pinch Elementary fifth-grade teacher, served on the Kanawha County Schools Textbook Adoption Committee. She said terrorism is covered on two pages in the new textbook with Sept. 11 called the worst act of terrorism. The section begins with the title "Facing New Dangers." It ends by saying President Bush, with support of Congress, pledged that the United States would lead the world in a war against terrorism.
Although the books are new this year, she said teachers previously have discussed terrorism. The subject also sparks talk of morals and America's heroes, she said.
"There has always been some sort of discussion because it is there," she said. "Generally, it is brought up in current events and sometimes through journaling."
Meanwhile, Watts Elementary had a program Thursday to commemorate Sept. 11. Principal Eric Lutz said he felt it was important to recognize the date even though it falls on a Saturday this year. Students were told to wear scout uniforms or red-white-and-blue attire. The event included patriotic tunes, the raising of the flag and Popsicles in red, white and blue.
"This is the third year for the ceremony," Lutz said. "We wanted to be sure to have something to commemorate that day."
St. Albans High School social studies teacher Delbart Brannon said today's class discussion would include the tragedy and history of Sept. 11.
"I will ask students 'where were you?,'" he said. "That is important history. You have got to remember the moment. It has had such a major effect on our lives. Last year, we went over what happened. We cover a lot of history that is not in the textbook."
However, this year it will be in the textbook.
"Look at the page number," he said. He opened the book and pointed to page 911.
Contact writer Charlotte Ferrell Smith at charlotte@dailymail.com or 348-1246.  

Load-Date: September 10, 2004


End of Document