Thailand charges former leader; Warrant accuses him of terrorism in recent protests
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
May 26, 2010 Wednesday
Final Edition


Copyright 2010 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL; Pg. A-07
Length: 439 words
Dateline: BANGKOK 
Body


 BANGKOK - Thai authorities accused ousted Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra of terrorism yesterday, issuing an arrest warrant on charges that carry a possible death sentence for his alleged role in deadly street protests, and setting the stage for further political strife.
 Thaksin, who lives in self-imposed exile but still has wide support among the so-called Red Shirts whose protests were ended violently by the military last week, responded that the government should be ashamed of itself for its handling of the crisis that left 88 dead and said he merely wants to keep Thailand from becoming a "banana republic."
 The charges are likely to intensify the rift between those who support Thaksin - mostly the urban underclass and rural poor - and the conservative establishment and many in the middle class who agreed with the 2006 military coup that saw him ousted.
 Thaksin, who fled abroad ahead of a corruption conviction he says was politically motivated, is accused of being a key force behind the protesters who occupied areas of Bangkok for two months in their bid to bring down Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva.
 The protesters accuse the Oxford-educated Abhisit of being elitist and coming to power through back-room deals and military meddling.
 Though he has supported the Red Shirts' cause, Thaksin denies involvement in the recent violence - which culminated in a military crackdown that left several protesters dead and prompted rioting and arson attacks.
 After last week's crescendo of violence, life in Thailand's capital, which remains under a nighttime curfew, was returning slowly to normal.
 Residents weary of the unrest returned to shopping centers, crowded around street food stalls, and picnicked in public parks.
 About 1,000 Buddhist monks were to gather today for a ceremony where the anti-government protesters held firm until a final crackdown left at least 16 dead and more than 100 injured.
 Before he appeared before investigators yesterday, Red Shirt leader Jatuporn Prompan said the government overreacted to the protests. He was appearing voluntarily because he has immunity as a member of Parliament.
 "If the government thinks that dispersing protesters would defeat us, then they're wrong," he said. "Today the Thai society has to think carefully who the terrorists are."
 The Red Shirts have demanded that Abhisit resign and call early elections. Earlier this month, he offered to hold elections Nov. 14, but that offer was revoked when Red Shirt leaders made more demands.
 Abhisit now says elections will not be held until the threat of violence is quelled completely. His term expires in late 2011.

Notes

BREAKING NEWS 5/25/10 7:50 AM TimesDispatch.com

Load-Date: May 27, 2010


End of Document