Thailand's Fugitive Former Premier Denies Financing Protests
The New York Times
May 27, 2010 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 844 words
Byline: By SETH MYDANS
Body


BANGKOK -- One day after being charged with terrorism, Thailand's fugitive former prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, said in a telephone interview on Wednesday that he did not finance or organize the red-shirt movement that had staged a two-month sit-in here.
  ''No, no, no,'' he said. As evidence, he said that during the military crackdown last week when 15 people died, ''I was in Paris -- they sent my picture -- shopping at Louis Vuitton with my daughter.'' 
  After that, as red-shirt leaders were being rounded up and arrested in Thailand, he said, he went to the Cannes film festival.
  ''I am in contact with them, and they ask for advice sometimes,'' he said, describing his relationship with the protest leaders. Some of those leaders asserted that he was more directly involved.
  The telephone interview was one of several organized by lawyers for Mr. Thaksin, who was speaking from an undisclosed location outside Thailand, on the same day they filed an appeal against the terrorism accusation; the charge carries a maximum sentence of death.
  Speaking in court during the appeal hearing on Wednesday, one of the opposition leaders, Jatuporn Prompan said, ''I am prepared to explain to the court that core leaders of the red shirts were responsible for every move at the rally without any influence from Thaksin.'' 
  Terrorism charges have also been filed against some of those core leaders.
  In the interview, Mr. Thaksin suggested that he was afraid of being assassinated if he returned to Thailand, where politics have become increasingly volatile since his ouster in a coup in 2006.
  Asked about a statement he made early last year calling for a revolution and asserting that he would return to Thailand ''when it is necessary,'' Mr. Thaksin said: ''I really wanted to go, but my supporters said my safety was more important. They wanted me not to be assassinated in my own country.''
  Mr. Thaksin was in New York at the time of the coup, and for most of the time since then he has remained abroad, evading a jail term on a conviction for corruption.
  ''I have been in Uganda, Moscow, Saudi and Lebanon,'' he said, naming just a few of the countries he has visited on what seems an endless world tour.
  ''During what is happening in Thailand, I'm traveling for my business in many countries,'' he said. ''How can I become a terrorist.'' 
  The Thai government has expressed frustration that its requests for extradition have been denied, and the authorities in Bangkok are hoping the terrorism charge will bolster their effort to force his return.
  In denying that he had helped finance the protests, Mr. Thaksin said the red-shirt movement was self-sustaining through donations from both poor and wealthy supporters. The government has frozen the bank accounts of dozens of people it says have been involved.
  The movement is the product of years of political organizing and held major rallies long before the recent, prolonged and well-organized occupation of Bangkok's central shopping district.
  A telecommunications billionaire, Mr. Thaksin was one of Thailand's richest men. In February, a court found him guilty of concealing his wealth and confiscated $1.4 billion in frozen assets, while allowing him to keep nearly $1 billion. Mr. Thaksin is believed to have considerable wealth outside Thailand as well.
  The conviction was based in part on Mr. Thaksin's evasion of electoral laws, in which the court ruled that he had illegally transferred some of his assets to proxies.
  One core leader of the protests, Jaran Dithapichai, asserted on the stage at the long-running rally that Mr. Thaksin was among people who had given financial support. 
  ''What's wrong with that?'' he said. ''Rallies have costs, and we need donors.''
  Another prominent opposition figure, Maj. Gen. Khattiya Sawatdiphol, who was assassinated May 13, had said repeatedly that he was in contact with Mr. Thaksin, both to give information and receive directions.
  General Khattiya, who broke ranks with the military, was in charge of security for the protests and was widely believed to be involved in much of the violence over the past two months.
  ''They keep telling people that this fight is not a fight for Thaksin, but everyone here came out to fight for Thaksin,'' the general said moments before he was shot in the head by a sniper.
  However much he may or may not have been involved in the movement, Mr. Thaksin has been its figurehead and inspiration. Until recently, he maintained a high profile among his supporters with audio and video messages as well as a cascade of Twitter messages.
  ''My heartfelt support to everyone who has come out and made sacrifices to join in the writing of the nation's history by demanding democracy and justice for the future of our children and grandchildren,'' he said on Twitter in March, just before the sit-in began.
  For a while, the main rally site looked like a Thaksin fair, with vendors selling T-shirts, head bands, banners, caps, fans, scarves and buttons bearing his image and, often, the words, ''I love Thaksin.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 27, 2010


End of Document