Thanksgiving travel 2015: Cheap gas but fears of terrorism
The Northern Star: Northern Illinois University
November 24, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: HOME; Pg. 1
Length: 293 words
Byline: Lynne Sladky
Body


LOS ANGELES - That other Thanksgiving tradition - congested highways and jammed airports - is getting underway with gas prices low and terrorism fears high.
An estimated 46.9 million Americans are expected to take a car, plane, bus or train at least 50 miles from home over the long holiday weekend, according to the motoring organization AAA. That would be an increase of more than 300,000 people over last year, and the most travelers since 2007.
Among the reasons given for the increase: an improving economy and the cheapest gasoline for this time of year since 2008.
On Tuesday, some travelers were gearing up for an early exit.
"There's a little bit of a tie-up here, but I'm sure once we get going, things will be great," Mark Sullivan said as he waited at New York's Port Authority bus terminal. He was traveling to see family in Springfield, Massachusetts.
Anyone trekking to a major airport should factor in 50 extra minutes on the road, according to the traffic date company INRIX - and that's just getting to the airport, never mind getting through security.
Though there have been no changes to the nation's terror alert status, the recent attacks in Paris, West Africa and elsewhere prompted the State Department to warn American travelers about the risks overseas.
On Tuesday, the head of the Transportation Security Administration, Peter Neffenger, boasted that the U.S. has the world's best aviation security and assured the public that TSA is "taking every measure to protect the millions of air travelers in the coming weeks."
Airfares have increased just 69 cents on average since last year, according to the Airlines Reporting Corp., which processes ticket transactions for airlines and travel agencies.
___
Joseph B. Frederick in New York contributed.

Load-Date: November 25, 2015


End of Document