THANKS, FBI; BOMB STING SHOWS FEDS HAVE THE CITY'S BACK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
June 21, 2019 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2019 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 327 words
Body


For months, federal officials quietly monitored what they described as a developing plot to blow up a North Side church.
And then, when the moment was ripe, they pounced, potentially sparing Pittsburgh a second deadly attack on a house of worship.
The FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force on Wednesday charged Mustafa Mousab Alowemer, 21, a Syrian refugee and Pittsburgh Brashear High School graduate, with plotting to bomb the Legacy International Worship Center in Perry South to support the Islamic State and inspire similar acts of violence.
Authorities said the attack was set for July. That would have been just nine months after a gunman walked into the Tree of Life synagogue in Squirrel Hill, killing 11 and injuring others. Pittsburgh is still grieving those losses. It doesn't need more.
It's tempting to say that Pittsburgh can breathe easy today, but no community in this age ever can afford to let its guard down. The good news is that as decent people go about their daily lives, the FBI and other law enforcement agencies are closely watching emerging threats and using a variety of resources to run danger to ground
The case against Mr. Alowemer began unfolding in April 2018, when, the FBI says, it identified a social networking site on which he had expressed a desire to kill on behalf of IS. The agency said it made contact with Mr. Alowemer through an Arabic-speaking FBI employee who posed as an IS member, and that led to a series of meetings between the defendant and FBI operatives, including at least one visit to the church. On Wednesday, the FBI said, the group was to have its final meeting.
Mr. Alowemer is presumed innocent unless proven guilty, and it's difficult to understand why a young refugee given a second chance would want to harm people in his adopted home. But terrorism and mass violence are inexplicable. Pittsburgh cannot breathe easy today, but it can be thankful to those who work hard to prevent more blood from being spilled.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Stephanie Strasburg/Post-Gazette: The Legacy International Worship Center on the North Side.

Load-Date: September 11, 2019


End of Document