THATCHER FAULTS U.S. TERROR POLICY
The New York Times
April 28, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk
Length: 661 words
Byline: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, April 27
Body


Referring pointedly to her Government's readiness to allow the use of British bases in the American raids on Libya, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher contended today that the United States had an obligation to fight the terrorism of the Irish Republican Army by agreeing to an extradition treaty that has been held up for months in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
''What is the point,'' Mrs. Thatcher asked, ''of the United States taking a foremost part against terrorism and then not being as strict as they can against Irish terrorism, which afflicts one of their allies?''
The delay on the extradition treaty has become a sore point in British-American relations in the aftermath of the raid, with critics of Mrs. Thatcher's decision saying that the United States was highly selective in its battle against terrorism and indifferent to the problems of its allies.
 
Support of I.R.A. Challenged
The critics have maintained that President Reagan's backing for the rebels in Nicaragua is an example of ''state-supported terrorism'' and have stressed that Irish gunmen get more support from America than they do from Libya.
In a long BBC radio interview dwelling almost entirely on the subjects of terrorism and the raids, the Prime Minister noted that the Reagan Administration had been ''very, very active'' in its support for the extradition treaty. Then, repeating the case that British representatives have been pressing in Washington, she said, ''If you're fighting terrorism, you can't fight it just on one front and not another.''
Mrs. Thatcher advanced various arguments in defense of her decision to allow the use of British bases, which has made the secret security arrangements that govern the use of American tactical aircraft based here an emotional issue in British politics. ''We must never forget,'' she said, ''that the United States forwent regional interests in Latin America to give us fantastic help on the Falklands.''
 
A Bulldog, Not a Poodle
But recalling earlier differences with President Reagan over supplies to the Siberian pipeline and the American invasion of Grenada, she denied that she had allowed herself to become the President's ''poodle,'' She described herself as ''more a sort of bulldog.''
Diplomatic sources have said that informal signals have been sent to Washington making it clear that another request for the use of the bases in Britain would not be welcomed by Mrs. Thatcher's Government. But the Prime Minister refused to commit herself when asked what she would do if Mr. Reagan sought to use American F-111's here in reprisal strikes against Iran or Syria. ''No one will ever hear me say,'' she declared, ''that a tyrant can be certain that this Government will not take action against him, because that would be the green light for terrorists to go ahead.''
She also indicated that she remained skeptical about the possibility of effective economic sanctions against the regime of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. ''It would be very effective if everyone would say, 'We will not pick up oil from Libya,' '' she said. ''But you know, Europe isn't even saying that now.''
 
No Action on Libya Contracts
Government spokesmen today denied a report in The Sunday Telegraph that a decision had been made to force British companies that still have contracts with the Libyan armed forces to withdraw from the country.
Britain halted the sale of arms to Libya when it broke diplomatic relations with the Qaddafi regime in 1984. While forbidding any new military contracts, it took no action on contracts already in existence.
According to an official source, only two now remain. One was described as a contract for spare parts for military vehicles, excluding tanks. The other is a service contract held by the Plessey Corporation on British-made radar equipment.
Plessey has three engineers stationed in Libya, according to a company spokesman here. A fourth Plessey radar engineer, James Abra, is being held in Libya on espionage charges.


End of Document