THATCHER ASSERTS STRIKES ON LIBYA COULD SOW CHAOS
The New York Times
January 11, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 917 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, Jan. 10
Body


Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, arguing that terrorism has to be fought by legal means, warned today that retaliatory strikes against targets in Libya might produce ''much greater chaos.''
''I must warn you that I do not believe in retaliatory strikes that are against international law,'' she said at a news conference for American correspondents here. They pressed her repeatedly on Britain's response to President Reagan's call for measures against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's Government.
Her response about retaliatory strikes came after she had repeatedly ruled out economic sanctions as an effective way of countering terrorism.
'We Have Suffered'
''We suffer from terrorism in this country and in Northern Ireland,'' she said. ''Please may I remind you that we have suffered over 2,000 deaths at the hands of terrorists, so are well aware of the problems, and at no stage has anyone in this country suggested that we make retaliatory strikes or go in hot pursuit or anything like that.''
The Prime Minister quickly acknowledged that the analogy she appeared to be drawing was inexact, noting that the position of the Irish Republic on terrorism was ''wholly different'' from Libya's. ''But once you start to go across borders,'' she said, ''then I do not see an end to it. And I uphold international law very firmly.''
 
Reagan Shunned Force
Officials later said the British view was expressed in Washington through diplomatic channels last week when the Reagan Administration was considering a military strike against Libya. The Administration has accused Tripoli of aiding terrorists who carried out the attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports on Dec. 27 in which 19 people were killed, including 5 Americans and 4 of the Arab gunmen.
President Reagan decided against any immediate use of military force, although he said at a news conference Tuesday that the United States had ''irrefutable evidence'' that the Qaddafi Government was involved in the airport attacks. He vowed that ''further steps'' would be taken if economic measures against Libya proved ineffective. British officials said Mrs. Thatcher's Government was then asked not to do anything to undercut the American measures. But they said Washington did not press London to reverse its longstanding opposition to economic sanctions, which has become a sore point in relations with Commonwealth nations pressing for sanctions against South Africa.
In arguing that sanctions would not work against Libya, she used the same argument she has used at Commonwealth meetings against the imposition of sanctions on South Africa. The failure over 12 years of international mandatory sanctions against the white-settler Government in Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) demonstrated the futility of that approach, she asserted.
Asked again whether there were any measures that Britain was prepared to take against Libya, the Prime Minister appeared momentarily to bristle.
''Look,'' she said, ''you do not have to tell me about Libyan terrorism. We saw it on our streets, the murder of a policewoman by shots fired from the Libyan Embassy.'' She was referring to an incident in 1984 that led to a break in diplomatic relations between the two countries and a ban on arms sales to Libya.
''We do not intend to go further than that,'' she said, citing, in addition to her basic conviction about sanctions, the difficulty of gaining ''any consensus'' among European countries on sanctions.
The meeting with the American correspondents was held in the state dining room at 10 Downing Street, the Prime Minister's official residence, one flight up from the Cabinet room, which had been the scene 24 hours before of a dramatic resignation by Mrs. Thatcher's Defense Secretary, Michael Heseltine.
In her first public comments on charges leveled by Mr. Heseltine at a news conference, she denied that she had made ''a deliberate attempt'' to prevent Cabinet discussion of issues involved, in Mr. Heseltine's view, in the fight between two multinational consortiums competing for a stake in Britain's only helicopter maker, Westland.
''We have a style of great discussion and great debate,'' she said. ''That has always been characteristic of my handling of the Government.''
But she declined to respond to Mr. Heseltine's detailed charges that she had manipulated the scheduling of meetings and even censored the Cabinet's minutes in what amounted to tacit support for the bid by United Technologies and Fiat for Westland.
''I am not going into recriminations or detailed points,'' she said. She insisted as she had since the controversy began that the decision on the company's future was up to the shareholders, not the Government, since the Government was not prepared to put money into Westland.
She impatiently brushed aside the broader issue raised by Mr. Heseltine, who has used the Westland affair to argue that Britain would fall behind in high technology if it did not seek collaboration with Europe and allowed its companies to become franchising outlets for American products.
''I think it is totally wrong to say, 'Either Europe or the United States,' '' she declared, saying Britain would seek technological collaboration with both Europe and America.
Most national newspapers treated Mr. Heseltine's resignation as a sensational development in Conservative Party politics.
Hugo Young, a political columnist in The Guardian, wrote that Mr. Heseltine had established himself ''as the man who destroyed the reputation of a Prime Minister who thought she was untouchable.''


End of Document