The Mob Claims a Martyr
The New York Times
June 5, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 29; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Column 2;; Op-Ed
Length: 581 words
Byline: By Louis J. Freeh;

Louis J. Freeh is U.S. District Judge in the Southern District of New York.

By Louis J. Freeh;  Louis J. Freeh is U.S. District Judge in the Southern District of New York.
Body


At a time when many people around the world are expressing malaise about their public officials, the assassination last month of Italy's leading anti-Mafia investigator should be gravely noted. Judge Giovanni Falcone was killed by a car bomb along with his wife, Judge Francesca Morvillo, as well as three bodyguards and several travelers on a Sicilian highway.
For the last 15 years, Judge Falcone led a crusade against the Mafia octopus, which has gripped his native Sicily for centuries. In 1986 he engineered Italy's judicial assault on the Mafia in a mass trial that resulted in 350 Mafia members sentenced to long prison terms. The powerful village and provincial Mafia leaders who ruled Sicily's underworld and exported death and terrorism throughout the world retreated. It was the first time in several hundred years that the Mafia was thoroughly investigated and prosecuted.
Judge Falcone readily accepted the price of such a dangerous and mostly solitary undertaking. In his house, sandbags replaced vulnerable windows. Armored cars transported him everywhere and armed guards were his constant companions. Secret communications networks and clandestine movement were the daily routine and every journey took on the peril of a combat foray.
His murder was more than the assassination of one Mafia enemy. It was also an attack on the Italian-American Working Group on Organized Crime, and an affirmation of the threat the group poses to the Mafia. Established in 1982 to combat Mafia terrorism and its Cosa Nostra counterpart in the U.S., the group's co-chairmen are the U.S. Attorney General and the Italian Minister of the Interior.
One example of its success was the so-called "pizza connection" prosecution of a New York heroin ring in the mid-80's. In terms of witnesses, evidence and legal theory, this case overlapped with Judge Falcone's trial in Palermo that resulted in 350 convictions. Tommaso Buscetta, the highest-ranking Sicilian Mafioso ever to become a government witness, was coaxed into confessing by Judge Falcone and did so with devastating effect at both trials.
Therefore, the working group's response to this attack must be immediate and overwhelming. It should consider the following:
* Convening an emergency meeting to adopt a U.S.-Italian plan for prosecution, including designating special prosecutors and investigative strategies.
* Posting a reward of up to $500,000 for information regarding the assassination.
* Asserting U.S. jurisdiction for prosecuting the assassination. Because of Judge Falcone's involvement with the working group, the extraterritorial provision of the Federal Witness Protection Act allows U.S. participation.
* Making available the Attorney General's witness protection program for Sicilian informants. The program is being used for international terrorists, so the precedent for protecting foreign informants is established.
* Planning the use of U.S. racketeering laws and well-established conspiracy principles in Federal prosecution if any aspects of the crime occurred in the U.S.
* Employing all available law-enforcement techniques and judicial assistance to obtain evidence identifying the killers.
Judge Falcone's colleagues in law enforcement and the judiciary throughout the world should not be disheartened in their struggle even as they deeply mourn the loss of a dear friend. The fight will not be one of vengeance but of lawful prosecution of this scourge in Italy, in America and in all the dark places where it hides.

Graphic

 
Drawing

Load-Date: June 5, 1992


End of Document