The Bush Doctrine is dead
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
October 10, 2004, Sunday


Copyright 2004 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P3C
Length: 716 words
Byline: Brandt Ayers
Body


FOR THOSE WHO'VE been depressed by our global isolation, our estrangement even from allies like Germany which copied our democracy, and loved all things American, there's good news.
It is this: The Bush Doctrine of preventive war is dead.
Iraq is the testing ground of a theory that contradicts every all-American cowboy hero we ever cheered - that says you drill the bad guy before he can draw, before you even know if he's armed.
The theory says to shoot him down before you can prove he intends to do you harm, or is capable of it. You tear up his country, fill mass graves with his people - for what, and at what cost?
The original reason for the first unprovoked war started by an American president in 100 years was that Saddam Hussein had doomsday weapons. We now learn that Bush knew there were serious doubts about the never-found WMDs.
What if the cloud of doubt turned into a mushroom cloud? asked National Security adviser, Condy Rice, sending a shiver up the spine of Congress and the public.
Banish doubt! cried George W. Bush, resolutely. Full speed ahead! As the original causes of the war vanished, Bush remained steadfast, reasserting and re-reasserting commitment to a war that Bush-Cheney have wanted since the first national security meeting.
When all of the original reasons for the war were filed away in the archives, a bright new excuse emerged from nowhere: We had to go to war to topple Saddam and fight terrorism.
In a world full of tyrants, Bush chose one of the puniest, one his father sent back from Kuwait to Baghdad, a whipped dog, tail between his legs. In his palace, the neutered despot grumbled about his fate, and played with his toy-soldier army.
Iraq then was no breeding ground of terrorism as it is now. There were terrorists aplenty in the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan. But most of our troops stationed in Afghanistan went to Iraq, leaving all but major cities open to warlords and terrorists.
John Kerry was right in the Sept. 30 debate, we should have focused our attention and resources on fighting terrorism, Osama bin Laden, instead of the unnecessary war of choice against Saddam.
Had we done so, more than 1,000 lives of young Americans would not have been aborted. Instead of being shunned by most of the world, we would be at the head of a global alliance - with $ 200 billion more to spend fighting terrorism and on domestic priorities.
Maybe in the last three weeks of the campaign, the public will catch on to the selling of the Iraq war as a war on terrorism, done with such noiseless stealth by the political genius, Karl Rove, that most of us see no difference between the two.
The rest of the world draws a bright line between them: Other nations reject the Iraq war as a magnet for Islamic fanatics, but would fight and pay in a tight alliance with us against terrorism.
Now that we have paid such a high cost for the mess in Iraq, both the president and Sen. Kerry agree, we can't leave it a failed state in perpetual civil war, a spawning ground for terrorists.
The question for voters is this: Can the crowd that proved its incompetence by the tragic mess it created be counted on to clean it up by itself? And can a man rattled in debate with a senator convince tough, experienced world leaders to help?
Apparently the president doesn't want to try. Bush made Kerry's call for a broader alliance into a renewal of 1920s isolationism: We don't ask anybody when we're ready to shoot.
You would have to reach back to Warren Harding to find a precedent for Bush's isolationism. "We will accept no responsibility except as our own conscience and judgment, in each instance, may determine," said the naive Harding before scandal killed him.
But the precedent that made Bush blanch during the debate was the words of his own father from Gulf War I, quoted by Kerry. "Had we gone the invasion route, the United Sates could conceivably still be an occupying power in a bitterly hostile land."
Stung by his father's ignored advice, surely knowing now that the preventive war theory advocated by Cheney, Rove, Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz was a tragic mistake, he isn't likely to try it again.
There is good news for America and the world, regardless of who wins in November. The Bush Doctrine is history.
Ayers is publisher of The Anniston (Ala.) Star.

Load-Date: October 11, 2004


End of Document