The World;
The I.R.A. Reminds Britons of the War At Their Back Door
The New York Times
February 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week In Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week In Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 831 words
Byline: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT
Dateline: LONDON
Body


SINCE the outbreak of fighting in the Persian Gulf, Britain's domestic security forces have gone on a war footing. Soldiers patrol airports, fresh signs in subway stations warn of the threat of bombs, and scores of Iraqi immigrants await deportation inside British prisons, where they have been detained as possible agents of terrorism.
But when mortar rounds exploded in the heart of London this month, narrowly missing Prime Minister John Major and his War Cabinet as they met inside 10 Downing Street, the perpetrators were not Arabs. Rather, the audacious attack was carried out by members of the Irish Republican Army, a much more familiar but no less brutal foe of British security agents.
Last week the I.R.A. struck again, mounting bomb attacks on two central London railroad stations that left one man dead and 40 wounded. For some here, it was almost as if the I.R.A. were using the nation's preoccupation with the gulf war, and its apprehension about Arab terrorism, to deliver a forceful reminder: Whatever battles Britain may wage on other fronts, it must never forget that London is first of all at war over Northern Ireland.
Residents of London looked on the attack on the railroad stations Monday as another demonstration of callous brutality by the I.R.A. Although the first bomb, at Paddington Station, inflicted no casualties, the second, in the main concourse of Victoria Station, sprayed glass and shrapnel across a crowd of early-morning commuters. Among those hurt were three children.
For Government officials and students of Northern Ireland, the I.R.A.'s new offensive raised puzzling questions about not only the timing of the attacks, but the apparent shift in tactics. By bombing the railway stations, the I.R.A. had launched its first attack on ordinary civilians in England since 1983, when six people were killed by a bomb at Harrod's department store.
No one outside its leadership really knows what is going on within the I.R.A., whose operations are obviously controlled by a small and highly secret cabal. Indeed, experts on terrorism say the recent violence in London may have been the work of secret cells of no more than eight highly trained operatives who have been planning their actions for months.
Along with a turn toward more violent tactics in Northern Ireland, the attacks in London this month seem to suggest that hard-liners are clearly in command within the I.R.A. In recent months there have been published reports hinting at dissension within the movement, of friction between hard-liners and those who believe the I.R.A. must move away from terrorism if it is to make any political gains. That there is debate within I.R.A. ranks was underscored Friday when Mitchel McLaughlin, a high official in Northern Ireland of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political arm, broke ranks to condemn the bombing in London. In an article in The Irish News, Mr. McLaughlin described the attack at Victoria Station as a "catastrophe" and a "tragedy for the families involved, and a tragedy for the Republican struggle."
 
Murder Trials
 Although it might have been sheer coincidence, the attacks came as two murder trials involving I.R.A. operatives were opening. In Belfast, seven defendants are accused of conspiring to kill a man who was suspected of being a police informant. In the Netherlands, four I.R.A. members went on trial in the murders of two Australian tourists who were mistaken for off-duty British soldiers.
Whatever the I.R.A.'s strategic or tactical considerations, the bombings have had a wrenching effect on everyday life in London. Since Monday, delays on trains and subways have become commonplace, as police respond to bomb threats and close off stations to inspect every abandoned parcel or briefcase.
But while it is not easy to move around the city on some days, life does go on. "The British public is comparatively phlegmatic about these things," said Frank Brenchly, who is with the Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism. "After all, even with the bombings, it's safer to travel to London by train on any day than it is by automobile."
 Although the public shows little passion for Britain's continuing military role in Northern Ireland, the bombings only affirmed the broad view here of the I.R.A. as a terrorist organization.
In an interview in the Sinn Fein newspaper earlier this month, an anoynmous I.R.A. official said that by opening a new front in London, the I.R.A. intends not only to reap a harvest of publicity, but to drive the British "from their ivory towers" and into "the underground bunkers that the soldiers in the British Army have been living in for years in their forlorn attempts to maintain British rule in Ireland." In the end, the I.R.A. may simply be trying to do to London what it has been doing all along in Belfast: to create a constant atmosphere of civic uncertainty. Whatever happens in the Persian Gulf in the coming days, the I.R.A. has served warning that the war over Ireland will go on.

Graphic

 
Photo: Memorial bouquets for victims of a bomb blast last week in London's Victoria Station. The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: February 24, 1991


End of Document