The decade in travel: Technology and terrorism
The Bismarck Tribune
December 15, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 5A
Length: 488 words
Byline: BETH J. HARPAZ AP Travel Editor
Body


NEW YORK - Remember getting through an airport without removing your shoes, dumping your water bottle or showing ID?
Remember when buying plane tickets by phone was faster than using a clunky Web site with a dial-up connection?
Remember when you needed a guidebook to plan a vacation, and when you had to phone ahead to get directions?
All these things are different now, thanks to two forces that have changed travel and tourism in the last decade profoundly and forever: Terrorism and technology.
Long before Sept. 11, 2001, air passengers walked through metal detectors and had their carry-on luggage screened by X-ray. But these procedures failed to prevent the 9/11 attackers from boarding four jets with knives and box cutters.
In the aftermath of the attacks, the Transportation Security Administration was created, "the number of prohibited items doubled or tripled," all checked bags were screened and "the scrutiny passengers undergo was increased," said Robert Baker, director of global security intelligence studies at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Prescott, Ariz.
A few months later, in December 2001, Richard Reid tried to blow up a plane by igniting explosives in his shoe. That led to barefoot passengers padding through the checkpoints. Then in August 2006, British authorities uncovered a plot to blow up aircraft using liquid explosives. That led to restrictions on liquids and gels.
Today, travelers who forget that snow globes, wine and water bottles aren't allowed through airport checkpoints seem absurdly out of touch. And there's little sympathy if you miss your flight because you didn't allow enough time for security lines.
The attitude toward air travel has changed over the last decade, too. Flying isn't fun anymore. It's just one big headache: Flight delays, lost baggage, overbooked flights, fewer onboard amenities and fees for things that used to be free. Despite the hassles, though, Americans fly more now than they did a decade ago.
Technology is the other big force that's changed travel in the last decade. Expedia and Travelocity began accepting online bookings in 1996, but the phenomenon of using the Internet to routinely book and plan travel has exploded in the 21st century.
In 2009, for the first time, more than half of travel bookings were made online, according to Douglas Quinby of PhoCusWright, a travel industry research company. (If you're surprised that online bookings make up only 50 percent of travel, consider this: Most group travel, most cruises, many complicated itineraries and even the majority of lodging reservations are still booked through a travel agent, by phone or in person, Quinby says.)
But the Internet's impact on travel is not just in booking; it's also in planning trips. Instead of buying a guidebook, today's traveler might consult a destination Web site. To find a restaurant, you might ask friends for a recommendation through Facebook or Twitter.

Load-Date: December 15, 2009


End of Document