The Execution of Timothy McVeigh
Indiana Statesman: Indiana State University
November 18, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: SEARCH; Pg. 1
Length: 656 words
Byline: Erin Bradshaw
Body


Better known as the Oklahoma City Bomber, Timothy McVeigh was the man who committed an act of terrorism in Oklahoma City in 1995. 
This white man with a military background was on a mission. 
He succeeded in bombing a third of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. More than 150 people were killed and injured from the act. 
At that point in time, it was the largest act of terrorism committed on U.S. soil. 
The media has painted a pretty picture of him: a church boy, a decorated veteran, a "knowledgeable" young man. 
However, this is not the truth. 
He was a lethal killer with an obsession with guns, and a vendetta from being bullied and not having the perfect family life growing up. 
Because of his crimes, he was convicted on 160 counts of state offenses, 11 federal offenses, and was found guilty in 1997 and sentenced to death. 
Contrary to most, he only sat in jail for four years, whereas most people stay for about 15. 
The style of execution that was brought upon him was by lethal injection. Many feel this way of execution was not harsh enough considering the damage he had done. 
McVeigh is not the only one to have been executed in Indiana. 
The Department of Justice issued a statement that five death row prisoners will be executed in a series of six weeks, which is something that hasn't been done since 2003. 
Some people strongly disagree with the death penalty, specifically people leaning toward the left. 
However, I have found it isn't a matter of left and right, it is based on an individual and what they have gone through.
People believe different things for different reasons. 
I have a friend who was raped her freshmen year of college. Prior to this horrible incident happening, she firmly believed against the death penalty, but afterward, her mind changed a little. 
Because of what happened to her, she felt like people who do these horrible things don't deserve to live. Until something happens to you, you cannot judge how other people think.
I also used to be under the assumption that most religious people did not believe in the death penalty. 
My train of thought lead me to this because if God put somebody in the world, it's his job to take them out. 
Now, I think religious views vary on the topic, but many religious people I've talked to believe in the death penalty. 
Most people quote the Bible stating "an eye for an eye" or something of the sort. I can see this point of view.
Other people might also be in favor because of taxes. 
The reality is that the longer someone sits in jail, then the longer our tax money is used to feed them, clothe them, etc. 
If a murderer or a rapist is sitting on death row, I don't think I necessarily want my money going to keep them alive when they hurt people. Some people also argue that the death penalty deters potential offenders from committing crimes. 
Many studies have found this to be untrue. In fact, countries where capital punishment was abolished, murder rates decreased (Abdorrahman Boroumand Center, 2018).
I am torn on the topic. 
I am more on the sides of, it isn't my place to take people out of this world, but I don't want my taxes paying for a murderer. 
I can see all sides; I can see the morality of it all. 
During Obama's presidency, he pardoned two people from getting the death penalty and instead gave them life sentences. 
Even though he had a more liberal perspective, people were still upset he didn't do more about capital punishment. 
Now, President Trump will definitely not outlaw it, so it is up to voters for the next election to decide how they feel on the topic. 
On another note, the death penalty is not something that happens every day. 
Because of the media and the popularity of documentaries on serial killers, it seems like it happens as often as we drink water, but that isn't the case. 
The death penalty is something that is taken with the upmost seriousness and is designed for the most lethal people alive. It isn't for just anyone. 

Load-Date: November 19, 2019


End of Document