THE AMERICAN MEDIA'S BIAS ON NORTHERN IRELAND
The New York Times
May 13, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 293 words
Body


To the Editor:
If over the next few weeks or months there are acts of terrorism against British Government officials in America, a deal of responsibility will rest with the disgraceful and unbalanced coverage the U.S. media - especially TV - have given to the death of Bobbie Sands.
In all the outpouring of indignation and emotion, the American media have given nearly exclusive coverage to pro-I.R.A. spokesmen.
Peter Samuel letter criticizes American press coverage of starvation death of convicted Irish Republican Army prisoner Robert SandsNot a word has been heard from the many moderate critics of the I.R.A. The Rev. Ian Paisley, the Ulster extremist who is an apologist for Ulster vigilantism and the terrorism of the other side, has been portrayed as somehow representative of critics of the I.R.A.
This grotesque picture is sheer I.R.A. propaganda. It overlooks the following pertinent facts:
* Democratically elected Irish governments over the years have consistently dissociated themselves from I.R.A. terrorism such as Sands was engaged in.
* The Thatcher Government, in refusing to capitulate to I.R.A.  terrorism, has been following a policy consistently followed over the years by British governments of all political persuasions.
* Bobby Sands was properly in prison, having been convicted of armed robberies and malicious use of firearms (he was involved in gun battles with the police).
* His death was suicide. Any death is tragic, and the obviously unnecessary death of Sands is rightly cause for mourning. But by joining so uncritically in an I.R.A. propaganda exercise, the American media have contributed heavily to the likelihood that more misguided I.R.A. zealots like Sands will copy his pathetic suicide.
PETER SAMUEL, New York, May 7, 1981


End of Document