THE WORLD;
French Officials Mobilize Against New Terrorism
The New York Times
October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 364 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and James F. Clarity
Body


France took extraordinary precautions last week against terrorist incidents that might follow the five bombings that killed 10 people and injured 162 in September. Senior officials appealed for public vigilance, repeating warnings issued before the bombings.
''We do not believe things have ended,'' said Interior Minister Charles Pasqua. ''Things could get worse.'' All police leaves were canceled for the first time since the student and worker upheavals in May 1968. And security checks were inaugurated for the semiannual Paris fashion showings, which are attended by hundreds of foreign buyers, writers and photographers.
The warnings followed the apparent failure of efforts by French officials to bargain for a truce with Middle Eastern guerrilla groups. Archbishop Hilarion Capucci of the Roman Catholic Melkite Church of the Eastern Rite, a Syrian who had sought to function as a go-between, left France expressing disgust after President Francois Mitterrand questioned his credentials. The Archbishop was sentenced to a three-year jail term in Israel in 1974 for transporting explosives. Mr. Mitterrand said he was concerned about the ''extraordinary facilities'' being accorded the Archbishop, though the clergyman did not represent any country.
Michel Aurillac, a Cabinet Minister who recently visited Damascus, said it was known ''with certainty'' that the brothers of Georges Ibrahim Abdallah - a suspected Lebanese terrorist leader being held in a French prison - had been spirited out of France ''by professional secret agents.''
''We noted,'' Mr. Aurillac added, ''that they have held press conferences in Lebanon in a region controlled by Syria.'' The French police believe the Abdallah brothers had a role in the bombings. Prime Minister Jacques Chirac said France was studying ''methods of retaliation'' against countries that help terrorists. But he said no proof of such help had been found, and ''nothing allows us to accuse Syria of anything at all.''
Officials took special pains to protect Pope John Paul II during his four-day visit to France, which began yesterday in Lyons. Security was also tightened at synagogues during Jewish New Year services this weekend.

Graphic

 
Photo of French policemen checking pedestrian's identity card in Paris (Reuters)


End of Document