The big question : Will we see more terrorism or less ? less ? less ?
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
August 21, 1998, Friday friday friday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P7C P7C P7C
Length: 605 words
Byline: Tony Pugh and Joyce Davis Knight-Ridder Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Body


WASHINGTON - While Thursday's U.S. attack on terrorist bases in
Afghanistan and the Sudan drew widespread support from Democrats and
Republicans, terrorism experts were divided about whether the strikes
will mean less terrorism or more.
Edward Kane, a former CIA operations officer who served 15 years in
the Arab world and in Africa, said the attacks could prove devastating
to the region's tightly knit terrorist networks.
"Assuming these are the factions involved in the double bombings in
Africa, it could deprive those groups of human and material assets.
Any further violence against the U.S. would likely have been carried
out already," Kane said.  said.  said.
Others were less optimistic. "What happens next depends on whether
this was a one-shot war or not," said a senior U.S. official who
asked not to be identified.
"If this is all we're going to do, there will be more terrorism, not
less. If we are willing to continuing hitting these people, they may
have second thoughts."
But many counterterrorism experts say Osama bin Laden and many of his
operatives are hard-bitten veterans of the war in Afghanistan and also
are fanatically devoted to Islam.
They are even less likely to be impressed by a few cruise missiles
than heads of state such as Libya's Muammar Kadhafi and Iraq's Saddam
Hussein - and neither Kadhafi nor Saddam has behaved himself for very
long after U.S. air attacks, said one U.S. intelligence official who
asked to remain anonymous.
As Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., said Thursday, evidence suggests that
two Libyan agents put a bomb on PanAm Flight 103, killing 270 people,
two years after Ronald Reagan ordered the Navy and Air Force to
retaliate for Libya's role in bombing a Berlin discotheque.
Saddam, who has endured both the Persian Gulf war and repeated U.S.
attacks since, is once again refusing to cooperate with United Nations
weapons inspectors.
The world's most muscular and consistent retaliatory policy, mean
while, has never succeeded in ending terrorist attacks against Israel.
The greatest dangers now, some officials and experts said, may be
attacks on vulnerable U.S. allies in the Arab world such as Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak or a move by bin Laden's or other terrorist
groups to up the ante by striking at targets in the U.S. or trying to
use chemical or biological weapons.
Some U.S. officials also think terrorists may switch from attacking
U.S. embassies or military posts to softer overseas targets such as
American schools, businesses and airlines.
Mohamad Sid-Ahmed, a political analyst for Al Ahram newspaper in
Cairo, said the bombing probably will encourage more attacks against
the U.S. and its allies.
"This could eventually backfire because the people [here] are not on
the same wavelength even those constituencies that are not against
America will not be able to support this action."
But Patrick Eddington, a CIA military analyst from 1988 to 1996, said
the reaction and additional terrorist acts against the U.S. would have
occurred with or without the bombing.
"It was going to happen anyway," Eddington said.
"The administration had made it clear that it had received credible
reports of possible threats against other U.S. facilities in that
region. This action was prudent and pre-emptive, no question about
it."
But a leader of an international Islamic movement, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity, said that as a courtesy, the U.S. should have
given Afghanistan and Sudan some advance warning of the attacks, which
he said would do little to stop further terrorism.
"I fear that it will provoke more.  Essentially it's an admission that
the rules of the game are the rules that bin Laden plays by." by." by."

Load-Date: August 21, 1998


End of Document