The 9/11 Poll Respondents Talk; The Caucus
The New York Times 
(The Caucus)
September 11, 2006 Monday 09:33 EST


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 823 words
Byline: KATE PHILLIPS
Highlight: From the Times/CBS Poll, published last Thursday, are follow-up interviews with respondents. The national poll was conducted Aug. 17-21 and the New York City poll conducted Aug. 23-27. Mildred Donovan, 82 Natrona Heights,Pa. I don&#8217;t think Hussein was personally involved. We found him and the attacks are still going on. He doesn&#8217;t have anyone in [&#8230;] 
Body


From the Times/CBS Poll, published last Thursday, are follow-up interviews with respondents. The national poll was conducted Aug. 17-21 and the New York City poll conducted Aug. 23-27.
Mildred Donovan, 82
Natrona Heights,Pa.
I don’t think Hussein was personally involved. We found him and the attacks are still going on. He doesn’t have anyone in direct contact with him. They don’t have the use of his money, they don’t have his sons, and the attacks haven’t stopped.
Ms. Marthe Beasley, 74
Fayetteville, Ark.
I think if we stay right with God, he’ll protect our nation.
I know that our president is doing all he possible can.  I think the government is doing enough and they’re doing all they can.  The Democrats are not going to do any better.
Anthony Tacopina, 63,
Breezy Point, Queens, N.Y.
NYC seems to be in the terrorists’ eye.  They tried to knock the Towers down years before they accomplished it   I think they just want to do something again.  You’re dealing with people who really don’t care, they’re fanatics.  It’s hard to say what’s going on in their minds but you have to be on the alert all the time because they’re waiting for you to drop your guard. And it’s impossible to guard every subway station. I thought for a while that they blew their wad on 9/11 and didn’t have time to plan things because they were on the run, but who knows were they are now.  
William Rappaport, 48
Brooklyn, N.Y.
This is a war of civilizations and until we leave the Middle East,  Al Qaeda and Islamic rights groups will continue to attack  America.  And they’re not going to attack Florida, they’re going to attack New York.   Without a doubt it will happen here and soon. 
 Sally Rosenheim, 63
Albuquerque, NM
As far as terrorism is concerned, I think we’ve taken care of enough here, but I’m really upset with how long the war in Iraq has lasted. We’re losing a lot of people and we’re not gaining any ground.  I think the war was supposed to end terrorism, but it didn’t.
I’m just not really big on war.  I don’t know that many women are.  My granddaughters have asked me if I thought we would stop having wars if we had a woman president. But I don’t think it would stop because since time began men have always fought to have the power and they’re going to fight no matter who is president.
If going to war was going to do something for terrorism, I don’t know what we’ve accomplished.  I don’t think this war is fighting terrorism.  I think it’s gone beyond that.  It’s not helping anybody in Iraq.  I disapprove of the war.  If the war is supposed to be taking care of terrorism, then I disapprove of that way of doing it.  
Cathy Hart, 33
Vienna, W.Va.
I think that the government knows more about what is going on, but I truly think if the terrorists are going to attack us they’re going to attack us and the government is not going to stop them.  I know the government is now more aware and they think they know who are terrorists and who are not terrorists but they are there and they are in our country and if it happens it’s going to happen, it doesn’t matter whether the government is prepared or not. 
 Danielle Meredith, 64
Marble Falls, Texas
We may be less safe because I don’t think our borders are being protected adequately.  It’s pretty wide open.  It’s an open avenue for terrorists to come in.  I’m not afraid of an attack because I’m in a rural area.  I don’t spend my life being afraid because I think their main object is to render us helpless and nervous.
 Enid Grossi, 65
Arroyo Grande, Calif.
Five years ago we really weren’t aware of the terrorist threat per se.   We are safer now than we were but we were unaware of the danger we were in. When 9/11 occurred it brought everything to a head.  There have been so many attacks on this country, on our embassies and our ships and the previous attacks on the World Trade Center, but we’ve been too complacent. But now we are so faced with this we have no choice.  Under the circumstances I think the president and the federal government are doing all they can. You can’t be completely prepared  because it’s like trying to fight ants. 
Adrian Mordaunt, 30
Sunnyside, Queens, N.Y.
A commercial building with offices and a shopping mall would be in bad taste.  If they build a hospital as a memorial, that would actually benefit people.
Maybe they should have know better about the long-effects of the air quality, but it was such a massive mess down there maybe it took a while to figure it out.  I would ask the government serious questions about what actually happened.  Whether they slipped up or deliberately held back information, I don’t know. 
Alaina Davis, 20
Queens (Long Island City), N.Y.
We’re always going to have our guards up as individuals and as a city.  I respect that the space needs to be a memorial for the people’s families, but it’s a money making world.  We need both a memorial park and we need the Freedom Tower because  it will be valuable commercially for the city.

Load-Date: May 18, 2017


End of Document