THE HIJACKING AFTERMATH;
THATCHER SAYS SHE WILL WORK WITH U.S. TO STOP TERRORISM
The New York Times
July 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 552 words
Byline: Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, July 3
Body


Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher agreed today to work with the United States to stop international terrorism, but she declined to join, at least for the moment, in President Reagan's campaign to ''isolate'' Beirut International Airport.
After a meeting with Vice President Bush at 10 Downing Street, at which the hijacking of a Trans World Airlines plane last month by Lebanese Shiite fundamentalists headed a long agenda, the Prime Minister issued a statement pledging that ''as a first step,'' Washington and London ''will seek the agreement of all those states which share their concern for the security of civil aviation, to suspend all air services between their countries and Beirut.''
The United States and Britain will try to persuade the other five participants in a meeting at Bonn next week to ban flights between Beirut and airports on their own national territory.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher agrees to work with United States to stop international terrorism, but says he will not join in Pres Reagan's campaign to 'isolate' Beirut International Airport unless France, West Germany, Italy, Japan and Canada do so also; all seven countries are already committed to policy like one Reagan has adopted by virtue of agreement they made in Bonn in 1978; photo (M)
At a luncheon at which she entertained Mr. Bush, his wife, Barbara, and 60 other guests, Mrs. Thatcher decribed the United States as Britain's closest ally - a theme she has sounded consistently during her term of office.
But later, standing in the doorway to Number 10, she told reporters that Britain ''will be very pleased'' to stop Lebanese flights to this country, ''provided that we can get all the Bonn summit countries to stop them as well.'' If no such agreement is possible, she added, ''we will have to consider whether we and the U.S. stop them.''
Mr. Reagan has already taken such action, however, and American officials said that there was no considering to be done in Washington.
According to Western diplomats here, the Prime Minister's cautious course was dictated by a desire to avoid offending the Lebanese Government and, more important, the rest of the Arab world, where Britain has important political and economic interests. By winning the backing of France, West Germany, Italy, Japan and Canada - the other Bonn participants - Mrs. Thatcher would diffuse any Arab wrath.
In a sense, all seven countries are already committed to a policy like the one the President has adopted. The last time the seven met in Bonn, on July 16 and 17, 1978, they agreed that when a country fails to extradite those involved in a hijacking, their governments '' will initiate action to halt all incoming flights from that country or from any country by the airlines of the country concerned.''
But the French may well prove even more reluctant than the British to move against Beirut airport. Mr. Bush said last week in Paris that he had not raised the question with President Francois Mitterrand, and American diplomats there said he had not done so because he had been told that the answer would have been no had he broached the subject.
Mr. Bush said here that the United States was grateful to ''Mrs. Thatcher and her Government and people for their leadership and determination to help eliminate the scourge of international terrorism.''

Graphic

 
photo of Margaret Thatcher and Vice President Bush (Agence France-Presse)


End of Document