The Cairenes Aren't Impressed
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
December 29, 1993, Wednesday


Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: A LETTER FROM CAIRO; Pg. 24
Length: 600 words
Byline: Deborah Pugh
Highlight: Egypt is hosting Israeli-Palestinian talks, but the people
want an end to violence and poverty
Body


THE world has focused in on Cairo as the venue for the latest
attempt to break the deadlock between Israelis and Palestinians
over the future of autonomy for the Gaza Strip and the West Bank
city of Jericho, but few Egyptians are interested in the historic
events transpiring in their midst. Nor do they appear much
impressed by their government's role in chivying the participants
to make progress.
Confronted with escalating violence between Islamic militants
and their government, the average Egyptian finds his own troubles
more immediate than those of the region. This country, after all,
already has a peace treaty with Israel. Egyptians express deep
frustration that, despite 15 years of peace and billions in
international aid, they have not achieved prosperity - except for
a small and highly conspicuous elite set apart by Mercedes cars and
flamboyant lifestyles.
Indeed, if there are any successful negotiations made in Cairo,
Egyptians would prefer they centered on finding an end to spreading
civil unrest. Instead, the government and Islamic militants appear
to be preparing for an accelerated confrontation with catastrophic
implications.
''This terrorism is a disaster. It is destroying Egypt, and
ordinary people are caught between the terrorists and the
government. It's fine if they can solve things for the
Palestinians, but what about solving things here?'' asks a young
woman.
On the morning of Dec. 27, even as Egyptians were reading in
their newspapers that ''25,000 tourists arrived last week,'' for
their holidays, a group of Islamic militants surrounded a tour bus
on its way to visit Cairo's ancient Christian quarter, riddled it
with bullets, and threw an explosive device inside.
Only eight tourists were injured, but Egyptians know that, with
tourists once more being singled out for attack by Islamic
militants, there will be no early recovery for the country's
already blighted tourism industry.
Tourism is critically important to Egypt. Not only was it the
country's main source of hard currency before the rise of militant
attacks in 1992, but 3 million tourists a year also provided
sustenance for many ordinary Egyptians from taxi drivers to the
makers of souvenirs.
In a move to boost tourism, the Egyptian government announced
Dec. 27 that it will again place on public display royal mummies,
which were once barred from public view. Antiquities officials say
a select group of 11 pharaohs and queens, including famed Ramses
II, could go on display as early as February in Cairo's Egyptian
Museum.
And Egyptian authorities insist that they are doing their utmost
to solve the terrorism problem. Since last December, thousands of
alleged militants have been arrested. Military courts have been
empowered to try those accused of a wide range of political
offenses. Since June, more than 29 militants have been executed,
many after rapid military trials from which the foreign press
frequently has been barred.
But these bloody reprisals appear only to increase the ferocity
of the militants who have realized that whether or not they kill
anyone, they are likely to die if captured.
In November, Islamic militants came very close to assassinating
Prime Minister Atef Sedki. In December alone, 18 policemen have
been killed. On the evening of Dec. 27, three Coptic Christian
jewelers were murdered in their shop in a raid allegedly carried
out by Islamic militants looking to finance their operations.
Egyptians, who have long been proud of their stable society, are
now looking toward 1994 with deep pessimism. Not a few believe that
the prospect of peace between Israelis and Palestinians looks more
promising than for themselves.

Load-Date: December 30, 1993


End of Document