THE 9-11 COMMISSION : RICE HAS TO PERFORM MAGIC DURING HER TESTIMONY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 8, 2004 Thursday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. D13; COMMENTARY
Length: 670 words
Byline: Thomas F. Eagleton
Body


*    She has to create an alternate reality for the terrorism actions ofthe Bush administration.
R-Day has arrived. The president's National Security Advisor, Condoleezza Rice, will tell us -- in sworn public testimony scheduled today before the 9-11 commission -- how vigorously the Bush administration was pursuing Osama bin Laden and al-Qaida.
What do we know as of now? We know that Richard Clarke, the so-called terrorism czar, regarded the issue as an urgent priority. So, too, did CIA Director George Tenet and Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage.
But their boss, President George W. Bush, didn't. As Bush told The Washington Post's Bob Woodward, "I didn't feel that sense of urgency."
During her burst of television and press interviews after Clarke's commission testimony, Rice claimed she had always had a sense of urgency about terrorism. So, as close as she was to the president, why couldn't she and the others get him to share it? Why did she let the plan to address the terrorism threat bounce around at the secondary-staff level for eight months?
There is little mystery to the mystery. Bush's top foreign and defense policy advisers had utter disdain both for the policies of former President Bill Clinton and for Clinton personally. They wanted a clear de-Clintonization of American foreign policy.
So the Bush administration set new priorities:
* Missile defense: Clinton was moving too slowly. Make it the top priority of defense procurement.
* China: Clinton had grown too cozy. Communists are communists; keep them at a distance.
* North Korea: Clinton was going too far to cut a deal on nuclear weapons. Cool it and stiff 'em!
* Israel-Palestine: Clinton had failed at Camp David. Steer clear of this never-ending mess.
* United Nations: Clinton pandered to it. We will pursue our interests in our way in our own time.
* Global Warming Treaty: Clinton could not get it ratified. Kill it.
* Nation-building: This got Clinton in trouble. It's not for us.
* Iraq: Last, but first.
Iraq was an obsession of Bush's incoming hawks: Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, his chief deputy Paul Wolfowitz and Defense Policy Board adviser Richard Perle. In 1998, these men strenuously urged Clinton to invade Iraq. When they assumed their new positions in January 2001, they finally had the power to translate their predispositions into policy -- including the principle of Iraq First.
It was in this context that Iraq replaced al-Qaida on the terrorism front burner. Al-Qaida was a multilateral threat. Iraq was unilateral and fit neatly in Bush's order of priorities.
This does not mean that the Bush people totally ignored al-Qaida. It does not mean they were indifferent to terrorism. It means that in the evil world in which we live, Iraq became Evil No. 1 and bin Laden was put on hold.
After the 9-11 attacks, of course, Afghanistan and bin Laden had to be dealt with immediately. Still, when the Bush war-on-terrorism cabinet met at Camp David soon after 9-11, Wolfowitz called Iraq a co-conspirator with bin Laden and even cast Iraq as the principal culprit. Although he was overruled at the time in favor of action against Afghanistan, Iraq remained the ultimate and unwavering focus of the group.
Cheney and Wolfowitz, to this day, insist that there had to be a state sponsor for 9-11; that al-Qaida could not have pulled it off alone. Even though there is no evidence that Saddam Hussein was involved, they still mouth it.
Yes, it is R-Day. Rice has two and a half hours of testimony to piece it all together and somehow make it fit. She has to convey a sense of urgency that the president did not feel. She has to convert eight months of motionlessness into frenzied activity. She has to link Iraq and al-Qaida where there was no linkage. She has to put al-Qaida up front where it wasn't. In other words, she has to transform inadvertence into vigilant oversight.
And she has to do all of this against the backdrop of blood, near-anarchy and a mini-version of a Tet offensive in Iraq.

Notes

COMMENTARY/ A FORUM FOR OTHER VOICES, IDEAS AND OPINIONS/ Thomas F. Eagleton was a Democratic U.S. senator from Missouri (1968-1987). He served on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Senate Intelligence Committee and the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo by CHUCK KENNEDY / KRT - National Security Advisor Dr. Condoleezza Rice stands in the Oval Office behind President George W. Bush's chair in February. Rice is scheduled to testify today before the 9-11 commission.

Load-Date: April 8, 2004


End of Document