The Color of Terrorism
The New York Times
December 22, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 489 words
Body


A common and ignoble color marks the new surge of terrorism in the Middle East, El Salvador and now Britain. Whether the victims are marines or trade unionists or Christmas shoppers, the ultimate sponsors pretend their death squads are acting strictly on their own. Color that kind of terrorism yellow.
Though its own troops committed the deed, the Irish Republican Army minimizes its responsibility for last weekend's grisly killings at Harrods, the London department store. The I.R.A. insists that it hadn't ''authorized'' a car-bombing that took five lives and wounded 91. Besides, it added callously, the London police had ample warning - 40 minutes - to clear a store jammed with Christmas shoppers.
The I.R.A. also purported to disavow the killers who burst into a Northern Ireland church three weeks ago and machine-gunned the congregation, slaying three and wounding seven. A hitherto unknown group calling itself the ''Catholic Reaction Force'' claimed it was responsible, while the I.R.A. formally repudiated the crime as ''blatantly sectarian.''
But this brotherhood of fanatics and its American defenders cannot be allowed such a self-serving exculpation. By condoning murder as a political weapon, the I.R.A. has put itself behind the same fence as all political killers, ''authorized'' or not. When Gerry Adams, the public voice of the secret army, asserts ''We support the use of force in the struggle for Irish independence,'' he preaches the principle put into practice at Harrods.  Morally, there is no difference between the car- bombers of Beirut and those of London, between the death squads of El Salvador and those of Ulster. Politically, such crime may be mitigated when paths to peaceful change are blocked, especially when a whole people rebel against an armed occupation. But random murder in a worthy cause is still murder, and to contend otherwise is to lobotomize conscience.  Even the crudest justification - that terror sometimes works - fails in Northern Ireland. After 2,300 deaths and 43,000 violent incidents in the province since 1969, a Protestant majority is as resistant as ever to unification with the predominantly Catholic Irish Republic. And in the sober reckoning of a report just submitted to the Dublin Government, the further bill for this bloodletting has been $18 billion for all Ireland.  The way to change minds is to join the political process, not to wreck it; to shame Protestant bigotry, not emulate it. In tyrannical Poland, Solidarity managed to mobilize resistance without loss of life or honor. Yet in a parliamentary democracy, Irish guerrillas ask for license to kill Christmas shoppers.  Having tutored the killers, the I.R.A.'s leaders compound the crime by ducking responsibility. ''And what rough beast, its hour come at last, slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?'' As if in answer to Yeats's poetic forebodings, death squads are slouching forward, and not only in Ireland.


End of Document