The misguided criticism of Representative Omar
The Rebel Yell: University of Nevada - Las Vegas
April 15, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 761 words
Byline: Eduardo Rossal
Body


Violence and terrorism in the U.S. is nothing new. It began with the Confederate army of the South, and when they lost; they emerged as the Ku Klux Klan. In the era of the Trump Administration, hate crimes have been increasing, and 2018 was marked as the deadliest year.
While we do not have that many lynchings occurring today as in the 19th and 20th centuries, it still happens in the rural areas of the U.S. However, most of the terror nowadays is done with the use of guns, pipe bombs, and true-threats.
Yet the people who incite such fear are not as greatly ridiculed as the people who merely criticize it.
In the last couple of weeks since the new Congress was seated, the words of Minnesota Representative Ilhan Omar have been taken out of context and she has been threatened on a daily basis.
Rep. Omar was first attacked for being Muslim, as it is a crime in the U.S. to be anything that is not from the "norm." This is especially true if your view of the government is not in line with the establishment narrative.
Rep. Omar criticized money in politics and the influence it has on the government in a tweet that read: "It's all about the Benjamins baby." This tweet was in reference to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee and its influence in U.S. discourse of foreign policy decisions.
Due to her tweet, "It's all about the Benjamins baby," the media and politicians on both sides of the aisle made her out to be an Anti-Semitismatic when she was just criticizing money in politics; a sin in Washington D.C.
A popular conspiracy in far-right websites, not based in reality, is that a cabal of wealthy-Jewish-elite-bankers run the world. This belief has fueled so much hate and terror in the Jewish communities around the U.S.
A far-right-wing-terrorist attacked the Tree of Life Congregation in October 2018, leaving 11 dead and four wounded police officers and two others with injuries.
The U.S. has a true Anti-Semitism terror and making Rep. Omar out to be a person associated as a sympathizer with the movement, is utterly unprofessional. The criticism of having an organization that influences U.S. foreign policy is a valid concern that U.S. public officials should address.
However, the problem is much more severe. The Anti-Defamation League conducted a research study looking into domestic terrorism in the U.S. It looked into 573 cases where victims have been killed by terrorism and found that 80 percent of all terrorism in the U.S. between 2002 and 2016 was perpetrated by the right-wing.
The rise of the right-wing-terrorist-machine is attributed to stochastic terrorism. Stochastic terrorism is displayed by dog-whistling and scapegoating. For example, by blaming all crime and murders toward particular groups-there will be an increase of hate crimes toward those specific groups.
In 2018, CNN was attacked by yet another right-wing-terrorist. Cesar Sayoc, 56-years-old, sent pipe bombs to CNN New York City headquarters after years of President Donald Trump smearing the network for being an enemy of the U.S. There have been countless attacks towards the individuals that Trump has called out through his tweets and has broadcast them as well.
The Department of Justice released a report on hate crimes toward Latinos and Hispanics, specifically in California, which has increased by 50 percent since 2016.
Conservatives' minds tend to lean towards fear and disdain to make political decisions, as shown in a study conducted by The Royal Society.
It is the responsibility of the media to understand the nuance of any debate and have the proper context before making headlines and smearing the name of a Congresswoman. Rep. Omar has been getting threats in the daily, and that is no coincidence.
The Ohio College Republican Federation called Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez a domestic terrorist in an email. The email contained a brochure asking to raise money to defeat the Democratic Party in 2020, inciting both fear and anxiety to the recipients of the email.
If the Democratic Party leadership wanted to make an example out of anyone, it should have been Iowa Representative Steve King since his early years in Congress. Rep. King has always had a disdain for minorities and has come out to be a true sympathizer to white-supremacy, not Congresswoman Omar.
The Democratic Party turned its wagons on its own for criticizing money politics, rather than calling the false outrage from its counterparts on the right for having a representative in Congress and high position leadership for inciting hatred of minority groups around the U.S.

Load-Date: April 15, 2019


End of Document