THE GATES HEARINGS;
C.I.A. Analysts Said Iran Assessments Were Warped to Back Arms Sales
The New York Times
October 2, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1076 words
Byline: By PATRICK E. TYLER,

By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1
Body


Central Intelligence Agency analysts working under Robert M. Gates in 1985 complained in documents made public today that their detailed assessments on internal politics in Iran and Soviet influence there were seriously misrepresented to support a program of secret arms sales.
In addition, the documents show that the agency's analysts were shocked to learn that their superiors, including Mr. Gates, were appproving intelligence reports saying that Iranian support for terrorism was on the decrease, when they had found no evidence to support the assertion.
The analysts, in testimony before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and in supporting documentation released by the committee, were seeking to bolster their case that Mr. Gates, the Bush Administration's nominee to become Director of Central Intelligence, pandered to the political aides in the Reagan Administration who were preparing to trade arms to Iran for hostages held by pro-Iranian militants in Lebanon.
 
Debate Is Illuminated
 The eight previously classified documents on Iran that were made public today are significant in that they illuminate the highly charged debate in the C.I.A. over what is described as the "swerve" in professional judgments in 1985 at a time when Ronald Reagan's aides on the National Security Council were seeking an "opening" to Iran's leadership.
The most spirited criticism of the intelligence bureau over which Mr. Gates presided from 1982 to April 1986 as Deputy Director for Intelligence came from Thomas M. Barksdale, the C.I.A.'s senior political analyst on Iran.
In a Dec. 2, 1986, memorandum, Mr. Barksdale wrote, "I believe that the system as it has worked in regard to Iran over about the last 18 months has resulted in distorted, uninformed, and in some instances inaccurate information being presented to officials of this Government who presumably believed that they were receiving the collective judgment of this agency."
Mr. Barksdale's memorandum complained that a special study of Iranian support for terrorism prepared for the Director of Central Intelligence at the time, William J. Casey, contained a number of erroneous assertions. These included one that some moderate Iranian leaders were ready to restore relations with the United States.
In testimony before the committee on Sept. 25, another senior CIA analyst, Melvin A. Goodman, said, "I think the pattern is a very clear one in that they were trying to provide the intelligence analysis to the policy maker that would support the operational decision to sell arms to Iran."
Doing that, Mr. Goodman continued, required that "you had to say that there were pragmatists emerging in Iran, a moderate faction that wanted contact with the United States."
"You had to show that Iran's support for terrorism was down because if it continued at high levels, which it had, that would create political complications for getting arms to Iran," he said.  "They slanted it to say that terrorism was down. "
These allegations of "slanted" C.I.A. analysis when Mr. Gates was the agency's analytical director were presented today with the greatest detail to date and could complicate Mr. Gates's confirmation.
The committee also released a March 2, 1987, letter from Mr. Gates to Senator David L. Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who heads the committee, in which Mr. Gates defended himself from "false allegations" that the agency had colluded with officials of the National Security Council "in preparation of the May 1985 Estimate on Iran to reach specific conclusions."
In his defense, Mr. Gates argued that the security council officials had no role in preparing the estimate on Iran, that there were no dissents "from any agency" and that "the independence and integrity of the intelligence process were preserved throughout."
Dissent, however, was rife among the professional C.I.A. analysts who were working under Mr. Gates at the time, according to the documents released today. In a Jan. 28, 1987, memorandum, the agency's director of Soviet analysis, Douglas J. MacEachin, told his superiors that the analysis on Iran suffered from a "swerve" in 1985 with the production of the controversial estimate that warned of growing Soviet influence in Teheran and the potential for Soviet military pressure.
Mr. MacEachin said the Soviet specialists working under him felt that "their judgments in 1985 were overruled." Those judgments about Soviet intentions toward Iran, he said, were "subsequently demonstrated to have been correct."
Mr. MacEachin said Graham E. Fuller, the national intelligence officer for the Middle East, "made significant changes" in the Soviet group's draft assessment on Iran, adding an assertion that Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev would "see Iran as the key area of opportunity for Soviet foreign policy in the next year" and predicting renewed Soviet arms sales to Iran.
 
Major Point Is Cut
 The final estimate also dropped a key judgment of the Soviet group holding that the Soviet Union was "extremely unlikely to sacrifice good ties with Baghdad for uncertain gains in Teheran while an Islamic regime mistrustful of the U.S.S.R. and Communism rules Iran."
On the political side, Mr. MacEachin pointed out, "we concluded that the U.S.S.R. has not found the Iranian leadership responsive to Moscow's conditions for closer ties." Those conditions included a requirement that Iran reduce its anti-Soviet rhetoric, end its support for rebels fighting the Soviet Army then occupying Afghanistan, allow the return to Teheran of expelled Soviet diplomats and stop repressions of the pro-Soviet Tudeh Party.
Jennifer L. Glaudemans, who was a Soviet analyst for the agency, told the intelligence committee in closed session on Sept. 25 that Mr. Gates's "heavy handed" supervision of the agency's intelligence estimates "had tragic consequences" for American policy.
"There was and apparently still is an atmosphere of intimidation in the office of Soviet analysis," Ms. Glaudemans testified.
Now a Soviet analyst with the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Mr. Glaudemans described Mr. Gates's handling of the estimates on Iran. "There were heavy-handed and under-handed efforts to reverse or to impose analytical conclusions," she said. "This is not what I would call editing. Nor was it the suppression of dissent."
"As I recall the dissent was located on the 7th floor," she said referring to the C.I.A.'s executive floor where Mr. Gates's office was located.

Graphic

 
Photos: The C.I.A.'s involvment in the Iran-contra issue during leadership of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, left, was referred to as "national tragedy." William J. Casey, former C.I.A. director, shows above with Ronald Reagan, was believed to have seized every opportunity to exaggerate the Soviet threat. (United Press International; Associated Press)

Load-Date: October 2, 1991


End of Document