The stain of terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 21, 1996, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 18A; EDITORIAL
Length: 405 words
Body


For the families and friends of Red Cross workers murdered in Chechnya this  week, and the hundreds of diplomats still held hostage by left-wing militants  at the Japanese embassy in Peru, terror has tarnished this season of good will  and peace on Earth.
In Chechnya, the war-ravaged region seeking independence from Russia, life  ended too soon for six Red Cross relief workers who were slaughtered as they  slept in their hospital dormitory by unidentified attackers. The workers were  part of an international contingent who had dedicated their lives to caring  for the sick and the injured. The killings, senseless and obscene, are made  all the more vile by the depth of the victims' devotion to humanity.
TERROR
Five of the victims were women, four were nurses. They served the Red Cross  in the world's most dangerous places, healing the wounded in Bosnia, Angola,  Rwanda, Somalia and Central America. One victim, Gunnhild Myklebust, a  Norwegian surgical nurse, missed the birth of her first grandchild so she  could care for victims of Chechnya's violence. Fernanda Calado, a Spanish  nurse slain in the attack, had taught her patients and colleagues to dance the  flamenco.
It is a bitter irony that these selfless peacemakers became casualties of  the Chechen conflict. The identities of their murderers remain a mystery.
Whoever they may be, and whatever their motives, their crime is as cowardly  as the one being committed in Lima, Peru, where members of the Tupac Amaru  Revolutionary Movement are holding hundreds of foreign diplomats - including  about a half dozen Americans - hostage in the home of the Japanese ambassador.  The violent, Marxist guerrillas have killed thousands of Peruvians since they  began their anti-government campaign in the 1980s. The group is now demanding  that about 300 of their comrades be released from prisons and that Peru reform  its economic policies.
The release of a number of hostages Friday is a hopeful sign that the  standoff in Lima can be resolved peacefully. Whatever the outcome though, it,  like the murder of the Red Cross workers, is a reminder that terrorism strikes  at the most unexpected hour, in the most unlikely places. Its victims can be  aid workers in the trenches or dignitaries in a fortified embassy compound.  The innocent should not be forced to suffer for someone else's cause. And all  should be in our thoughts as we begin to celebrate the holidays. 

Load-Date: December 26, 1996


End of Document