The Case Against Iran
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 9, 2008 Wednesday
Final Edition


Copyright 2008 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-13
Length: 719 words
Byline: AUSTEN GIVENS
Body


 Imad Mugniyah, former operations chief of the Iran-backed terrorist group Hezbollah, was killed by a car bomb in February. This event is instructive for the United States in its dealings with Iran. Before the attacks
of Sept. 11, 2001, Hezbollah had killed more Americans than any other terrorist organization.
 In the face of growing concern over Iranian nuclear ambitions, it is worth noting that these attacks by Hezbollah universally involved the use of conventional weapons. Iran's ruthless past and continuing support for conventional terrorism, then, should work to inform American efforts to curb Iran's nuclear development.
 Until December of last year, the American intelligence community appeared convinced of Iran's intent to manufacture nuclear weapons. The U.S. National Intelligence Estimate of that month abruptly changed course, noting that Iran had likely halted any nuclear development work in fall 2003.
 It is clearly in the American interest to convince the world a nuclear Iran is unacceptable. Yet the embarrassment of the Iraqi case now hampers our ability to be convincing internationally. How are we to approach Iran's nuclear ambitions, as well as rally support abroad for our efforts?
 FIRST, WE MUST be honest in the arguments we deploy in the war on terrorism. Though the proliferation of nuclear weapons will remain a grave concern for generations to come, we must not lose sight of the fact that we are in the midst of an evolving war on terrorism - not a war on the proliferation of nuclear weapons per se. For the U.S., it should not just be about nuclear material or Iran's international obligations to fully disclose its nuclear activities. It should be about the past.
 Iran's history of quiet war on the U.S. is long and distinguished, and therefore all the more viable as the foundation of our arguments toward stopping Tehran. Attacks by the Iranian proxy Hezbollah - dubbed the "A-team" of terrorism by former Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage - include the bombings of the U.S. embassy and embassy annex in Beirut in 1983 and 1984, the bombing of a Marine barracks in Beirut that killed 250, and the murder of U.S. Navy diver Robert Stethem aboard TWA Flight 847.
 Efforts against the U.S. continued through the 1990s. The 1996 bombing of the U.S. Air Force barracks at Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia remains to this day an unsolved crime. The 9/11 Commission's reporting pointed to a possible al-Qaida-Iran connection in that attack.
 IRAN HAS TAKEN pains to undermine reconstruction and democratic initiatives in Iraq - a great point of frustration to the U.S. and its partners there. Discovery of Iranian bomb parts in diffused Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), shadowy alliances between Iraqi Shiite clerics and their Iranian counterparts, and the vast numbers of Iranian intelligence operatives deploying across the Iraq/Iran border all point to Iran's fear of the budding democracy in Iraq. It also illustrates Iran's determination to prevent the rise of representative government alongside another Iranian neighbor and nascent democracy, Afghanistan.
 To be sure, the development of an Iranian nuclear weapons program is arguably the greatest emerging security risk to U.S. interests in the Middle East today. Iran's past and continuing sponsorship of terrorism, coupled with its 20-plus-year clandestine war against the United States through Hezbollah and its intelligence service, make the possibility of a nuclear event against American interests a chilling prospect. More likely, though, is Iran's wielding of any future nuclear capability as a bargaining chip - a means of advancing its interests in the region and abroad. Either scenario signals tremendous future challenges for the U.S. that must be addressed sooner rather than later.
 Iran's clandestine nuclear program will remain a subject of debate even following a successful campaign to stop it in its tracks. Its long history of terrorism against the U.S., by contrast, is an item of record in world history, and should form the bedrock of our justifications to check the growth of a nuclear-armed Iran.
* Austen Givens is a graduate student in Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness at Virginia Commonwealth University. Contact him at givensad2@vcu.edu The views expressed are the author's alone.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 12, 2008


End of Document