The Changing Face of Terror
The New York Times
May 3, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 408 words
Body


The first step toward combating international terrorism is to identify the places from which it springs, and the latest State Department report properly points to South Asia as a new hub of activity. Pakistan and the rigidly Islamist Taliban movement that dominates Afghanistan are providing safe haven and support for the loose networks of individuals and groups that seem to be replacing states as the primary source of global terror. The challenge for the United States and its allies is to devise a combination of diplomatic and economic pressure that will induce the leaders of Pakistan and Afghanistan to join the fight against terrorism.
Washington cannot rely on methods that have helped to reduce terrorist threats elsewhere. In South Asia, unlike the Middle East, peacemaking does not offer the prospect of ameliorating underlying inequities that fuel terrorism. The conflicts of South Asia, especially the tensions between India and Pakistan and the confrontation between them in Kashmir, are not the primary source of inspiration or support for the international terrorist groups that are based in the region.
The terrorist problem in South Asia involves privately sponsored groups motivated less by political grievances than by religion and ideology, which are not amenable to negotiation. The most notorious of these organizations is led by Osama bin Laden, the fugitive Saudi-born financier suspected of masterminding the 1998 bombings of two American embassies in East Africa that killed more than 200 people. Mr. bin Laden remains at large in Afghanistan, sheltered by the Taliban, which he supports financially. He also leads a militia with thousands of fundamentalist fighters that defends the Taliban against northern Afghan insurgents.
Washington has already imposed some sanctions on both the Taliban and Pakistan, and it does not recognize the Taliban's harshly repressive regime. Pakistan is a key source of support for the Taliban, providing arms, food, fuel and, not least, thousands of volunteers for its fighting forces. But Washington, concerned about Pakistan's economic stability, has refrained thus far from placing Pakistan on the list of states that sponsor terror, which would cut off aid, loans and credit from Washington and international lending institutions. If Pakistan's military ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, fails to reduce his country's links to the Taliban, Washington will have to consider stronger measures.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 3, 2000


End of Document