THE BUSINESS OF HOMELAND SECURITY;
Companies around Maine are marketing their products and expertise to help protect people and property from terrorism
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
March 9, 2003 Sunday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1F
Length: 1442 words
Byline: EDWARD D. MURPHY Staff Writer
Body


Jeff Bardin and his partners at Treadstone 71 share a trait that most people wouldn't consider an asset.
"We're all a little bit paranoid," Bardin said - and the Scarborough start-up has found that government agencies and private companies are eager to tap into that paranoia.
Treadstone 71, named for the site of an ultra-secret agency in a spy novel, is a security company, but the partners aren't worried about office locks or motion detectors. Instead, they focus on securing a company's ideas and plans.
"Much like there's a hardening of physical structures, we're hardening the information side of the house," said Bardin.
Treadstone 71 is one of a growing number of Maine companies that are finding a market for products that wouldn't have garnered much attention 18 months ago, before Sept. 11 resurrected a term that hadn't been uttered in decades: homeland security.
Around Maine, companies are working on homeland security projects such as sensors to detect chemical agents in the air, better airport screening devices, methods to allow easier tracking of what's being shipped into the country and high-tech methods to defend Navy ships from terrorist attack, among other ventures.
The market for homeland security is already big and likely to grow, said Dawn Van Zant, the president of ECON Investor Relations, a company that works with businesses involved in the sector.
Van Zant noted that the budget for the new Department of Homeland Security is nearly $40 billion, but the total market is estimated at nearly $100 billion when spending by local and state governments and the private sector is included. The private sector alone, she said, is expected to make up almost half of that figure.
Van Zant said a lot of attention has been focused on how much money will be going to large defense contractors as a result of the looming war with Iraq, but that overlooks the longer-term spending likely to result from terrorism prevention.
"There's a huge market opportunity for those areas and the bigger defense companies might not be the ones to benefit," she said.
In Maine, it's mostly smaller - and in many cases, very new - companies that are involved in homeland security.
Bardin said his company is working with government agencies as well as for private companies that are either required to or are voluntarily upgrading their electronic security.
He declined to identify the firm's clients, but said they include companies in Maine as well as others around the country.
Bardin said wireless networks are one of the weakest links in a company's attempts to secure its information. Few companies realize that simply installing a wireless network, without any security systems, is like leaving the office unlocked at night.
"Most people say, 'I want a wireless (network),' plug it in and walk away," he said. "A lot of people have the false sense that if they have a firewall, they have security."
Bardin said he periodically cruises around Portland in a process called "war-driving" - testing the security of wireless networks. During a typical day last week in his car - equipped with an antenna, a laptop computer and special software - he picked up 10 wireless networks.
Only one was secure.
"I could sit outside and surf the Internet off those connections, among other things," if he wanted to, Bardin said.
Treadstone 71's staff all worked for the government or military and had high-level security clearances. Bardin, for example, was a tank commander in the Army and also worked for the National Security Agency, where he broke codes and ciphers and translated intercepted Arabic messages.
Now, he helps businesses determine whether their computer systems are vulnerable, conducts tests to see if he can hack into a company's networks and recommends ways to make the systems more secure.
Bardin said the business, which was founded last April, got off to a slow start because of the soft economy, but interest is picking up. He said Treadstone 71 has a growing network of contractors around the country to work with and has proposals before several agencies.
Other Maine companies have been involved in anti-terrorism ventures for a longer period, back before it gained urgency.
Sensor Research & Development has been around for 10 years, mostly working on sensors that monitor air and water pollution. Interest in the company's chemical and biological detectors, which already were in development, picked up significantly after Sept. 11, 2001.
The Orono company is entering the home stretch in its attempt to develop a reliable, hand-held sensor, about the size of a pager, under a contract with the Defense Department.
The work is complex, involving tiny metal oxide films that react to certain chemicals. John McCarthy, the company's proposal manager, said the difficulty involves making it sensitive enough to detect minute traces of dangerous chemicals, but not too sensitive.
"It doesn't help much when the sensors are always going off," McCarthy said. But, "if it doesn't go off when the stuff is there that's bad, that's bad as well."
Another Maine company is grappling with much the same problem.
Detection Technologies is developing its sensors to pick up signs of chemical or biological agents as well as metal and explosives, although the company is looking at devices that can be used in airports or mounted in office corridors, in addition to hand-held units. The company, based in South Portland, uses spectral array analysis - essentially looking at the air around a person or a piece of luggage and determining if the "signature" of something hazardous is present.
Rand Stowell, the president of the company, said the opportunities for a company that develops affordable, reliable sensors are enormous.
"The private market is, we think, the major opportunity," he said. "We know it's big enough, and if our technology is as dramatic a leap forward as we think it could be, we think it will be a major market."
McCarthy, of Sensor Research & Development, said it's too early to tell how profitable his company's product might be, since they don't yet have a good idea of what it will cost. He said the company plans to continue with its non-homeland security work as well, although the chemical and biological detector is the company's primary product currently.
A few other Maine companies have more of an idea, rather than a product, to enhance security.
William Hagenzieker runs Coastwise Inc. in Rockport and has a patent on a "sled" that would hold the material being shipped in cargo containers, the kind that move from ship to tractor-trailer.
Hagenzieker said the shipping industry doesn't have enough cargo containers to go around, so his sled would allow material to be easily moved from a container to a traditional tractor-trailer, freeing up the container for the next sailing. But he said a byproduct of the idea is that it would allow customs inspectors to check out what's being shipped much more readily than by opening up a container and digging through the contents.
Federal officials have said that they worry about being able to track all the material that's being shipped into the U.S. to make sure terrorists aren't smuggling in chemical or biological weapons.
Hagenzieker said he hopes that, with a little more engineering, his sled could be in production in a year or so.
Military work, long a mainstay of the Maine economy, is also shifting toward anti-terrorism projects.
David Patch, the president of Technology Systems Inc., said his company is refining some of its products for the Navy to help defend ships against terrorism.
Technology Systems, based in Wiscasset, works in the field of "augmented reality." He said one example of the company's work is a monitor that combines an underwater camera mounted on the bow of a ship with computerized navigation equipment.
The result is a camera picture overlaid with information from a computer on buoy locations, ship channels and even the location of underwater mines, derived from a Navy database.
Patch said the technology has other applications as well. For instance, a camera could be mounted on the mast of a Navy ship in port and a computer could track smaller boats that are nearby. If one made a sudden turn toward the ship, sailors onboard could be notified and watch to make sure the ship is not threatened.
Patch said the work is exciting and promising, but he notes that similar products are being developed around the world and Maine companies will have to keep pushing to stay in the market.
"We're on the leading edge of it, but the competition is all around us," he said.
Staff Writer Edward D. Murphy can be contacted at 791-6465 or at:
emurphy@pressherald.com  

Graphic

 
Staff photo by John Patriquin
David Patch, president of Technology Systems Inc. in Wiscasset, said his company is refining some of its products to help the Navy defend ships against terrorism. Here, he holds a camera and a dual GPS antenna that could "augment reality" as a ship navigates through potentially dangerous waters.

Load-Date: March 10, 2003


End of Document