The I.M.F. Cites Terrorism And Issues Bleak Forecasts 
 The New York Times
November 19, 2001 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 449 words
Byline:  Reuters 
Dateline: OTTAWA, Nov. 18  
Body


Finance ministers and central bankers from around the world ended three days of meetings today with their plans to improve world output battered by the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States.
     The meetings yielded some solid results, with the world's top economies promising to cut interest rates further if they had to in order to revive flagging growth. 
 "It's a different world after Sept. 11," India's finance minister, Yashwant Sinha, the departing chairman of the World Bank's policy-setting development committee, said at the closing news briefing.
"It's a more integrated world with a greater awareness that we must be able to stand together, developed as well as developing countries, because alienation, poverty, degradation, violence, anger, impatience anywhere is a threat to peace and prosperity."
The International Monetary Fund issued bleak forecasts, painting a grim picture with growth slowing in almost every part of the globe. But the fund insisted that the picture would improve by next year.
Despite the show of unity by the wealthier countries promising to keep the world economy afloat and not be beaten by terrorism, disputes were evident in many items on the weekend's agenda.
The fund declared the United States economy to be in a "mild recession," but the United States said the forecast was too pessimistic. Europe's two largest economies, Germany and France, also insisted they would outperform the fund's guess. One Canadian official said the fund's forecasts should be "taken with a grain of salt." 
The fund now expects economic growth of just 2.4 percent this year and next, a level most private economists view as indicative of a global recession.
The Group of 20, the world's richest countries and leading emerging economies, and the fund promised to make every effort to squelch terrorist financing. But the weekend failed to produce what many had hoped for on that score -- that the fund would take a leading role in that effort.
Argentina, the country in most dire need in the wake of Sept. 11, left without the international endorsements it sought before starting a program on Monday to handle its debt.
Much time was spent over the weekend talking about the plight of the world's poorest people, and all agreed that something should be done to reduce poverty. But the rich nations bickered over exactly how to help. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill pressed his idea that rich countries should give poor countries grants rather than loans. Calling his idea "honest," he reiterated the view that loading already heavily indebted countries with more debt was counterproductive.
But Clare Short, Britain's development minister, dismissed the proposal as "a crazy idea." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 19, 2001


End of Document