THE WORLD;
A Roundup of Mideast Hostility
The New York Times
May 4, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk
Length: 352 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim, James F. Clarity and Richard Levine
Body


Libyan officials were accused last week of plotting terrorist violence against Americans in Turkey.
The chief state prosecutor said Libyan Embassy personnel had supplied explosives in a plot to blow up an American officers club in Ankara April 18, three days after the United States air raid on Libya.
Two Libyans were formally charged with conspiracy to commit mass murder at the club.
Libya and Iran, meanwhile, denounced the April 15 attack as ''a 10th crusade led by America, Europe and the Zionist enemy against Islam and the Moslems.'' (Europe's Christian rulers launched nine crusades from 1095 to 1272 to try to recapture Jerusalem from the Moslems.) The two countries called on Moslems to come to Libya's defense and threatened retaliation against Europeans taking ''hostile measures against Libya.''
Portugal expelled five of the 10 Libyan diplomats in Lisbon last week, joining other European Community countries that have sent Libyan diplomats home since the raid.
One Community country, Greece, has said it will not participate because it does not have proof of Libyan responsibility for terrorism.
Libya has retaliated by expelling more than 100 Britons, Spaniards and Italians in the last 10 days.
In Beirut, the Abu Nidal terrorist group said it killed a 28-year-old British tourist in Jerusalem last Sunday because of his country's ''complicity'' in the raid, which employed British-based American F-111 bombers. The man, who was shot near the entrance of a Christian holy site, was the third Briton killed since the raid.
The United States holds Abu Nidal responsible for the December attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports.
And in London, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, whose support for the raid has proved unpopular, said the United States should assist Britain's battle against Irish terrorist by approving a treaty facilitating extradition for suspects associated with the Irish Republican Army.
''What is the point,'' she asked, ''of the United States taking a foremost part against terrorism and then not being as strict as they can against Irish terrorism, which afflicts one of their allies?''


End of Document