The U.S. Army calls the right soldier to fight terrorism
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 6, 2004, Monday


Copyright 2004 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: LOCAL NEWS,; VOICES
Length: 679 words
Byline: Steve Brody
Body


"I have just received in the mail a compelling call from the U.S. Army," begins what was to be a letter to the editor.
"The (brochure) tells me I will gain strength, self-confidence and self-esteem.
"It tells me I can choose over 150 careers, up to $50,000 for a college education and a $20,000 enlistment bonus with a chance to travel.
"I'll tell you it's mighty enticing -
"EXCEPT…
"I am a WWII veteran and will soon be 87 years old.
#VOICES 9-6 BRO#
"Do you think I should show up?"
Rather than send his letter to the editor, the writer graciously allowed me to print it here. He is, after all, my grandfather.
Now, those who know him, and know the stories of his combative youth, would not dismiss outright his returning to active duty. His grandchildren still affectionately call him Big Gig (pronounced "jij," a corruption of his first name, George), even though he now stands a few shades over 5 feet and weighs in at about 120 pounds.
"Everywhere I go, I'm the oldest and shortest guy in the room," he likes to say.
His skin is as thin as wax paper, his bones as brittle as chalk. He has adult-onset diabetes and a pacemaker-defibrillator for his congestive heart failure - "My heart is like a paper bag. It's not like a muscle." - and he has beaten two cancers. Or, as he would say, "licked" them.
Yet once upon a time, he was taller and broader, a barrel-chested, athletic guy, a boxer and street fighter who could have "licked" you and me together.
Ask the men, now grown old, who challenged him in the boxing ring one afternoon many years ago at Stevens Trade School, where he taught English. In his late 30s then, he boxed and defeated 20 of his students, one after another, giving each man two minutes. Think of the lawsuit that would follow nowadays.
His receiving the glossy yellow-and-black recruiting brochure might have been a snafu (a word coined by GIs; cleaned up, it stands for "situation normal all fouled up"). But why not recruit this ex-private of the 2nd Infantry Division, this member of the Greatest Generation, for the war on terrorism?
I can see my grandfather in a cave somewhere in the darkest heart of Afghanistan. Because he is light, he was carried and dropped among the enemy by an otherwise unmanned remote-controlled drone aircraft.  Instead of "routin' the evil ones out and gettin' 'em runnin'," as President Bush was fond of saying, Special Forces commanders decided to send in Big Gig - "An Army of One," to borrow a recruitment slogan. His top-secret mission: to hit, quite literally, the terrorists where they live.
I can see him, the octogenarian warrior, putting down his cane, rolling up the sleeves of his camouflaged shirt and pulling off his eyeglasses. He squints across a makeshift boxing ring drawn on the dirt of the cave floor.
His opponent, the rangy Osama bin Laden, glares and talks trash as he unhooks himself from his dialysis machine.
From the glistening stalactites falls a microphone, and in comes Michael Buffer, the famous ring announcer, with his trademark line, "Let's get ready to rumble!"
"Gentlemen!" (There are no ladies present, of course.) "In this corner, weighing 120 pounds, hailing from Lancaster, Pennsylvania, George 'Big Gig' Brr-ohh-dee!
"And in this corner, weighing 120 pounds, from the lawless tribal lands of the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, Ohh-sahh-mahh 'The Evil One' bin Laden!"
Who would win? Sure, bin Laden has the height and reach. But my grandfather has the skills and experience. Bin Laden fights dirty. But a flurry of well-placed blows to the kidneys, even from arthritic fists, would do him in. I would bet on Big Gig.
So, over lunch the other day, I encouraged him to put on his uniform and go down to the recruiting office. Well, he told me, after the war he stowed it in a suitcase in his in-laws' attic. Later, when he retrieved it, it was no more than the skeleton of a uniform. It had been eaten away by moths.
That is too bad. Because the Army has sent him another brochure. Uncle Sam still wants him.  ---
The Voices column is written by a rotating team of New Era staffers. It appears Mondays.

Load-Date: September 7, 2004


End of Document