THE END OF THE JACKAL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
August 16, 1994, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1994 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 16B; EDITORIAL
Length: 308 words
Body


It was Frederick Forsyth's dream come true. Under appropriately foggy circumstances, the notorious terrorist Carlos was apprehended in Khartoum, Sudan, and turned over to French authorities Monday.
At this point, many details of his capture remain shrouded in mystery. Who actually arrested Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, or Carlos? The Sudanese or the French? How long was Carlos, who was holding a false diplomatic passport, in the Sudan? What was he doing there? In true spy thriller fashion, the full story may never be known.
What is sure, though, is that the elusive Carlos will finally face justice. In 1992, a French court convicted Carlos in absentia of the 1975 murders of two counterintelligence agents, and sentenced him to life in prison. There is little doubt he will serve that sentence; and it is possible, given the enthusiasm with which German prosecutors welcomed his arrest, that he will be tried on other outstanding charges, including the 1983 bombing of a French cultural center in Berlin.
The murders of the French agents were just two of the horrific crimes reportedly committed by Carlos. The Venezuelan-born terrorist is thought to have planned the massacre of 11 Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics in 1972; the 1975 assault on OPEC headquarters in Vienna, and the 1976 hijacking of an Air France airliner to Entebbe, Uganda.
Carlos' arrest comes at a time when the face of terrorism has changed from its heyday in the '70s and early '80s. Then terrorism was frequently a tool of marginal extremist groups trying to topple established governments and win power. Now terrorism has become, perversely, a weapon wielded by radical governments, such as Iran, Syria and even Sudan. Indeed, the biggest question in this whole affair is why Sudan, a nation known to sponsor terrorism, would turn in the terrorist granddaddy of them all.

Load-Date: August 17, 1994


End of Document