THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Suarez Jumps His Battered Galleon
The New York Times
February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 285 words
Byline: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim
Body


Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez, leader of the center-right coalition that has guided Spaniards along the path to democracy, astonished everyone last week by handing in his resignation to his friend and patron, King Juan Carlos.
Mr. Suarez, under fire from the ranks of his own party, the Roman Catholic Church and senior generals, hinted that he was politically burned out.
Saudi Arabia hosts Islamic SummitHis popularity in opinion polls had dropped under 30 percent, reflecting dissatisfaction with his failure to curb terrorism or to contain such Europe-wide economic maladies as inflation and unemployment.
Senior generals, some nostalgic for the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, who died in 1976, blamed Mr. Suarez for legalizing the Communist Party and for conceding limited autonomy in the Basque region, a policy the King will underline by a visit there this week.  Church leaders have condemned a new law permitting divorce by mutual consent.
''My political power has been eroded,'' Mr. Suarez said, contending that his loss had been Spain's gain. He boasted of ''building a system of liberties, a new model of social coexistence,'' and added, ''I do not wish to see this democratic coexistence become, once again, a parenthesis in the history of Spain.''
Mr. Suarez was a self-made political outsider who won prominence with brains, charm and Juan Carlos' patronage. To succeed him, his divided Union of the Democratic Center Party nominated Deputy Prime Minister Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, a former industrialist. Right-wing party chieftains, protesting the swiftness of the decision, walked out before the vote. Many politicians said the abrupt departure of Mr. Suarez made early parliamentary elections probable.


End of Document