The C.I.A. Seeks Out Informers On Terrorism, and Finds Them
The New York Times
September 6, 1996, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 398 words
Byline: By TIM WEINER 

By TIM WEINER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5
Body


The Central Intelligence Agency is recruiting informers on terrorism at a rate that far outstrips past efforts, its director said today.
The Director of Central Intelligence, John M. Deutch, said in a speech at Georgetown University that the agency's covert operators had obtained new agents offering inside information on terrorist groups at an unprecedented pace.
"The gain of new sources in the past 18 months far exceeds previous achievements," he said. Mr. Deutch asserted that the counter-terrorist center at the C.I.A. had helped foreign governments arrest suspects five times in the last two years, and had "prevented a number of terrorist acts."
He specifically cited the 1995 arrest in Pakistan of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who was convicted today of plotting to blow up a dozen United States commercial airliners. Mr. Yousef stands accused as the mastermind of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
To increase the power of the United States to track and trap terrorist suspects, Mr. Deutch said he was creating a new intelligence cell to provide warnings against potential attacks, sending new cadres of undercover C.I.A. officers overseas to work against foreign terrorism and expanding the use of C.I.A. teams to help foresee threats against United States military personnel deployed abroad.
He also said, without being specific, that the C.I.A. would seek to "give the President more options for action against foreign terrorists to further pre-empt, disrupt and defeat international terrorism." These would presumably be covert operations, short of acts of war, designed to prevent terrorist operations or to take revenge for successful attacks on Americans.
Part of this strategy is a new level of cooperation between the intelligence agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, traditional rivals in several fields. Senior F.B.I. agents stationed overseas have held long and apparently successful meetings with C.I.A. station chiefs -- the first at the United States Embassy in Rome in January, the second at the embassy in London in May -- to work out ways to cooperate against terrorists and other international criminals.
Such a meeting, intelligence officials said, would have been unthinkable as recently as two years ago, when the two agencies were at each other's throats over their conduct in the investigation and arrest of Aldrich H. Ames, a spy for Moscow inside the C.I.A.

Load-Date: September 6, 1996


End of Document