THE YEAR 2000: KEEPING WATCH;
With Fears Of Terrorism, Precautions Will Continue
The New York Times
January 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 12; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Column 6;
Length: 741 words
Byline: By JAMES RISEN

By JAMES RISEN
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 1
Body


Law enforcement and intelligence officials in the United States and around the world remained on a high state of alert today because of the possibility of terrorism, even as they expressed relief that the year 2000 began without any sign of significant disruptions caused by criminal or extremist groups.
Federal authorities said that as a precaution they would maintain significantly greater staffing levels of counterterrorism forces, and urged state and local authorities to do the same for at least a week or two.
At the same time, the officials acknowledged that they had received no credible or specific threats inside the United States since the arrest on Dec. 14 of an Algerian trying to enter the United States from Canada with a car carrying explosives and timing devices.
Today, several officials expressed satisfaction that their biggest fear, that foreign or domestic terrorists would stage an attack involving one of the many huge public gatherings celebrating the arrival of the year 2000, never materialized. A lesser, but still significant, concern was that cyberterrorists might attack computer networks, but that fear also diminished as the clock wound into the new year.
All through the long night on New Year's Eve and into today, American intelligence and law enforcement officials kept vigil at command posts for any signs of trouble. A response center inside the Central Intelligence Agency's counterterrorism offices has been operating 24 hours a day for the past few days. But C.I.A. officials reported all quiet as the new year arrived, with no evidence of imminent terrorist action.
At the F.B.I.'s command center, the Strategic Information and Operations Center in Washington, agents remained on duty on 12-hour shifts and will remain on duty for several days. All of the agency's field offices were also on increased alert status. One senior law enforcement official said, "So far so good, but let's see what happens in the next few days."
In the United States, the frequent government warnings of terrorist threats in the weeks leading up to New Year's Eve reflected the unusually high anxiety levels among counterterrorism officials. The alerts and advisories may have held down turnout at some events, but appeared to do little to dampen the jubilant mood at many of them. The warnings, which emphasized that Americans should be vigilant at home and careful if traveling abroad, gained credibility in the days leading up to New Year's Eve because of evidence that at least some groups were trying to stage attacks. The State Department travel advisory urged caution through the middle of January.
In Jordan, 13 people were arrested last month in connection with a suspected plot by Islamic radicals linked to a Saudi-born militant, Osama bin Laden, to attack celebrations in Jerusalem and at the Vatican.
Still, the only specific evidence of a terror plot followed the arrest of Ahmed Ressam as he sought to enter Washington State from Canada. That arrest led federal agents to suspect that Mr. Ressam and his associates were mounting an effort to detonate a bomb within the United States.
As a result, federal authorities have arrested several people who they believe may have some connections to Mr. Ressam, and they have interviewed others. Two people arrested trying to enter Vermont across the Canadian border are also thought to have ties to an Algerian terrorist group, and on Thursday, an antiterrorist force staged a dramatic dawn raid in Brooklyn to arrest Abdel Ghani, a 31-year-old Algerian believed to be an accomplice of Mr. Ressam.
F.B.I. agents also arrested five men in Boston, three of whom were known to be Algerian. On Friday, federal agents completed interviews with several dozen people in the United States believed to have some ties to Mr. Ressam, in a move that American officials hoped would glean more information about him and serve as a deterrent to other potential terrorists.
The possibility that Mr. bin Laden's network might strike on New Year's Eve was clearly the biggest nightmare that haunted American intelligence and law enforcement officials as they prepared to guard the celebrations. Those fears prompted the Clinton administration to encourage several nations in the Middle East and elsewhere to order precautionary arrests of suspected terrorist sympathizers in December. The officials said that there was no hard evidence, though, that those arrested were preparing to take action.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 2, 2000


End of Document