The Imperial Price We Pay
Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania)
October 28, 2012 Sunday


Copyright 2012 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: P; Pg. 1
Length: 634 words
Byline: Gil Smart / Smart Remarks
Dateline: Lancaster, PA 
Body


S o I get a call from a reader who identifies himself as a conservative and is quick to say he disagrees with me most of the time.
They have to say that, you know.
But after establishing his bona fides, he wanted to ask - maybe because he's seen some kind words here for Ron Paul and his neo-isolationism - just what it is we think we're doing in the Mideast:
"I don't understand," he said. "They hate us, we send them money, and they're killing our people. Why don't we just get out?"
I agreed, but avoided wading too deep into that quicksand - we could've been on the phone all day.
Because there's one reason we're stuck in the Mideast, and why we'll stay stuck: oil. And the geopolitical clout that flows from it.
Given the strategic importance of the Mideast, of course the world's preeminent superpower is going to be hip deep in it. It's not just that we want the oil, though we do want it. It's that we want to deny control of the region to competitors; we want to ensure the oil makes it to the market, rather than being funneled into sweetheart deals with countries like China.
China, for example, is Iran's largest oil customer (and is paying in yuan, its own currency, rather than dollars). And yet you don't hear a lot of talk about this Iranian "threat." The reality is, Iran's strategic partnership with China is every bit as unacceptable to the United States as is Iran's pursuit of nuclear technology, perhaps nuclear weapons.
So, to withdraw from the region would be to invite others in. It could court chaos, as if we don't already have that. So we rationalize that we can at least exert some sort of "control" by staying.
And yet, that "control" - which we really have very little of anyway - comes at an immense price.
It was fascinating to hear Mitt Romney, of all people, lament that price in last week's foreign policy debate. Mitt tried to come off as a peacenik-- I half expected him to start singing John Lennon's "Give Peace a Chance" at any moment.
"We can't kill our way out of this mess," he said, and I thought - isn't Romney the Republican in this race? He even dared suggest there might be legitimate reasons for people in the Mideast to dislike the United States, and that's surely conservative apostasy.
At the same time, he again accused Obama of mounting an "apology" tour, for conceding that the U.S. on occasion has "dictated" to other nations. "We don't dictate to nations, we free nations from dictators," Romney insisted.
Hmm. I bet the Iranians who watched the CIA-aided overthrow of Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh in 1953 - not to mention folks in Guatamala, Indonesia and elsewhere - might have a slightly different take on that.
And when "freeing them from dictators" unleashes even greater hatred and death - as in Iraq - do we really expect people in the Mideast to bow down in gratitude?
While avoiding the term itself, Romney has positioned himself as a neoconservative, and would sink us deeper into the Mideast morass.
Will it make things any better? Nope. In the Mideast, what you're seeing is what you get. So long as we are there, some will resent our presence and actions, so there will be terrorism. To maintain that presence - and fight terrorism - we'll spend evermore on our military. More Americans will die, and as we saw in Libya (not to mention 9/11), not all of them will be soldiers.
This is the imperial price we pay. And it's never presented this way. It's always about "defending freedom," as if that's what we're doing over there. It's all noble; it's all because we're so magnanimous. For cloaking it in this rhetoric is the only way you get Americans to agree to pay the price, a cost that will be assessed regardless of who wins this election.
Gil Smart is associate editor of the Sunday News. Email him at gsmart@lnpnews.com, or phone 291-8817.

Graphic

 
Gil Smart Smart Remarks

Load-Date: October 29, 2012


End of Document