THE UNWELCOME MAT IS OUT FOR IDEOLOGICAL UNDESIRABLES
The New York Times
July 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 771 words
Byline: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The Reagan Administration last week placed Gerry Adams, head of Sinn Fein, the Irish Republican Army's political wing, in the same company as Hortensia de Allende, widow of the Chilean President, Salvador Allende Gossens, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, the Colombian novelist and 1982 Nobel laureate, Roberto d'Aubuisson, the Salvadoran rightist leader, Ruben Zamora, a Salvadoran leftist leader and Nino Pasti, a retired Italian general who opposes deployment of United States missiles in Western Europe.
 What these people have in common is that this and other Administrations have at one time or another denied them visas to enter the United States to speak to groups of Americans because it did not like their political views or associations - in Mr. Adams's case, his public support for I.R.A. terrorism.
Others similarly barred in recent years range from more than 300 Japanese who had planned to attend a United Nations disarmament session in 1982 to Bernadette Devlin McAliskey, the militant Catholic from Northern Ireland and the Rev. Ian Paisley, the equally militant Protestant.
Still others, including Mr. Garvia Marquez and other prominent writers, have had trouble getting visas and have bridled at what they consider insulting probing of their political views. Mr. Garcia Marquez was barred from the United States during most of the 1960's.
Ideologically based visa denials were not invented by the current Administration. Foreign officials, opposition politicians, and prominent artists, writers, scholars and scientists of the political left - and occasionally of the far right - have found it difficult and sometimes impossible to visit the United States for decades.  Officials say the power to deny visitors' visas is an important foreign policy tool for expressing disapproval of those who would enjoy a ''propaganda platform'' and raise money here while supporting totalitarianism or terrorism abroad. What these officials call propaganda, libertarians call free speech. In a report this month, Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, accused the Administration of ''a comprehensive campaign to restrict and control the free movement of ideas and information across the American border.'' The A.C.L.U. and other critics are attacking the ideological exclusion policy in the courts and Congress. But they face formidable obstacles.  The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, a legacy of the McCarthy era, gives the executive branch broad authority to deny visas to those with political views it dislikes, along with prostitutes, polygamists, drug addicts, beggars, lepers, homosexuals and others deemed undesirable.  One section of the law, also known as the McCarran- Walter Act, permits exclusion of Communists, anarchists and those who advocate such doctrines. Another authorizes exclusion of foreigners who might engage in ''activities which would be prejudicial to the public interest, or endanger the welfare, safety or security of the United States.'' Challenging the Exclusions In 1972, the Supreme Court spurned a challenge to the law, saying the Government could bar Dr. Ernest E. Mandel, a Belgian Marxist scholar and journalist, from visiting academic conferences in the United States. It said the ''plenary government power to make policies and rules for exclusion of aliens'' outweighed the First Amendment rights of Americans ''to receive information and ideas,'' at least on the facts of that case.  Seeking to narrow this precedent, the A.C.L.U., New York City and others have filed Federal lawsuits in Boston and Washington challenging denials of visas to Mrs. Allende, Tomas Borge, Nicaragua's Interior Minister, Mr. Pasti and two Cuban women who had been invited to New York by a city commission on women. Meanwhile, Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, is pushing for legislation to prevent denial of visas on the basis of political beliefs. He said ''we've got a good shot next year.'' Some of his allies are less optimistic.  In practice, thousands of Communists and others visit the United States every year after obtaining waivers of the exclusion rules, compared to the roughly 800 people who were excluded for ideological reasons in 1983, according to State Department figures. And the broad discretion of officials under the McCarran-Walter Act has inevitably led to inconsistency and arbitrariness. Mr. D'Aubuisson was granted a visa in May after having been turned down at least twice in the previous six months. Mr. Paisley, Mr. Garcia Marquez, Mrs. Allende and others have been granted visas on some occasions and turned down on others.

Graphic

 
photo of Gabriel Garcia Marquez; photo of Rev. Ian Palsley; photo of Tomas Borge; photo of Gerry Adams


End of Document