The President in Wartime
The Forward
April 11, 2008


Copyright 2008 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. 12
Length: 399 words
Body


The Bush administration recently declassified a secret Justice  Department memo from 2003 that shows just how serious  a threat our democracy faces in the current war on terrorism.  Unfortunately, the threat revealed in the memo is not from  Al Qaeda, but from us.
The memo was addressed to the legal department of the  Pentagon. It was meant to advise the military on how far it may  lawfully go in roughing up captured terrorism suspects during  interrogation. The answer was, pretty far indeed. It was the considered  legal opinion of the chief legal office of the United States,  the Department of Justice, that the president of the United States is   well, above the law. In wartime, it is for the President alone to  decide what methods to use to best prevail against the enemy, wrote  the memo's author, John Yoo, then a Justice Department lawyer.
In fact, Yoo wrote, Even if an interrogation method arguably  were to violate a criminal statute, the Justice Department could not  bring a prosecution because the statute would be unconstitutional  as applied in this context. That is, the law would conflict with  the Constitution's designation of the president as commander in  chief, charged with doing whatever necessary to protect the nation  during wartime. There's original intent for you.
And who decides what constitutes wartime? According to  the Constitution, the Senate does. But that's old stuff. Nowadays,  we're at war whenever the president says we are. All he has to do  is decide we're under attack  or threatened with attack  and  order our troops to open fire.
And when does the war end? When the president says so.  Right now, for example, we face an enemy so shadowy and ubiquitous   terrorism  that the war could last, we're told, for a  generation. Until then, according to the Bush Justice Department,  the president may do whatever he thinks necessary to protect us.  In other words, anything he wants.
The Yoo memo was withdrawn a year after its drafting, following  a revolt by government lawyers. But a similar Yoo memo,  issued to the CIA, remains in force. Congress passed a law overriding  it a few years ago, but the president vetoed the bill.
It's hard to imagine what terrorists could do that would  threaten our democracy more than this president's notion of his  power. Next time we choose a president, we ought to find out how  the contenders define the job.

Load-Date: April 7, 2008


End of Document