The Latest: Iran says Saudi will face 'divine revenge'
The Northern Star: Northern Illinois University
January 3, 2016 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FROM AP; Pg. 1
Length: 300 words
Body


RIYADH, Saudi Arabia - The latest developments after Saudi Arabia executes a prominent opposition Shiite cleric convicted of terrorism charges, sparking anger in Iran and among Shiite leaders across the region (All times local).
10 a.m.
Iran's Supreme Leader says Saudi Arabia will face "divine revenge" after the execution of a revered Shiite cleric.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei made the comments Sunday, a day after Riyadh announced the execution of Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr.
Khamenei's website carried the comments by the ayatollah, who also criticized the ongoing Saudi-led war in Yemen against Shiite rebels, as well as the "persecution" of Shiites living in Saudi-allied Bahrain.
Also on Sunday, Khamenei's Twitter account said: "Doubtlessly, unfairly spilled blood of oppressed martyr (hashtag)SheikhNimr will affect rapidly & Divine revenge will seize Saudi politicians."
Protesters in Iran, angered by al-Nimr's execution, broke into the Saudi Embassy early Sunday, setting fires and throwing papers from the roof.
___
9:40 a.m.
Saudi Arabia says that by condemning the execution of an opposition Shiite cleric, Iran has "revealed its true face represented in support for terrorism."
A Foreign Ministry statement carried by the official Saudi Press Agency accuses Tehran of "blind sectarianism" and says that "by its defense of terrorist acts" Iran is a "partner in their crimes in the entire region."
Shiite-majority Iran expressed outrage over the execution of Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, who was put to death along with 46 others convicted of terrorism charges, including three other Shiite dissidents and a number of al-Qaida militants.
Al-Nimr was a central figure in protests by Saudi Arabia's Shiite minority until his arrest in 2012. He was critical of the Saudi government and but denied ever advocating violence.

Load-Date: January 3, 2016


End of Document