The torture of terrorism suspects
University Wire
November 23, 2005 Wednesday


Copyright 2005 The Vista via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 305 words
Byline: By Trisha Evans, The Vista; SOURCE: U. Central Oklahoma
Dateline: EDMOND, Okla. 
Body


If it is true that war blurs the lines between right and wrong, we are going blind.
In Nov. 17 issue of The Vista, we posed the "Word on the Street" question: "Do you think the U.S. should be able to torture terrorism suspects to obtain information?" Three of the four students we asked said yes.
President Bush would also say yes. He is threatening to veto the $440 billion defense spending bill that passed the Senate last month because an amendment added to the bill states that torture is wrong.
Torture is already illegal according to U.S. and International law, but it was deemed OK by Bush's executive order after 9/11-as long as the torture was not done on U.S. soil. This allowed for cruel treatment of prisoners in Guantanamo and suspected secret CIA prisons in Eastern Europe.
The amendment, by Sen. John McCain, states that prisoners in U.S. custody should not receive degrading and inhumane treatment. It overwhelmingly passed 90-9. Both Oklahoma senators, Jim Inhofe and Tom Coburn voted against it.
Let's be clear. This is not a question of supporting the war on terror. Framing the debate in terms of patriotism further muddies the waters of discussion. It's a question of basic human rights.
Torture, even if it is government sanctioned, is never right.
The amendment will not jeopardize our country's security, only uphold the same principles expressed in the U.S. Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, the same ideals the U.S. clings to as an international leader. Or have we so quickly forgotten the shame of Abu Ghraib?
Some may say that our torturous methods are warranted because of the heinous actions of al-Qaeda or Abu al-Zarqawi. If we continue to stoop to this eye-for-an-eye logic, we will become a terrorist nation in the eyes of the world. Some may say we already are.
(C) 2005 The Vista via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 23, 2005


End of Document