The liberal media equals Democrats
The Bismarck Tribune
January 5, 2012 Thursday


Copyright 2012 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A8
Length: 704 words
Byline: JOE RICHARDSON Fargo BRENT McCARTHY Bismarck
Body


On Dec. 31, President Barack Obama signed the National Defense Authorization Act, which authorizes the military to pick up and detain for any period of time - without trial or charge - anyone suspected of being a terrorist or aiding terrorists anywhere in the world.
The president has to give the nod for citizens to be so swept up. No court review.
Spending our liberties while funding our defense will lead to a dictatorship, the type of which many have died to fight elsewhere and the nature of which our constitution hoped to avoid.
Some of you might be shocked. However, do not make the mistake of blaming the president alone. When given the opportunity to amend this out in the Senate, Sen. Kent Conrad, a Democrat, and Sen. John Hoeven, a Republican, said leave it in. Republican Rep. Rick Berg also voted to give the president this power.
I am beginning to think this might be what is meant by "North Dakota values" at work. You know, how these guys say they want to bring North Dakota values to Washington. Looks like habeas corpus (which requires that a person in custody be brought before a court) is not among the North Dakota values.
Some say that the presidential authority granted in the National Defense Authorization Act is no different from the actual practice under President George Bush so we shouldn't see it as a big deal. Once the war on terrorism is finished, we will be able to resume our regular constitutional order.
Problem is, how does terrorism surrender? Who signs the treaty of terrorism?
There will be no victory over terrorism, especially when so much is to be gained by the few whose financial and political interests are dependent on our belief that terrorism is something over which victory can be achieved.
In this looming campaign season, I hope that we will find those rare and courageous voices willing to stand up to fear-mongering in defense of our liberty, even at the risk of being painted "soft on terrorism."
The biased liberal media is working hard pretending to engage in journalism in its efforts to get the most liberal candidate it possibly can selected in the Republican primaries.
It has destroyed conservative candidates like Herman Cain (who would have spelled certain doom for the Democratic Party) with baseless and even racist attacks and have fully vetted all of the leaders in the polls except for Mitt Romney.
Members of the media have investigated the churches of leading Republican candidates. They have even accused Michele Bachmann of attending a church that is (gasp) protestant. They will investigate Romney's church should he win the primary.
They conveniently forgot to investigate President Barack Obama's church. For all we know, Obama had a pastor who preaches racism, anti-Semitism, hatred for America and Marxism from the pulpit.
Perhaps he had a pastor who yelled "God 'bleep' America" from the pulpit as he and his congregation celebrated the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
With the exception of Romney, they have fully vetted the associations of the leading Republican candidates. They have yet to do this for President Obama.
Even though the media never vetted candidate Obama on foreign policy, we do want them to vet the Republican candidates on this.
Thankfully, no Republican candidates have made racist statements like "typical white person" or have committed gaffes like saying that there are 57 U.S. states or have pronounced "corpsman" as "corpse-man." That would be reported.
It is time for people to realize that the mainstream media and the Democratic Party are one.
If the media reported the truth about Democrats, they would be unelectable.
We don't want a president who would use his influence or even military force to overthrow brutal secular dictatorships in countries like Libya and Egypt in favor of even more bloody and oppressive radical Islamic dictatorships.We don't want a president who would use his influence or even military force to overthrow brutal secular dictatorships in countries like Libya and Egypt in favor of even more bloody and oppressive radical Islamic dictatorships. We don't want a president who would remain silent as the people of Iran rise up to protest their bloody Islamic oppressors (before being rounded up and executed).

Load-Date: January 6, 2012


End of Document