The new young faces of terrorism
University Wire
July 11, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 Western Courier via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 462 words
Byline: By Piotr Skrabacz, Western Courier; SOURCE: Western Illinois U.
Dateline: MACOMB, Ill. 
Body


Lately it's been hard to turn on the news without hearing of another suicide bomber attack -- you'd have a better chance of getting an iPhone -- but there may be a reason why halting these tragedies is getting more difficult than ever.
At first, suicide bombers were thought of as religiously crazed men with little, other than their lives, left to lose. But that eventually became too obvious for authorities to single out.
To counter that profile, the Taliban slowly started turning toward women when recruiting for suicide missions as a part of their so-called "strategy" of terrorism.
Now, children are being sought as a new source of suicide bombers, which is outraging many people. In a recent documentary, "The Making of a Martyr," Taliban members can be seen targeting and recruiting children to become suicide bombers.
The process is simple. They first scout out children who seem to be loners or outcasts among their peers, promise them rides on Ferris wheels, paradise and if they were lucky, $20.
Then all they had to do was jump into a crowd, rip open the bomb belt cord and all their dreams would come true, right?
Wrong.
These "chosen" children, in some cases, are mentally and/or physically challenged, making them easier to persuade to do something they can't completely understand.
How could a child be playing in a schoolyard one day and the next be trying on a custom-made bomb belt? Military and religious propaganda is how.
The documentary shows cartoons and military posters depicting child terrorists as heroes to the cause and making it seem possible to become "someone" just by pulling a cord.
Just watching children ranging from 16 years old to as young as 6 years old shooting guns and practicing opening bomb belts is nauseating and beyond one's imagination of how psychotic some of these terrorists can be.
In an interview with a former terrorist group leader, he jovially explains that "we refuse child martyrs, one, two, three, four or five times, until the child reaches a point where he will use a knife if no one gives him a bomb belt."
It's despicable how anyone could go about taking advantage of a child's self-esteem issue for his or her own idea of personal gain.
Coercing oblivious children with empty promises into murdering not only innocent people, but also themselves, is completely immoral and evil regardless of a person's religion.
One of these children, who realized what he was doing was wrong and dismantled his bomb pack, was interviewed and said something that made more sense than any terrorist propaganda could ever conjure up: "Why should I die, if there is peace tomorrow?"
This is a statement any terrorist of any age could understand and use to confidently follow in the footsteps of a real hero.
(C) 2007 Western Courier via U-WIRE

Load-Date: July 11, 2007


End of Document