The war in Afghanistan has not come to an end;
Even as the world focuses on Iraq, the first front in the war on terrorism remains open.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
July 16, 2003 Wednesday, FINAL Edition


Copyright 2003 Blethen Maine Newspapers, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8A
Length: 361 words
Body


Don't tell the Taliban the war is over in Afghanistan. Indeed, don't tell the families of the five Afghan police officers killed Monday in a raid in Kandahar.
The world has turned its attention to the struggles of the Bush administration to build on its military victory in Iraq. There, fighters loyal to fallen Iraqi President Saddam Hussein continue to harass and kill American troops.
With such controversy and danger in Iraq, it's easy to forget the other major front in the war on terrorism. Forgetting, however, would be a mistake.
Bush acted with just the right measure of patience and resolve following the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in New York. The American campaign to oust the Taliban from power in Afghanistan was decisive and successful. That government had harbored the al-Qaida terrorists who plotted the American attacks, and it was justifiably removed.
Left behind is an interim authority run by President Hamid Karzai. The goals now in Afghanistan are to eliminate the remaining Taliban and al-Qaida fighters, help the nation rebuild after decades of war and establish a working democracy there.
There are troubling signs that the United States is falling behind in all three areas.
The Taliban continue to be active, attacking elements of Karzai's government. The attack on the police station in Kandahar is just a recent example. The Taliban are said to be working with other Afghan militants in an attempt to reassert themselves and disrupt recovery efforts.
Those efforts, by the way, are coming along poorly. The Wall Street Journal reports that the interim government's foreign minister has said publicly the United States is not doing enough to help the nation recover economically.
Meanwhile, efforts to conduct Afghanistan's first democratic elections in more than 30 years are behind schedule. A planned census of the population - a necessary step in forming an appropriately representative government - is coming along slowly. The Christian Science Monitor says the government is short on the funds needed to conduct elections.
All of this is bad news for the war on terrorism, which cannot be won without a stable and democratic Afghanistan.

Load-Date: July 16, 2003


End of Document