The Nation;
Preventing Terrorism After the Cole Bombing
The New York Times
October 15, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 948 words
Byline: By ERIC SCHMITT

By ERIC SCHMITT
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


YEMEN is a failed state on the mend just around the corner from Somalia, in a truly wild neighborhood. It has been a haven for international terrorists and radical Islamic groups and there is little evidence that the government has any control over them.
Given these facts, some critics are already blaming policy makers for placing United States forces in such a dangerous place -- and by extension, in all such places.
Using a refueling stop to build stronger ties with a volatile and struggling Arab nation not only backfired, such critics say, it shouldn't have been tried.
"It's not worth the risk," said Richard N. Haass, director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution who served on the National Security Council under President George Bush. "Yemen has a bad record, and it's still a place where the government is unable or unwilling to take certain steps against certain terrorist groups. We must become more selective and more wary of who we do normal operations with."
Others at least as numerous insist that the United States must not let terrorists dictate how and where it projects its presence on the globe. And to be sure, the United States is staying put in the Middle East.
"We have very large interests in the region that aren't just important, they are vital," said Lee Hamilton, a former Democratic congressman who headed the House International Relations Committee.
Mr. Hamilton's list of interests is a long one: unfettered access to affordable oil; protecting Israel's security; limiting the spread of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to launch them; checking the influence of Islamic fundamentalists; advancing economic development in the region.
"It would be an absolute victory for terrorists, if they're behind this attack, if we pulled back and stopped doing our job in the Middle East or elsewhere in the world, and we're not going to give them that victory," said the Pentagon spokesman, Kenneth H. Bacon.
Indeed, say critics of withdrawal, wouldn't abandoning the field in places like Yemen just leave them open to getting worse? Everyone points to Somalia as the example to avoid. But it wasn't the worst case by any means. Consider, for example, the experts in the Reagan administration who put American troops in a barracks at the airport in Lebanon in 1983.
After the killing of 241 American servicemen by a Shiite Muslim driving a suicide truck bomb in October 1983, American resolve was badly shaken and there was a furious domestic debate over whether the United State should have brought in troops in the first place, or whether it should have done so in a different way.
The alternative, which came to pass when the American troops left, was Syrian control, for which everyone in the region is still paying the price.
The thing the Saudis, Egyptians and others in the region remember most about the marines in Beirut was not their arrival, but their departure. In Arab eyes, the marines simply cut and ran from Lebanon when the Syrians and their Lebanese allies made the cost of staying too high.
Both sides of the leave-or-stay debate, however, ignore a simple point: that there are common-sense rules of engagement for doing business in dodgy places that could reduce the risks of operating in them.
First of all, the diplomatic and military services should invest heavily in intelligence, preferably the kind using real eyes and ears, which can infiltrate terrorist groups and snitch.
"We're constantly reading the tea leaves very carefully," said one four-star officer with experience in the Middle East. "You continually assess the intelligence, bounce those observations off others and gauge the host nation's level of security cooperation. These things don't stay on a flat line, they ebb and flow."
Second, avoid stationing forces where they can become targets of opportunity and resentment. After the 1996 bombing of a housing complex in Saudi Arabia, in which 19 airmen were killed, American troops in Dhahran were moved out of urban compounds into more defensible desert bases.
Third, when traveling around the region, go well armed and avoid falling into predictable patterns that are vulnerable to preplanned attack.
Fourth, to the extent possible, limit dependence on host-nation support for security, supplies and other services that would allow terrorists to carry out an inside job, as the bombing of the destroyer Cole seems to have been.
Fifth, work closely with the host country's intelligence and police forces to limit vulnerabilities.
These are pretty straightforward operating principles, but they may be ignored, ether because of overconfidence in American armed might (forgetting that the whole point of terrorism is to puncture that very image), or because American forces overseas often want to be seen as benevolent and helpful.
"It's very, very complicated," said Adm. Stanley R. Arthur, who commanded allied naval forces in the 1991 Persian gulf war. "The basic nature of Americans is that we're much more comfortable reaching out than being in a bunker mentality."
In Lebanon, the United States trusted all factions to accept that it would be an even-handed guardian of order. In Yemen, it trusted the port authority not to be infiltrated by Islamic kamikazes, a doubtful proposition at best. "They executed the plan as it was specified," Adm. Vern Clark, the chief of naval operations said of the American commanders' security precautions.
Today, it is clear that the plan was inadequate. What happened in Yemen is a reminder that the world abounds in dangerous places, that American forces are vulnerable whenever they venture into them and that they must take precautions equal to that knowledge.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Yemen, where the U.S.S. Cole was attacked, has been a haven to several radical Islamic organizations. (Agence France-Presse)

Load-Date: October 15, 2000


End of Document