The Charleston massacre: A blatant act of domestic terrorism
The Daily Athenaeum: West Virginia University
June 23, 2015 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: COLUMNS; Pg. 1
Length: 627 words
Byline: Kayla McCormick
Body


By now, every news station, paper and internet blogger has covered the massacre at the AME Church in Charleston, South Carolina.  I want to say the event was incogitable, and perhaps in my own privileged, white-girl sphere, where I have never been denied anything or feared for my life because of the color of my skin, it is indeed incogitable.  In our society, however, it is just another event to add to a list, another nine bodies to stack atop the dead that deep-rooted racism has claimed.  The news has concentrated on the murderer, on the Confederate flag, and taken the time to deliberate on whether the Charleston massacre, occurring in the oldest AME Church in the south, was actually an act of racism.  Let me speak plainly - this was not only a racist act, but it was an act of domestic terrorism.
This man drove an hour from where he lived to get to the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, a church known for its long history with black activism.  He was not driving around when the urge to mass murder struck him; he acted preemptively and premeditatedly, choosing to sit through half of a service before unloading the gun he decided to bring.  To hear one more person or media outlet reference the "race card" and how black people are always whipping it out could be the end of my composure.  There is no card being pulled; this is racism, alive and well, and it is an epidemic.
When I checked the news and saw the Charleston murderer being brought into custody wearing a bulletproof vest, I was made physically sick.  Not because I was secretly hoping for him to be gunned down, but because of the blatant racism.  This man sat through half of a church service listening to a group of people praise their God in peace before he opened fire on them.  He killed nine people in a very calculated way, and the police bought him Burger King while in custody because he was hungry.  Not only is there no circumstance in which this same scenario would play out for a black perpetrator, but black people are being gunned down for nothing, for simply existing.  Unarmed people are being murdered for the hue of their skin.  I understand that we, as a generation, have become desensitized to the true horrors of human capability, but please allow yourself to feel the weight of this
truth.
It is in my nature to be tolerant, and while I wish I could respect the history of the Confederate flag, I understand what it is.  It is the symbol of a corrupt, treasonous government with racist ideologies, and it is a symbol of slavery and fear.  I do not think everyone that flies a Confederate flag is horrible or racist or treasonous, and I am not insinuating that this is what it means to everyone.  It is important to acknowledge that our personal truths are not the only truths, however, and to black Americans, the Confederate flag is a reminder of enslavement and oppression. 
With that being said, the flag is not the problem.  It is a side effect of the problem and is being used as a distraction.  We will sit around, sipping our non-fat mocha lattes and arguing whether the Confederate flag is evil or not.  We will argue whether the Charleston murders were an act of racism or just more random human violence, and then we will get up and go about our day.  The American culture will promote widespread ignorance and we will allow it because that is what is easy.  America is in need of a renovation, and I have no idea how to approach such a daunting necessity except by one individual at a time. So instead of a stagnant existence, I implore you to experiment with deconstruction of thought.  Where you have prejudice and hatred, consider instead compassion and tolerance, and perhaps one day we can truly boast about the time we obliterated racism.

Load-Date: June 24, 2015


End of Document