THE WORLD ;
Britain FailsIn Extradition Bid
The New York Times
December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk
Length: 300 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger
Body


Joseph P.T. Doherty, a member of the extremist provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army, escaped from a Belfast prison in 1981, two days before his conviction for the murder of a British captain during the ambush of a British Army patrol in Northern Ireland the previous year. He found clandestine refuge in New York until his arrest last year in a Manhattan bar.
Review of decision by Federal judge in New York to reject British request for extradition of Joseph P T Doherty, member of Irish Republican Army, who killed British Army captain in Northern Ireland, on grounds that extradition treaty excludes political acts from those considered extraditable (S)
Last week, a Federal judge in New York said his crime was a political act and rejected a request by the Justice Department on behalf of Britain that he be extradited. If he was sent back he would face life imprisonment. The extradition treaty between the United States and Britain, like most such treaties, excludes political acts from those considered extraditable. Judge John E. Sprizzo indicated that even though the provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army did not engage in traditional warfare in its fight against British rule in Northern Ireland, it had a discipline and organization that made acts committed by its members political offenses. There were angry reactions in London. ''A seal of approval to murder, maiming and terrorism,'' said Jill Knight, a Conservative Member of Parliament.
Mr. Doherty was not completely out of trouble. In addition to considering an appeal, Federal authorities continued to hold him while deportation proceedings were carried out for unlawful entry into the United States. He can choose his country of deportation but if none wants him, he would be returned to either Britain or Ireland.


End of Document