THE TERROR CONSPIRACY: THE OVERVIEW;
SHEIK AND 9 FOLLOWERS GUILTY OF A CONSPIRACY OF TERRORISM
The New York Times
October 2, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk ; Column 6; 
Length: 1545 words
Byline: By JOSEPH P. FRIED 

By JOSEPH P. FRIED 
Body


Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and nine other militant Muslims were convicted yesterday of conspiring to carry out a terrorist campaign of bombings and assassinations intended to destroy the United Nations and New York landmarks, kill hundreds of people and force America to abandon its support for Israel and Egypt.
Climaxing the biggest terrorism trial in the nation's history, a Federal jury that had deliberated over seven of the last nine days returned to a heavily guarded courtroom in Manhattan and pronounced the 10 defendants guilty on 48 of 50 charges.
It was a sweeping second victory for prosecutors in a trilogy of trials stemming from the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, which left six dead and terrorism at the fore of American consciousness. The defendants were not accused of that bombing, but prosecutors said four men convicted last year, and two to be tried next year, were co-conspirators of those convicted yesterday.
The centerpiece of the conspiracy, according to prosecutors who had no actual explosion to support their case and who relied heavily on secretly made tapes and a shady informer, was to be a cataclysmic "day of terror": five bombs that were to blow up the United Nations headquarters, the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, the George Washington Bridge and 26 Federal Plaza, the Government's main office building in New York.
"Guilty. Guilty. Guilty." The word rang out again and again as a jury of six women and six men, who had heard eight months of testimony, confronted the sober-faced defendants in Judge Michael B. Mukasey's courtroom at Foley Square.
Mr. Abdel Rahman, 57, a blind Egyptian cleric who came to this country in 1990 and attracted a devoted following of Islamic fundamentalists with his fiery denunciations of United States policies in the Middle East, was found guilty of directing a conspiracy to wage "a war of urban terrorism" against America and of plotting to kill Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.
Mr. Abdel Rahman, his red clerical cap offering a bright dash of color at the cluster of defense tables, showed no emotion as Judge Mukasey read from the jurors' verdict sheet.
Another defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, was convicted of murdering Rabbi Meir Kahane in 1990, an assassination once regarded as a crazed gunman's isolated attack but later portrayed by prosecutors as the first blow in a four-year terrorist agenda. Mr. Nosair was acquitted of the murder in a state trial in 1991, but was jailed on related weapons charges. Legal experts, citing many precedents, said yesterday's conviction did not constitute double jeopardy, because the Federal Government charged him under a conspiracy law aimed at racketeers.
All 10 defendants were convicted under a rarely used Civil War-era seditious conspiracy charge -- in this case, of plotting assassinations and bombings as part of a Jihad, or Holy War, to undermine United States support for Egypt, whose secular government is anathema to Mr. Abdel Rahman and his followers, and for Israel, a sworn enemy of many Islamic radicals.
In the only acquittals, Mr. Nosair and Ibrahim El-Gabrowny were found not guilty of any direct role in the plot to bomb city landmarks, although they were convicted of the broader conspiracy. Mr. Abdel Rahman and Mr. Nosair face life in prison, and the others face up to 20 years for the most serious charge against them, seditious conspiracy. They are to be sentenced in late January or early February.
There were no spectators in court yesterday. Aside from the judge and jury, the defendants, their lawyers, prosecutors and armed guards, only a dozen news reporters and some Federal officials were present. After the verdicts, security around the courthouse was increased, with police officers and Federal marshals ringing the complex of Federal buildings in lower Manhattan.
The day's only outburst came from two defendants as they left the court. Victor Alvarez, one of two American-born Muslims on trial, shouted "Takbir!" -- a call for others to respond with the Arabic phrase, "God is Great!" There was no immediate response, but several minutes later, another defendant, Fadil Abdelghani, cried "God is Great!" in Arabic as he left the courtroom.
The jurors, white-collar, civil service and professional workers from Manhattan, the Bronx and Westchester County who have been anonymous throughout the trial, refused to talk with reporters. They were taken away in a van with a police escort.
In a case that began with Government surveillance of potential terrorists even before the World Trade Center explosion in February 1993, the prosecution charged that Mr. Abdel Rahman became the ideological leader -- and at times the strategic leader -- of a conspiracy to bomb targets and assassinate leaders that year.
Prosecutors said an F.B.I. informant, Emad Salem, infiltrated the plot and made hundreds of secret tapes to ensnare the conspirators, most of whom were arrested in June 1993. His recordings showed Mr. Abdel Rahman discussing potential bombing targets with Mr. Salem and some of the other defendants also discussing bombing plans with each other and with Mr. Salem.
In addition, videotapes showed four defendants mixing diesel oil and fertilizer at a Queens garage for the intended bombs. The garage, which the suspects called a safe house, had actually been fitted out by the Government with hidden cameras and microphones for a sting operation.
Mr. Salem, the Government's key witness who testified for a month and is now in a Federal witness relocation program, was vigorously attacked by the defense as a liar and profiteer who had demanded $1 million to snare the defendants.
But his tapes made crucial points against Mr. Abdel Rahman. In one, Mr. Salem says one of the conspirators has proposed bombing the United Nations headquarters, and asks, "Is this considered licit or illicit?"
"It is not illicit," Mr. Abdel Rahman replies, according to a transcript, "however, will be bad for Muslims." He goes on to tell Mr. Salem to find a way instead to "inflict damage on the American Army itself."
The defense argued that the government and its informant had trumped up the conspiracy to save face after ignoring Mr. Salem's warnings before the attack on the trade center.
The defense contended that Mr. Abdel Rahman had only been exercising his free-speech rights to urge the overthrow of an oppressive regime in his native Egypt; Mr. Salem, the defense said, was gathering intelligence for Egypt and acting as an agent-provocateur for the United States.
Only four defendants testified, not including Mr. Abdel Rahman. Three of them said they thought they were training to prepare to go to Bosnia to help Muslims fight the Serbs. The fourth said he had been led to believe he was helping prepare for an attack on a Serbian warehouse in New York in which arms were stored.
Two of the trial's original defendants pleaded guilty in mid-trial. Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali last February pleaded guilty to plotting to murder Mr. Mubarak and to bomb-conspiracy charges and made admissions in court implicating Mr. Abdel Rahman and others. And Matarawy Mohammed Said Saleh, who became involved late in the plot and had only a small role, pleaded guilty in August to a bomb-conspiracy count.
The verdicts were hailed by prosecutors, who had produced more than 100 witnesses and hundreds of exhibits in a case involving plots that they said had been crushed before coming to fruition. Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, whose office prosecuted the case, called the result "extremely important for the city, the country and the world."
But the defense lawyers, who said they would appeal, denounced the verdicts as a miscarriage of justice. "He's not the first person to go to prison for his beliefs," Lynne F. Stewart said of her client, Mr. Abdel Rahman, "and he won't be the last."
The verdicts were greeted with subdued anger by some worshippers at mosques in Brooklyn and Jersey City, N.J., where Mr. Abdel Rahman had preached. Some said he was unfairly convicted, while others said that he and his militant followers did not represent true Islamic ideals, which do not embrace violence. Many said their faith, as well as the defendants, had been on trial.
Riaz Siddiqui, president of the Islamic Society of Central New Jersey, said he was disturbed by the trial's effect on the image of Islam in America. "I resent that an individual's act leads to the condemnation of a religion," he said.
In Cairo, news of the convictions was greeted with relief and apprehension as some prominent Egyptians noted that Mr. Abdel Rahman, the spirtual leader of the outlawed Islamic Group, would now go to jail and would not have to be extradicted to his homeland to face charges at a potentially dangerous trial. But they also voiced concern that the sheik's followers might retaliate with a new wave of attacks; Egypt has been plagued in recent years with anti-government violence.
Law-enforcement officials in New York said they were prepared for possible retaliatory attacks. While declining to go into detail, they said special security precautions were already in place for major events in the city -- the visit of Pope John Paul II this week and the 50th anniversary celebrations of the United Nations.

Graphic

 
Photos: Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Lynne F. Stewart, a defense lawyer in the seditious conspiracy trial, wept after the guilty verdict yesterday. (Thomas Dallal for The New York Times) (pg. B4)
      

Load-Date: October 2, 1995


End of Document