THE TEXTBOOK APPROACH TO TERROISM
The New York Times
April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 16, Column 3; Week in Review Desk
Length: 866 words
Byline: By
Body


DAVID SHRIBMAN
WASHINGTON - In the last decade, from Beirut to Belfast, the rapid rise of international terrorism has changed the way countries think about their national security. It has also changed the way historians and social scientists view the study of international affairs.
''Terrorism was treated as just a nuisance for many years,'' said Yonah Alexander, director of the Institute for Studies in International Terrorism at the State University of New York. ''Now it's clear that it is the new mode of warfare, and worthy of study in strategic terms.''
Article on academic and governmental research on terrorism and how it is used by governments to combat terrorism; table showing incidence of various kinds of terrorism in 1983 in US and abroad (M)
For several years, academic circles have discussed the origins and tactics of terrorism. The central issue, said Brian M. Jenkins, a Rand Corporation analyst, is that ''terrorists can attack anything while governments cannot protect every conceivable target against every possible kind of attack.'' Proof came in last week's explosion at the officers club at the Washington Navy Yard. A group that said it opposed United States policy in Central America took responsibility. And in London, 22 people were hurt when a bomb exploded at Heathrow Airport. There was suspicion that the blast was related to the standoff between the British police and the Libyan Embassy over the killing of a police officer.  Perhaps the area of greatest controversy among academic experts is a government's use of covert, pre-emptive strikes to combat terrorism. The Reagan Administration last week unveiled a new policy for ''taking the offensive'' against international terrorism. The White House did not elaborate on how the directive would be carried out, but officials earlier said that it would allow preventive and retaliatory raids against terrorist bases and camps abroad. The new policy is a response to the bombing that killed 241 marines in Beirut last October.  Governments use research, whether by psychologists, historians or political scientists, to help them deal with politically motivated kidnappings, hijackings and other terrorist attacks. Studies have found, for example, that the longer a hostage is held, the better his chances of staying alive. So it is usually not a good idea to substitute hostages. Experts said the Israelis showed their understanding of how terrorists work after Palestinian gunmen hijacked a bus near Gaza 10 days ago. Relying on studies that show that terrorists are vulnerable several hours after such attacks, the authorities stormed the bus early the next morning. The Government reported that all four hijackers died in the raid, although last week there were charges that one of the terrorists was captured and killed later.
Scholars disagree on what gives rise to terrorism as well as what to do about it. Some researchers view terrorists solely as the products of such factors as persecution, poverty and national dispossession. Others argue that nations such as the Soviet Union and Libya organize and manipulate terrorist groups. This view is supported by the Reagan Administration, which last week announced that it has warned six Eastern European countries about their continuing support of Palestinians and other ''international terrorists.'' The White House said that if the six nations wanted better relations with the United States, they would also have to stop carrying out espionage and flouting American export laws.
Many scholars believe that terrorists share certain personality traits. According to a report summarizing a Rand Corporation conference in 1980, many terrorists suffer from a fear of success and may feel as estranged in their underground groups as they do in society. This knowledge has helped governments persuade some terrorists to defect or to become double agents.
In recent years, scholars and the United States Government have begun to share information on terrorism. ''We interact with the academy,'' said Terrell E. Arnold, deputy director of the State Department's Office for Combating Terrorism.  ''It's a constant kind of talking, back and forth, about the subject and it really helps our understanding.'' Mr. Alexander, who is editor of Terrorism, a journal based in New York, agrees. ''We cannot be isolated in the ivory tower.''
But the cooperation between academia and governments is not without friction. Some researchers are sympathetic to the aims of the groups they study, supporting, for example, the Palestinians' fight for a homeland and the campaign against apartheid in South Africa.
Still, the overriding view is that academic involvement is crucial to an understanding of terrorism. ''Because we live in such a vulnerable society, these studies take on real importance,'' said Seymour M. Finger, a political scientist at the City University of New York.
As the study of terrorism has progressed, the focus has shifted from finding ways to protect embassies and deal with terrorist attacks. ''We're no longer trying to figure out how to stop them,'' said Mr. Jenkins, the Rand analyst, ''as much as we are trying to understand why they are the way they are.''

Graphic

 
chart of various types of terroism in 1983


End of Document