THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: The Iranians;
World of Terrorism Didn't Halt Overtures
The New York Times
February 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1190 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26
Body


The United States was receiving intelligence about Iranian terrorist activities that were to be conducted against the United States at the same time that Robert C. McFarlane, the former national security adviser, was preparing his trip to Iran in May 1986 to complete an arms-for-hostages swap, according to the Tower Commission report released today.
Despite these intelligence reports, the trip was made.
The Tower Commission did not give details on the sort of terrorism that was planned against the United States. And, while the report does not specify whether Mr. McFarlane was aware of the reports, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, then the national security adviser, was so disturbed by them that he asked whether Iranian officials should not be reminded of an apparent commitment they made to abstain from future terrorism against the United States.
This was but one of dozens of instances in which private diplomatic initiatives conducted by the National Security Council subverted longstanding American policies toward a number of Middle Eastern countries, the Tower report said.
 
Effect on Relations
The findings could further strain United States relations with a number of Middle Eastern countries and weaken the Reagan Administration's credibility abroad.
Perhaps most damaging is the commission's conclusion that, although President Reagan says he cannot remember many of the details of the sale of arms to Iran in return for the release of American hostages in Lebanon, he was involved in the initiative from the outset and probably approved the policy when the Israelis first proposed it in August 1985.
The report discloses for the first time that the confession of William Buckley, the C.I.A. station chief in Beirut, who is believed to have been tortured to death while a captive in Lebanon, was an issue in the negotiations with the Iranians. Mr. Buckley, a longtime C.I.A. operative, had access to some of the most sensitive information about the Middle East, and his release was one of the primary goals of the arms-for-hostages deals. At some time in the latter part of 1986, the Iranians offered to turn over the 400-page confession, according to the Tower report.
 
Remarks on Iraqi President
The Administration did not abandon its covert policy of making overtures to Iran even though there was proof that it clearly ran counter to stated American policy and interests, the Tower report said. For example, the McFarlane trip went ahead anyway (Appendix B, ''Excursions: May 1986'').
Regarding the Iran-Iraq war, contrary to the United States' official neutrality, Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North told Iranian intermediaries that President Reagan believed President Saddam Hussein of Iraq was ''causing the problem'' in continuing the war, the Tower report said. It said the colonel, who was on the staff of the National Security Council until his dismissal last November, told the Iranians that the Administration realized Mr. Hussein ''must go,'' which has been one of Iran's demands for ending the war.
Mr. Reagan has denied ever expressing such views to Colonel North, but the episode indicates the extent to which the colonel apparently conducted foreign policy on his own and, the report said, ''misrepresented his access'' to the President.
The report said Colonel North, also without Administration authority, committed the United States to an Iranian agenda that would have required the release of 17 terrorists held by Kuwait. Both the United States and Kuwaiti governments have publicly opposed this.
The report confirms that American officials, through Manucher Ghorbanifar, a middleman in the arms deals with Iran, were dealing with the top leaders of the Iranian Government, most of them clerics clearly committed to the ideals of the Islamic Republic, not ''moderates'' as Admiral Poindexter, Mr. McFarlane and other officials first described them.
While Mr. Ghorbanifar primarily dealt with Iran's Prime Minister, Mir-Hussein Musavi, and its Oil Minister, Gholam Reza Aqazadeh, who paid for the arms, Mr. Ghorbanifar said he was dealing with ''all three factions'' in the regime, which he does not identify, according to the Tower report. He said he also met with Ahmed Khomeini, son of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian leader, and with Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, Speaker of the Iranian Parliament.
The report includes the most detailed analysis to date of what the Administration believed was Iran's extraordinary influence over the Party of God, the group or groups of Shiite Moslem believed responsible for the kidnappings of foreigners, including Americans, in Lebanon.
The report said that, according to Mr. Ghorbanifar, all that was required for release of the American hostages was for Prime Minister Musavi ''to issue an order'' and the revolutionary guards in Iran would secure their release. Conversely, Iranian officials could insure the hostages' death if there were no agreement with the United States, Mr. Ghorbanifar said.
His analysis appeared to be a driving force that kept the arms-for-hostages initiative going.
While relying on information on Mr. Ghorbanifar, the C.I.A. was reporting that he was a liar, according to the report. On a polygraph test in January 1986, Mr. Ghorbanifar ''showed deception on all of the relevant questions,'' including his knowledge that the hostages would not be released.
 
A Change in View of Iran
The Tower report traces a drastic change in the Administration's analysis of how to deal with Iran. At the beginning of 1984, an analysis by the N.S.C.'s top Persian Gulf official said the Iranian Government was such a ''menace'' that covert operations against Iran should be revived (Appendix B, Part I, Section A: ''Intellectual Threads in the NSC Staff: 1984'').
But by May 1985, a memorandum by Graham Fuller, national intelligence officer on the Middle East for the C.I.A., argued that the time had come for alternatives, because the ''Khomeini regime is faltering'' and a struggle for succession was imminent. He suggested a number of courses, including encouraging ''friendly states'' to sell arms to Iran, contrary to official American policy.
The report details the opening of a second Iranian channel, between August and October 1986, with a relative of Hojatolislam Rafsanjani and an Iranian identified as Tabatabai. He is believed to be Sadegh Tabatabai, a Khomeini relation who successfully negotiated the release of the American hostages in 1980. There was a feeling on the American side that Mr. Gorbanifar was unreliable and could not deliver the hostages.
Among other findings in the Tower report was that Charles Allen, the national intelligence officer for terrorism at the C.I.A., transmitted some ''limited'' intelligence to the Iranians through Mr. Ghorbanifar about the Iraqi war front, in exchange for some information about Iranian terrorism.
The commission also said Colonel North ordered C.I.A. surveillance of Mr. Ghorbanifar and Yaacov Nimrodi, a private Israeli arms dealer involved in the arms-for-hostages initiative, while they were in Washington in October 1985. American law prohibits the C.I.A. from doing such work in this country.

Graphic

 
Photo of Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani with Bible sent by Pres. Reagan (Reflex/Kaveh Golestan)


End of Document