THE MARINE TRAGEDY;
INTELLIGENCE: TOO MUCH INFORMATION, TOO LITTLE EVALUATION
The New York Times
December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 51, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1842 words
Byline: By Philip Taubman and Joel Brinkley
Body


The marines, defending the adequacy of security at their Beirut headquarters on Oct. 23, have said they never received intelligence information warning that they might be the target of a suicidal truck-bomb attack. General Kelley, the Marine Commandant, told Congress last month that the marines ''have yet to find a shred of intelligence which would have alerted a reasonable and prudent commander to this new and unique threat.''
 General Kelley may be right, according to intelligence and military officials, in the sense that the marines never received a tip that a large truck packed with explosives would come crashing into the Marine compound. But they said intelligence warnings about terrorist threats, particularly car bombs, were never in short supply.
''We got one or two a day,'' recalled General Mead, who served two tours and five months as Marine commander in Beirut. He said, ''I was told by my intel officer, 'Hey boss, we've had another warning.' You got that every day. 'You're gonna get it, you're gonna get it, you're gonna get it.' Initially, after the American Embassy went, we went into a condition-one-type situation. I had my men on alert all the time. But then I began thinking I had to have more specificity, I'm wearing my men down without more specificity of a threat. So we had to take them out of that condition.''
Too Much Raw Intelligence
The intelligence problem in Beirut was not insufficent intelligence, but insufficient evaluation, according to a variety of current and former military and intelligence officials familiar with the intelligence support provided to the marines.
If anything, commanders up the line agreed, the marines received too much raw intelligence about terrorism and were not trained to analyze it, eventually becoming somewhat complacent about almost daily car-bomb warnings.
Admiral Holcomb, the deputy commander of American Naval Forces in Europe, said the flow of intelligence information was filled with warnings of impending terrorist attacks. General Kelley told Congressional committees that the marines were given descriptions of at least 100 potential car bombs between June 1 and Oct. 23.
General Mead recalled receiving dozens of warnings about white Mercedes vehicles that might be carrying bombs. ''We were told this every day,'' he said in an interview, ''so everybody's looking for this white Mercedes. I used to laugh every day when I'd get on the street with my driver and I'd say, 'Count the white Mercedes!' ''
 
Bits and Pieces of Data
No one in the Marine contingents in Beirut or the chain of command above them appears to have appreciated the influence this might have on security. No one proposed establishing a special intelligence task force composed of terrorism experts to help the marines, according to the intelligence officials.
Intelligence experts said such a unit, which could have been based in Washington, Europe or Beirut, could have sifted through the various kinds of intelligence, including information obtained from informants and electronic surveillance, and helped separate the reliable from the unreliable.
In addition, they said, the specialists could have looked for patterns in the bits and pieces of data that might reveal whether terrorists were receiving support from Iran or Syria, which, in turn, could help pinpoint targets for surveillance.
Analysis of this kind in Washington since the Marine bombing indicates that an Iranian-backed Shiite Moslem faction in Lebanon called the Islamic Amal, located in Baalbek, northeast of Beirut, was involved in both the embassy and Marine bombings.
A senior intelligence official said there are also ''some indications'' that Syria aided in the attack by providing explosives. He denied reports that the United States has irrefutable evidence linking the attacks to Syrian leaders.
Formation of a group of specialists before the attack could have given a more sophisticated reading of the terrorist threat, intelligence experts said.
''It was a colossal oversight,'' one former senior intelligence official said. He added, ''It's almost criminal to send Marine intelligence officers, men who've dealt only with battlefield intelligence, into Beirut without sending some experts in to help them handle the specialized kind of information they were getting on terrorism.''
 
Results of P.L.O. Pullout
Senator Warner, who has been investigating intelligence aspects of the Marine mission, said the chain of command ''should have required that someone with this training be reassigned temporarily to the Marines.''
From the beginning of their mission in Lebanon, the marines seemed to be haunted by American intelligence setbacks. The first, which the marines indirectly abetted in their first tour in August 1982, was the P.L.O. evacuation after the Israeli invasion.
Over the years, while the United States officially refused to deal directly with the P.L.O. because of its terrorist activities and hostility toward Israel, the C.I.A. developed a highly effective intelligence network in the Palestinian community in Lebanon.  ''The disintegration of the P.L.O. was a serious intelligence loss for the United States,'' one former intelligence official said.
Then in April almost the entire C.I.A. staff in Beirut was killed by the bomb blast that destroyed the American Embassy, including several of the agency's leading experts on the Middle East. Intelligence officials said the C.I.A. station was quickly rebuilt and the network of informants in Lebanon was not affected, but acknowledged that the change was disruptive.
Gathering intelligence about terrorism, particularly trying to penetrate terrorist groups, is considered one of the toughest jobs in the intelligence business.
One intelligence official said: ''Terrorist cells are small, fanatical and highly paranoid. It's almost impossible to plant an agent in one. You may get lucky and turn someone already inside, but you generally have to rely for information on wiretaps and other communications intercepts, often several steps removed from the cell itself.''
 
A Staff at Each Level
The marines brought to Lebanon basically the same contingent of intelligence and counterintelligence specialists they would use in a more conventional deployment, according to Col. Bobby F. Cole, the intelligence officer for the Second Marine Division at Camp Lejeune. The two levels of Marine forces in Beirut, the Marine Amphibious Unit and the Battalion Land Team under it, each had intelligence staffs.
The Marine Amphibious Unit staff was directed by a chief intelligence officer, usually a captain. His staff consisted of an intelligence chief, normally a gunnery sergeant; two intelligence analysts, either corporals or sergeants, who looked at conventional threats such as the tactics and location of enemy forces, and two counterintelligence specialists whose primary job was to protect against sabotage, espionage and subversion. Because of the unstable environment in Beirut, several additional counterintelligence experts were added to the amphibious unit staff, Marine officers said.
The battalion intelligence staff, under the direction of a captain or lieutenant, included a chief intelligence officer and two assistants.
Because the marines were not accustomed to dealing with terrorist threats, the Marine officers said, none of those men were specially trained to collect or analyze intelligence about terrorists. Since terrorism was most closely related to sabotage, the counterintelligence staff was given responsibility for tracking it.
 
Exchanges and Meetings
To supplement their own sources of information, which were limited, the marines exchanged information frequently with intelligence officers from the French, Italian and British units in the international force, and worked closely with the Lebanese Army.
General Kelley said there was also a weekly intelligence meeting between intelligence officers from the various contingents in the international force and the Surete Generale, the Lebanese internal security force, at which a list of suspected car bombs, including car descriptions and license plate numbers, was given to the foreign officers.
In addition, overall American intelligence coverage of the area was intensified after the marines arrived in September 1982. The steps included communications interception by the National Security Agency and the use of agents managed by the C.I.A.
Information developed by those agencies was funnelled to the marines through the European chain of command. Both senior commanders and marines in Beirut said the troops in Lebanon received such information within hours of its dissemination in Washington.
Both intelligence and military officials said the information from all those sources was fragmentary, often contradictory and frequently unreliable. But intelligence officials heatedly disputed Marine statements that the intelligence offered no clue to the kind of attack that occurred Oct. 23.
Intelligence officials said that along with the normal flow of information to the marines, the National Intelligence Digest, a daily summary of significant intelligence information, contained several reports on terrorist threats in Beirut during the summer and fall, including one published on Oct. 20 that specified that American forces in Beirut might soon be the target of a major terrorist attack.
 
'I Was Satisfied'
Marine officers said the commanders in Beirut received the report but took no special precautions because, like previous warnings, it was ''vague and imprecise.''
Representative Bob Stump, Republican of Arizona and a member of the House Select Committee on Intelligence, visited Beirut after the bombing to see if the attack was, in part, the result of an intelligence failure. ''I was satisfied that intelligence moved through the system to the marines,'' he said. He added, ''If anything, there may have been too much.''
Military and intelligence officials said the European Command was primarily responsible for the failure to help the marines sort through the information. ''Making sure your men in the field have the best intelligence and know how to evaluate it is the duty of the chain of command,'' one senior military officer said. General Smith, the deputy commander of United States Forces in Europe until July, said, ''I think the intelligence system that existed was adequate.''
Other Administration officials suggested that the Defense Intelligence Agency and the C.I.A. should also have offered to lend some special assistance to the marines.
Intelligence officials said they thought it was ironic that intelligence about terrorism had not been better handled by agencies in an Administration that has stressed the importance of improving the quality of information available about terrorist groups.
In one of his first national security decisions after taking office in 1981, they said, President Reagan instructed the intelligence community to strengthen its collection and evaluation of intelligence on terrorism. Tens of millions of dollars, they said, have been spent on the effort.

Graphic

 
photo of heavy truck


End of Document