The Calendar ;
 Tuesday
The New York Times
January 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk; Schedule
Length: 373 words
Byline: By Marjorie Hunter
Body


Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale begins the National Press Club's new year with a political address. 12:30 P.M., Capital Hilton.
South of the Border: Representative Claude Pepper of Florida and a delegation from the House Rules Committee, which he heads, take off on a two-week trip to examine conditions in Costa Rica, Brazil, Peru, Argentina, Grenada and Jamaica. Richard B. Stone, the Administration's special envoy to Latin America, also leaves today for Guatemala and other countries in the region.
Children in Poverty: The Children's Defense Fund releases a report detailing an increase in the number of American children living in poverty. 10:30 A.M., 122 C Street N.W.
Tax Benefits: The Employee Benefit Research Institute is to release copies of a report on pension-related benefits. 10 A.M., 2121 K Street N.W.
Lebanon Briefing: House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.'s 14-member group monitoring the situation in Lebanon meets at 3 P.M. in the Speaker's office to be briefed by Under Secretary of State Kenneth W. Dam.
Mr. Chairman: Dario Castro Alves of Brazil becomes chairman of the permanent council of the Organization of American States in a ceremony at the O.A.S. Building. 11 A.M., 17th and Constitution.
Wednesday
There won't be many Alaskans around Washington to celebrate it, but this is Alaskan Statehood Day, so designated by Presidential proclamation to mark the day in 1959 that Alaska became the 49th state.
Auto Show: The five-day annual National Capital Area International Auto Show opens at the Washington Convention Center.
Thursday
Claire Sterling, author and journalist, is to address the Women's National Democratic Club on ''Terrorism and the Public: To Know or Not to Know.'' Noon, 1526 New Hampshire Avenue N.W.
Educational Television: Plans for new financing in education and telecommunications are to be disclosed. 10:30 A.M., Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Friday
The Labor Department releases unemployment figures for December, signaling whether the year's projected decline from 10.7 percent to 8.2 percent has held steady.
Academic Environment: The Washington-Baltimore Regional Association is to make public a study on how the academic environment affects new businesses. Noon, 1129 20th Street N.W.


End of Document