The constant challenge of terrorism
University Wire
September 11, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The BG News via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 800 words
Byline: By Mwendah M'mailutha, The BG News; SOURCE: Bowling Green State U.
Dateline: BOWLING GREEN, Ohio 
Body


On this day six years ago, the world was irrevocably changed by the hateful acts of individuals bent on mass death and destruction. The events of Sept. 11 will, undoubtedly, remain a momentous edifice of contemporary times.
Sept. 11 above all, attests to the fact that terrorism is pervasive. It is a clear and present danger that the international system can only overcome through genuine unity devoid of grandstanding, condescension or saber-rattling.
Terrorism has a global reach; its effects have been felt all over the world. Kenya and Tanzania, in August 1998. In Spain it was March 2004. July 2005 saw a terror attack on Britain's transport system in London. This past June in the same country, a terrorist act was foiled in central London while a day later another one went wrong (fortunately) at Scotland's Glasgow airport. Last week in Germany and Denmark, authorities arrested individuals who, ostensibly, were in the late stages of committing terrorist attacks.
Tragically, in the Middle East, terrorist acts are the rule rather than the exception. Southern Asia also has had its share of terrorist activities. Nonetheless, the Sept. 11 attack was different. It is hard for a normal human being, with any sense of humanity to plan an act so insidious, so evil.
The aftermath, however, has become protracted and pernicious in a way that is very dangerous to global security and stability. Any judgment errors that ensue from Sept. 11, the current situation and the bleak outlook all play into the hands of the perpetrators. This is where danger lies; the world and its leaders should never allow a cabal that plots against world security any advantage, whatsoever.
Human actions are irrational, at least most of the time. However, the planners, supporters and executioners of Sept. 11 not only lacked (and lack) the essential element of humanity, they also are very dangerous people who deserve fates worse than their warped minds can ever fathom.
Today, the U.S and the entire world remembers that bleak September day six years ago. As we remember and honor those who lost their lives, as we remember the gallant men and women of the New York police and fire departments who risked their all to save fellow human beings, we need to pause and ask ourselves what the day has taught us.
Have the wounds healed or have the emotions of hate and anger dissipated? What honor has the U.S in particular and the world in general given to those who lost their lives on that day? Terrorists, though pervasive and faceless, thrive best in the midst of fear and confusion. They are happiest when the international system is in knots out of fear and suspicion. That is why the attacks, threats, vague pronouncements and ultimatums are so widespread and spontaneous.
Methinks that apportioning blame and dualizing the fight against terrorists on the lines of the "good" versus the "evil" is not exactly right. When victory over terrorism is achieved, it needs to be real, not pyrrhic. My two cents is that no particular group of people, with distinct physical, geographical or religious qualities is bent on decimating the world.
Framing terrorism in the context of a geographical region, religion or nation is hence a moot point. Most people in the world are against terrorism. This gets complicated by people who purport, for whatever reason, to be better than others. They are those who may be tempted to impose their beliefs on others at whatever cost, even murder. Paradoxically, religion has been used a lot of times as a proxy for meaningless wars. Why anybody would purport to kill in the name of God is beyond my ken.
This past month CNN correspondent Christiana Amanpour presented a shocking documentary named "God's Warriors." The documentary, depicted three faiths -- Christianity, Judaism and Islam -- and how some individuals in each faith arrogate themselves the role of "God's warrior." What leads anyone to imagine that God needs warriors to fight real wars of blood and flesh is something I don't understand.
Fighting terrorism is a global task that calls upon the dedication of every member of the human race, every nation and every government. Incidentally, the task can only be led by the U.S., not only out of necessity and the country's highly developed security complex, but also as the world's sole super power.
Terrorists know the essence of the U.S.; the country's strong spirit and determination. They know the U.S.'s allure appeals to billions across the world. And they want to alienate the many who cherish the U.S. and its ideals. It is disheartening, then, to indulge in actions that aid this alienation. In this fight, it is wrong to co-opt God in any side. God/Yahweh/Allah does not need to be co-opted by anybody in senseless, hateful and needless wars.
(C) 2007 The BG News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 11, 2007


End of Document