THE WORLD;
Fujimori Aims for a Head-on Collision With 'Shining Path'
The New York Times
December 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 936 words
Dateline: LIMA, Peru
Body


PERU'S President and Peru's Maoist rebels appear to be on course for a major confrontation in 1992.
Marshaling the forces on one side is Alberto K. Fujimori, the mild-mannered university president who after becoming Peru's president 16 months ago suddenly worked Latin America's most rapid and most radical free market revolution. Last month, the determined leader turned from economics to counterinsurgency and issued a blizzard of decrees intended to give Peru's army a free hand in fighting terrorism. On a recent visit to California, Mr. Fujimori predicted that Peru would be pacified by the end of his term, in 1995. His advisers say by the end of 1993.
On the other side is the Sendero Luminoso, or Shining Path, the Maoist guerrilla group that took advantage of vacillating Peruvian presidents in the 1980's to spread terror into every region of this country. Convinced that a worker-peasant state dominated by an Indian and mixed-race power base will be achieved by the end of the decade, Luis Arce Borja, the movement's European spokesman, predicted recently to Lima's Expreso newspaper, "Nothing will stop the triumphal march of the Shining Path."
Gustavo Gorriti, a Peruvian journalist writing a history of the rebels, believes that "1992 is going to be much more violent, because we now have two locomotives running toward each other on the same track."
"Fujimori believes he is going to pacify the nation in two years," Mr. Gorriti said. "Sendero believes they are going to win in this decade. The meeting of these two radical convictions are going to produce greater violence."
In the clash, two issues of concern to Americans may be lost in the dust: human rights and cocaine interdiction.
On human rights, Mr. Fujimori often speaks with two voices. To win American aid before a September visit to the White House, he ordered police and military commanders to open bases to Red Cross visits and told the military to stop making terrorist suspects "disappear."
But addressing military audiences at home, he later attacked human-rights groups as "legal arms of subversion" and "useful fools" manipulated by terrorists. After Amnesty International charged that 250 people had "disappeared" since Mr. Fujimori took office, the President blasted back in a late November speech before air force officers: "The terrorists present themselves as victims before the world, using for their ends the efforts of institutions like Amnesty International and Americas Watch."
This fall, stung by earlier charges that their reporting had been one-sided, both human rights groups condemned many atrocities committed by the Shining Path who, to drive any other authority out of areas they control, have killed clergy, foreign aid workers and even housewives running slum soup kitchens.
But, noting that three human rights activists have been killed since 1989, the groups say the president's verbal attacks endanger them too.
The fight against the export of semi-refined cocaine also seems to be a low priority. The underpaid police are seizing coca base and paste at rates half those of last year. The United States Drug Enforcement Administration has had little success persuading the government to shut down air taxi companies that fly cocaine.
Many Peruvians believe that the Shining Path is a far greater threat than cocaine and that the focus of American aid should be the defense of Peru's democracy. Low salaries and poor equipment add up to low morale: Peru's army loses one officer a day to civilian jobs. This week, Hector Jhon Caro was dismissed as head of Peru's anti-terrorism police because 16 subordinates allegedly stole a $23,000 agency payroll.
The cost of Peru's "Fuji-shock" -- Mr. Fujimori's abrupt adoption of free market policies and reintegration into the world financial community -- has been greater poverty, and better Shining Path recruiting conditions.
"Schoolteachers' children are not eating three meals any more, tuberculosis is up, real malnutrition is up," said an American priest driving through a Lima shantytown daubed with Senderista graffiti: "Fujimori = Genocide."
A rise to power by the brutal Shining Path could destabilize the region the same way the ascendance of radical Shiites did in Iran in the 1970's. Believing their movement "a beacon for world revolution," Shining Path leaders hope to export Marxist revolt to Bolivia and Ecuador.
"Peruvian democracy is a conquest of the people, and the Shining Path seeks to destroy this democracy," said Carlos Tapia, a sociologist affiliated with the Socialist Left party. "But the political parties tell the military 'kill them quick, so we won't have to get our hands dirty.' "
So far, Peru's feuding politicians show little interest in forming a common front.
"Alan inocente, Alan presidente," supporters of Alan Garcia Perez chanted this week on learning that a supreme court judge had decided not to open a trial on embezzlement charges against the former president . The judge, an appointee of the former president, taught Mr. Garcia geography in high school. During Mr. Garcia's five years in office, Peru had 2 million percent inflation, but the 42-year-old politician is seen as a leading contender in the 1995 presidential race.
However, popular support for Mr. Fujimori is strong. A mid-November poll gave him a 58 percent approval rating; one among business executives gave him an even higher approval rate -- 95 percent. "Fujimori is our first president to get into the saddle on the terrorism issue," said an industrialist here, unconsciously using an image long associated with Latin American authoritarianism -- the man on horseback.

Graphic

 
Photo: Peasants in the Peruvian highlands have formed self-defense militias to protect themselves against attacks by Shining Path guerrillas. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: December 8, 1991


End of Document