The winners and the losers
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
July 23, 2011 Saturday


Copyright 2011 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 373 words
Body


 Loser: Terrorism, unfortunately, did not die with Osama bin Laden. A deadly bomb ripped through Oslo, Norway on Friday. Meanwhile, a horrible drought is plaguing Somalia, but al Qaida terrorists who control much of the area have been slow to allow much outside aid. 
Terrorists, of course, just want to destroy and kill. They have no plan for prosperity and they do nothing to build or heal. When critics say the United States should do more to win hearts and minds against terrorism, one wonders why the terrorism sales pitch even needs any comment. Winner: The Utah Department of Workforce Services reports that the number of Utahns with jobs improved 2 percent over the past year. The unemployment rate held steady at 7.4 percent in July, but that may not change much as previously discouraged workers begin looking again. Unless the folks in Washington decide to destroy the economy to make a point, this could be a sign that things are looking up in the Beehive state. Loser: On the subject of Washington and the states, the financial rating agency Moody's this week issued a credit-rating warning to five states that have coveted AAA bond ratings. Utah, thankfully, was not among these, although its rating is AAA. Moody's said a federal debt default would also hurt the states in question, making it harder for them to pay their bills. Standard & Poor's was even less optimistic. A federal default, it said, would likely downgrade the ratings of all states. Despite Utah's strong states-rights bent, it cannot prosper on its own without a solvent federal government. Winner: Congratulations to University Hospital and Primary Children's Medical Center. Both were cited this week by U.S. News & World Report as being among the best in the nation for their specialties. University Hospital was cited for its gynecology and ear, nose and throat services, and it was named the No. 1 health care system in the Salt Lake City metro area. Primary Children's was cited for its pediatric cancer, cardiology, gastroenterology, neonatology, nephrology, neurology and orthopedics. Less than 3 percent of the 4,785 hospitals analyzed nationwide qualified to be ranked in even one of the 16 specialties specified, which isn't terribly good news. 

Load-Date: July 24, 2011


End of Document