The media's failure to recognize white, Christian terrorism
Ka Lee O Hawaii: University of Hawaii-Manoa
April 12, 2017 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 607 words
Body


class="asset-contentsubscriber-premium">
Terrorism, from ISIS to Al Qaeda, has been one of the most covered news topics of the 21st century. Countless attacks have dominated the news cycle in recent years. In 2013 there was the Boston Marathon bombing, then in 2015 there was the San Bernadino shooting and Paris attacks and in 2016 Orlando night club shooting. These attacks garnered headlines like: "Terrorist attack at nightclub in Istanbul kills dozens," or "London terror attack death toll rises to FIVE." The examples listed above were worthy of their titles, but many acts of terror are not labeled terrorism because the perpetrator is not muslim or associated with any major terrorist organizations.
Terrorism is not exclusively linked to the Islamic State. The FBI defines it as "the unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives." Despite this, news sources continue to characterize non-muslim acts of terror otherwise - thus further radicalizing our stereotypes about muslims.
Dylann Roof: Terrorist
In June 2015, Dylann Roof fired 70 rounds at Emmanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, killing nine. The attack was meticulously planned. CNN reported Roof researched the church, found out the time of bible study, packed extra ammunition and arrived early. Local officials found a list of other African-American churches in the Charleston area, presumably as other targets. A self-proclaimed white supremacist, Roof even went as far as to describe his crime as "political."
The CBS news headline the next day? "Suspect identified in Charleston church mass shooting." Had his name sounded Arabic, the title would most likely have read: "Suspect identified in Charleston church terrorist attack."
The attack involved unlawful violence against persons or property, was attempted to intimidate a group of people and was driven by political and social objectives: textbook terrorism. But because of the color of his skin and his Anglo-Saxon name, the title read the former.
James Jackson: Terrorist
In March 2017, James Jackson, driven by racism, stabbed a 66-year-old black man to death. The assistant chief of New York City's Police Department told the Washington Post that Jackson "picked New York is 'cause it's the media capital of the world," adding that, "he [Jackson] wanted to make a statement." Jackson later admitted to police a more wider scale Times Square murder was in his future plans. This incident was supposed to be the first of many.
Mainstream news sources failed to characterize the attack as terrorism. Similarly to the Dylann Roof attacks, it fell in line with the FBI's definition of terrorism. Jackson clearly attempted to intimidate a group of people, his attack was planned to be highly publicized, and was driven by political/social means.
But yet again, due to complexion, a textbook terrorist was called otherwise by news sources.
"White stabbing suspect targeted black men," was the CNN news headline the next morning.
Not a coincidence
Dylann Roof and James Jackson aren't the only examples of the media shying away from properly labelling terrorists because the perpetrator was American-born and Christian. There was the Kansas Shooting, the planned but not executed "Dylann Roof style attack," the Quebec Mosque Shooting and many others. The perpetrators also were not allotted the terrorist label. 
If we are to extinguish the mounting hatred toward the Islamic community, a step forward would be to begin to call these individuals their rightful name: terrorist.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document