THE PRESS:HOW TO USE IT OR LOSE IT
The New York Times
June 28, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk
Length: 1004 words
Byline: By CHARLES MOHR
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 27
Body


Journalism, which is accustomed to dishing it out, was a serious preoccupation here this week at two conferences that seemed to underline a love-hate relationship between the news business and conservative groups. In each case, it seemed, the group felt wronged by journalists but admitted it would dearly like to use them as an educational tool.
 At one conference, ''The Conservative Movement and the Media,'' sponsored today by the National Conservative Foundation, conflicting advice was given out on how to deal with the ''liberal news media.'' Some recommended a friendly approach and others suggested scaling journalism's walls to wage war.
Article on recent conferences that seem to underline love-hate relationship between news media and conservative groups; conference sponsored by National Conservative Foundation gave conflicting advice on how to deal with 'liberal news media'; cartoon (M)
Earlier in the week, at the Second Conference on International Terrorism, the world's experts on international terrorism heard a similiar dissonance on the perceived sins or possible usefulness of journalism. Somewhat like the conservative movement, most students of terrorism generally share a sour view of the news industry's performance.
 
Playing 'With the Big Boys'
Richard Viguerie, publisher of Conservative Digest, who is nd the metaphorical Henry Ford of direct-mail fund-raising and political solicitation, was among the speakers at the conservatives' conference.
Mr. Viguerie, who bows to no one in his condemnation of news bias, nevertheless said conservatives should ''socialize with'' reporters and develop ''deliberate contacts'' with them.
Mr. Viguerie said the first time a reporter from a major East Coast newspaper telephoned him to ask for an interview he recoiled in horror but then decided this was the wrong attitude when playing ''with the big boys.''
After a long lunch, he added, the reporter wrote an article ''not like my mother would have written, but a good, decent, fair story.''
 
For 'an Intelligent Relationship'
Representative Newt Gingrich, an articulate Georgia Republican who has recently been jousting with the Democratic leadership in the House, said he stood for ''an intelligent relationship with the media,'' which he described as the nervous system of society. The Congressmen said he saw little value in analyzing journalists, in contrast to finding out how to use them.
Mr. Gingrich said conservatives should ''take advantage of the values that dominate the professional life'' of journalists by permitting them to induldge their ''voyeur's'' desire to watch ''reality happen.''
''You can't expect newsmen not to be newsmen,'' he said. For example, he added, ''You don't get on TV with cars that get home safely.'' Thus, he said, conservatives should be in favor of confrontation and taking on ''sweaty'' situations - to be, in his words, more like ''Indiana Jones than the Philharmonic.''
On a more somber note, he said conservatives should fight for better access to journalism because ''education and intellectuality matter; they are the way in which, in the long run, our society and our culture teach itself.''
 
More Emotional Fervor
These views, and similar ones at the terrorism conference, were respectully received by the audiences, but other speakers seemed to elicit more emotional fervor when they strongly condemned journalism.
John T. Dolan, the head of the National Conservative Political Action Committee, which took credit for defeating several liberal senators in 1980, also suggested trying to use the news media, but asked such questions as ''why is the American media pro- Soviet?'' At another point he intervened in the discussion to say there probably were ''active Soviet agents'' in American journalism.
Reed Irvine, chairman of the organization Accuracy in Media, said the news media objected to being prevented from early coverage of the United States-led invasion of Grenada last October because it ''deprived them of the opportunity to publish the facts in advance'' and thus cause the abortion of the military operation.
Mr. Irvine said the agenda of journalists was, if not to control foreign policy, to have a ''veto'' over it.
Mr. Irvine, who specializes in appearing at annual stockholder meetings of news corporations, has always favored a coercive approach, including threats to sponsors of television shows, in his efforts to influence. He and Mr. Dolan favor creation of new networks and publications.
Ted Turner, chairman of Cable News Network and Turner Broadcasting, seemed to fall somewhere in between in a keynote speech. Saying he had long wanted to gain control of one of the three largest networks, he accused them of resembling the late centuries of the Roman Empire, ''feeding Christians to lions,'' with violent and shoddy programming.
 
'The Greatest Enemies'
Mr. Turner described the networks as ''the greatest enemies America ever had'' and said he had once suggested that broadcast executives were ''guilty of treason.'' Such lines were delivered, however, with such panache and good humor that they drew loud laughter.
The tone was similar Tuesday morning at a seminar on the news media and terrorism and the international terrorism conference.
Claire Sterling, a writer who recently had published long articles indicating that Bulgaria may have directed the attempt to assassinate Pope John Paul II, accused the press and Western governments of a ''conspiracy of silence'' on the Soviet Union's reputed direction of international terrorism.
Lord Chalfont, a former British Foreign Secretary, intervened in the seminar to ask why the press took a ''majesterial'' position of objectivity on such subjects as terror. ''Is it too much to ask that the press be on our side?'' he asked amid much applause.
Charles Krauthammer, a magazine editor, responded, ''Yes, it is too much to ask.'' He said that if journalism and society did not equally condemn right-wing, authoritarian murder, they would suffer a ''moral corruption'' that ''will be irreversible.''

Graphic

 
drawing


End of Document