The NYPD May Have Violated Handschu Laws
Kingsman: Brooklyn College
March 5, 2012 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2012 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT-PAGE; Pg. 1
Length: 667 words
Byline: Rachel Silberstein
Body


Flicker user (Vidiot)
According a recent article in ProRepublic, there are several levels of laws that the NYPD must abide by when gathering intelligence.
On a city level, the Handschu agreement is set of guidelines which were set up 1985 in response to the NYPD's unchecked spying on political groups, during the political upheaval of the '60s and '70s, in order to gather intelligence about political activity within those groups. The guidelines set limitations for the NYPD to monitor groups - the NYPD had to get consent from the Handschu authority, which was made up of three members: two high-level police officials and an appointed civilian.
After 9/11, though, the NYPD asked a court judge to review the consent degree to ask for more freedom for their counter terrorism operations. The result of the request was that new guidelines were adopted.
In these guidelines, there was no requirement for the NYPD to get approval from the Handschu authority before gathering information about political activity. The guidelines also allowed the NYPD to attend any public gathering as a member of the public they cannot collect any information from the public gatherings unless it is positive that there is some kind of terrorist activity occurring.
When the Associated Press released a series of documents delineating that the NYPD has been targeting Muslim communities since 2007, many critics expressed their outrage by saying that moral laws were broken.
According to the leaked documents, the undercover NYPD officers secretly monitored Muslim neighborhoods, mosques, stores, restaurants and any other predominantly Muslim locations across the northeast in order to determine the presence of terrorist activity.
Even though Muslim organizations and higher officials criticized the NYPD's counter terrorism efforts, Mayor Bloomberg defended it by saying that the spying is "legal, it is appropriate, it is constitutional."
As of right now, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder told a congressional committee that the Justice Department is reviewing whether to investigate if there were civil rights violations done by the NYPD.
There are many people who believe that the NYPD crossed a moral line by targeting a group of people based on their religion without any suspicion. Mayor Bloomberg even signed a law in 2004 that that prohibits law enforcement to profile based on religion.  But did the NYPD cross the boundaries of the Handschu Guidelines?
Faiza Patel, co-director of the Liberty and National Security Program at the Brennan Center at NYU School of Law, told ProPublica that it is a definite possibility that the police violated some of the Handschu laws still in effect..
"There are a couple of documents that suggest they may have violated Handschu - for example, the [2006 NYPD report on the Danish cartoon controversy, which is a collection of statements in mosques and other places that have been taken by undercover officers or confidential informants," he said.
According to another AP story, the NYPD used money and equipment from the HIDTA (High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area) Program to spy on Muslim communities, which is a federal program that provides funds to fight drug trafficking and sometimes allows for counter terrorism spending.
"It requires the IDTA executive board to basically make sure that funds were being used for the purposes that they were supposed to be used for," Patel told ProPublica. " So, I think there's a real issue about accountability and oversight of the use of HIDTA funds here."
Last year Handshu lawyers went to court and told the judge that NYPD violated the Handschu decree by putting surveillance in Muslim communities without any suspicion of terrorist activity. As of yet, the discovery to see whether the NYPD violated the decree on keeping dossiers has not started but Patel believes that it will be starting soon.
Finding a violation of the Handschu Guidelines could go a long way for those critics who are  demanding more oversight for NYPD.
By Fatima Qadeer

Load-Date: September 18, 2013


End of Document