THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Red Brigades Issue A New Ultimatum
The New York Times
January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk
Length: 286 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and Renato Curcio
Body


The Italian Government last week rejected the latest asking price set by Red Brigade guerrillas for the freedom of Giovanni d'Urso, the magistrate they kidnapped last month. The guerrillas replied that they would kill the magistrate tomorrow unless Italian newspapers published ''political documents'' from their colleagues in two maximum security prisons.
Italian Government rejects Red Brigade guerrillas' demand for newspapers to print proganda message in return for freedom of kidnapped magistrate
The ultimatum, issued yesterday, seemed to go against the wishes of their jailed comrades, including Renato Curcio, a Red Brigade founder. Mr. Curcio, who is in Palmi prison, told his lawyer that victory had been achieved. He reportedly referred to the Government announcement that it will close the top security prison on the Sardinian island of Asinara (a previous guerrilla demand) and to Mr.  d'Urso's purported cooperation in identifying other officials active in the Government's effort to disrupt the terrorist underground.
Another of the kidnappers' demands was also partially fulfilled when the Socialist Party newspaper, Avanti, yesterday published excerpts of statements by jailed terrorists at Palmi and Trani which favored the judge's release. The Italian news agency, Ansa, issued the statements in full but the kidnappers were apparently holding out for full newspaper publication.
In printing the excerpts, the Socialists broke ranks with the other three members of the coalition Government of Prime Minister Arnaldo Forlani, who rejected the guerrilla demands. One coalition member, the left-of-center Republican Party, threatened to quit the Government if it did not take a tougher line against terrorism.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Giovanni d'Urso photo of Renato Curcio


End of Document