THE WILLIAMS CASE IS SETTLED BUT QUESTIONS ON F.B.I. LINGER
The New York Times
March 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 959 words
Byline: By EDWARD T. POUND
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


As William H. Webster began his fifth year as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation a few weeks ago, he could look back on a number of accomplishments. He had, it seemed, helped create nothing less than a ''new F.B.I.,'' an agency that has generally abided by strict investigative guidelines and given new emphasis to white collar criminals and organized crime.
But the bureau's refurbished reputation was under heavy assault last week as the Senate reviewed the conduct of Senator Harrison A.  Williams Jr., Democrat of New Jersey, in the so-called Abscam affair. While Mr. Williams, who was convicted last year on Federal bribery and conspiracy charges, resigned to avoid expulsion, the bureau's conduct in the undercover Abscam investigation also was on trial.
Highlights of criticism of FBI in light of Senator Harrison Williams's charges of entrapment
Mr. Williams and his supporters contended that the bureau had illegally entrapped him and violated the separation of powers by focusing on him and other members of Congress. Some senators said they were concerned that the investigation amounted to a threat to the independence of the Senate.
Mr. Webster, a former Federal judge, and other bureau officials reject those charges and maintain that the Abscam inquiry was a significant accomplishment. Nonetheless, a Senate investigation of the F.B.I.'s tactics is expected and some Senators believe that the Williams case could provide the impetus for a charter defining the bureau's mission and authority.
Mr. Williams's Senate supporters, and even some of his critics, contend that for one thing the bureau did not adequately supervise an informant, Melvin Weinberg. The response from the bureau is that Congress is providing careful oversight and that, despite the complaints, the bureau didn't set out to ensnare members of Congress and that, further, the F.B.I. was careful not to violate anyone's constitutional rights.
''It isn't a matter of one branch investigating another,'' said Roger S. Young, an assistant bureau director. ''We went where the allegations of criminality took us.'' But the bureau is sensitive to criticism, and Mr. Young noted that an internal review of its Abscam tactics was under way. ''We're not saying everything we did was right,'' Mr. Young said, but he was confident that any review - on Capitol Hill or in the courts - would show that law enforcement powers were not abused.
The bureau's increasing use of undercover tactics disturbs some civil libertarians. John H.F. Shattuck, the head of the American Civil Liberties Union's Washington office, said that the agency has been ''more open and forthcoming with the public'' under Mr. Webster, but that the Abscam affair raises ''serious implications for Federal law enforcement in terms of civil liberties.'' Mr. Shattuck said, ''We have been very much concerned about the whole issue of runaway 'fishing expeditions' in which the Government tries to induce people to swim into a net and commit crimes, which is ultimately what the Abscam techniques are all about.'' Mr. Shattuck said that one answer would be for the Congress to require strict judicial controls over undercover operations.
Bouncing Back by the Book
When Mr. Webster was appointed in early 1978 by President Carter, the bureau had not yet recovered from the criticism of some of its tactics - including illegal wiretaps, harrassment of civil rights leaders and domestic spying - under J. Edgar Hoover, who headed the F.B.I. for 48 years. Associates say that Mr. Webster, as part of an effort to restore the bureau's good name, has insisted on professionalism and strict adherence to detailed guidelines governing domestic security and undercover investigations and the use of paid informers.
The domestic security guidelines, imposed on the bureau during the dark days of 1976, worry some conservatives, who fear that the bureau is too severely restricted in investigating potential terrorism.  According to bureau statistics for 1973, 21,000 domestic security cases were under investigation, many of which involved non-violent groups. The bureau says that it is now focusing solely on potential terrorists and is keeping watch over 18 individuals and 11 organizations in domestic security operations.
Mr. Webster has drawn some criticism for supporting proposed revisions to the Freedom of Information Act. Like many other law enforcement officials, he has argued that the release of files in foreign counterintelligence, organized crime and terrorism investigations makes it easier for criminals to identify informers.  Press groups have challenged him, saying that the evidence does not support his assertion that law enforcement has been damaged by the information act.
Generally, though, Mr. Websters' supporters far outnumber his detractors. He is credited with hiring more blacks, women and Hispanic Americans as agents and for emphasizing cases involving white collar crime, organized crime and foreign counterintelligence.
And while the bureau under Mr. Hoover was reluctant to involve itself in narcotics investigations, Mr. Webster assumed the task in January. The bureau was given concurrent jurisdiction with the Drug Enforcement Administration over violations of Federal criminal drug laws, and Mr. Webster was directed by Attorney General William French Smith to oversee their efforts.
Some bureau officials say privately, however, that the agency may be taking on too much. ''The biggest impact on the bureau's resources could come when we start working narcotics heavily,'' said one official. Further, he maintained that while the Administration was committed to combating violent crime, the bureau's resources were not infinite; its effectiveness may be limited without more manpower.


End of Document