THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE POLL; Poll Bolsters Bush on Terrorism But Finds Doubts on Economy
 The New York Times
January 18, 2004 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1765 words
Byline:  By ROBIN TONER and JANET ELDER
Body


President Bush begins his campaign year with Americans voicing strong support for his handling of the war against terrorism, but many doubting his economic and domestic policies, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.
     Fewer than one in five people said their tax burden had been eased by Mr. Bush, who has made tax cuts the centerpiece of his economic program. His latest domestic initiatives, unveiled in the run-up to the State of the Union message on Tuesday, got only a lukewarm response, with 58 percent saying that building a permanent space station on the Moon was not worth the risks and costs. 
 Moreover, the support Mr. Bush gained after the capture of Saddam Hussein last month has largely dissipated. His overall approval rating now stands at 50 percent, comparable to President Bill Clinton's 47 percent in January 1996. Mr. Bush remains a polarizing figure in a sharply divided country, with 9 in 10 Republicans approving of his performance, and only 1 in 4 of the Democrats.
Despite those vulnerabilities, which the Democratic presidential candidates are busily trying to exploit, Mr. Bush retains a powerful advantage on national security. Sixty-eight percent, including majorities of both Democrats and independents, gave him high marks for the campaign against terrorism, and 68 percent said the Bush administration's policies have made the United States safer from terrorist attacks. Sixty-four percent said they considered him a strong leader.
"He demonstrated a maturity after 9/11, responding in a positive and determined way to bring the country onto a steady keel," said George House, a 72-year-old Democrat in Sigourney, Iowa. Mr. House, who was reinterviewed after the poll, added that he still had doubts about the war with Iraq.
Such assessments could set a high bar for Mr. Bush's Democratic challengers, who are still largely unknown, even among Democratic primary voters, many strategists say. "People wonder whether the Democrats will be as aggressive as Bush in keeping the country safe," said Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster.
Already, credibility as commander in chief has emerged as a major issue in the battle for the Democratic nomination. Many Democrats in rival campaigns have argued that Howard Dean, who has led in the polls for most of the primary season, is unlikely to pass that test on national security, because of his opposition to the war in Iraq and his lack of foreign policy experience.
The Times/CBS News poll was conducted Monday through Thursday by telephone with 1,022 adults nationwide, and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.
Other polls released last week and conducted earlier than the Times/CBS News poll found Mr. Bush's job approval rating to be higher. For instance, a Gallup Poll taken Jan. 9 to 11 had a 59 percent job approval rating for Mr. Bush, while an NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll taken Jan. 10 to 12 had a 54 percent approval rating.
While the Times poll was a road map for an intensely divided electorate, it also highlighted Mr. Bush's strengths. His approval rating is highest among those ages 30 to 44; those younger and older are more divided. Whites approve of his performance by 56 to 41 percent; in contrast, 70 percent of blacks disapprove of the job he is doing, while just 17 percent approve, the poll found.
He also has a big edge among those who say religion is extremely or very important to them; 56 percent of that group say they approve of Mr. Bush and 39 percent say they disapprove.
His approval rating among men and women is about the same, suggesting he is addressing the historic Republican vulnerability of a gender gap. And he has a substantial edge among married women.
One of the president's signature accomplishments on the domestic front -- the passage of a Medicare overhaul with new coverage for prescription drugs -- has yet to register much with the voters, the poll suggests. Twenty-nine percent said they thought the administration had made "a lot" or "some" progress on prescription drug relief. Fifty-four percent said the administration had made little or no progress.
For all of Mr. Bush's strengths, the poll shows the potential for a competitive election. When asked whether Mr. Bush had done more to unite the country or divide it, the public was split -- 43 percent said he had brought Americans together, 44 percent said he had divided them.
When given a choice between an unnamed Democrat and Mr. Bush, 43 percent of the registered voters polled said they would vote for Mr. Bush, while 45 percent said they would vote for the Democrat.
The survey found the nation still in an anxious state economically, despite the recent rebound in economic growth and the improvement in the stock market. The economy, jobs and unemployment led the list of most important issues for voters, with health care and education not far behind.
Administration officials argue that by almost every major measure -- save jobs -- the economy is in a strong recovery, and that employment will soon catch up. In fact, more people now rate the state of the economy as "very" or "fairly" good -- 54 percent, compared with 41 percent who gave it that rating a year ago. Similarly, people are more optimistic about where the economy is headed -- 34 percent said they believed it was getting better and 26 percent worse, another sharp turnaround from last year.
But many in the poll still worried. "They say unemployment is down, but that's because a lot of people's unemployment ran out, so they're not listed anymore," said Ellen Diliello, a Republican retiree in Preble, N.Y. Thirty-nine percent said they remained worried that they or someone in their household would lose a job in the coming year.
Moreover, many Americans say their own economic circumstances have not improved much. A majority said they were having a hard time keeping up with their bills. Only 19 percent said their tax burden had been eased by the administration's policies, while 32 percent said their taxes had gone up and 44 percent said the policies had not affected them one way or the other.
Mr. Bush argues that the tax cuts are spurring economic growth and must be made permanent. But only 27 percent in the poll said they believed the tax cuts were good for the economy, while 17 percent said the tax cuts were bad and 51 percent said the cuts had not made much of a difference.
The perception that Mr. Bush's economic policies favor the affluent and big business remains; 64 percent said they thought "big business" had too much influence on the Bush administration, while 57 percent said the administration's policies favored the rich, as opposed to the middle class and the poor.
"It's a Republican theory that if you help large corporations, it should filter down to everyone else, but it takes too long, and sometimes it just doesn't," said Patricia Domingo, a 58-year-old Democrat in Byron, Calif.
In contrast, Ardis Barton, a Republican businessman in Earth, Texas, argued, "The tax cuts were needed and he got them through. The economy is improving, and that proves he made the right choice on the tax cuts."
Mr. Bush's proposal to overhaul immigration policies, announced this month, is getting a skeptical response. Two thirds of those polled said immigrants who entered the country illegally should not be allowed to stay and work in the United States for three years, as Mr. Bush proposes. There was little enthusiasm for increasing levels of immigration at all, with a plurality saying immigration should be decreased.
The survey also found divisions over Mr. Bush's proposal for returning to the Moon by 2020, and eventually using a lunar base as a launching pad to Mars. Forty percent said the nation was spending too much on space exploration programs, while 17 percent said the nation was spending too little. Forty-eight percent said they would favor the United States' sending astronauts to explore Mars, while 47 percent said they would oppose it.
And 58 percent said building a space station on the Moon was not worth the risks and costs, while 35 percent said it was.
Despite the widespread support for Mr. Bush's handling of terrorism, there are also doubts about his handling of foreign affairs in general. Forty-seven percent in the survey said they approved of the way he was handling foreign affairs, while 45 percent disapproved.
Moreover, half the public said the result of the war in Iraq was not worth the loss of life and other costs. Forty-nine percent said Mr. Bush was too quick to get the United States involved in a war there, while 35 percent said the timing had been about right and 13 percent said the administration was too slow to act.
The public is also divided over Mr. Bush's current handling of the situation in Iraq, with 48 percent approving and 46 percent disapproving. In addition, 6 in 10 of those polled said the Bush administration had been hiding information about the existence of weapons of mass destruction; only 27 percent said the administration had told the public most of what it knows.

How the Poll on the Presidency Was Conducted
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted Monday through Thursday with 1,022 adults throughout the United States.
The sample of telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges across the country.
Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete telephone number, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey.
The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variation in the sample relating to geographic region, sex, race, age and education.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults.
For smaller subgroups the margin of sampling error is larger. For instance, for self-described Democratic primary voters it is plus or minus five points.
In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll. Variation in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results.
The complete questionnaire and results are available online at www.nytimes .com/politics.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
ChartPresidents' job approval in January of the year they sought re-election. Jimmy Carter 1980APPROVE: 52%DISAPPROVE: 34 Ronald Reagan 1984APPROVE: 58DISAPPROVE: 32 George Bush 1992APPROVE: 48DISAPPROVE: 39 Bill Clinton 1996APPROVE: 47DISAPPROVE: 40 George W. Bush 2004APPROVE: 50DISAPPROVE: 45 Those with no opinion are not shown. Boldface indicates presidents who were re-elected. (Source by The New York Times/CBS News Poll)(pg. 1) Chart: "Public Perceptions of the Presidency"Do you approve or disapprove of the way George W. Bush is handling . . . . . . his job as president?APPROVE: 50%DISAPPROVE: 45NO OPINION: 5 . . . the campaign against terrorism?APPROVE: 68DISAPPROVE: 28NO OPINION: 4 . . . the situation with Iraq?APPROVE: 48DISAPPROVE: 46NO OPINION: 6 . . . foreign policy?APPROVE: 47DISAPPROVE: 45NO OPINION: 8 . . . the economy?APPROVE: 44DISAPPROVE: 51NO OPINION: 5 Do you think the Bush administration has made a lot of progress, some progress, not much progress, or no progress at all in . . . . . . improving the nation's economy?A LOT: 10%SOME: 48NOT MUCH: 21NONE: 20NO OPINION: 2 . . . improving public schools?A LOT: 9SOME: 33NOT MUCH: 18NONE: 34NO OPINION: 6 . . . making sure Social Security and Medicare are there for future generations?A LOT: 4SOME: 31NOT MUCH: 19NONE: 35NO OPINION: 10 . . . reducing the cost of prescription drugs for the elderly?A LOT: 4SOME: 25NOT MUCH: 16NONE: 38NO OPINION: 18 And the EconomyThe condition of the national economy is:VERY GOOD: 3%FAIRLY GOOD: 51FAIRLY BAD: 34VERY BAD: 11NO OPINION: 1 The economy is:GETTING BETTER: 34STAYING ABOUT THE SAME: 39GETTING WORSE: 26NO OPINION: 1 Totals may not add to 100 because of rounding. Based on nationwide telephone interviews conducted from Jan. 12 to 15 with 1,022 adults. (pg. 20)

Load-Date: January 18, 2004


End of Document