The Case For and Against Abducting Terrorists
The New York Times
January 28, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk; LETTER
Length: 365 words
Body


To the Editor:
Abducting terrorists for trials in this country would be an act of illegal desperation. In your front-page article on Administration discussion of such a step, the State Department's legal adviser says, ''such a move would violate international law,'' yet he seems inclined to go along with ''bending'' the rules, as in the Adolf Eichmann case, to overcome our frustrating inability to bring such criminals to justice. A return to the posse era of the Wild West can only create dangerous precedents and undermine the foundations of civilized society.
If President Reagan's pledge of last July, to ''indict, apprehend and prosecute'' atrocities, is to be carried out, the United States must lead the way toward more, rather than less, respect for the rule of law.
Last December, for the first time, the United Nations General Assembly unequivocally condemned as criminal ''all acts, methods and practices of terrorism wherever and by whomever committed.'' The International Law Commission is drafting a code of offenses against the peace and security of mankind, and there is widespread agreement on many of its principles. Since international offenses, such as terrorism, genocide, apartheid and other crimes against humanity, are almost universally outlawed, it is common sense that there should be an international penal tribunal to cope with such breaches.
The United States led the world in creating the Nuremberg tribunals, where aggression and the crimes and atrocities of war were prosecuted. Those who breached the laws of humanity were punished. The Nuremberg courts were dissolved, and the present World Court at The Hague was never vested with criminal jurisdiction or the right to place individuals on trial.
Those who have had enough of the outrageous acts of terrorism should insist that legal loopholes be further tightened and that an international criminal court, permanent or ad hoc, be created to punish those who believe that murdering civilians is a justi-fied method for pursuing their own goals. BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ New Rochelle, N.Y., Jan. 19, 1986 The writer, adjunct professor at Pace Law School, was executive counsel at the Nuremberg war-crimes trials.


End of Document