THE WORLD;
Some Terrorists Thwarted, Some Reach Targets
The New York Times
December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 334 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger
Body


Secretary of State George P. Shultz's strategy for ''active prevention'' of terrorism seemed to produce results in Rome last week, but the worldwide threat was far from over. American embassies came under attack from leftist guerrillas in Lisbon and from drug traffickers in Bogota, Colombia.
Italian police officials announced the arrests of seven men carrying Lebanese passports near Rome, where they appeared to be planning an attack on the United States Embassy. They had a map of the building showing supposed ''weak points,'' Police Chief Marcello Monarca said. Leaflets seemed to link them to Islamic Holy War, which has taken responsibility for five embassy and barracks bombings in Beirut and Kuwait in the last 19 months that killed 360 people. Chief Monarca said an address found on an eighth man who was arrested carrying explosives in Zurich led to the suspects in Rome. Western news agencies in Beirut later received threats denouncing the Italian Government for ''following the ways of American imperialism and desperately defending its devilish role.''
Review of terrorist activity around the world in past week; photo (M)
The murder of a senior British diplomat in Bombay may also have had a Middle Eastern connection. According to calls received by news agencies, Percy Norris, the British Deputy High Commissioner, was shot by a Revolutionary Organization of Socialist Moslems, which also had claimed responsibility for killing a British official in Greece in March. London newspapers suggested that the killers hoped to force Britain to free three Arabs convicted of shooting Israel's Ambassador, Shlomo Argov, in London two years ago.
In Bogota, a woman was killed and six men - all Colombians - were wounded when a bomb exploded near the American Embassy. Cocaine smugglers had threatened reprisals if suspected traffickers are extradited to the United States. In Lisbon, leftist guerrillas claimed responsibility for four grenades tossed into the American Embassy compound; no one was hurt.


End of Document