The Latest: Iranian president condemns Saudi Embassy attack
The Northern Star: Northern Illinois University
January 3, 2016 Sunday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FROM AP; Pg. 1
Length: 1045 words
Body


RIYADH, Saudi Arabia - The latest developments after Saudi Arabia executes a prominent opposition Shiite cleric convicted of terrorism charges, sparking anger in Iran and among Shiites across the region (All times local).
1:50 p.m.
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani has called an attack on the Saudi Embassy in Tehran "unjustifiable."
In comments Sunday, Rouhani also condemned Saudi Arabia's execution of opposition Shiite cleric Nimr al-Nimr, which sparked the attack on the embassy and generated outrage among Shiites across the region.
Rouhani said he ordered the Interior Ministry to apprehend those responsible for the embassy attack and bring them to court to "end forever such ugly acts." He also called the embassy attackers "extremists."
Protesters in Iran, angered by al-Nimr's execution, broke into the Saudi Embassy early Sunday, setting fires and throwing papers from the roof.
Al-Nimr was among 47 people executed Saturday after being convicted of terrorism charges. He was an outspoken critic of the Saudi government but denied advocating violence.
___
1:40 p.m.
The U.N.'s top human rights official has strongly criticized Saudi Arabia for executing 47 people in a single day.
Zeid Raad al-Hussein says the execution Saturday was "a very disturbing development indeed, particularly as some of those sentenced to death were accused of non-violent crimes."
He says international law only permits the death penalty in cases where the crimes committed are considered "most serious" and human rights bodies have consistently defined those as being "being restricted to murder and other forms of intentional killing."
In a statement Sunday, he questioned whether due process had been observed during the trials of those executed, all of whom were convicted of terrorism charges.
Those executed included prominent Shiite opposition figure Nimr Al-Nimr, three other Shiite dissidents and a number of al-Qaida militants.
___
1 p.m.
Iraq's top Shiite cleric has condemned the execution of a prominent Shiite opposition figure in Saudi Arabia, calling him a "martyr."
In a statement Sunday, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani extends his condolences for the "martyrdom" of Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr and others from eastern Saudi Arabia, where the Shiite minority is concentrated.
He adds that "their blood was unjustly and aggressively shed."
Al-Nimr and three other Shiite dissidents were among 47 people executed by Saudi Arabia on Saturday after being convicted of terrorism charges. Those executed also included a number of al-Qaida militants.
Al-Nimr was an outspoken critic of the Saudi government and a central figure in Shiite protests before his arrest in 2012. He denied ever advocating violence.
___
11:25 a.m.
The BBC is reporting that one of 47 people executed by Saudi Arabia was convicted of the 2004 shooting that killed one of its cameramen and wounded a correspondent.
The BBC World Service reported on Sunday that Adel al-Dhubaiti, among the 47 executed Saturday, was convicted over the shooting. Al-Dhubaiti took part in the attack outside the house of a suspected al-Qaida militant.
The June 2004 shooting in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, killed 36-year-old Irish cameraman Simon Cumbers. British reporter Frank Gardner, now the BBC's security correspondent, was seriously wounded in the attack and paralyzed, but survived.
___
11 a.m.
Iran's powerful Revolutionary Guard has compared Saudi Arabia's execution of an opposition Shiite cleric to attacks carried out by the extremist Islamic State group.
The Guard says in a statement Sunday that Saudi Arabia's "medieval act of savagery" in putting Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr to death will lead to the "downfall" of the monarchy.
The comments by the Guard mirror those of Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who also strongly criticized the sheikh's execution.
Protesters in Iran, angered by al-Nimr's execution, broke into the Saudi Embassy early Sunday, setting fires and throwing papers from the roof.
Al-Nimr was among 47 people executed Saturday after being convicted of terrorism charges. He was an outspoken critic of the Saudi government but denied advocating violence.
___
10:45 a.m.
Iranian authorities say 40 people have been arrested on suspicion of taking part in an attack on the Saudi Embassy in Tehran after the execution of an opposition Shiite cleric in the kingdom.
Iran's semi-official ISNA news agency quoted Tehran prosecutor Abbas Jafari Dowlatabadi announcing the arrests Sunday.
The prosecutor said "investigations to identify other persons involved in this incident are ongoing."
Protesters in Iran, angered by Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr's execution Saturday, broke into the Saudi Embassy early Sunday, setting fires and throwing papers from the roof.
___
10 a.m.
Iran's Supreme Leader says Saudi Arabia will face "divine revenge" after the execution of a revered Shiite cleric.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei made the comments Sunday, a day after Riyadh announced the execution of Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr.
Khamenei's website carried the comments by the ayatollah, who also criticized the ongoing Saudi-led war in Yemen against Shiite rebels, as well as the "persecution" of Shiites living in Saudi-allied Bahrain.
Also on Sunday, Khamenei's Twitter account said: "Doubtlessly, unfairly spilled blood of oppressed martyr (hashtag)SheikhNimr will affect rapidly & Divine revenge will seize Saudi politicians."
Protesters in Iran, angered by al-Nimr's execution, broke into the Saudi Embassy early Sunday, setting fires and throwing papers from the roof.
___
9:40 a.m.
Saudi Arabia says that by condemning the execution of an opposition Shiite cleric, Iran has "revealed its true face represented in support for terrorism."
A Foreign Ministry statement carried by the official Saudi Press Agency accuses Tehran of "blind sectarianism" and says that "by its defense of terrorist acts" Iran is a "partner in their crimes in the entire region."
Shiite-majority Iran expressed outrage over the execution of Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, who was put to death along with 46 others convicted of terrorism charges, including three other Shiite dissidents and a number of al-Qaida militants.
Al-Nimr was a central figure in protests by Saudi Arabia's Shiite minority until his arrest in 2012. He was critical of the Saudi government and but denied ever advocating violence.

Load-Date: January 3, 2016


End of Document