The Libyan raid, four months later
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 11, 1986, Monday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Ideas; PERSPECTIVES; Column; Pg. 21
Length: 951 words
Byline: RUSHWORTH M. KIDDER
Dateline: Santa Monica , Calif.
Body


Four months ago this Friday, American planes bombed Libya.
What's been the result?
During an interview in his office here last week, I put that question to Rand Corporation analyst Brian M. Jenkins, one of the world's leading experts on international terrorism.
His answer was cogent, lucid - and thoroughly paradoxical.
Mr. Jenkins readily concedes that the last four months have brought ''a perception that there is a lull in terrorism.'' He also points out that the statistics show no lull at all.
Why this cleavage of fact and appearance? The answer is as complex as it is fascinating.
In the nine months preceding the bombing, notes Jenkins, public frustration had been escalating. The surge began with the 17-day hostage-taking aboard TWA Flight 847 on June 14. It was further fueled by the Achille Lauro seajacking Oct. 7, the EgyptAir hijacking on Oct. 10, the attacks at the Rome and Vienna airports on Dec. 27, and the explosion aboard TWA Flight 840 as it approached Athens airport April 2. The targets, in the main, had been ordinary citizens. Americans responded with a new fierceness of mood: In the week before the air raid, a private poll Jenkins helped to prepare showed Americans favoring military action against terrorists and their state sponsors by a margin of 2 to 1.
As pressure for action built, so the choice of possible targets - nations that aided and abetted terrorists - narrowed. The Libyan-American contretemps grew into ''a personal verbal duel between President Reagan and (Colonel Muammar) Qaddafi'' that in its name-calling took on, quips Jenkins, ''the kind of hype that precedes a professional wrestling match on TV.''
In that game of hype and counterhype, he notes, Qaddafi provided the ''perfect villain (with) his threats, his one-liners, his kaffiyeh, his sunglasses, his jump-suits. If Hollywood (had) invented a villain, it could not have done better than Muammar Qaddafi.'' And, as Jenkins notes wryly, ''All drama requires a villain.''
That sounds facetious. In fact, it's wholly serious. What made the attack possible was the force of public opinion. And public opinion seemed to need for its target not an abstraction but a specific person - however fictionalized that person might be. In the months preceding the bombing, Jenkins recalls, ''People didn't talk much about combating terrorism. People talked about smacking Qaddafi.''
The colonel, then, was a ripe target. But was he really a culprit or just an overbearing blowhard? Could his hand really be seen behind the recent spate of terrorist incidents? The links are fuzzy at best. But that's not the point. What mattered, in the administration's view, was the principle that America could and would defend itself.
What's been the result? For one thing, the equation has been changed, perhaps permanently. ''No government in the future,'' says Jenkins, ''is going to be able to think about (sponsoring terrorism) without taking into account the possibility (of military reprisal).'' The raid also served to ''galvanize the Europeans into action'' - partly out of solidarity, partly out of alarm that the United States might repeat such actions. On the negative side, the raid provoked widespread resentment in Europe, fostered the image of an America sending billions of dollars of equipment to blast a tiny third-world country, and further radicalized some elements in the Middle East - as evidenced in last week's carefully orchestrated attack on a British airbase in Cyprus by a previously unknown pro-Libyan terrorist group. So, says Jenkins, it's still too early to count the final results. It's not, however, too early to look at some numbers. And they tell a fascinating tale - one sure to disappoint those who favored the raid.
''If I compare the first six months of 1986 to the first six months of 1985,'' says Jenkins, ''I have trouble discerning the difference.'' For that period in 1986, Rand figures show 227 incidents (a provisional figure that could rise slightly) compared with 243 for 1985. Nor, says Jen kins, does any slackening of the pace show up when the 10 weeks prior to April 15 are compared with the 10 weeks after.
There has, however, been a shift in the nature of the incidents - away from kidnappings and hijackings and toward armed assaults and bombings. And that may help account for the appearance of a lull. Hostage-takings, after all, can drag out into long-term dramas, while bombings flash into the news and disappear.
Jenkins also notes another important shift: a decline in incidents in Europe and the Mideast and a rise in events in South America. Terrorism is still with us, but ''it's not taking place in the places that we watch carefully,'' he says. He notes that to much of the US news media, especially TV, ''South America's invisible.''
The overall result? ''There is less terrorism because we are perceiving less terrorism,'' says Jenkins. Paradoxical? Not really. Terrorism only works if it terrorizes - and to do so, it has to be noticed.
That raises the age-old philosophical question. Does a tree falling in a forest make a sound if no one hears it? Can a terrorist event be said to occur if no one reports it? In terrorism's political theater, is there only as much terrorism as we agree to recognize?
In the long term, the raid on Libya may have accomplished much or little. One thing it has done is to remind us that terrorism is not just something that exists ''out there'' in the world. It exists ''in here'' in our response to it - and raises some probing philosophical questions.
Mulling over those questions, we should remind ourselves that, when illusion exclaims, ''The raid worked - look at the lull it produced!'' we just might want to wait for some hard facts.

Graphic

 
Picture, Colonel Qaddafi: the 'perfect villain'?  FILE PHOTO/AP


End of Document