THE EROTIC TERRORIST
The New York Times
June 1, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk; review
Length: 1171 words
Byline: By ROBERT ALTER; Robert Alter's most recent books are ''Defenses of the Imagination'' and ''A Lion for Love: A Critical Biography of Stendhal.''
Body


TIME OF DESECRATION By Alberto Moravia.  Translated by Angus Davidson.  376 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $12.95.
''TIME OF DESECRATION,'' Alberto Moravia's 21st volume of fiction, is an odd and intriguing experiment in using the erotic novel as an instrument for the scrutiny of political behavior. Though occasional allusions are made to the ideal of revolution, though Marx is once actually discussed by two of the characters, scarcely anything happens in the novel that is not explicitly, claustrophobically, steamily sexual. The effect of the book, however, is quite the reverse of the conventional erotic novel. There is nothing rousing or arousing about the relentless sequence of sexual scenes: Sex for the female protagonist is alternately a sordid means to an end and a ghastly trap; and her flat-toned narration of her erotic experiences ''defamiliarizes'' them by allowing no other feelings toward them to emerge.
This deliberate flattening is made easier by the peculiar narrative form of the novel. Desideria, a beautiful Roman girl who would appear to be involved in terrorism, tells the story of her life in an extended interview to an impassive, laconic questioner who serves as the author's surrogate, seeking through his questions only to understand the concatenation of events without revealing an iota of his - or indeed, perhaps her - identity, politics, social background, moral values. Desideria is the adopted daughter of a vulgar rich woman who oscillates, as we are told with perhaps too much schematic insistence, between the role of solicitous mother and bisexual libertine; and this ambiguous figure comes to embody for her adopted daughter everything hateful and morally gangrened in the Italian haute bourgeoisie.
Desideria is first seen as a 12-year-old fat girl, a monstrous blob of protoplasm compulsively and angrily feeding its face. After the traumatic discovery of her mother's orgiastic proclivities, she resolves as a first step of self-assertion to escape the prison of fat she has piled up around herself. Once she succeeds in doing that, an inner voice, which she compares to the one that addressed Joan of Arc, begins to issue commands about what she should do with her life, how she should set herself in defiant opposition to her mother's world. The voice (''which was talking to me uninterruptedly - rather like the radio in a taxi'') is humorless, implacable, mercilessly uncompromising. It summons the now nubile Desideria to a career of revolution which is to be preceded by a long preparatory or dedicatory process of ''transgression and desecration,'' the objects of this ritualized fury being the principal sancta of bourgeois society: property, family, religion, culture, human life itself.
In practical terms, Desideria, who until the last chapter is armed only with her lovely young woman's body, carries out this process of dedication to revolution almost exclusively through sexual activity.  Most of the plot, then, can be summarized by a catalogue of what, in a simpler era than ours, used to be called unnatural acts. While still preserving an entirely technical virginity, she participates in, toys with, or at least witnesses all of the following: sex a trois, lesbianism, incest, anal intercourse, oral intercourse, masturbation, voyeurism, exhibitionism, sado-masochism and prostitution. In several memorable instances, genitalia end up smeared with excrement, vomit or blood, and that would seem to be the real consummation of revilement to which Desideria aspires. At the very end, she succeeds in acting out literally murderous violence, and that, rather than any ruptured membrane, is her true loss of virginity.
But what, after all, does all this deflected, displaced, perverted sex have to do with understanding the nature of revolutionary politics? To begin with, it is a way of representing a certain state of mind, a certain inner sickness unto death, that issues in terrorism. As Desideria, in a rare flash of self-knowledge, says to another character, ''The moralist'' -and of course the idealistic revolutionary is a moralist par excellence - ''is one who hates himself in other people, who condemns himself in other people, who kills himself in other people. He pardons himself, but precisely for that reason, he doesn't pardon others.'' Just such self-hatred channeled into the hatred of others is the hallmark of Desideria's constant sexual transactions.
More complicated in its relation to revolutionary politics is the fact that the grim farce of sex, as it is enacted by Desideria and her sundry partners, both bourgeois and proletarian, is invariably a vehicle for the playing out of private obsessions, the projection of fantasies, involving epidermal contact that is never real contact, action that is chiefly symbolic. This sense of the erotic as primarily a symbolic - and hence distortive - gesture is strikingly and disturbingly expressed in two complementary scenes of oral sex.  In the first, Desideria has a gratifying fantasy of castrating her partner, annihilating him. In a later scene, when the man is in the position she was in before, she becomes convinced that he is seeking desperately through his kisses to return to the darkness and nothingness of the womb, to death itself.
Sex as symbolic action, sex as the arena of virtually solipsistic fantasy, becomes an eerily appropriate model for the ''expressive politics'' that constitutes terrorism in our era. In this regard, it is a pity that the novel's Italian title, ''La Vita Interiore,'' was changed in translation, for surely one of Moravia's main points is that for Desideria and her kind revolution is an exacerbated impulse of ''the inner life'' that remains radically, painfully disjunct from the real world.
The one professional revolutionary who appears near the end of the novel is scarcely less hateful than the representatives of the bourgeoisie in the book; but however we view him, Desideria makes the probing observation that he, she and all their conceivable comrades are really working for a revolution that will never take place, or if it does takes place, will finally change nothing.  Desideria thinks this is the real heroism of revolutionary action; others might see it as mere destructive futility, the ultimate decadence of the revolutionary ideal. An industrialist may be kidnapped or murdered, a bomb set off in a crowded shop: all the act really amounts to, if one considers its essential inefficacy, is a symbolic expression of the terrorist's rage or frustration or dreams of power, like those hands and lips and members obsessively placed in strange conjunction through Desideria's sad rites of ''transgression and desecration.''
This is a bleak novel, more than a little airless in the stark selection of its human materials; but through it Moravia manages to tell us, with the weight of imagined individual presence that is the novelist's special realm of knowledge, something important about the pointless violence of politics in our time.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Moravia


End of Document