THE MURKY DEFINITION OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 7, 1989, SATURDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B
Length: 864 words
Body


The Dec. 30 editorial on the bombing of a Pan Am airliner shows the same selective myopia that has plagued our government since President Reagan first took office: the ''us vs. them'' syndrome. It is an approach that excludes a peaceful, diplomatic solution. Military retaliation becomes not only the sole available response but the preferred one. When an administration becomes intransigent on any issue, it rapidly leaves itself as well as its opponents with no other response but pure force.  When you are a people without a country, such as the Palestinians, or you are a small, weak country that is being harassed by the far superior military of the United States, as with Libya, and the United States doesn't show enough interest in your position to even talk with you, what actions are left to obtain what, in your mind, would be justice?  If you are a Palestinian, you have seen the USS New Jersey shell your villages, killing who knows how many innocent men, women and children because the Marine barracks were bombed by someone a Palestinian would have called a soldier.  If you are a Libyan, you saw American bombers kill some 120 men, women and children, almost all non-combatants because Libya helps support some of the groups responsible for terrorist acts.  If you are a Western European, you have been told of doctors, librarians, teachers and nurses murdered by Contras or of the CIA's bombing of oil dumps in Nicaragua.
In short, we are as guilty in using terrorism for political purposes.  We are now reaping what the Reagan administration has sown. It is probably too late to defuse the hatred and anger that helped create the groups who now kill the innocent to get their political points across. We can, however, prevent a new generation from forming in Beirut and the West Bank who will grow up and learn to kill.  The solution certai nly doesn't lie in U.S. military intervention. Again, that would only create more desperate people willing to follow our lead in killing for political reasons. It certainly won't stop terrorism - after all, how long has Israel been bombing Palestinian camps? Has that stopped terrorist attacks against Israel?  We must give the Palestinians the hope that peaceful negotiations can solve their problems and get them the justice that they desire. The U.S.  government must be able to consider and satisfy the positions of other groups besides just Israel in the Middle East. If we can convince the Palestine Liberation Organization that peaceful negotiations will work, maybe it will police itself. If we don't, what do the Palestinians have to lose by continuing the killing? Will it bother them if we continue to deny them a country they already don't have? Will it affect them if we continue to kill their women and children when earlier deaths at the hands of the Israeli Air Force or the U.S.  Navy already have hardened their hearts?  If we continue to ignore the needs and desires of the PLO, the Sandinistas, the Libyans and the others who the Reaganites have labeled terrorists and only deal with them through hate-mongering, then terrorist attacks by both sides will continue. Each attack will be used to justify the next.  George Heth Granite City We hear and read much about terrorism in this turbulent world. I suppose it leads many, like me, to wonder just who is and is not a terrorist.  Is a terrorist one who feels he has been wronged and has little defense against a great power and must stand and take it or fight back in any way he can, however cruel it may seem to us? Or is a terrorist one who hires mercenaries to kill thousands in Central America, who bombs Libya and Grenada with no fear of retaliation and drops big shells in the hills of Lebanon?  To me, cruelty is cruelty and terrorism is terrorism, whether it is a few who sneak a bomb aboard an airliner or a great power that pays others to kill thousands. Anyway I doubt if terrorism is the right word for it. It's a case of the pot calling the kettle black.  R. E. Johnson De Soto The not surprising evidence that Pan Am Flight 103 was bombed has been tied to a threat of retaliation for the accidental downing by Americans of an Iranian airliner last summer. This leads to a chilling thought. By simple extension, if a small terrorist group can kill 270 innocent people in a random bombing, think what a similar group could do by launching a nuclear missile!  The patently obvious conclusion to the recent tragedy is that, despite sophisticated equipment, we are pretty helpless to prevent such terrorism. And that evidence relates to the futility of our present nuclear arsenal together with the ''strong America'' theme that President-elect George Bush is enunciating as he prepares to take over.  My point is: If terrorists can retaliate on a jumbo jet as easily and effectively as was just demonstrated, other terrorists can retaliate against whatever they choose with the use of a nuclear device. Or, to put it into primary values, ''they'' can manufacture any weapon we can fabricate, and they are demonstrably unimpressed and unafraid in the face of our huge arsenal and our ideology of strength through weapons.  Edgar Roberts Shrewsbury

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document