The free and the brave
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
June 12, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 321 words
Body


 As we approach the bicentenary of our national anthem and the season when we celebrate independence, freedom and liberty, it's a good time to think about ways we can improve our celebrations. One place to start is to think in new ways about the last group of words in our anthem: "the land of the free and the home of the brave." There have been many changes in the two centuries since they were written. 
They are still inspiring, but they are not as true as they once were, and it may not be wise or helpful in our modern world to repeat them as often as we do and in the ways we do. It is wonderful that the United States continues to be a land of the free and a home of the brave, but there are many other countries such as England, France and New Zealand that are also lands of the free and homes of the brave. In some ways, it is not a big deal whether we think of our nation as "the" land or "a" land of the free, but in other ways it makes an important difference in how we view ourselves, how we view others and how we treat others. It would be a small step to change two of the words from "the" to "a," but in another sense, such a small step would also be a giant leap for mankind. And it is possible that leaps such as this are more important and will make more difference in the modern world than the leap Neil Armstrong was talking about when he expressed these same words about landing on the moon. Another aspect of these ideas is that many in America put the blame for terrorism on others, but American arrogance and insensitivity have contributed in important ways to worldwide problems with terrorism. It is also possible that if we were to make a few seemingly minor changes, such as changing our national anthem to sing about "a land of the free and a home of the brave," it might make more difference in what we call the "war" on terrorism than all our military might will ever achieve. Wesley Burr Lehi 

Load-Date: June 13, 2011


End of Document