The Terrorism Card
The New York Times
November 11, 2007 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 14NJ; Column 0; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 33; NEW JERSEY
Length: 386 words
Body


Sometimes victory comes at too high an ethical cost. We are talking about the handful of New Jersey candidates in last week's legislative elections who smeared their opponents with suggestions that they were sympathetic to terrorism. Republicans in one legislative race used the innuendo in an especially vicious, inaccurate and irresponsible manner. 
  The target was Tracy Riley, a Democratic candidate for the Assembly in the Eighth District, which is near Trenton. Ms. Riley's Republican opponents suggested she had terrorist sympathies because her husband, Michael, is a court-appointed defense lawyer for one of the six suspects charged with plotting to kill soldiers at Fort Dix. 
  About three weeks before the election, the Republican Party organization sent out a flier with a picture of militants wearing balaclavas and carrying machine guns. Referring to Ms. Riley, the flier asked, ''Will she repeal death penalty laws for terrorists?'' A party official said that Phil Haines, the Republican Senate candidate in the district, and both of the G.O.P. Assembly candidates, Scott Rudder and Dawn Marie Addiego, approved the mailing. 
  They also won the election -- but at a big loss to their personal reputations. The federal judge, a Bush administration appointee who presided over a hearing on the case, described the campaign attack as ''despicable,'' and he is right. A bulwark of our constitutional form of government is that people accused of crimes, no matter how heinous, have the right to a legal defense, and lawyers have an obligation to defend them. Since Mr. Haines and Ms. Addiego are lawyers, one would expect them in particular to understand that. 
  Another candidate who played the terrorism card was Senator Gerald Cardinale of Bergen County's 39th District. Mr. Cardinale won too. But during the campaign he suggested that his opponent, Joseph Ariyan, might be sympathetic to terrorism. 
  The reason: One of Mr. Ariyan's law partners, Mr. Cardinale said, had connections to an Arab-American civil rights group whose former national spokesman and other officials made comments supportive of Hamas and Hezbollah and hostile toward Israel. 
  What all this has to do with either Mr. Ariyan or the Senate campaign is unclear. What is clear is that some candidates will say almost anything to win.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 13, 2007


End of Document