The Daily Record News Briefs: July 27, 2009
The Daily Record of Rochester (Rochester, NY)
July 27, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 Dolan Media Newswires All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 994 words
Byline: Daily Record Staff
Body


Ethics Award finalists announced
Finalists in the 2009 Rochester Business Ethics Award were announced by The Rochester Area Business Ethics Foundation last week.
A panel of independent judges selected four companies as finalists: ConServe, Dawnbreaker, xpedx and Parrone Engineering.
ConServe is a Fairport financial/collection and recovery services firm specializing in higher education Mark E. Davitt is the company's president.
Dawnbreaker, a Rochester professional services firm, assists advanced technology firms with business planning, market research and valuation Jenny C. Servo is the company's president and CEO.
Xpedx is a Rochester distributor of equipment and supplies, printing paper, facility supplies, graphic imaging supplies and related products Merit Wilkinson is the group vice president.
Parrone Engineering is an East Rochester firm that provides civil engineering and land surveying services Edward G. Parrone, is the company's president and CEO.
"After seven years of conducting this competition, we remain impressed by the continued interest among area businesses in doing things right," said Martin Palumbos, co-chairman of the Rochester Business Ethics Award program and a principal in the financial planning firm PS&E LLC.
The companies selected to receive awards will be announced at a luncheon Sept. 22 at the Rochester Convention Center. Subsequently, award recipients from competitions in Rochester and throughout the nation are eligible to enter a national competition for the American Business Ethics Awards.
The 2009 judges are Christopher Pape, president and CEO of Monroe Litho Inc.; Richard Vega, director of the Office of Public Integrity/Inspector General, City of Rochester; William Dresnack, senior associate dean at the E. Philip Saunders College of Business, Rochester Institute of Technology; Kent Gardner, director and chief economist of the Center for Governmental Research; Sheila A. Gaddis, executive director of the Volunteer Legal Services Project Inc. and partner, Hiscock and Barclay LLP, and Susan O'Brien, vice president of Outsourcing Service, HR Works.
Judging criteria include executive commitment to business ethics; company ethics program; conflict resolution procedures and demonstration of sound ethical business practices.
RPO seeking Showhouse nominations
For the first time, the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra is accepting public nominations and will hold a public vote to select its 2010 Showhouse property.
The RPO's biennial Symphony Showhouse has been a significant fundraiser for the orchestra since 2000. A team of designers, artisans and landscapers make over a home, which is then opened for public tours, concerts and special tasting events.
Potential properties can be historical or new builds, for sale or occupied, existing homes.
Other considerations include high-visibility on or near well-traveled streets, size of 5,000 to 14,000 square feet, suitable room on the property for a Symphony Showhouse Boutique, availability of parking and appeal to the professional interior design community.
The owner's consent is necessary prior to a property's being nominated, as well as a contact for the neighborhood association, if applicable.
Nominations will be accepted beginning July 27 and may be e-mailed to mmerrigan@rpo.org Individuals can nominate more than one property, including their own.
At the end of the nomination period in mid-August, a selection committee including designers, former Showhouse leaders, RPO representatives and photographers will announce the finalists for final online voting through the RPO's Web site. Public voting will end Sept. 4, and the 2010 Symphony Showhouse will be announced Sept. 10.
EPA to hold Great Lakes public hearings
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency will hold a public hearing on the federal Great Lakes Restoration Initiative in Rochester on Wednesday, July 29.
It is the fourth in a series of six EPA public hearings being held in U.S. cities near the Great Lakes.
EPA officials will gather input on the agency's fiscal 2010 spending plan, priorities for fiscal 2011 activities and a multi-year action plan that spells out the federal commitment to restoring the Great Lakes.
A coalition of more than 100 conservation groups, The Healing Our Waters-Great Lakes Coalition, is calling on Congress to support President Obama's $475 million Great Lakes Restoration Initiative, which seeks to clean up toxic sediments, combat invasive species and restore fish and wildlife habitat, according to the group.
The plan is the first step in a $20 billion restoration program proposed by government agencies and nonprofits in 2005.
More information is available at www.healthylakes.org.
ABA issues report on terrorist trials
The American Bar Association's committee on law and national security issued a report on "Trying Terrorists in Article III Courts," the second in its series on "Due Process and Terrorism. "
The report concludes that some of the procedures and practices developed for trying mob-related criminal trials are adaptable to terrorism trials. In addition, many ad hoc court procedures for managing terrorism trials have been effective - but there is a steep learning curve for judges and courthouses trying terrorist suspects, the report states.
Some challenges associated with terrorism trials are posed by constitutionally-mandated safeguards, and the reports suggests the use of an alternative forum - such as a national security court - may not alleviate those challenges.
The report was generated by an April workshop with 33 national security practitioners and experts. Some participants suggested that a backstop to the Article III court framework may be required to deal with terrorist suspects who may pose a threat to national security but who cannot be prosecuted successfully.
The full report is available online at www.abanet.org/natsecurity. A third report, "Exploring Counterterrorism Detention Alternatives" will be released in August.

Load-Date: July 28, 2009


End of Document