The erosion of freedom;
Spying tools are now routinely used against ordinary, law-abiding Americans who have no connection to terrorism.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
November 22, 2005 Tuesday Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 13A
Length: 901 words
Byline: Bruce Schneier
Body


Christmas 2003, Las Vegas. Intelligence hinted at a terrorist
attack on New Year's Eve. In the absence of any real evidence, the
FBI tried to compile a real-time database of everyone who was
visiting the city. It collected customer data from airlines,
hotels, casinos, rental car companies, even storage locker rental
companies. All this information went into a massive database -
probably close to a million people overall - that the FBI's
computers analyzed, looking for links to known terrorists. Of
course, no terrorist attack occurred and no plot was discovered:
The intelligence was wrong.
A typical American citizen spending the holidays in Vegas might
be surprised to learn that the FBI collected his personal data, but
this kind of thing is increasingly common. Since 9/11, the FBI has
been collecting all sorts of personal information on ordinary
Americans, and it shows no signs of letting up.
The FBI has two basic tools for gathering information on large
groups of Americans. Both were created in the 1970s to gather
information solely on foreign terrorists and spies. Both were
greatly expanded by the USA Patriot Act and other laws, and are now
routinely used against ordinary, law-abiding Americans who have no
connection to terrorism. Together, they represent an enormous
increase in police power in the United States.
The first are FISA warrants (sometimes called Section 215
warrants, after the section of the Patriot Act that expanded their
scope). These are issued in secret, by a secret court. The second
are national security letters, less well known but much more
powerful, and which FBI field supervisors can issue all by
themselves. The exact numbers are secret, but a recent Washington
Post article estimated that 30,000 letters each year demand
telephone records, banking data, customer data, library records,
and so on.
In both cases, the recipients of these orders are prohibited by
law from disclosing the fact that they received them. And two years
ago, Attorney General John Ashcroft rescinded a 1995 guideline that
this information be destroyed if it is not relevant to whatever
investigation it was collected for. Now, it can be saved
indefinitely, and disseminated freely.
September 2005, Rotterdam. The police had already identified some
of the 250 suspects in a soccer riot from the previous April, but
most were unidentified but captured on video. In an effort to help,
they sent text messages to 17,000 phones known to be in the
vicinity of the riots, asking that anyone with information contact
the police. The result was more evidence, and more arrests.
The differences between the Rotterdam and Las Vegas incidents are
instructive. The Rotterdam police needed specific data for a
specific purpose. Its members worked with federal justice officials
to ensure that they complied with the country's strict privacy
laws. They obtained the phone numbers without any names attached,
and deleted them immediately after sending the single text message.
And their actions were public, widely reported in the press.
On the other hand, the FBI has no judicial oversight. With only a
vague hinting that a Las Vegas attack might occur, the bureau
vacuumed up an enormous amount of information. First its members
tried asking for the data; then they turned to national security
letters and, in some cases, subpoenas. There was no requirement to
delete the data, and there is every reason to believe that the FBI
still has it all. And the bureau worked in secret; the only reason
we know this happened is that the operation leaked.
These differences illustrate four principles that should guide
our use of personal information by the police. The first is
oversight: In order to obtain personal information, the police
should be required to show probable cause, and convince a judge to
issue a warrant for the specific information needed. Second,
minimization: The police should only get the specific information
they need, and not any more. Nor should they be allowed to collect
large blocks of information in order to go on "fishing
expeditions," looking for suspicious behavior. The third is
transparency: The public should know, if not immediately then
eventually, what information the police are getting and how it is
being used. And fourth, destruction. Any data the police obtains
should be destroyed immediately after its court-authorized purpose
is achieved. The police should not be able to hold on to it, just
in case it might become useful at some future date.
This isn't about our ability to combat terrorism; it's about
police power. Traditional law already gives police enormous power
to peer into the personal lives of people, to use new
crime-fighting technologies, and to correlate that information. But
unfettered police power quickly resembles a police state, and
checks on that power make us all safer.
As more of our lives become digital, we leave an ever-widening
audit trail in our wake. This information has enormous social value
- not just for national security and law enforcement, but for
purposes as mundane as using cell-phone data to track road
congestion, and as important as using medical data to track the
spread of diseases. Our challenge is to make this information
available when and where it needs to be, but also to protect the
principles of privacy and liberty our country is built on.
Bruce Schneier is the CTO of Counterpane Internet Security and
the author of "Beyond Fear: Thinking Sensibly About Security in an
Uncertain World."

Graphic

 
ILLUSTRATION

Load-Date: November 30, 2005


End of Document