The real enemy;
It's terrorism, not Iraq
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
March 13, 2004, Saturday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2004 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 22A
Length: 541 words
Body


When President Bush took office, an imminent threat against the United States indeed existed, but it wasn't from Saddam Hussein. It was from terrorism worldwide - most immediately from Osama bin Laden and Al-Qaida.
     The Bush administration was apprised of that threat by the outgoing Clinton administration and presented with a plan of action for taking the fight aggressively and soon to Bin Laden. The White House all but ignored the warning. Instead, counterterrorism funding was cut and, as former Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill has disclosed, the president and his national security team focused on removing Saddam Hussein from power.
   Then came Sept. 11, 2001, the Bali bombings, the attacks in Istanbul and others, numbering almost 30 in all. Now comes the horror of the attack on Spanish trains Thursday to again illustrate just how important a worldwide, coordinated focus on terrorism is - and how wrong America's focus on Iraq was.
     No one knows for sure at this point whether Al-Qaida was connected to the bombings in Madrid - although the operation certainly looks more like a Bin Laden-type operation than an attack by the Basque separatist group ETA, which reportedly has denied involvement. But the reality is that it doesn't matter whether a hard link is found. This latest attack demonstrates anew how important it was, before 9/11, to build a strong international coalition capable of a tightly focused, sustained and comprehensive effort against terrorist groups of every stripe everywhere in the world.
     At the beginning of the Bush administration, the United States enjoyed immense amounts of what Harvard University's Joseph Nye calls "soft power" - respect, admiration, friendship. That soft power increased dramatically in the days and weeks following 9/11. The Bush administration failed to use that soft power before 9/11 and caused it to evaporate after 9/11, first by attempting to go it alone in Afghanistan, then by lurching away from the focus on terror to invade Iraq - where no imminent threat existed, where containment was working and where most of the world didn't want the United States to go. As many critics have emphasized, Iraq was a distraction from the war on terror, not part of it.
     Imagine a different scenario: Instead of unleashing a radical neoconservative foreign-policy agenda focused on Iraq, what if the Bush administration had spent its first months taking the terrorism threat seriously and building a very strong international coalition that included France, Germany, Russia, China, India, Spain, Britain, Italy and others?
     What if such a coalition had sought to take preemptive action not against Iraq, but against known terrorist groups that had already bombed U.S. embassies, attacked the USS Cole, and so on? What if that coalition had followed every lead, every link, every money transfer and arms purchase? What if the coalition had sought to root Al-Qaida out of its Afghan base? Would that coalition have been capable of preventing 9/11? Would it have led to discoveries that might have foiled the attacks in Bali, or Istanbul or Madrid?
     Those questions can't be answered, and the answer could be no. But this much is certain: The Bush administration didn't try.

Load-Date: March 15, 2004


End of Document