THE CORE OF THE CONFLICT
The New York Times
March 25, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk; Review
Length: 1396 words
Byline: By BENNY MORRIS; Benny Morris, the author of ''The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem, 1947-1949,'' is currently a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution.
Body


PALESTINE AND ISRAEL
The Uprising and Beyond.
By David McDowall.
322 pp. Berkeley:
University of California Press. $24.95.
Western commentators on the Israeli-Arab conflict tend to lay claim to objectivity. David McDowall is refreshingly if not disarmingly forthright: ''I should declare my own position, which is more sympathetic to the Palestinian view than to the Zionist one.'' He goes on to say, however, that the purpose of his book is not to plead a case but to examine and enlighten. In large sections of ''Palestine and Israel'' he is successful. In others, he is less so.
Mr. McDowall, a former employee of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, takes a big bite out of the Middle East apple. His focus is on what was and remains the core of the Israeli-Arab conflict: the clash between Jew and Arab in Palestine/Israel. In less than 300 pages of text, he scans the past (early Zionist settlement and clashes with the Arabs, the 1948, 1967 and 1973 wars, the occupation), the present (the Palestinian intifada in the occupied territories) and the future. His history, compounded of a great deal of Jewish and Arab selfishness, folly and malice, is bleak; his conclusions and prognoses are far from encouraging.
But first, to the present. The Palestinian rebellion in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, which began in December 1987 and, with ups and downs in the level of violence, has continued ever since, contains two essential aspects: it is a revolt of an occupied, colonized third-world people trying to shake off chains of oppression and gain its political freedom and statehood (in smaller measure, it is also a social revolt of the poor against the system that perpetuates their condition); and it is the latest stage of the Arab struggle against Zionism and Israel. In general, the Palestinians, especially in the occupied territories, present the intifada in the former light, while Israelis, especially on the right, tend to view it exclusively in the latter light.
Mr. McDowall, correctly, takes both views. He regards the intifada as a just uprising of the oppressed. At the same time, he perceives it, in historical perspective, as merely one more round in the Arab-Jewish struggle for Palestine. And, while positing throughout the justice of the Palestinians' endeavor, he is keenly aware of the threat the Palestinians pose to the Israeli polity - to its character, dimensions and destiny.
He is caustic, indeed bitter, in his condemnation of Israel's methods in attempting to suppress the intifada, methods that include torture, deportations, the demolition of homes and the massive use of beatings, tear gas and rifle fire (with rubber, plastic-coated and metal-jacketed bullets). These have left some 750 Arabs dead and more than 10,000 wounded. Over the past two years, tens of thousands more have been incarcerated, mostly without due process. (Israeli casualties from Arab violence have been infinitely smaller, reflecting the lopsided guns-versus-stones nature of the conflict.) A book on history in progress is, by nature, a risky undertaking. Mr. McDowall, who completed the work in late 1988, was caught up by the intifada in midstride. But some of his tentative conclusions are manifestly cogent: the intifada has already given the Palestinians a ''freedom of mind and spirit . . . dignity and self-respect'' and a new sense of unity and nationhood. It has also driven the Palestine Liberation Organization toward moderation and realism.
But it remains unclear whether the Palestinians, under tremendous Israeli pressure, can sustain their revolt for much longer. Alternatively, it is possible that the cumulative pressures of the revolt will ultimately persuade Israeli society of the relative benefits of concession and withdrawal. At present it appears, depressingly, that most Israelis can indefinitely live with the current levels of violence and suppression - though perhaps a different, and spiritually diminished, Israel will emerge from the process.
In any event, crushing the intifada will not solve the problem. I agree with Mr. McDowall's assessment - which is shared by members of the general staff of the Israel Defense Forces - that the spirit of the current Palestinian revolt will no doubt re-emerge in further surges of violence and rebellion in years to come, and that Israel will never again be able to govern the territories on the cheap, politically, economically and militarily, as it did before 1987. Mr. McDowall does not seem to invest much hope in the efficacy of Washington's current irresolute, weak-kneed diplomacy. Real movement toward a settlement, he implies, must await a radical change in Israeli public opinion - meaning approval of negotiations with the P.L.O. and acceptance of the principle of land for peace.
When it comes to the history, Mr. McDowall demonstrates his pro-Palestinian bias (though his narrative is far more balanced than his initial caution would lead us to expect). Too much blame - for hostilities or missed opportunities for peace - is laid at the Zionists' feet, too little at the Arabs'. Mr. McDowall, indeed, finds it so difficult to present the Jewish claim to the land of Israel that he writes, convolutedly: ''It was natural that these Zionists should fix upon Palestine, in European eyes a relatively undeveloped land closely connected with the last time, 2,000 years earlier, that the Jews had been a nation.''
There is no explicit mention anywhere that the Jews had become a nation and lived on that land almost uninterruptedly for 1,300 years (from the 13th century B.C. to the 2d century A.D.) before their exile to Europe at the hands of the Roman Legions; no mention of the continuing, unparalleled ties with and longing for that land by exiled Jewry during its almost two-millennium dispersion. Altogether, he devotes too little space to the hostile actions and attitudes of the surrounding Arab states over the past four decades (invasions in 1948 and 1973; state-inspired guerrilla and terrorist campaigns; maritime blockades and minatory troop concentrations; continuous threats and boycotts, etc.), which go a long way toward explaining present-day Israel's siege mentality and inflexibility.
In addition, Mr. McDowall's bias is clearly responsible for some of the factual errors that dot his book. He suggests, for example, that Israel's Phantom aircraft deliberately and as a matter of policy bombed ''civilian targets deep inside Egypt.'' In truth, the Phantoms accurately and effectively attacked Egyptian (and Russian-manned) military targets. Only twice in the course of hundreds of sorties did the Phantoms - clearly by accident - hit Egyptian civilian targets.
Yet Mr. McDowall is far from being a blind advocate of the Arab cause. The Palestinian leaders, he writes of the pre-1948 period, ''had poor political judgement and provided poor leadership.'' And he berates the Palestinian terrorism of the 1970's: ''Although in terms of quantity Palestinian terrorism was less than 5 per cent of all international terrorism over the period 1967-87, Palestinians have established their pre-eminence as exponents and practitioners of terrorism by the use of sensational tactics.''
The major strengths of Mr. McDowall's book are in his analysis of the present and projections for the future. His description of Israel's Arab minority is excellent. His demographic analyses, highlighting the dangers to the ''Jewishness'' of Israel posed by the rapid growth of the Arab populations of both the occupied territories and Israel proper, should provoke thought. (Israel's Arab minority, which numbered some 150,000 in 1949, today totals over 700,000; East Jerusalem's Arab population, which numbered 65,000 in 1967, today stands at over 130,000.) The current surge in the immigration to Israel of Soviet Jews, to which Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir in recent weeks turned for demographic salvation, can hardly solve or offset the problem. One or two or even 400,000 new olim (Jewish immigrants) may briefly stay but will not halt the gradual, inevitable ''Arabization'' of Israel should it hold on to the occupied territories. Unless, in the grim fullness of time, an embattled, desperate Israel adopts a ''transfer'' (forced eviction) solution to its Arab problem - a prospect to which Mr. McDowall, I fear, devotes insufficient weight.


End of Document