THE WORLD;
Syria Is Linked To Berlin Bombing
The New York Times
November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 289 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and James F. Clarity
Body


The purported Syrian connection to terrorism was explored again in court testimony in Europe last week.
Ahmed Nawaf Mansour Hazi, a Jordanian and Farouk Salameh, a Palestinian, went on trial in West Berlin and admitted responsibility for an explosion that injured nine people last March at an Arab social club in Berlin.
Before the trial, Mr. Hazi said he had obtained the bomb at the Syrian Embassy in East Berlin from a man named Abu Ahmed. In court, he said his pretrial statement had been made under duress - the judge suggested that a threat to expel him to Jordan may have swayed him - and he would not say where the bomb had come from.
The Palestinian, Mr. Salameh, said he had accompanied Mr. Hazi's brother, Nezar Hindawi, to Damascus, where they met a man identified as Haitem Said, the name of a senior Syrian intelligence official.
Mr. Hindawi was convicted in London last month of trying to blow up an Israeli airliner. The testimony in his trial also implicated Syria, and Britain broke diplomatic relations with Damascus immediately after the guilty verdict.
The United States has also imposed diplomatic and economic sanctions against Syria, which insists it is not sponsoring terrorism.
Mr. Hazi, who has admitted that he went to Libya with Mr. Salameh and Mr. Hindawi, who was seeking support, was arrested in April after the West Berlin discotheque bombing in which two American servicemen and a Turkish woman were killed and 230 people wounded.
But he was not accused of responsibility for that attack.
The United States blamed Libya and launched an aerial raid on the North African country. Last week, the United Nations General Assembly voted, 79 to 28, with 33 countries abstaining, to condemn the United States attack.

Graphic

 
Photo of Ahmed Hazi (Reuters)


End of Document