The Economics of Violence by Giant Oak Founder and Georgetown University Professor Gary M. Shiffman, Recognized for Contributing to the Professional Literature on Conflict and Violence
The Breeze: James Madison University
September 10, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 524 words
Body


ARLINGTON, Va., Sept. 10, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Giant Oak is delighted to announce that our founder and CEO Gary M. Shiffman's new book, The Economics of Violence: How Behavioral Science Can Transform Our View of Crime, Insurgency, and Terrorism, has been selected as a finalist for "Best New Nonfiction Book" and as a winner by the American Book Fest's 2020 International Book Awards in the category "History: Military." The creator of the Machine Learning platform GOST速, Shiffman leverages his deep study in human behavior and organized violence and coercion to offer tools to promote peace and liberty.
The American Book Fest's Best Book Awards, now in its 17th year, represent one of the largest and most competitive mainstream book awards in the United States. Jeffrey Keen, president and CEO of American Book Fest, said, "This year's contest yielded over 2,000 entries from authors and publishers around the world, which were then narrowed down to the final results."
"It is an honor to have The Economics of Violence recognized by the International Book Awards," said Shiffman. "I wrote this book to empower those engaged in keeping us safe and free, and to inform the public on new approaches to enhancing public safety and security. I use case studies to make arguments articulating a new analysis of violence based on economics and using the terminology of markets."
Shiffman is a U.S. Navy Gulf War veteran, a former chief of staff for U.S. Customs and Border Protection, and a former U.S. Senate National Security Advisor. He teaches at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Screeners at financial institutions and government agencies use GOST to detect threats to public safety and security, including human and drug trafficking, money laundering, and terrorism.
To learn more about The Economics of Violence, click here.
About Giant OakAt Giant Oak, we build trusted tools at the frontiers of behavioral science and artificial intelligence that enable you to make both rapid and informed decisions in an increasingly dynamic security environment. Giant Oak Search Technology (GOST速) makes screening easy. GOST速 is an open-source search and triage tool that builds a custom internet domain and organizes information to detect suspicious behavior. GOST速 re-indexes the open and deep webs to return publicly available electronic information in prioritized results relevant to the user's requirements. By deploying machine-learning algorithms to refine search results and generate analytic scores, entities are sorted by relevance and threat level. For more information, visit www.giantoak.com.
This article originally ran on curated.tncontentexchange.com.
Facebook
Twitter
WhatsApp
SMS
Email
Print
Save
Tags
Gary M. Shiffman
Gost
Politics
Computer Science
Military
Economics
Behavioral Science
The Economics Of Violence
Terrorism
Founder
Search
TownNews.com Content Exchange
Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup.
Error! There was an error processing your request.
News Updates
Featuring the latest in news, opinion, culture and sports from The Breeze.
Please enter a valid email address.
Sign up
Manage your lists

Load-Date: September 10, 2020


End of Document