The Latest: British police back Turkey in terror fight
The Northern Star: Northern Illinois University
October 10, 2015 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FROM AP; Pg. 1
Length: 618 words
Byline: Jacques Brinon
Body


ANKARA, Turkey - Developments relating to Saturday's deadly bombing of a peace rally in the Turkish capital of Ankara. All times local.
___
8:15 p.m.
The director of Britain's counter-terrorism police unit says British police are providing "ongoing support" to investigators in Turkey after Saturday's deadly explosions in Ankara.
Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley, who heads the police counter-terrorism department, said British police are working closely with Turkish investigators. He urged anyone in Britain's "affected" communities with information about Saturday's attack in Turkey to contact the police anti-terrorist hotline.
"We are deeply saddened to hear" of the deadly explosions, he said, offering condolences to Turkey and to the substantial Turkish community in Britain.
British police have been working with Turkish police to try to prevent Britons from traveling to Turkey and then into Syria to join Islamic State extremists.
___
7:40 p.m.
About a thousand people, primarily Kurds, have held an impromptu rally in Paris to show support for victims of the Ankara bombings.
Somberly holding aloft photos from Saturday's attack on a peace rally that left 86 people dead and scores wounded, the group marched at the expansive Republique plaza in central Paris.
Paris has a large and active Kurdish community.
French President Francois Hollande, meanwhile, offered his condolences to the Turkish people and condemned "the attack that cost the lives of dozens of protesters in Ankara."
___
7:25 p.m.
The United States says the fact that deadly bombing in Turkey's capital targeted a planned peace rally underscores the depravity of those who carried it out.
Ned Price, a spokesman for the White House National Security Council, says the U.S. will stand with the Turkish government and its people in the fight against terrorism. He says horrific acts like Saturday's bombing in Ankara will only make nations more determined to confront terrorism.
Two explosions Saturday targeted a peace rally by opposition supporters and Kurdish activists in Ankara, killing 86 people and wounding 186. Turkey's prime minister says the attacks likely were suicide bombings.
Price says the U.S. condemns the bombing and offers its condolences to the loved ones of the victims.
___
7:10 p.m.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has sent her condolences to Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, calling the attacks that killed scores in Ankara "particularly cowardly acts that were aimed directly at civil rights, democracy and peace."
Two nearly simultaneous explosions on Saturday targeted a rally in Ankara by opposition supporters and Kurdish activists who were calling for equality and non-violence. Turkish officials say at least 86 people were killed and nearly 190 wounded.
Merkel says the attack "is an attempt at intimidation and an attempt to spread fear." She says "I am convinced that the Turkish government and all of Turkish society stands together at this time with a response of unity and democracy to this terror."
___
5:15 p.m.
Turkey's government says it has imposed a temporary news blackout following two blasts that killed 86 people at a peace rally in Ankara, the capital. The attack was Turkey's deadliest in recent years.
A government spokesman said the blackout Saturday covers images showing the moment of the blast, gruesome or bloody images or "images that create a feeling of panic."
He warned media organizations they could face a "full blackout" if they did not comply.
On Saturday, many people in Ankara reported being unable to access Twitter and other social media websites after the blasts. It was not clear if authorities had blocked access to the websites.
Turkey frequently imposes blackouts following attacks.

Load-Date: October 10, 2015


End of Document