THE TWIN TOWERS: Terrorism;
Throughout Arab World, 20 Years Of Growth of Islamic Terror Groups
The New York Times
March 6, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 24; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Column 1;
Length: 989 words
Byline: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,

By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: PARIS, March 5
Body


Islamic terrorist groups have mushroomed throughout the Arab world during the last two decades, multiplying into scores of tightly knit organizations. Staffed mostly by young zealots, these terrorist cells, known as Islamic groupings, number anywhere from a handful to several dozens of hardened fighters, some of whom were trained in Afghanistan, Iran and the Sudan, today's strongholds of Islamic fundamentalism.
Even though they use a variety of esoteric labels that seemingly differentiate them, including names like Those Saved From Hell, The Army of Mohammed and Islamic Bugle, as well as the more familiar Holy War, Party of God and Hamas, virtually all these groups draw their logic from two convictions.
One is that violence is necessary to replace Arab secularist governments with theocratic Islamic ones, and the other is that it is the duty of every Muslim to strive for that goal.
It flows from this logic that a wide variety of activities -- from the killing of Egypt's President, Anwar el-Sadat, in 1981 to the taking of hostages in Lebanon to calls for the murder of Christians, Arabs and foreign tourists -- are legitimate means of action for Islamic groups. Indeed, one of these groups' ideologues, Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind Egyptian cleric exiled in the New York area, has called this violence a "religious duty" for every sincere Muslim.
 
Led by Muslim Brotherhood
 The quest to establish fundamentalist Islamic states has long existed in the region.
It was, and still is, championed and pioneered by the largest and most powerful of all Islamic fundamentalist groups, the Muslim Brotherhood. The organization was founded by Hassan al-Banna in Egypt in 1928 and is firmly established today in most Arab countries, including major Western allies like Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
Over the years the Muslim Brotherhood has come under extreme pressures from several Arab regimes, particularly those in Syria and Egypt, forcing some of its leaders to modify the notion of taking power by force into an evolutionary process that begins with the broad education of the masses about Islam.
But with the advent of Islamic revolutionary Iran in the late 70's, a new generation inspired by the Iranian example has revived enthusiasm for using force to take power. Arab social scientists and political analysts have long debated the origins, structures and goals of these groups, settling on some conclusions.
 
Impatient With Elders' Pace
 "The bottom line for these younger extremists is that they want to accelerate the goals adopted by their elders in the previous generations," Ghassan Salame, an expert on Middle East affairs at the Paris Institute of Political Studies, said today.
"They differ from the older generation in three crucial ways. First, their impatience with the status quo is stronger. Second, their willingness to use force is palpable. Third, their list of enemies is much longer, perhaps including some of the elderly fundamentalists themselves and Muslim intellectuals as well as secularist enemies."
Other experts, incuding most interior ministers of the Arab world who are in the front line of the fight against Islamic militancy, do not make much distinction between old fundamentalists and new ones.
"They all came out from under the turban of the Muslim Brotherhood," said Egypt's interior minister, Abdel Halim Mussa, in remarks widely echoed by security officials in Algeria, Tunisia, Jordan and Morocco, all of whom are preoccupied by a continuing battle against terrorism.
 
Orchestrated From Exile
 What is clear is that the younger, front-line soldiers who throw bombs, shoot at police officers and make targets of tourists take their inspiration from elder fundamentalists operating as orchestra chiefs from exile or from jail. Equally clear is that all the leading figures of fundamentalism are former members of the Muslim Brotherhood organization.
One of these is the blind Egyptian religious leader, Sheik Rahman, who has lived in the New York area since 1990, making weekly pronouncements on cassettes dispatched to his followers, calling for the murder of Egyptian officials, Christian Copts and tourists in Egypt.
But far more important and influential than the Egyptian exile are three other major religious and ideological guides of these Islamic groups:
*Hassan al-Turabi, the Sudanese fundamentalist widely believed to be the real power behind the Government of Gen. Omar al-Bashir in the Sudan, and who last year was allowed to visit the United States, lecturing at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York;
*Rashid Ghanoushi, who lives in London and is a fugitive from Tunisia, accused of leading the banned Al Nahda Party in attempts to overthrow the Tunisian Government;
*Abassi Madani, the Algerian head of the Islamic Salvation Front, who is jailed in Algeria, accused of plotting to overthrow the Government.
By far the most effective is Mr. Turabi, who has successfully used the Sudan to establish an alliance with Iran in the past two years that has resulted in the creation of a multitude of training camps in the Sudan and Iran for hundreds of militant Muslim recruits.
The civil war in Afghanistan has proven to be a very rich recruiting ground for these young men, many of whom were encouraged, financed and helped to go there by their governments, with Saudi money and American logistical and weapons support, to join Afghan rebels in the 1980's fighting the Soviets.
Today, the stream of recruits continues.
A senior Egyptian official said in a recent conversation that much of the money for training camps was being sent from the Muslim Brotherhood, despite repeated denials by spokesmen for the group. The Brotherhood, which has much real estate in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, has accumulated a huge financial chest over the years. Much of it was donated by Muslim Arab governments, including most of the rulers of the gulf region, who are now themselves targets of fundamentalists.

Graphic

 
Photos: Omar Abdel Rahman, an exiled Egyptian cleric, shown at his 1989 trial in Cairo for inciting the public against the state, believes violence is "a religious duty" for every sincere Muslim fighting for Islamic causes (Agence France-Presse); The assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt in 1981 was a product of an Islamic grouping that sees its goal as replacing Arab secularist governments with theocratic Islamic ones. (Gamma-Liason/Nakram Gadel Karim, Al-Akhbar)

Load-Date: March 6, 1993


End of Document