The financial war against terrorism also takes a toll
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
December 6, 2001, Thursday


Copyright 2001 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: COMMENTARY,; EDITORIALS
Length: 606 words
Body


When he declared war on terrorism in September, President Bush promised to lead a global coalition employing military, diplomatic, intelligence and financial tools against terrorist cells and their state sponsors.
The military aspect of this campaign has been most evident since the United States began bombing forces of the Taliban government and al-Qaida terrorist network in Afghanistan two months ago.
Diplomatic efforts also have been highly visible as Secretary of State Colin Powell and other administration officials work diligently to hold together a worldwide coalition of nations united against terrorism.
#HAMAS.BRUD90#
Intelligence gathering at home and abroad has made headlines when alerts are announced regarding possible terrorist threats, new reports of Osama bin Laden's possible whereabouts are released and disagreements erupt over how to treat those arrested on charges related to terrorism.
The financial aspect of this war has not made a comparable impression -- until this week. The Bush administration on Tuesday froze the financial assets and closed the offices of a Texas-based foundation accused of funneling money to Hamas, a militant Palestinian organization.
So this week the financial war is big news because by closing down the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development the administration not only has extended its attention from al-Qaida to Hamas, but has solidly placed itself on Israel's side in the war against terrorism.
This is only the latest event in an active financial war. After the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the administration began freezing the assets of dozens of individuals and groups believed to be linked to terrorism and urged foreign governments to do likewise.
So far, the administration says it has blocked $61 million in worldwide assets held by the Taliban andal-Qaida. Germany's intelligenceservices this week claimed that the U.S.-led effort has successfully dried up the financing of bin Laden's terrorist cells, but the United States is not confirming that.
What we do know is that Bush is committed to expanding the financial war beyond a global challenge to al-Qaida. In addition to closing down the Holy Land Foundation, the president also ordered a crackdown on two Palestinian groups accused of financing Hamas.
Bush said Hamas uses the money raised by the foundation to indoctrinate Palestinian children to become suicide bombers and to support the families of suicide attackers. Without these funds, efforts to recruit new terrorists are crippled.
Of course, Holy Land Foundation officials denied all of these charges, saying they raise money for charitable causes and counter-charging that Bush is harming Moslems by cutting off these charities during Ramadan.
This is nonsense. The horrific Hamas attacks on Israel over last weekend prompted Bush's direct action against the foundation, but the U.S. government has understood the nature of the organization for a long time.
In 1996, Democratic Rep. Nita Lowey of New York asked the Internal Revenue Service to revoke the foundation's tax-exempt status because it raised money for Hamas and published the terrorist group's communiques. Other lawmakers have made similar charges.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill said Tuesday, "This is not a case of one bad actor stealing from the petty cash drawer and giving that stolen money to terrorists. This organization exists to raise money in the United States to promote terror."
The Holy Land Foundation raised an estimated $13 million last year. It probably has raised a comparable amount this year. Next year it will not raise any money to finance terror in the Middle East.

Load-Date: December 7, 2001


End of Document