The Right to Counsel, In the Right Situations
The New York Times
February 26, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11; SIDEBAR
Length: 953 words
Byline: By ADAM LIPTAK
Online: Court documents and an archive of Adam Liptak's articles and columns: nytimes.com/adamliptak.
Body


Zacarias Moussaoui would seem to have little to complain about. He is an admitted member of Al Qaeda. He has pleaded guilty to plotting to commit mass murder. He was tried in a federal court in Virginia before a judge who generally seemed attentive to his constitutional rights. And he was spared the death penalty.
  But it turns out that Mr. Moussaoui has two powerful and quite fundamental objections to how his case was handled, both involving the right to counsel guaranteed by the Constitution. He is asking the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, Va., to let him withdraw his guilty plea and start over from scratch.
  According to an appellate brief filed last month but only recently made public, the trial judge, Leonie M. Brinkema, of Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va., issued two rulings that interfered with Mr. Moussaoui's ability to defend himself. One concerned which lawyers could represent him, the other what his lawyers could tell him. 
  Both sorts of restrictions are unusual, and they give rise to this question, as framed by Mr. Moussaoui's appellate lawyers: ''Are federal courts willing to compromise or eliminate core constitutional protections if the indictment arises in the context of a terrorism case?''
  Judge Brinkema told Mr. Moussaoui that he could use only a lawyer who held a security clearance. But not every otherwise capable lawyer is willing to undergo the exhaustive investigation into employment, medical, financial, family and other records that getting a security clearance entails. And allowing the government to decide who can represent the defendant gives it a troubling veto at odds with the adversary process.
  Just two years ago, the Supreme Court, in a decision by Justice Antonin Scalia, ruled that depriving a defendant of the lawyer of his choice was such a fundamental violation of the Sixth Amendment that the conviction must be reversed whether or not the defendant would have done better with a different lawyer. 
  But lower-court judges have rejected the argument that requiring a security clearance interferes with the client's right to choose a lawyer. Last month, for instance, Judge Loretta A. Preska of Federal District Court in Manhattan said the right to choose was important but outweighed by ''the government's interest in preventing the unauthorized dissemination of classified information.''
  That assumes, though, that the government must necessarily provide classified information to the defense lawyer in a terrorism case. Mr. Moussaoui argues that he should have been allowed to make the strategic choice of proceeding with a lawyer who could learn only unclassified information. 
  ''It is up to the defendant to determine how he wishes to conduct his defense,'' Mr. Moussaoui's appellate lawyers wrote. ''If he wishes to forgo his counsel's access to classified information so that he can have the benefit of counsel of his choice, that is his right.''
  That brings us to Mr. Moussaoui's second point. He was in the end provided with lawyers who had security clearances. But those lawyers were prohibited from telling him about the classified information the government had given them. 
  In the ordinary case, clients and lawyers work together, weighing and sifting the evidence, brainstorming, investigating and strategizing. It is a relationship built on trust and a common pool of information. 
  ''In Moussaoui's case,'' his appeals brief said, ''his lawyers had to consistently tell him they were unable to share crucial evidence with him, and these circumstances irreparably damaged the attorney-client relationship.''
  Mr. Moussaoui's lawyers urged him not to plead guilty, but they could not tell him why.
  ''Incredibly,'' the brief said, ''defense counsel had evidence specifically found to be material and exculpatory as to Moussaoui, but at the time of the plea his lawyers could not discuss that evidence or even tell Moussaoui it existed. No plea can be knowing and counseled under these circumstances.''
  The brief is riddled with the black boxes lawyers call redactions. They cover text that presumably sets out the facts that Mr. Moussaoui was not allowed to know.
  In a supporting brief filed Friday, the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers argued that providing classified information to lawyers but forbidding them to consult with their clients about it violated the Constitution. They added that the problem was spreading  to ordinary criminal cases from terrorism cases.
  A Justice Department spokesman said the department had no comment on Mr. Moussaoui's arguments ''at this time.'' The government's brief is due in two months.
  Mr. Moussaoui would get little sympathy from prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, who will be tried before military commissions, if they are tried at all, and will face even more substantial restrictions on their access to lawyers. Indeed, the upshot of Mr. Moussaoui's case may be to make the government reluctant to try people accused of terrorism in ordinary criminal courts.
  Nearly 50 years ago, the Supreme Court appointed Abe Fortas to represent Clarence Gideon, a Florida drifter accused of breaking into a poolroom, who was tried and convicted without a lawyer. In the decision that followed, Gideon v. Wainwright, the court ruled that poor people accused of serious crimes were entitled to lawyers paid for by the government.
  In the Moussaoui case, the Fourth Circuit appointed Justin S. Antonipillai to represent Mr. Moussaoui in his appeal. As it happens, Mr. Antonipillai works at Mr. Fortas's old firm, which is now known as Arnold & Porter, and it may be that the firm will once again help clarify what it means to have a lawyer.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Zacarias Moussaoui is asking an appellate court to let him withdraw his guilty plea.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY CENICOLA/THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                     

Load-Date: February 26, 2008


End of Document