THE WORLD: Terrorism;
Army of Scholars Study Terrorists' Visions
The New York Times
November 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2; Week in Review Desk; Text
Length: 1252 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN
Body


TERRORISM, since it burst anew on the international scene in the early 1970's, particularly in the Middle East, has spawned a small army of researchers and specialists, including government officials, political scientists, journalists, psychologists, and others, trying to understand its causes and the best ways of putting a stop to it. Among the basic questions they are asking are these: What pushes some people over the boundary from dissatisfaction and protest into terrorist activity? Is each terrorist group a case apart, or do they belong to common patterns? Are there things that can be done to identify people who are prone to terrorism and draw them away from the terrorist groups that encourage them? Finally, in a world where the same violent killers are described as terrorists and freedom fighters, what is the most accurate definition of terrorism?
Some scholars, searching for the broadest possible definition, identify it as organized political violence aimed at achieving a psychological effect on an audience much larger than the immediate victims.
All of this was on the agenda at a conference on terrorism in New Mexico last month that drew specialists from the United States and abroad. The conference's purpose was to take stock of research in the field and to determine whether their findings could help policy makers combat terrorism itself.
Here are comments from some of the participants:
 
MARTHA CRENSHAW
professor of government, Wesleyan University
The superficial view of terrorism is that it was an isolated phenomenon, that it occurred at random, and that it had no pattern, that there was nothing systematic about it and that no single instance of terrorism had anything in common with any other. It took five years after terrorism began to affect America directly for the U.S. to realize that a consistent response was necessary rather than just an immediate reaction to events. We sort of wished it would go away, and only when there was a big hostage-taking would we begin to devote attention to it.
I insist that studying terrorism reveals common patterns, that terrorist groups have a common strategic conception. You could say, for example, that terrorists today are less discriminate than, say, the Russian revolutionaries of the 19th century, in that the latter generally attacked people whom they held directly responsible for the policies they opposed. Yet, you can see common ground here, in particular in the terrorist's main desire, which is to attract publicity for his cause, to get a global audience. In the 19th century, to attack a head of state shocked all of Europe. No longer. Terrorism always has to shock and surprise, and that leads to innovation. It forces the terrorists to keep thinking of something new.
 
JERROLD M. POST
professor of psychiatry and international affairs, George Washington University
Looked at individually, most terrorists are psychologically normal, though, of course, people with certain personality traits are drawn disproportionately to terrorism, particularly those who tend to seek an outside cause for their problems. A significant number of the youths that get involved in terrorism come from broken homes, or they've been involved in juvenile delinquency, or have experienced school or work failure. And, it's really very attractive if you're lonely and suffering to find a group that tells you, 'It's not us, it's them. They are the cause of our problems.'
Moreover, it follows from that that the solution to their problems is to destroy 'them.' The terror-prone individual can convince himself not only that it's not immoral to undertake violence, but that it's justified.
This all-or-nothing, black-and-white view of the world is very characteristic. There's no gray zone for terrorists. Moreover, carrying out a kind of fantasy war against society and the Establishment is the most important part of a terrorist's life, and it is thus very difficult to deter him from it. You cannot hold a club over somebody's head and say, 'Stop doing the most important thing you've ever done.' It's like asking him to commit suicide.
 
JOHN L. P. THOMPSON
associate research scholar, Center for the Social Sciences, Columbia University
People often wonder if trends in violence are related to trends in hardship, if hardship causes terrorism. If that is true, you should be able to plot the rises and falls in violence and the unemployment rate, which is a measure of hardship, and they should be systematically related. I did this in Northern Ireland for the period 1922 to 1985. But I found that the trends in violence do not seem to be related to trends in hardship at all. There was no systematic correlation.
An alternative hypothesis is that the stimulus to terrorism is political expectations. In Northern Ireland, both the Catholic and Protestant communities have profound political aspirations that are very sincere. And the problem is that they believe them to be defensible in terms of 20th century values, the idea that each ethnic group is entitled to a homeland. It's possible that once you've activated these aspirations, you provoke, by some process that we don't entirely understand, a kind of polarization that becomes impossible to regulate.
 
ARIEL MURARI
psychologist and member, Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, Tel Aviv
In many cases, chance is perhaps the most important factor in somebody's becoming a terrorist. You just happen to be in bad company. Your brother happens to be associated with terrorists. As far as nationalist groups are concerned, such as separatist Basques, Palestinians, the Irish, it's often quite simply positive, in terms of the general values of the society, for the individual to be associated with these groups. It's really 'in' to be an insurgent. . . .
To stop terrorism, police work is essential, but not generally sufficient. In some cases it is. Take, for example, the Symbionese Liberation Army some years ago in the U.S. It was a small group with no real routes, with an ideology that looked quite bizarre to 99.99 percent of the American people and could thus be eliminated by pure police action. But in other cases that is not enough because the basic conflict is going to create other expressions, violent expressions, terroristic expressions of discontent.
 
DAVID E. LONG
State Department anti-terrorism specialist
The question is, how to stop them, and you clearly need a comprehensive, multi-faceted policy. Diplomatic efforts are very important. Unilateral condemnations are never enough. You have to get universal condemnations, so that terrorism will be put into the category of actions that no state, or almost no state, will tolerate. The next element is intelligence. If you don't know who they are, where they are, and when they're likely to strike, you can't stop them. There's just no way to overemphasize the importance of good information, because terrorism by its very nature is secretive. Because terrorism is criminal activity, law enforcement is important, including efforts to beef up extradition treaties to enable terrorists to be brought to the United States for trial even when the terrorist act has been committed overseas. Then, there is the use of force. You have to determine when military force can be used as a tactic to make a political point, such as we did with the bombing raid in Libya. Finally, there is covert action. Terrorism itself is a form of covert action, so if you're going to try to stop it, you've got, at least, to consider covert action yourself.


End of Document