The spread of terrorism muddies torture debate;
After abuse at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq and questions about CIA interrogations elsewhere, the Pentagon is developing guidelines about how to treat detainees.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
May 8, 2005, Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 963 words
Byline: David Westphal; Staff Writer
Dateline: Washington, D.C.
Body


One year after the first pictures of abused Iraqi prisoners appeared on network television, the Pentagon is working on new policies to prevent future abuse of detainees.
In recent weeks the Defense Department has drafted new guidelines for acceptable Army interrogation techniques, barred the practice of holding unregistered "ghost" detainees at military prisons, and wrapped up a majority of criminal prosecutions that grew out of the Abu Ghraib scandal. On Thursday the Army took another step, demoting Brig. Gen. Janis Karpinski, the woman whose Reserve unit oversaw Abu Ghraib prison, while exonerating more senior generals.
Even so, the debate over what constitutes torture and inhumane treatment toward detainees in an age of terrorism is far from over.
Lawsuits filed on behalf of some of the detainees could reveal more details of prisoner abuse. For example the ACLU, representing eight detainees, has sued Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, saying he bears "direct responsibility for the torture and abuse of detainees in U.S. military custody."
Attention now may also shift to more than two dozen detainees who have died under U.S. custody in Iraq and Afghanistan. A recent Army report counted 27 detainees who died under military supervision in those two countries as a result of homicide or suspected homicide, and new anecdotal evidence suggests others may have died during CIA interrogations.
"Abu Ghraib is, in some sense, a distraction inasmuch as it really represented amateur hour, a total breakdown of military command and control," said Sanford Levinson, a law professor at the University of Texas and an expert on torture laws. "Whereas the deepest questions about torture involve what professionals are doing, especially the CIA, in distinctly unphotographed places."
Levinson says the country has only begun to work through the question of how to balance the imperatives of fighting modern terrorism with American society's respect for human rights.
President Bush has promised a worldwide hunt for terrorists or would-be terrorists, but has condemned the abuse of detainees at Abu Ghraib and vowed that the United States will not send detainees abroad to be tortured.
At the same time, the United States has been linked to countries with poor human rights records through the so-called rendition program, under which the CIA transfers terror suspects to foreign countries to be held and interrogated.
For example, the New York Times reported that there is growing evidence that the United States has sent terror suspects to Uzbekistan, a nation with a well-known record of torture. Uzbekistan's role as a surrogate jailer for the United States was confirmed by a half-dozen current and former intelligence officials working in Europe, the Middle East and the United States.
Many experts say that the nature of today's terrorist threat has brought about a sea change in the United States' willingness to consider coercive interrogation techniques. At an American Enterprise Institute conference on torture, academics talked about how the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks had placed incredible pressure on interrogators to uncover scraps of evidence that will stop future terrorist attacks.
"The unthinkable has become thinkable," said Kim Scheppele, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School. "The urgency and immensity of the war on terrorism   tend to tip the scales in favor of torture."
To date, assessments of detainee humiliation and abuse have come principally from the military, which has conducted dozens of investigations on Abu Ghraib and other prisons in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Increasingly, though, attention in Congress and elsewhere is turning to suspected homicide cases and the possible involvement of CIA operators and contractors.
In the only alleged homicide at Abu Ghraib, the military says Manadel al-Jamadi died in November 2003 under CIA interrogation as he was suspended by his wrists in a prison shower stall. The detainee, suspected of involvement in the previous month's bombing of Baghdad's Red Cross headquarters, was placed in a position identified by the Associated Press as "Palestinian hanging," which human rights groups equate with torture.
Nine Navy SEALs and one other sailor have been charged with abusing Al-Jamadi after his arrest and before he was turned over to the CIA.
The only CIA worker to be indicted publicly in connection with a detainee's death is David A. Passaro, a CIA contractor accused of beating to death an Afghan, Abdul Wali, in June 2003. Prosecutors said Passaro beat the detainee with a flashlight 10 to 30 times.
Passaro's public defender, Thomas McNamara, said Passaro believed Wali knew the location of rockets and land mines that been used against an Army base in Afghanistan. Further, he said in legal papers, Passaro "asserts that he acted under the authority of the Central Intelligence Agency and President George Bush."
Passaro, whose trial is to begin in North Carolina on July 11, wants to call former CIA chief George Tenet and Attorney General Alberto Gonzales as witnesses.
Beyond these high-profile cases, though, there's evidence that the CIA is looking into additional incidents of suspected detainee abuse, which could lead to more criminal proceedings.
Sen. Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the Senate intelligence committee, is pushing a full review of CIA interrogation practices, but so far he has been rebuffed by the committee chairman, Republican Sen. Pat Roberts of Kansas.
"Congress has largely ignored the issue," Rockefeller said in a Senate floor speech that marked a rare partisan divide on the intelligence panel. Roberts responded that a committee investigation would hurt CIA morale and damage operations.
David Westphal is at dwestphal@mcclatchydc.com  

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: May 10, 2005


End of Document