THE DAY ON WALL STREET: Market delivers gains despite terrorism blow
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
July 8, 2005 Friday
Home Edition


Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Business;
Length: 503 words
Byline: TOM WALKER
Body


By the end of the day, the attraction of corporate profits overcame the U.S. stock market's initial shock in the wake of Thursday's deadly terrorist attack in London.
All the major U.S. stock market indexes ended the session with modest gains after rising steadily during the session from early lows on news of the explosions.
European stocks, which were still trading when the New York Stock Exchange opened, declined across the board by from 1.4 percent to almost 2 percent.
By and large, U.S. market analysts agreed that Wall Street would not take long to recover even if it had closed with losses on Thursday.
"Considering the number of formidable hurdles facing stocks in the first half of 2005, the stock markets performed better than could be expected," Robert W. Baird & Co. strategist Bruce Bittles said Thursday.
Wachovia Securities global economist Jay Bryson said the impact of the London bombings on U.S. financial markets was "rather muted because the effects on the economy should be limited."
Citigroup Smith Barney analyst Tobias Levkovich, in a note to clients composed before the London bombings, said that "the U.S. stock market remains reactive to events that occur within its own borders and is less sensitive to overseas events."
Levkovich added that even the impact of events inside the United States "have been short-lived."
The U.S. market got some support from the crude oil market, where the price fell to $60.73 per barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange from an all-time high of $61.28 Wednesday.
Initial claims for unemployment assistance last week increased from the week before but not as much as economists had expected.
The major employment news of the week comes today when the government releases job growth numbers for June. A Bloomberg Poll of economists found a consensus forecast of 198,000 new jobs, compared with 78,000 in May.
On the corporate profit front on Thursday, Alcoa, the world's biggest aluminum maker, launched the latest earnings report season by reporting a 14 percent year-over-year rise in second-quarter profit, beating Wall Street estimates. Alcoa shares rose 0.4 percent.
Shares of Pepsi Bottling, Pepsico's biggest bottler, rose 6.5 percent on its report of a 4 percent increase in second-quarter earnings, based on strong demand for new products.
The broadest gains were in the retail sector, where AnnTaylor Stores rose 8.1 percent after reporting a smaller decline in June same-store sales than analysts had forecast.
The shares of Wal-Mart Stores and other retailers advanced on the industry's biggest sales gain in June in more than a year, as reported by the International Council of Shopping Centers.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which fell 96 points at the opening on the London bombing news, closed on Thursday at 10,302.29 with a gain of 31.61 points, or 0.3 percent. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 2.93 points, or 0.03 percent, to 1,197.87, and the technology-weighted Nasdaq composite index rose 7.01 points, or 0.3 percent, to 2,075.66.

Load-Date: July 8, 2005


End of Document