The Latest: Massacre could be tied to terrorism, Obama says
The Northern Star: Northern Illinois University
December 3, 2015 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2015 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FROM AP; Pg. 1
Length: 685 words
Byline: Ringo H.W. Chiu
Body


SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. - The latest on the mass shooting at a social services facility in San Bernardino, California (all times local):
8:20 a.m.
President Barack Obama says it's possible the mass shooting in California was related to terrorism but that authorities still don't know. He says it's possible it was workplace-related or that there were mixed motives.
Obama is speaking in the Oval Office. He's assuring Americans that authorities will get to the bottom of what happened. The president also is calling for people to wait for facts before making judgments.
Obama says many Americans feel there's nothing they can do about mass violence. But he says "we all have a part to play."
The president says the nation must make it harder to carry out violence but acknowledged that the threat can't be eliminated completely. He says it will be important for all Americans, including state legislatures, to see what they can do.
___
8:10 a.m.
Ten shooting victims are being treated at two hospitals following the massacre in San Bernardino, California.
San Bernardino County spokeswoman Felisa Cardona says all five patients at Arrowhead Regional Medical Center are in stable condition Thursday morning. She says one other patient left the hospital after being treated Wednesday.
Loma Linda University Medical Center is treating five patients for gunshot wounds. CEO Kerry Heinrich says two are in critical condition and three are in fair condition.
Heinrich praised first responders and hospital staff, saying "there's nothing really you can do to prepare for an event like yesterday."
Authorities say Syed Rizwan Farook and his wife or fiancee, Tashfeen Malik, killed 14 people in a precision attack Wednesday at a social service center before they died in a gunbattle with police.
___
6:45 a.m.
U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch says the Justice Department will be offering "any and all assistance necessary" as the investigation into the California mass shooting continues.
Lynch is speaking at an event about criminal justice at the White House. She says the shooting in California was "unspeakable."
Lynch says the government doesn't know a lot yet about the incident. But she says the FBI, the U.S. Marshals Service and other federal authorities have been dispatched.
The attorney general says whatever the results of the investigation, there's no place for this type of violence in the U.S. She says that's not what the country stands for or works for.
___
5:40 a.m.
Police and federal agents are for a second day searching a home in connection to the massacre in San Bernardino, California.
A search team combed the residence early Thursday in neighboring Redlands, about 7 miles from the shooting at Inland Regional Center.
A black sedan parked outside was also searched.
The home is where officers initially saw a vehicle matching the description of the suspects' SUV in the hours before the final gun battle that killed them. A bomb squad on Wednesday swept the building with robots.
Police didn't immediately say if the suspects - Syed Rizwan Farook and Tashfeen Malik - lived at the home. Public records show it is a possible residence of a family member of Farook.
Residents tell KABC-TV Redlands is a "sleepy little town" and expressed shock that the killers might be their neighbors.
___
3 a.m.
Federal authorities say that the two assault rifles and two handguns used in the San Bernardino massacre were all purchased legally in the United States - two of them by someone who's now under investigation.
Meredith Davis of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives says investigators are now working to make a connection to the last legal purchaser.
She says all four guns were bought four years ago but she's not saying whether they were purchased out of state or how and when they got into the hands of the two shooters.
Davis says California requires paperwork when guns change hands privately but many other states don't.
She also says the rifles involved were .223-caliber - powerful enough to pierce the standard protective vest worn by police officers, and some types of ammo can even plow through walls.

Load-Date: December 3, 2015


End of Document