THE WORLD IN SUMMARY
The New York Times
August 15, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 298 words
Byline: Anti-Semitism By Any Name
Body


''There is not an important anti-Semitic movement in France,'' said the prominent French commentator Raymond Aron after the bombing of a synagogue in 1980. ''There are little groups of killers, and it is not the same thing.''
After eight attacks on the Jewish community in France, anti-semitic terrorism is recognized as a realityBut last week after one group of killers staged the bloodiest attack on Jews in France since World War II, many French Jews - and Israeli leaders - failed to see a practical difference.
Authorities believed that a renegade Palestinian group was responsible for the grenade and machine-gun raid on a Paris Jewish restaurant, in which six people were killed. (The group, at war with the Palestine Liberation Organization, has been linked to the shooting of an Israeli diplomat in London in June.) But there was no shortage of other suspects; besides having to keep track of its own pro-Arab leftists and neo-Nazi rightists, France has been a magnet for all sorts of Middle Eastern vengeance-seekers.
There have been eight violent incidents this month. In Paris, after the restaurant attack, an Israeli company's offices were bombed, a hall used for Jewish worship was set afire, and Iran was blamed for an explosion in front of the Iraqi consulate.
Jewish demonstrators and Israeli officials blamed Prime Minister Francois Mitterrand and the French press for creating a ''climate'' for anti-Semitic attacks. Mr. Mitterrand had warmed traditionally chilly relations with Israel, but he also has condemned the invasion of Lebanon. Mr. Begin says that position, along with some newspapers' comparisons of Israel's action with the Nazi suppression of Jews during World War II, is tantamount to an attack on the French Jewish community, the fourth largest in the world.


End of Document