The new foundation of terrorism
University Wire
October 30, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Chronicle via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 898 words
Byline: By Pavel Molchanov, The Chronicle
Dateline: Durham, N.C.
Body


November 9, 2005: The California Department of Public Health declares a statewide medical emergency as upwards of 15,000 residents of the Los Angeles area are suddenly admitted to local hospitals with flu-like symptoms. Officials have no immediate comment on what caused the strange outbreak.
November 10, 2005: With the numbers of ill Californians reaching 80,000 and the death toll rising by the hour, all hospitals in Los Angeles and surrounding counties are placed under federal control by a presidential order. Scientists are feverishly working to identify this disease, which resists all treatment efforts.
Duke U.
November 11, 2005: The Centers for Disease Control announce that the Los Angeles Aqueduct is severely contaminated with an unknown strain of bacteria that is confirmed to be the cause of the epidemic. Half a million people in the western United States are now showing symptoms, with 20,000 casualties reported so far.
November 12, 2005: All air travel in the nation is stopped after scientists determine that the still-unrecognized bacteria is airborne and spreads through human contact. The epidemic has now spread to the East Coast, Europe and Asia. Quarantine zones are established in all major population centers.
November 13, 2005: As the number of confirmed deaths reaches the 120,000 mark, a national emergency is proclaimed. The entire transportation system is nationalized, and road traffic is restricted to emergency personnel only. With all state and federal courts suspended and martial law declared, a shoot-on-sight order is issued for all persons violating quarantine orders.
November 14, 2005: A total of 178 governments ban Americans and U.S.-made goods from entering their countries. Stock trading in New York, London and Tokyo is suspended indefinitely after markets drop 45 percent over three days on the news that virtually all economic activity in the United States is stopped due to the ban on domestic travel. The World Bank predicts the most severe global depression since the 1930s.
November 15, 2005: The White House determines that bacterial contamination of California's water was an act of terrorism. The U.S. military is placed on its highest alert level since the Cuban Missile Crisis as the president issues a warning that any country found to have harbored or supported the suspected terrorists would face immediate and massive nuclear retaliation.
While there is no indication that such an attack will occur in the near future and while it is unlikely for logistical as well as political reasons to ever happen, the threat of bioterrorism is as high as it has ever been. The sobering reality is that Sept. 11 heralded a completely new kind of terrorism, one that lacks any legitimate political objectives. Al Qaeda and those supporting it do not share the dominant goals of 20th century movements that relied on terrorist tactics: the formation of an independent state and/or religious and social freedom. Osama bin Laden is clearly not driven by dreams of power or nationhood.
This terrorism of hatred is objectively neither better nor worse than conventional coercive diplomacy, but it is much more difficult to counteract. The Irish Republican Army, for instance, engaged in countless acts of violence in the 1970s and 1980s, but it remained focused on a concrete objective that was achievable only through political channels. The British government successfully pursued the strategy of courting the moderate wing of the IRA in the 1990s while marginalizing its extremist elements, with devolution and multiparty government in Belfast finally bringing stability. Because nothing short of a complete reversal of U.S. policy towards the Middle East would satisfy bin Laden, placating him is simply not an option.
How does this make bioterrorism more likely? Terrorists who were pursuing politics by other means had to consider the effect of their attacks on public opinion. Since the cold-blooded murder of thousands would be universally condemned, they never resorted to it. The aim was to make the world pay attention without provoking widespread condemnation of the terrorists' cause. Al Qaeda, on the other hand, is not concerned about its image and can therefore attempt the most devastating attacks that are technologically feasible.
Recent cases of anthrax in the United States are not on the scale of the fictional scenario, and it is conceivable (though unlikely, in my opinion) that they are unrelated to al Qaeda, but their goal is the same: systematic destruction of people's faith in all institutions of civic life. On Sept. 11, airlines and public buildings were targeted; now the target is the mail system. It is possible that the power grid, nuclear reactors, highways and hospitals will be next, but a biological attack on a major population center must not be ruled out.
It cannot be said too often that the likelihood of such a calamity is practically nil. Even terrorist-supporting states would seek to prevent it because the threat of massive retaliation -- perhaps using America's nuclear arsenal -- could not be discounted. The logistics of this kind of operation would also be immensely challenging even for a powerful terrorist faction. Living in fear, then, is not the answer, but refusing to recognize that the threat exists would be foolhardy.
(C) 2001 The Chronicle via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document