The USA Patriot Act is working well Neither Congress nor the courts have found abuse
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
May 10, 2005, Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 804 words
Byline: KASEY WARNER
Body


ATTENTION is again being focused locally on the USA Patriot Act as Congress debates renewal of "sunset" provisions.
Let's start with fact, not detractor-inspired fiction as we debate this important tool in our society's fight against terrorism
This Act repeatedly has been found to be constitutional.
Why, then, sunset provisions? Clearly, Congress wanted to re-look at certain provisions after law enforcement developed a track record: Would these new tools be abused to endanger the liberties we are charged to defend?
The answer could not be more clear: During more than three years of the Patriot Act, there has not been one verified case of civil liberties abuse. Neither Congress nor any court has found any abuse of the act's powers whatsoever.
Not one civil action has been filed - much less an allegation proved - for willful violation of the act - none. As recently as April 5, even Sen. Dianne Feinstein found "no reported abuses" of the act.
Accordingly, it is time to tell law enforcement "well done" by making these statutory tools permanent for the long-term fight against terrorism.
Let me address the two provisions most often attacked.
Opponents derisively refer to Section 213 of the Act as the "sneak and peek" authorization as if delayed-notice criminal search warrants are somehow evil.
They don't tell you that such warrants are allowed by court order only when an independent, life-tenured federal judge determines there is a reasonable risk that immediate warrant notification would result in death or physical harm, flight from prosecution, evidence tampering, witness intimidation or other serious jeopardy to an ongoing investigation.
The fact is that law enforcement has been permitted delayed-notice search warrants in exceptional cases under our Constitution for decades before the Patriot Act. The act simply sets uniform standards for judges in supervising such warrants.
Claims that delayed-notice searches violate the Fourth Amendment are just dead wrong under repeated U.S. Supreme Court decisions since 1979.
Are these provisions being overused to make delayed-notice searches the norm instead of a rarely but much-needed tool?
Fact: Delayed-notice search warrants have been used in only 0.2 percent of all federal search warrants, or 1 in every 500 warrants.
Detractors also push the belief that Section 215 allows FBI agents to hang around libraries and snoop on what we read.
The facts? Section 215 allows for better law enforcement access to business records believed to contain evidence beneficial to a legitimate investigation. That section has been used only 35 times during the life of the act, does not even mention the word "library," and has never been used to obtain library records, medical records or even gun records.
Very simply, Section 215 recognizes common practice.
Prosecutors, through grand juries, have been able to subpoena business records in criminal inquiries for many years. Section 215 wisely extends that same ability to national security intelligence investigations; interestingly enough, the Act actually "ups" civil liberty protections by now requiring federal judge authorizations and use only in national security investigations.
This requirement for court authorization strengthens, not weakens, constitutional protections of our citizens.
Further, Section 215 cannot be used to investigate ordinary crimes or even domestic terrorism, and it expressly protects our First Amendment rights.
The Patriot Act involves much more than these two red herrings.
For example, it (1) allows much needed sharing of information between this nation's law enforcement and intelligence agencies; and (2) properly brings methods allowed by our courts in the fight against drugs and organized crimes to be used in the fight against terrorism.
As Sen. Biden explains these provisions: "What's good for the mob should be good for terrorists."
And (3) Patriot permits us to bring accepted law enforcement tools of the rotary phone age into the real world of today with computers and cell phones so law enforcement can stand up to the technologically sophisticated criminals of today.
Even the ACLU commends most of the act as providing "tools … need(ed) to protect against terrorist attacks" which are "unobjectionable from a civil liberties point of view… ."
Renewing the Patriot Act is very important for effective law enforcement.
The Department of Justice has now charged close to 400 defendants with terrorism-related crimes. In well over 200 cases, convictions have been obtained..
And in doing so, the act has played a large part with law enforcement in preventing further attacks on our homeland.
Let's have informed debate, but let's demand honesty from those attacking this indispensable tool in the fight against terrorism.
Warner is the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of West Virginia.

Load-Date: May 11, 2005


End of Document