THE MARINE TRAGEDY;
SECURITY: AS THREATS GREW, DEFENSES WERE IMPROVISED
The New York Times
December 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 49, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 2067 words
Byline: By Philip Taubman and Joel Brinkley
Body


Lieut. Col. Hisham Jaber of the Lebanese Army recalls the marines' arrival at Beirut International Airport in September 1982 this way:
 ''They ran from tree to tree with their rifles pointed, thinking they were going to be attacked by an army. I think they must have thought they were in Vietnam.''
Colonel Jaber, who serves as liaison officer between the Marine Corps and the Lebanese Army, said he warned them right away: ''Do not expect any classical offenses against you. Do not expect tanks or companies or battalions to attack.
''Here,'' he added, ''the only threat is terrorism.''
It was a warning the marines apparently did not heed. Until the bombing Oct. 23, the Marine commanders seemed to underestimate the terrorist danger and instead to devote most of their energies to defending themselves against conventional military threats, which at times were severe.
General James M. Mead, who served twice as the Marine commander in Beirut, said he was aware of the terrorist threat but ranked it third among the possible dangers facing his men when he first arrived at Beirut International Airport in September 1982.  ''The first threat was unexploded munitions'' left around the airport from the summer's fighting. he said. ''We detonated 3,000 of them. The second threat was the Israelis, who kept coming through our lines. So now you've got a very conventional threat: tanks. And the third threat was terrorism.'' But that threat ''wasn't foremost in our minds,'' he said.
During the marines' first months in Lebanon, they were welcomed as liberators.
''The atmosphere was permissive,'' said General Mead, who was a colonel when he served in Beirut.  To defend the Marine compound, he said ''initially we just put in some sentry posts with sandbags. The threat was of such a low order that the sandbags were put in more to keep our personnel busy than anything else.'' In addition, he said, the compound's circumference was watched from several vantage points, but the defense was ''just M-16's. ''
The other members of the international force were not much better protected. The Italians, tied strings around Pepsi cans and hung them from a fence, thinking the cans would rattle if someone tried to climb into their compound, one Italian officer said.
In the following months, the marines added to their defenses in what seemed to be an almost casual manner.
''Everything evolved in a reactive kind of way, as the threats appeared,'' Major Jordan said. ''There was no long-range plan that we were going to be here for a year or two, so let's build some permanent defenses.''
 
First Direct Attack in March
General Mead was replaced as the Marine commander in Beirut by Col. Thomas M. Stokes in November 1982, but returned the following February for another tour of about four months. Still he ranked terrorism low on his list of possible threats, he said.
In February the marines strung barbed concertina wire around the southern end of the compound for the first time.  Then on March 16, in the first direct attack against marines since they arrived in Lebanon, someone tossed a grenade at a squad on patrol.  Five were wounded slightly.
On April 18 the United States Embassy was bombed, collapsing the building's front and killing 63 people.
Across town at the Marine compound, General Mead said later in an account of how he had felt at the time, he appreciated that the attack ''wasn't a car bomb of the normal size.''
''You've got a biggie, 2,000 pounds- plus'' of explosives, he said, ''enough to almost collapse an eight-story building.''
''It was a suicide attack, and they had used the same thing against the Iraqi Embassy earlier,'' he added. ''So that wasn't unknown to us.''
 
Defenses Are Increased
After the embassy bombing, General Mead said, he put two sentries at every post instead of one. More concertina wire was strung, and an 18-inch sewer pipe was placed in front of the main entrance to the headquarters. Cars driving into the Marine compound were searched.
''Still,'' General Mead said, ''terrorism was just one of the threats, and we didn't put our mindset inordinately in that area.''
After the embassy bombing, the State Department dispatched a team of counterterrorism experts to Beirut to help set up defenses around the new, temporary embassy, according to a top-level State Department official who was directly involved in matters concerning Lebanon.
No experts were sent to the marines, because, he said, ''Can you imagine me walking up to P. X. Kelley and trying to offer him advice?'' He was referring to Paul X. Kelley, the Marine Corps Commandant.
 
Normal Defensive Planning
The responsibility for planning the marines' defenses was spread among dozens of men - the battalion commander, company commanders, squad commanders and sergeants of the guard, among others, in each of the Marine Amphibious Units that occupied the compound, several commanders said.
Lieut. Col. Donald F. Anderson was the Marine battalion commander, second in command, when the embassy was bombed. He said his approach to ordering increased security was ''just to give my company commanders a mission-type order: 'You secure this area against these threats.' ''
''That's all I'd tell them,'' he said. ''Then they'd draft a plan, and I might modify it and then pass it on'' to General Mead.
He added, ''Very honestly, it was just normal defensive planning that we would use in combat situations.''
General Mead said he did not modify the defensive plans submitted by Colonel Anderson.
When Col. Timothy J. Geraghty arrived in Beirut to command the 24th Marine Amphibious Unit in late May, he said, he was aware of the terrorist threat but also considered it a secondary concern.
He did not modify the defenses that General Mead's unit had put in place earlier, General Mead said, adding that when he visited the Lebanese capital two days after the bombing of the compound, he observed that defenses around the headquarters building were ''pretty much the same.''
Colonel Geraghty said he felt his first problem was to protect his men from artillery fire.
 
Friendly Smiles Faded
Early in August, ''the friendly smiles we'd been seeing in the neighborhood began to fade,'' Major Jordan said. ''We were seeing young men in uniforms with weapons instead.''
Then the Lebanese Army and Druse militiamen, longtime antagonists, began fighting in the nearby mountains. Artillery and small arms fire started falling on the compound. Several marines were killed.
The fighting intensified in early September, when Israel pulled its troops out of the mountains, leaving the Druse and the Lebanese Army to battle for that territory.
A cease-fire was arranged in late September. But in mid-October, two marines were killed by sniper fire, so until the bombing on Oct. 23, Colonel Geraghty said, ''our greatest threat continued to be the shelling.''
 
Truck Bomb a 'Quantum Increase'
To protect his men from the incoming fire, Colonel Geraghty moved many of them into the steel-reinforced headquarters building. The possibility of terrorist acts was not forgotten, he said. ''Our defenses were keyed against the threat. Car bombs, pickup trucks, etc. - we were taking countermeasures against all of this.''
The truck bomb at the Marine compound, he said, ''was a clear quantum increase that took us by surprise.''
 
No Specialized Training
The marines' failure to anticipate the truck attack on the compound may be explained, in part, by their preparation for the Lebanon mission. Asked how much specialized training the marines had received before they were first deployed 15 months ago, General Mead said, ''Absolutely none.''
Instead, he said, they had received ''basic soldiering, mostly.'' He and other commanders said the focus of training changed little as successive units were sent to Beirut, even after the embassy bombing.
General Mead added, ''We were kind of writing the book as we went along.''
And to this day, some of the marines say they need no counterterrorism training.
When the general returned to Beirut for a second tour last February, he and his men did get some specialized training, he said, including ''four days on dealing with the press: how to project.''
Col. Robert B. Johnston, commander of the Eighth Marine Regiment at Camp LeJeune, N. C., from which four of the five units sent to Lebanon have been drawn, said ''only about 5 percent'' of the marines' training before going to Beirut was keyed to the specific mission.
 
Prepared for All Contingencies
The Marine troops, he said, were prepared for all possible contingencies because, even as they set sail for Beirut, they could not be sure they would not be sent somewhere else at the last minute. That happened in October, he noted, when the marines on their way to Beirut were diverted to Grenada.'' That wasn't a problem, Colonel Johnston said, because ''marines are supposed to be able to do anything.''
Colonel Johnston, who served in Beirut last year, said, ''You often think of operations like Beirut being carefully planned and orchestrated, but they aren't. We had little idea what we were doing until we did it.''
At Camp LeJeune, the standard training before being sent overseas includes the courses ''Combat in an Urban Area,'' ''Bombs and Boobey Traps'' and others that are useful for troops going to Lebanon, Colonel Johnston said. But the standard courses include no special training in counterterrorism, and none were added for the units going to Beirut, he said.
 
'Really Just Common Sense'
''People have the notion that there's this magic package of counterterrorism training that would have prevented that attack,'' he said. ''But it's really just common sense: being alert, looking for suspicious cars parked near your compound. That sort of thing.''
No one at Camp LeJeune is specifically in charge of determining how the marines are trained for their mission, Colonel Johnston said. The responsibility is spread among many officers, he said.
''There's nobody who sits down and says counterterrorism will or will not be a part of it,'' Colonel Johnston said.
 
General Defends Training
Gen. Alfred M. Gray, commanding general of the Second Marine Division at Camp LeJeune, said, ''I'm not saying we know everything we need to know'' about counterterrorism. ''But a lot of our courses and a lot of our field training is related to the subject of terrorism, even if it's not pure counterterrorism training.''
He added, ''I dare say my people know more than a lot of people think they do - more than even some of them think they do.'' Colonel Geraghty said his men ''had some considerable training on the background in Lebanon, the religious factions'' before going to Beirut. ''We got the chaplain involved and showed videotapes on closed circuit TV.''
At Camp LeJeune, Comdr. John Maiorana, the regimental chaplain, said he and other chaplains on his staff ''did get cranked into the training.''
''Part of it is character guidance, making moral choices and interrelationships. And part of it is on Lebanon: 'Who are these people we are going to be interacting with? The Druse, the Christians.' ''
 
Videotape on Lebanon Shown
''I am no expert,'' Commander Maiorana added. ''I read and discuss it with people. But it's pretty informal.''
The hourlong videotape shown to the troops is a mix of film clippings from various places and times in Lebanon. It shows battles, street scenes, children playing. There is no narration, and Master Sgt. Steven Wyatt, a Marine spokesman at Camp LeJeune, said no one explains the tape as it is being shown. ''It's really just for awareness,'' he said.
Camp LeJeune does have counterterrorism experts on the grounds: two British Royal Marines with experience combating terrorists in Northern Ireland. But Colonel Johnston said they were not involved in the training of marines going to Lebanon.
Senator John W. Warner, the Virginia Republican who is a member of the Armed Services Committee and the former Secretary of the Navy, observed that ''since the crusades, every force that has occupied Lebanon has been attacked by terrorists, not conventional forces.'' Given that, Mr. Warner asked, why wasn't anyone with the marines ''trained in counterterrorism?''
In retrospect, several Marine officers said, the units sent to Beirut should have received specialized training.
''Oh, absolutely,'' said General Mead. ''Everyone's homing in on the word 'terrorism' now, and I guess that's right. But that wasn't our thought process then.''

Graphic

 
diagram of the marines' vulnerable position; photo of commanders on the scene (p.50)


End of Document