The importance of shoes
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 3, 2005, Sunday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P3C
Length: 701 words
Byline: Brandt Ayers
Body


HAVING LANDED AT Asian and African airports on the way to 18 cities in nine countries this year (enough already), I didn't have to take off my shoes - except when leaving the United States.
As a way of making conversation while being patted down by yet another U.S. airport security guard, I noted that my wife and I had been around the world, but America seemed more nervous about security than any other country.
He informed me firmly, "9/11 happened here." When I suggested that other nations had suffered terrorist attacks too, he impatiently repeated, "9/11 … HERE!"
His emphasis on HERE, and his controlled anger made his point. The United States, which historically believed its territory was immune to the wounds suffered by other nations, had been tragically hurt.
I remember exactly where I was and what I was doing when the World Trade Center was hit. I expect most Americans do. It was a shocking, terrifying day.
The security guard's emphatic "here" also made another point. We, more than other nations, see ourselves as the center point on the global map, that our interests and feelings are paramount world concerns.
Though a relative adolescent among Asian nations, it is true that our culture and economy can be seen in every Far Eastern country. We interest their people, and they know more about us than we do about them.
But at a conference some years ago, the chief editor of the quality Japanese newspaper, Asahi Shimbun, put American self-absorption this way: "You have the most peculiar maps. The United States is that very large country in the middle, and Japan is a little place in the corner. In Japan, we are in the center of our maps."
Japan, China, Iraq - for that matter, every other nation on earth - puts its own interests and patriotic feelings before ours. It is only human nature. And other nations have been wounded far more deeply, for much longer than our lucky land. Iraqi families have suffered a thousand times the losses borne by American families on 9/11.
In fact, since that horrible Tuesday in September 2001, we have not been touched by terrorism at home, but other nations have, according to a recent State Department report on global terror in 2004.
Last year, the report says there were 651 significant international terrorist attacks worldwide, resulting in 1,907 killed and 6,704 wounded. That compares to 175 incidents in 2003.
"Terrorism remains a global threat from which no nation is immune," the study reported, concluding: "Despite ongoing improvements in U.S. homeland security, military campaigns against insurgents and terrorists in Iraq and Afghanistan, and deepening counter terrorism cooperation among the nations of the world, international terrorism continued to pose a significant threat to the U.S. and its partners in 2004.
Authorities attribute the growth of terrorism worldwide to increased terrorist activity in Iraq. Other major attacks in which innocents were slaughtered by terrorism in 2004 occurred at the Beslan school in Russia, commuter trains in Madrid, a Philippine ferry, and in the Sinai.
The fact that America has been spared terrorist attacks since 2001 is attributable in part to success in eliminating the top leadership of al-Qaida, which inhibits their ability to plan and execute complex, expensive international strikes. I doubt it had much to do with the X-rays of my shoes.
Yet as the report makes clear, it is a dangerous world out there - always has been. One of our stops this year was Nairobi, where there had been a hotel bombing, an attempt to shoot down an Israeli airliner, and in 2003, there was a plot to attack the U.S. embassy.
Security at the airport there was desultory, but downtown Nairobi was truly dangerous because of an army of street criminals, muggers and thieves. They were more to be feared than terrorists.
Having passed through security at airports around the world this year and before, my titanium knee makes me an alarm-buzzing security risk at U.S. airports, but not in England, Israel, Russia or anywhere else.
I wish our security would get over its heebie-jeebies as other nations have, give me a "frequently frisked" pass, and let me keep my shoes on.
Ayers is publisher of The Anniston (Ala.) Star.

Load-Date: July 5, 2005


End of Document