The Majority and the Rope
The New York Times
July 16, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; editorial
Length: 545 words
Body


In America and Britain, the polls show majority support for capital punishment, especially as a penalty for terrorism. Yet only hours after Irish terrorists killed four militiamen, Britain's Parliament overwhelmingly rejected a return to hanging. Although Prime Minister Thatcher favored the rope, as did her Home Secretary, Leon Brittan, a lopsidedly Conservative Parliament voted otherwise.  Why?
In America and Britain, the polls show majority support for capital punishment, especially as a penalty for terrorism.
Debate matters. It's one thing to give a snap response to a poll question. It is quite another to weigh the moral, legal and political implications of judicial killing - and personally to tie the knot.  Among advanced industrial nations, capital punishment survives only in the United States, South Africa, Japan and the Soviet Union. So there is ample experience as to whether eliminating the death penalty weakens law enforcement.
In America, after the penalty had been effectively dropped in the 1960's, 38 states reimposed it in the 1970's. There have been 1,154 death sentences in recent years, yet violent crime has increased.  Some would say that is because only seven persons have actually been executed. But the number of executions will never be very large.
Though Americans approve official killing in theory, they are agonized by indecision in practice. They want no mistakes. They want every mitigating factor explored. They don't really believe that a dozen more executions would deter murder. So they provide for endless appeals, an ordeal that only adds to the cruelty of a brutal punishment.
What about terrorists? Since Britain abolished hanging in 1965, the sectarian butchery in Northern Ireland has claimed 2,300 lives. But the rope is no answer for killers who are prepared to die for a cause. So believes James Prior, the British minister responsible for Northern Ireland and whose opinion carried great weight with Parliament.
Indeed, for Irish Republican Army gunmen, martyrdom is a weapon.  Their heroes are the Easter rebels, executed by the British in 1916.  They scorn treatment as ordinary criminals. Ten I.R.A. prisoners inflicted capital punishment on themselves in 1981 because they were not given special status as political offenders. It would be a favor to their movement to treat their crimes differently from common murder.
In Northern Ireland, morever, as a result of the violence, trial by jury has been suspended. So judges alone, sitting in special courts, would have to order any death sentences. And since most I.R.A. gunmen have dual citizenship, British and Irish, executing them would embroil Britain in furious arguments with the Irish Republic and human rights groups.
Weighing these and other arguments, a Parliament with a 144-vote Conservative majority said no to the hangman. And so would most people if they troubled to consider the matter carefully. Poll results favoring capital punishment measure emotion, not reason or information.
Taking a life for a life is illusory deterrence and primitive morality. What was said in Britain by the right-wing Enoch Powell applies as well in every country: a penalty that doesn't deter, he said, is ''an avoidable brutality that brutalizes the society that inflicts it.''


End of Document