The psychology of terrorism produces a vicious cycle
The Hillsdale Collegian: Hillsdale College
January 28, 2016 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINIONS; Pg. 1
Length: 692 words
Byline: JoAnna Kroeker
Body


Fol­lowing the Paris and San Bernardino attacks, the fear of ter­rorism has triggered America's trauma from 9/11. Halfway around the world, Israel expe­riences a wave of Palestinian-executed stabbings of Jewish citizens, the "knife intifada." The attacks trigger memories of the previous century of violence.
The traumas of our past affect our per­ception of current threats. Americans remember two distinct traumas: 9/11 and Afghanistan. On the right, 9/11 is the symbol for aggressive coun­tert­er­rorism and jus­tifies the assumption that all Muslims are dangerous.
On the left, Afghanistan is the symbol for a long and unsuc­cessful war in which aggressive coun­tert­er­rorism did not work, a jus­ti­fi­cation for minimal inter­vention. Meanwhile, Israeli Jews remember the Holocaust in their per­ception of the "knife intifada," and the exis­tential threat it poses leads to the emphasis on security and quick, short-term solutions.
Israel has fought for its right to exist since it declared existence in the '40s. This con­tinual fight with the sur­rounding Arab countries and Pales­tinian people who deny Israel's right to exist leads Israelis to perceive ter­rorist attacks of any scale as an imminent threat. And because the inter­na­tional com­munity crit­icizes Israeli policy, Israelis go at it alone, focusing on enactable short-term security solutions: gun permit changes, a security fence, racial pro­filing, and drones.
Daniel Kovler, a reserve Israel Defense Force soldier, said that the mandatory stint in the IDF and the constant threat to existence leads Israelis to elect prime min­isters who are ex-commanders or chief of staff in the military. Israel's current prime minister, Benjamin "Bibi" Netanyahu, served in the IDF's elite Sayeret Matkal unit.
In the last election, the Labor Party, a more left-leaning party, was ahead in polls until Netanyahu posted a 28-second video on Facebook.
"The right-wing gov­ernment is in danger," he said. "Arab voters are coming out in droves to the polls. Left-wing orga­ni­zations are bussing them out. Get out to vote, bring your friends and family, vote Likud in order to close the gap between us and Labor."
Netanyahu's strategy worked. He equated the "left" with what Hebrew Uni­versity Pro­fessor of Political Science Reuven Hazan calls "doves," people who argue for more com­mu­ni­cation with Pales­tinians and greater com­mitment to peace processes. Netanyahu is a "hawk," pro­moting a strong defense front and counting on the Israelis' col­lective exis­tential fear to show that the "doves" will not protect them. In times of heightened security and intifada, the word "Arab" triggers voters to run to their strongest leader. Security becomes Israel's only politics, dividing people into hawks and doves and neglecting social and economic issues.
Pres­i­dential can­didate Donald Trump, a hawk as well, echoed Netanyahu's "Arabs" when he insisted that we ban the entry of all Muslims. This sug­gestion invokes our ter­rorist trauma and dan­gerously con­flates "us" and "ISIS and hostile Arab countries" with "us" and "Muslims." His comment is a reaction to President Barack Obama, a dove, and his reluctance to call the Cal­i­fornia attack a ter­rorist attack, which would be racial pro­filing and would label the rad­i­calized Muslim couple "them" even though they were average Americans before.
Real violence leads American citizens to lose their faith a dovish gov­ernment. In response, people call for a hawkish leader who demon­strates greater strength and become hawks them­selves by turning to private own­ership of guns. They hope that guns will succeed where the White House and its coun­tert­er­rorism strategy seems to fail.
The psy­chology of ter­rorism, in the U.S. or in Israel, relives trauma and divides people into "us" and "the enemy," "hawks" and "doves." Ter­rorism turns people against each other and people turn to the "hawks" for pro­tection. Israelis perceive ter­rorism much more immi­nently because their existence is not secure like that of Americans'. They enact short-term security solutions out of necessity and push economic and social issues to the back burner.

Load-Date: January 28, 2016


End of Document