The ancestry of terrorism;
From Robespierre to Osama bin Laden, terror has worn many faces. Some analysts warn that the latest may be the scariest ever.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 30, 2001, Sunday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 25A
Length: 2281 words
Byline: Eric Black; Staff Writer
Body


RSEC:             Terrorism, depending on how you define it, may be as old as man's inhumanity to man. But according to most authorities, the modern term "terrorism" derives from the infamous "reign of terror" during the French Revolution.
     The group known as the Jacobins and led by Maximilien Robespierre controlled the revolutionary government of France in 1793-94. This faction rounded up and executed those it deemed enemies of the revolution, including the deposed King Louis XVI, Queen Marie Antoinette and up to 40,000 others.
     If Robespierre was the first modern terrorist, he stands in contrast to his most recent descendants. One key difference is that he exercised the power of the French state. In recent decades, the label "terrorist" has been applied mostly to those who lack governmental power, and usually to those who seek to overthrow a regime.
   Robespierre actually used the word "terror" to describe what he was doing. "Terror is nothing but justice, prompt, severe and inflexible," he said. He might have changed his opinion in 1794, when he lost power and his own head.
      V.I. Lenin and Josef Stalin, when they headed the Soviet government, and the Nazi German regime of Adolf Hitler were likewise explicit and unapologetic about their use of terror to eliminate political enemies. The Khmer Rouge movement in Cambodia is a more recent example of terror backed by state power; it took the lives of more than a million Cambodians between 1975 and 1979.
      In recent times, those whom the world generally calls terrorists tend to reject the label. They often say that their targets _ in the case of Osama bin Laden, the U.S. government and U.S. society in general _ are the real terrorists.
     Columbia University historian David Greenberg, in an interview and an article on the Web site History News Network (http://www.historynewsnetwork.org) identified five phases in the evolution of terrorism from Robespierre to Bin Laden:
     - A period of ideologically inspired terror, such as the assassination tactics employed by anarchists in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
     - A period of nationalist anti-colonial terror, including groups such as the Irish Republican Army, but especially common in less-developed nations since World War II.
     - A period of increasing violence against innocent civilians, which began with Algerians' struggle for independence from France in the 1950s.
     - A period since 1979, when a growing number of terrorists embrace religion as their inspiration and their cause.
     - And a fifth epoch, symbolized by Bin Laden and his organization, in which the cause has been expanded to a global campaign against Western influence, symbolized and epitomized by the United States, and in which the entire population has been declared a justifiable target.
     In his Web essay, Greenberg chillingly concluded: "This new terrorism springs from an unswerving conviction that to destroy America is to do God's work. Since it doesn't play to world opinion, world opinion cannot act as a brake upon it. And since it failed to destroy America, we should expect it will strike again."
     Anarchy
     During the 19th century, anarchists, nihilists, socialists and other revolutionaries favored the tactic of assassinating government leaders and other members of the elite.
     University of Minnesota historian Eric Weitz said the revolutionaries who killed several Russian leaders, including Czar Alexander II in 1881, had grown frustrated by their inability to convert the masses to their cause with propaganda and arguments, and hoped to inspire the masses with daring acts.
     Alexander Berkman, a U.S. anarchist, shot and stabbed steel magnate Henry Clay Frick in 1892, although Frick survived the attack. Anarchist Leon Czolgosz assassinated U.S. President William McKinley in 1901 "because," he said, "I thought it was my duty."
     Some bombings also were blamed on anarchists or on labor radicals associated with them, such as the 1886 bombing in Chicago's Haymarket Square that killed eight policemen, and the bomb that destroyed the Los Angeles Times building in 1910, killing 20 workers.
     The 1914 assassination of the Austro-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand by Gavrilo Princip represents a transition between terrorism's ideological phase and its national liberation phase.
     Princip belonged to a group called Young Bosnia that sought to separate Bosnia from the Hapsburg Empire and form an independent Yugoslav nation. The 1914 assassination set off a chain of events culminating in World War I, which wasn't Princip's intention, but the postwar settlement included the creation of Yugoslavia. Irish nationalists, who had used terror tactics to protest British rule, also won independence for most of Ireland soon after World War I.
     Weitz said the post-World War I period featured a new trend in Europe: terror from right-wing extremists, especially fascists and Nazis. On their way to gaining power in Italy and Germany, these groups used assassination and more generalized tactics of murder and intimidation.
     After World War II, the focus of terrorism shifted from Europe to the colonies still under European domination. Groups in many parts of the world used assassinations and bombings against their overlords as a way to convince foreign powers to relinquish control.
     Terrorism expert Bruce Hoffman wrote in his 1998 book "Inside Terrorism" that "Countries as diverse as Israel, Kenya, Cyprus and Algeria, for example, owe their independence at least in part to nationalist political movements that employed terrorism against colonial powers."
     During this period, terrorism gained its most common contemporary meaning: acts of violence committed by revolutionary, non-state groups to advance a political agenda. But the definition is notoriously unsettled. Hoffman documented 109 definitions that have been tried, and noted that the official legal definitions used by the FBI, the State Department and the Defense Department differ.
     In the same years, the anti-colonialist groups started the long-running argument about whether they should be considered terrorists, with the term's negative connotations, or "freedom fighters." As Yasser Arafat told the United Nations in 1974: "Whoever stands by a just cause and fights for the freedom and liberation of his land from the invaders, the settlers and the colonialists, cannot possibly be called terrorist."
     The argument persists. As President Bush seeks to create a global coalition against terrorism, many of the countries being recruited specify which "terrorists" they will coalesce against and which "freedom fighters" they would exempt.
     As columnist William Pfaff put it this week: "Your nationalists are my terrorists. My freedom-fighters are your terrorists. This is not a cynical observation, nor the judgment of a political relativist; politically it is simply the truth."
     Greenberg singled out the Algerian movement for independence from France in the 1950s and '60s as representing a turning point in terrorism history because of its decision to randomly target French civilians.
     "After France executed two Algerian rebels in 1956," Greenberg wrote, "the FLN [Algerian independence fighters] slaughtered 49 Frenchmen in three days. FLN terrorists bombed beachside cafes where they knew families would perish. They wanted to raise the price of colonialism to intolerable levels. They did. [Algeria gained independence in 1962.] . . . By the 1960s, the killing of civilians to sow fear and secure political gains was rampant, even in developed nations _ from the Weather Underground in the U.S. to the Marxist Baader-Meinhoff Gang in West Germany to the Red Brigades in Italy."
     Among those inspired by the Algerian success, the Palestine Liberation Organization and other Palestinian nationalist groups ushered in another breakthrough in terrorism history that Hoffman calls the internationalization of terrorism.
     Spectacular attention-grabbing incidents, like the kidnapping and eventual murder of 11 Israeli athletes from the 1972 Munich Olympics by the Palestinian group called Black September, failed to achieve the terrorists' stated goal, which was to secure the release of 236 Palestinians imprisoned in Israel and five other terrorists imprisoned in Germany. But the crisis dominated world media for days, and even though the kidnappers' tactics were almost universally condemned, they secured enormous media attention for their underlying cause, and won many new recruits.
     Hoffman called it "the premier example of terrorism's power to rocket a cause from obscurity to renown." Making an international impact by capturing media attention has been important to terrorist calculations ever since.
     Religion
     Several writers have noted that since 1979 _ the year of both the Iranian revolution and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan _ a growing number of terrorist groups have claimed religion rather than ideology or nationalism as their inspiration and guide. These include Muslim, Christian, Jewish, Sikh and other religious groups and cults, such as the Aum Shinri Kyo cult that committed the 1994 sarin gas attack on a Japanese subway.
     Hoffman wrote that in 1968 there were no religiously-based groups engaging in international terrorism. In 1980, two of the 64 international terror groups were considered religious. By 1995, the proportion had rocketed to almost half _ 26 religiously motivated groups out of 56 international terror organizations.
     Hoffman had written before Sept. 11 that the period of rising religious motivation among terrorist groups has coincided with an increase in the number of people killed per attack. The events of this month underscore that insight.
     Bin Laden, the alleged organizer of the Sept. 11 attacks, and his Al-Qaida network both draw from and exceed the historical patterns of terrorism. Bin Laden targets civilians, as several post-Algerian movements have done, but his fatwa declaring all Americans and Jews in the world to be legitimate targets raises the tactic to new heights. The fatwa and his other public statements also make clear that he claims a religious justification for his actions, as terrorists have done increasingly since 1979.
     If capturing international media attention has become a goal of terrorists, none has ever succeeded so completely as the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks.
     Bin Laden's goals resemble traditional national liberation goals _ such as the expulsion of U.S. troops from his Saudi Arabian homeland and the destruction of Israel. But he also speaks of the vast Islamic world as if it were one big nation needing liberation from Western domination as symbolized by growing U.S. military, economic and cultural influences. In so doing, he raises his demands to a global level seldom seen in the annals of terrorism.
     According to Hoffman, Al-Qaida "can call on the services of an estimated 4,000 to 5,000 well-trained fighters scattered throughout the Muslim world," which would dwarf the known terrorist organizations of recent history.
     By contrast, the Japanese Red Army or the German-based Red Army Faction never numbered more than 20 or 30 hard-core members, and even the feared Abu Nidal organization was limited to about 500 men at any given time, Hoffman said in "Terrorism Trends and Prospects."
     When you put together size, reach, targets, goals and tactics, the Bin Laden group represents something bigger and scarier than anything in terrorism history, said Andrew Latham of Macalester College.
     The anarchists tried to kill individual leaders. The IRA has often called in a warning just before one of its bombs was about to blow up a London building, hoping to hold down the number of casualties, Latham said. Even groups that regularly targeted civilians seldom killed more than a few dozen and seemed to worry that too much innocent blood would cause a backlash in world opinion that would do them more harm than good.
     "I used to argue in my classes that no terrorist is going to use a nuclear or biological or chemical weapon against a civilian population because it would alienate people that the terrorists are trying to appeal to," Latham said. "But I have had to rethink that after Sept. 11. It appears that there's no inherent limit on the kind of violence that these people would employ. We have to worry about that now."
     _ Eric Black is at eblack@startribune.com.  
More information on terrorism:
Web sites:
- Response to Terrorism. U.S. State Dept. daily udpdates of key announcements relating to the investigation and response to the Sept. 11 attack and its economic implications; links to key U.S. and U.N. documents. http://usinfo.state.gov/topical/pol/terror 
- The Terrorism Research Center. Analysis, profiles, links to policy documents. http://www.terrorism.com 
- Patterns of Global Terrorism 2000 (U.S. State Dept.) -background on groups and activity. http://www.state.gov/s/ct/rls/pgtrpt/2000 
- Coming to Grips with the Jihad. Access to past articles from the Atlantic, including "The Roots of Muslim Rage," "Blowback" (Osama bin Laden's rise to power), "The Lawless Frontier." http://www.theatlantic.com/unbound/flashbks/jihad.htm 
Books:
- "The New Jackals: Ramzi Yousef, Osama bin Laden, and the Future of Terrorism," by Simon Reeve (Northeastern University Press, 1999, $26.95).
- "Inside Terrorism" by Bruce Hoffman (Columbia University Press, 1999, $17.95).
- "Origins of Terrorism: Psychologies, Ideologies, Theologies, States of Mind," Walter Reich, editor (Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 1998, $18.95).
Compiled by Sandy Date

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: October 1, 2001


End of Document