The Rippling Effect of Bhutto's Death
The New York Times
December 28, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; LETTERS
Length: 637 words
Body


To the Editor:
  The audacious and outrageous assassination of Benazir Bhutto, the Pakistani opposition leader, is an attack not only upon her and the country she loved, but on the civilized and democratic world. 
  It is an assault that must be met with a renewed fervor to root out terrorism wherever it flourishes.
  Like most political figures, former Prime Minister Bhutto was flawed, as demonstrated by the corruption during the era of her leadership. Most recently, though, she had come to represent hope for the Pakistani people who believe in freedom and democracy. 
  Ms. Bhutto demanded free elections and a rollback of the brutal totalitarian rule imposed by President Pervez Musharraf. Ms. Bhutto was not only oriented toward the West, but was an ally of its nations.
  Ms. Bhutto could have chosen to remain out of the spotlight, enjoying a comfortable life in exile. She instead chose to return to Pakistan, knowing full well the danger of doing so.
  Those who were responsible for Benazir Bhutto's death must be hunted down. Today, the terrorists have won a key battle. They must not be permitted to win the war. Oren M. Spiegler 
  Upper Saint Clair, Pa., Dec. 27, 2007
  To the Editor:
  It is a sad day for Pakistan. With the assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, it is clear that the government of President Pervez Musharraf is incompetent and also irrelevant to the needs of the people of Pakistan.
  If a government cannot even provide security to its prominent citizens, then it has no right to govern.
  I hope and pray that President Musharraf will hand over power to a civilian government, whose first priority should be to form a unity government with the express objective of fighting the terrorists and restoring law and order.
  Ms. Bhutto gave her life for the cause of building a modern state and ridding the country of extreme elements. It will be a fitting tribute to achieve these objectives.  Syed Tasnim Raza
  New York, Dec. 27, 2007
  To the Editor:
  During the coming days many will be blamed and many may claim the blame for the killing of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. But one government, more than anyone else, deserves blame: the United States government. 
  By befriending Ms. Bhutto, and appearing to send her back to Pakistan to do its bidding, Washington made her a target. She became a symbol of American neo-imperialism.
  The Pakistan public has not supported the American invasion of Afghanistan or Iraq. Nor do Pakistanis support the government of President Pervez Musharraf, which has been propped up by Washington. And they certainly did not support the apparent American interference that Ms. Bhutto's return indicated.
  The ultimate responsibility for this new blood -- like that of more than a million Iraqis and Afghans -- is the United States government led by President Bush. Curtis F. J. Doebbler 
  Venice, Dec. 27, 2007
  The writer is an international human rights lawyer.
  To the Editor:
  Both India and Pakistan have suffered enormously in recent times because of terrorism and violence. The assassination of Benazir Bhutto is as cruel as the assassination of Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi, the former prime ministers of India. 
  Apart from such political leaders, hundreds of innocent lives have been lost in both India and Pakistan in the last few years because of terrorist attacks.
  The Indian and Pakistani governments should sink all their differences and cooperate economically and politically so that both countries can live in peace. More than five decades of confrontation between the two countries has retarded the progress of the entire subcontinent. 
  Active cooperation between India and Pakistan is an essential precondition for defeating the forces of terrorism on the subcontinent.
    N. S. Venkataraman
  Chennai, India, Dec. 27, 2007

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 28, 2007


End of Document