The Struggle for Balanced Surveillance
The New York Times
November 8, 2013 Friday
The International New York Times


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. ; LETTER FROM EUROPE
Length: 712 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Body


LONDON -- Since Edward J. Snowden began to leak secret data harvested from his erstwhile work as a National Security Agency intelligence contractor, the global debate pitting privacy against security has swirled around questions relating to surveillance on a beyond-industrial scale.
In short, as the arguments go, have the benefits of this broad-brush intelligence gathering justified intrusion into private lives? Or was Western counter-terrorism damaged by disclosures that benefited only its enemies?
But in Britain, embarrassed law enforcement agencies have been obliged to confront the much more modest challenge of keeping tabs on a single 27-year-old suspect who entered a mosque in west London on Nov. 1 as a man in Western garb and re-emerged, according to the police, disguised as a woman in Islamic dress. With that apparently simple ruse, Mohammed Ahmed Mohamed, a Briton born in Somalia, slipped off the radar of electronic tagging that Britain devised to monitor a category of terrorism suspects.
Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, described the episode as ''absurd.''
''If a fellow can get into a burqa and evade his invigilators in the way Mr. Mohamed has done, then we clearly need to look at how it is working,'' Mr. Johnson said, referring to a form of surveillance known as Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures, or TPIMs, introduced in 2011 to ''rebalance intrusive security powers and increase safeguards for civil liberties'' after an earlier and tougher regime known as control orders.
Both systems -- authorizing curfews and restrictions on contacts, movement and communication -- reflect the conundrum facing counterterrorism agencies in their efforts to restrain suspects who may not be tried and sentenced in public, partly because courtroom testimony could undermine covert operations.
In essence, the secret judgments raise questions about the collision between civil liberties and the perceived imperatives of the undercover fight against Islamic militancy -- both homegrown and imported from lands including Pakistan and Somalia whose citizens form substantial minorities in Britain.
If, for instance, TPIMs are decreed in closed-door deliberations, how is the judgment of officials and judges to be measured by the public in whose name the struggle against extremism is fought? And what guarantee is there against the abuse of counterterrorism measures for other purposes?
That question arose in another case this week when David Miranda, the partner of the journalist Glenn Greenwald -- who broke many of the stories based on Mr. Snowden's leaks -- complained to the British High Court that a counterterrorism statute had been misused to detain and search him in August while he was in transit at Heathrow Airport. The authorities' action, a lawyer for Mr. Miranda said, was a ''disproportionate interference with his right to freedom of expression.''
Concerns have also arisen over the practicality of the nine TPIMs currently in force. Mr. Mohamed was the second suspect to escape after Ibrahim Magag, 29, also born in Somalia, simply climbed into a taxi cab and disappeared last December. Both men were likely to have been absorbed by clandestine support networks.
One tabloid, The Daily Mirror, went so far as to say that Mr. Mohamed was an admirer of Samantha Lewthwaite, the widow of one of the July 2005 suicide bombers -- the White Widow, as the headline writers call her -- living a life on the run somewhere in East Africa.
British officials have said that Mr. Mohamed underwent training in Somalia and fought alongside Qaeda- linked forces of the Shabab, the group that took responsibility for the attack on the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi, Kenya, in September.
But, in perhaps the most bizarre twist to the story, a case at Britain's High Court on Thursday revealed that Mr. Mohamed had, in fact, been suing the authorities here over alleged human rights abuses when he fled.
According to court filings, he had accused Britain of complicity in his arrest along with another suspect in the semiautonomous Somaliland region on Jan. 14, 2011. They were tortured before they were sent to Britain in March 2011, he said, obliging Britain as an accomplice to pay damages to him.
A judge said there had been no ''abuse of process.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/08/world/europe/the-struggle-for-balanced-surveillance.html

Load-Date: November 8, 2013


End of Document