The Decatur Daily, Ala.,
The Decatur Daily (Alabama)
January 1, 2012 Sunday


Copyright 2012 The Decatur Daily
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: COMMENTARY
Length: 771 words
Byline: Eric Fleischauer, The Decatur Daily, Ala.
Body


Jan. 01--2011 was a year of invented crisis.
Our elected representatives, who agree on almost nothing, in 2011 came to a consensus that they fare better when Americans react with fear rather than proceed with caution.
Politicians did not have to create crises to prod us into panic, just prolong them.
Make them afraid
They used our fear of terrorism, which lingers from the crisis of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. They used our fear of financial disaster, which remains after the economic crisis of 2008.
Both were true crises that threatened our way of life. Neither merited the emotional responses that continued to wreak havoc on our nation and state in 2011.
The crisis of the Sept. 11 attacks started one war, but was extended to justify another. More significant to the long-term survival of our nation, the attacks turned the main check on governmental power -- the people -- into a cheerleading squad that actively promotes an end to civil liberties.
We like to blame politicians for ignoring the Constitution, and to be sure they deserve blame.
But they take only the liberties we give them, and in times of crisis we give them plenty.
We condoned indefinite detentions of alleged terrorists and warrantless searches. We allowed them to execute U.S. citizens without due process.
Our presidents initiate attacks on foreign soil -- even topple foreign governments -- without so much as a declaration of war, and we accept it as a necessary response to terrorism.
Drones don't just target terrorist suspects in the Middle East, they spy out common criminals in North Dakota and Arizona.
The "war on terror" has become a perpetual crisis that trumps the Constitution. The quaint Bill of Rights strikes a balance between authoritarianism and personal liberty that, we are told, is unworkable in times of crisis.
Our fear of terrorism fed our natural xenophobia. Porous borders are an invitation to terrorists, politicians told us, and we began building walls.
Tell 'em who to blame
The recession came and with it a renewed surge of fear. When elected officials in our state told us we could blame a discernible group -- undocumented immigrants -- for our unemployment woes, we trashed the Constitution in our enthusiasm to attack.
We were in a crisis, and Mexicans were the enemy.
Just as those in power strived to create a perpetual crisis out of the Sept. 11 attacks, they are squeezing every ounce of panic from a finite economic downturn.
Republicans stress the severity of the crisis as a way to gain power. If the crisis is over, they have lost the best cards they held in the effort to unseat President Barack Obama.
A debt 'crisis'?
By labeling the federal debt a crisis, Republicans have convinced us to dismantle environmental protections and eliminate programs that provide opportunities for the poor.
But Obama, too, is perpetuating the crisis. If the economic disaster is over, so is the rationale behind the deficit-financed giveaways that are so effective in buying votes.
The politicians of this age are not unique in recognizing the opportunity that crisis presents. In the 1950s, too, elected representatives used our emotional response to secure their own power.
Trying, with limited success, to remind Americans that the "Red Scare" was not a crisis that merited the dismantling of our Constitution, George Kennan wrote in 1951:
"America is not just territory and people. ... America is something in our minds and our habits of outlook which causes us to believe in certain things and to behave in certain ways, and by which, in its totality, we hold ourselves distinguished from others. If that once goes, there will be no America to defend. And that can go too easily if we yield to the primitive human instinct to escape from our frustrations into the realms of mass emotion and hatred and to find scapegoats for our difficulties."
The threat within
External dangers surround us but, as Kennan reminded those of his day, "the subjective emotional stresses and temptations to which we are exposed in our attempt to deal with this domestic problem are not an external danger: they represent a danger within ourselves -- a danger that something may occur in our own minds and souls which will make us no longer like the persons by whose efforts this republic was founded."
In 2012, we should reject those who tell us we are in crisis.
The best way forward, as it always has been, is to confront our troubles with reason and compassion.
Contact Eric Fleischauer at eric@decaturdaily.com
___ (c)2012 The Decatur Daily (Decatur, Ala.) Visit The Decatur Daily (Decatur, Ala.) at www.decaturdaily.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: January 1, 2012


End of Document