THE COLOR OF TERRORISM;
 A HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SECURITY IS RIGHT TO SEE RED
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 6, 2004 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 314 words
Body


While few Americans would dispute that they should be properly informed about terrorism threats, the color-coded alert system is coming under increased scrutiny. It's not surprising.
 Rep. Christopher Cox, a California Republican who heads the House Select Committee on Homeland Security, says the five-color system may be alarming "an awful lot of people who really can't do much with this information other than hand-wring and hanky-twist."
The most recent Code Orange coincided with the holiday season when millions of people were traveling, and the cost of coping with such alerts is aggravating financial headaches for officials and law-enforcement personnel at all levels. Mr. Cox makes a good point when he says that "If by making idle threats that are always taken seriously by people who are just scared, we can impose enormous costs on the country, and the terrorists can impose enormous costs on the country..."
 That, he says, "turns their losing game into a winning game."
 The congressman wasn't second-guessing the wisdom of the current Code Orange alert, but he and other lawmakers noted that the code system was designed for warnings tailored to specific areas.
 The increase in so-called "intelligence chatter" among groups linked to terrorist acts could in many cases be misinformation designed to induce Americans to spend more needlessly on security or to bring about a frame of mind where they will tend to ignore it. Talk, after all, is relatively cheap in a closely linked world society.
 It is impossible to tell when or where another terrorist act might take place. Americans must stay alert, even as they go about their business. Fortunately, the House select committee is looking at ways to refine the color-coded alert system. Given the long-term threat that terrorism might pose in the continental United States, some common-sense changes appear to be warranted.

Load-Date: January 6, 2004


End of Document