THE DEFINITION OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 3, 1989, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2C
Length: 559 words
Byline: Mary H. Cooper Editorial Research Reports
Body


For the United States to agree to meet with the Palestine Liberation Organization, it was not enough for Yasser Arafat to ''condemn'' terrorism; he had to ''totally and absolutely renounce all forms of terrorism.'' Now that he has done so, what exactly is it that he has renounced?  Terrorism is a notoriously slippery word. The bombing or hijacking of a civilian airliner definitely is a terrorist act. But what about throwing stones at soldiers on patrol?  Clearly, an outside definition of terrorism is needed, but it is hard to come by. The United Nations offers no help. Its legal commission gave up trying to pin down the meaning after members inundated it with 130 different proposals.  Even the United States has no official definition of terrorism. The closest it comes is in this 1968 ''working definition'' by the State Department: ''Terrorism is premeditated, politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine state agents, usually intended to influence an audience.'' That is not a broad enough definition to include the ''state terrorism'' that Riyad Mansour, the PLO's deputy permanent observer at the U.N., claims is perpetrated by Israel upon his people. ''Beatings, resulting in the breaking of arms and legs of thousands of people (in the West Bank and Gaza) is not only terrorism but an official policy of torture,'' Mansour said.  For its part, a spokesman for the Israeli government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir characterized the PLO as ''the single largest terrorist organization in the world today,'' and Shamir has vowed never to negotiate with the PLO.
But asked for the official Israeli definition of terrorism, the Israeli embassy in Washington was downright elusive. ''We recognize an act of terrorism when we see one,'' said an official, who then refused to elaborate.  In the end, a precise definition of terrorism may not be as important as a definition of ''renounce.'' Although the United States says it will hold Arafat to his word, Mansour says, ''The PLO leadership cannot be held responsible for the actions of any Palestinian anywhere in the world.'' Arafat's peace overtures have not been universally accepted by Palestinians around the world, and the rejectionist groups are generally the most violent.  Western European governments are said to be bracing for terrorist incidents aimed at derailing the peace process before it even gets moving.  The State Department characterizes only three of the 10 pro-Palestinian terrorist organizations it has identified as having direct ties to the PLO today. One of these is the Palestine Liberation Front, which the United States blames for the October 1985 attack on the cruise ship Achille Lauro and the murder of Leon Klinghoffer, a U.S. citizen. Another PLF incident would surely require Arafat to expel its leader, Abul Abbas, from the PLO leadership.  But what if the Abu Nidal organization, the most violent of all, strikes at the PLO leadership itself? Abu Nidal has killed or injured almost 900 people over the past 14 years.  The Middle East peace process hangs on words and the meanings they convey.  But the danger of all the talk about terrorism is that words may not spell the end of attacks by groups that act in the name of the Palestinian people but reject Arafat's offer to negotiate with Israel.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document