The P.L.O.: Only the Music's Better
The New York Times
December 14, 1988, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 560 words
Body


The State Department reacted just right to Yasir Arafat's long-awaited U.N. speech yesterday. The department's statement justifiably praised the P.L.O. chairman for his ''overall tone'' and for ''some movement'' on the details. But it sensibly went on to say that Mr. Arafat still failed to go far enough in accepting Israel's right to exist and renouncing terrorism inside as well as outside Israeli borders. ''These issues must be addressed clearly, squarely, without ambiguity,'' said the Department's spokesman.
Unfortunately, the U.S. stands virtually alone in this reaction to the speech, given at a special session in Geneva beause America refused to let Mr. Arafat enter to speak at the U.N. in New York. The United Nations continues to pay more attention to the music than the specific and necessary words. But the State Department rightly reminds the world that peace needs more than music. Israel has every basis for believing its existence is threatened; it must hear words so specific that uttering them constitutes deeds.
That's the main difference between the way the U.S. responds to Mikhail Gorbachev and Mr. Arafat. The Soviet leader has made specific promises and then backed them with concrete actions providing grounds for trust. Mr. Arafat avoids deeds and persists in varying his message with his audience -inching forward with the P.L.O. declaration in Algiers and in a meeting with Jewish leaders in Stockholm, then seemingly marking time in Geneva. This keeps him in the P.L.O driver's seat, but vitiates his credibility in Washington and Israel.
Diplomatic events of the last few days make the point. P.L.O. aides told Swedish officials that the chairman would, in Geneva, provide the specificity about Israel and terrorism required by the U.S. The Swedes passed this on to Washington, which told Israel that if the proper words were spoken, the U.S. would deal with the P.L.O.
The music of the Arafat speech was unquestionably harmonious. ''Come,'' he said to Israeli leaders, ''let us make peace. Cast away fear and intimidation. Leave behind the specter of the wars that have raged continuously in the furnace of this conflict for the past 40 years.''
Yet, while he repeated his rejection of terrorism ''in all its forms,'' he continued to imply that such acts were justified in wars of national liberation. He also spoke of making a comprehensive settlement with Israel. But as he described it, P.L.O. recognition of Israel would seem to come only at the end of negotiations, not at the beginning where it belongs.
Before recognition of Israel, three things would have to occur: (1) A preparatory committee with unspecified powers would be convened to set terms for an international conference on the Middle East; (2) Israeli troops would withdraw from occupied ''Palestinian land,'' which would be put under temporary U.N. supervision; and (3) an international conference would be called to make a comprehensive peace among ''the State of Palestine, Israel and other neighbors.''
Thus he seems to ask Israel to concede the existence of a Palestinian state with unspecified boundaries and powers in advance of a peace. Mr. Arafat, who does not feel strong enough within the P.L.O. to recognize Israel now, and who has for decades advocated its destruction, would never grant such terms if fate had reversed the roles of Israel and the P.L.O.


End of Document