THE WORLD;
Gemayel Gets Powers, on Paper
The New York Times
November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 6; Week in Review Desk
Length: 320 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger
Body


President Amin Gemayel was given virtually full power by the Lebanese Parliament last week to rule by decree for six months. Now all he has to do is go out and rule.
President Amin Gemayel was given virtually full power by the Lebanese Parliament last week to rule by decree for six months.
Israeli, Syrian and Palestinian forces still occupy about four fifths of his country. Private militias, notably that belonging to his own Phalangist Party, still have their weaons. Clashes are still taking place between Christian forces and the powerful and secretive Druse sect. Beirut is one of the few places Mr. Gemayel can more or less call his own but even there the loyalty of the armed Phalangists in the eastern section is uncertain. And terrorism is still alive, with at least six people killed and 19 injured in bombing attacks yesterday.
But the 58-to-1 victory was undoubtedly a morale raiser. Mr.  Gemayel now has a free hand to attend to such urgent problems as strengthening the army and getting rid of the foreign forces. He is to meet soon with the Israelis. Washington gave a clear sign it, too, was anxious to speed up the lagging negotiations on withdrawal; it sent Philip C. Habib back to the Middle East as special envoy, presumably because he carries more weight then Morris Draper.
The dangers of the situation were dramatized by the collapse of an eight-story building housing Israeli headquarters in the southern Lebanese city of Tyre and killed 94 persons, including 75 Israelis, and injured about 50. The victims included Palestinians detained inside. The disaster was first blamed on Palestinian fighters who had escaped Israeli vigilance but later the Israeli Chief of Staff, Lieut. Gen. Rafael Eytan, raised the possibility of a structural fault. A day of mourning was decreed in Israel for tomorrow.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger


End of Document