The Bill for Terror
The New York Times
October 25, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 27; Column 2; Editorial Desk ; Column 2; ; Op-Ed
Length: 497 words
Byline: By Susan and Daniel Cohen; 

Susan and Daniel Cohen are authors of "Pan Am 103: The Bombing, the Betrayals, and a Bereaved Family's Search for Justice."

By Susan and Daniel Cohen;  Susan and Daniel Cohen are authors of "Pan Am 103: The Bombing, the Betrayals, and a Bereaved Family's Search for Justice."
Body


President Clinton is ready to sign a bill that would authorize huge payments to American victims of international terrorism. Under the new law, more than $213 million in compensatory damages would be paid to eight families that have won judgments against Iran over terrorist acts.
And more payments -- to satisfy court judgments against other countries found to have sponsored terrorism -- are expected to follow.
We stand to benefit from this bill. Our 20-year-old daughter Theo was killed in the 1988 terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. Along with most other families of victims from that flight, we filed a wrongful death suit against Libya in a United States federal court, and we are almost certain to win it -- no matter what the verdict is in the criminal trial of two Libyan agents that is still dragging through a court in the Netherlands.
But if the damage award is to be paid under the provisions of the current bill, we will not accept it.
This is not because we don't need the money. We are not wealthy and are coming up on our Social Security and Medicare years without children to help us. Our daughter was our only child. Nor do we doubt that the Libyan government is guilty as charged. We feel no hesitation about the prospect of taking money -- lots of it -- from Libya.
The reason for our rejection of payment under this proposed law is that the money is not to be paid by a country convicted of sponsoring terrorism, but by the Treasury Department -- or, to put it more bluntly, the American taxpayer.
Over the past dozen years, we have seen an array of schemes intended to get terrorists to pay money damages for their crimes. This bill is only the latest of them. The sponsors of these proposals usually say they are not really about money but about "punishment." This is a dubious proposition at best; indeed, the putrid scent of "blood money" -- the idea that a murderer can somehow wipe away his crime by paying the family of the victims -- clings to it.
But the current bill doesn't even rise to the blood-money level. Yes, the bill includes provisions stating that the United States will try to recoup the millions from a nation convicted of terrorist acts, either through an international tribunal or negotiations -- somehow, someday. But don't bet that the money will ever be paid by such countries, certainly not all of it.
This bill is not anti-terrorism legislation; it's an evasion. It sets a precedent that will haunt us for years to come. Given current political conditions, there are bound to be a lot more American victims of international terrorism. One can almost imagine the lawyers salivating, now that our government is acting as a guarantor for terrorist nations ordered by American courts to pay their victims.
The eight families scheduled to receive payments have suffered horribly at the hands of terrorists and their sponsors. They deserve a lot of money. We deserve a lot. But from the terrorists, not the taxpayers.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 25, 2000


End of Document