THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Readjustments In the Mideast
The New York Times
February 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk
Length: 305 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim, Barbara Slavin and William C. Rhoden
Body


Although the Reagan Administration keeps insisting that its strong support for Israel is unchanged, it did some tinkering last week with its policy toward the Arabs that made Israel and its supporters nervous again.
Administration officials told Congress they were favorably disposed toward selling Jordan F-16 fighter planes and mobile antiaircraft missiles.
Administration officials tell Congress they favor sale of F-16 fighters and mobile antiaircraft missiles to JordanHowever, a request is unlikely until after the November elections since it would almost certainly touch off a row in Congress. Israel regards the sale of such weapons to Jordan as a grave threat to its security. It opposed the sale of Awacs radar surveillance planes to Saudi Arabia. The sale narrowly got through Congress last year. Administration officials said last week that the Saudi Defense Minister, Prince Sultan, had privately signed an agreement setting conditions on their use. It was not clear whether the Saudis had accepted all the conditions specified in a letter President Reagan sent to the Senate during last fall's debate.
Apparently without consulting Congress, the Administration has quietly dropped Iraq, a virulent foe of Israel, from a list of countries barred from receiving American weapons because they ''have repeatedly supported acts of international terrorism.'' Cuba was added to the list, which includes Southern Yemen, Syria and Libya.
Relations with the last country sunk to a new low last week. The National Security Council decided in principle to impose an embargo on Libyan oil and to bar the sale of oil drilling equipment to the Qaddafi regime.
The oil embargo would affect only 3 percent of American imports but 15 percent of Libya's exports. Libya could have a hard time finding new buyers in the present glutted market.


End of Document