The Road to Peace
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
December 6, 1994, Tuesday


Copyright 1994 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18
Length: 391 words
Body


AS Israeli and Palestinian negotiators sit down in Cairo today
to discuss the next phase of Palestinian autonomy, Israel is
reeling from a recent wave of terrorist attacks.
Last week, a member of Hamas, the Islamic resistance movement,
brutally killed a young Israeli soldier. A week earlier, Islamic
militants gunned down a rabbi in the West Bank. In October, a
suicide bomber blew up a bus in Tel Aviv, killing himself and 22
others. And another soldier was kidnapped and killed in October.
Israel has responded by launching a massive crackdown on and
manhunt for Hamas guerrillas in the West Bank. Security forces say
arrests in connection with the October suicide bombing already
brought to 400 the number of suspects detained in the past few
months.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin vowed that peace efforts with the
Palestinians would continue despite the terrorist attacks, and he
deserves credit for this. ''We shall continue on our road to peace
and to fight those who oppose it,'' he told reporters in Tel Aviv.
But on Sunday, Israeli officials began a policy debate over whether
or not to pull troops out of the West Bank before elections because
of serious security concerns.
Israel is right to take these countermeasures against this round
of terrorism. The Palestinian leadership also must continue to
distance itself from terrorist acts and make clear that it will
never accept terrorism as a legitimate method of doing business. If
it does not, the Palestinian Authority will not be accepted by the
international community, including other Arab states.
The danger of the crackdown is that it may increase militancy
among Hamas, turning it into a martyr in the eyes of many in the
West Bank and Gaza. Israel and the Palestinian Authority must take
strong measures to stop the radicals and their killing but also
consider other steps to keep the peace process on track.
The negotiators in Cairo are expected to discuss Israeli troop
withdrawals and Palestinian elections. Mr. Arafat must move forward
on elections. Israel has rejected any suggestion that Hamas be
allowed to participate, but ultimately this should be the
Palestinian Authority's decision. For this even to be an option,
Hamas would have to show that it's willing to accept a
participatory approach to government and reject violence. And this
is possible only if there is levelheaded leadership on both sides.

Load-Date: December 7, 1994


End of Document