The Shadow of a Gunman
The New York Times
August 17, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 498 words
Body


The great wave of terrorism that swept Europe in the 1970's was essentially secular, pro-Marxist or pro-Palestinian; the religious terrorism associated with Ayatollah Khomeini and others came later.
Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, better known as Carlos the Jackal, was the movement's fearsome embodiment, a cold-eyed zealot blamed for the death of 83 people. But now that he has finally been apprehended in the Sudan, the world's most wanted terrorist turns out to be smaller than life, figuratively the shadow of his old self. He appears to have been discarded by his former Arab patrons, and with the collapse of Communism he seems to have had no place to run.
In further insult to his reputation as arch-terrorist, authorities now dismiss as an exaggeration the widespread report that he played a major role in the 1972 slaughter of Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics.
His capture is a real victory for the democratic societies his movement sought to demoralize and destroy. Americans, Europeans, Israelis and even moderate Arabs became targets in a terror campaign waged by a clandestine network that hijacked planes, kidnapped hostages and bombed airports and rail terminals. That campaign was blunted by good police work and global cooperation, enabling governments to contend with greater confidence against more recent terrorist movements inspired by religious or ethnic fanaticism.
With Carlos in the dock, it may finally be possible to determine the truth about tales of his prowess. Carlos at large would have forever remained a myth: the Venezuelan-born guerrilla who did indeed abduct 11 ministers attending an OPEC meeting in Vienna in 1975, the master of disguises who eluded capture as a wanted murderer in France and elsewhere, the clandestine conspirator who worked variously with Germany's Baader-Meinhof gang and Palestinian groups based in Damascus or Tripoli.
Carlos would have served his cause better as a bullet-riddled corpse found after a climactic shootout. Instead, as a revolutionary who saw himself as the agent of history, he was ironically undone by the forces of history; the demise of the Soviet empire and Saddam Hussein's defeat provided an opening for peace between Israelis and Palestinians, rendering Carlos irrelevant. Moreover, since it could no longer count on Soviet help, Syria sought to be removed from the U.S. list of terrorist states, as did the Sudan, the country that turned Carlos over to French authorities for extradition.
In Damascus, after a decade of inactivity, Carlos surely became an expendable embarrassment; the Sudan's radical Islamic regime may have wanted to earn points with Europe and America by sacrificing him. As long as Washington struck no deals, and France offered no ransom, there was nothing inherently wrong with an attempt by Syria and the Sudan to improve their reputations as responsible states. Carlos's arrest is further evidence that the wind has changed in the Middle East, shifting against the likes of the Jackal.

Load-Date: August 17, 1994


End of Document