The wrong invitation
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 23, 2005 Thursday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. B6
Length: 376 words
Body


AFTER DECLARING that the slaughter occurring in the Darfur region of Sudan was genocide, the Bush administration has all but covered its ears, eyes and mouth. Save for a reiteration of his belief that the killings are genocide, President George W. Bush has done little to stop or respond to it. The CIA made matters worse by flying Sudan's intelligence chief to Washington in April for secret meetings aimed at mutual cooperation against terrorism. The Los Angeles Times and The New York Times reported last week that the visit by Salah Abdallah Gosh triggered controversy and criticism within the Bush administration. And no wonder. In a letter to President George W. Bush last fall, several members of Congress accused Sudan of engaging in a "scorched-earth policy against innocent civilians in Darfur." Rep. Frank R. Wolf, R-Va., says the invitation to Mr. Gosh was unjustified, and Rep. Donald M. Payne, D-N.J., called it a "dastardly and unconscionable act."
Some officials told the two newspapers that Mr. Gosh's knowledge of al-Qaida and the region was critical to the global war on terror. Even so, Mr. Wolf said, Mr. Gosh shouldn't have been invited unless the information he possessed was going to save the Western world.
The visit was a surprise, in part, because official U.S. policy has been to treat Sudan's Muslim-led government as a sponsor of terrorism. Osama bin Laden is said to have lived in Khartoum, the capital, from 1991 to 1996, before moving to Afghanistan. Sudan continues to be the target of U.S. criticism over human rights. Former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell first raised the issue of genocide in Darfur last fall, and Mr. Bush has underscored that point on at least two occasions.
Ridding the world of al-Qaida and other terrorists is a high priority. But so is protecting human rights by taking action to stop genocide. It is inconsistent-- and unconscionable -- for the United States government to cooperate with Sudanese leaders who collaborated with militias that burned villages, raped women, killed tens of thousands of people and displaced millions more in Darfur.
America's handling of the war on terror has put its credibility on the line. It doesn't help when a reputed sponsor of terrorism is invited to Washington.

Notes

 SUDAN  

Load-Date: June 24, 2005


End of Document