THE WORLD;
GANDHI AIDES STEP BACK IN ANDHRA PRADESH
The New York Times
September 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 360 words
Byline: By Katherine Roberts, Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger
Body


Prime Minister Indira Gandhi surprised both friends and enemies last week when she allowed her supporters to step aside in the southern Indian state of Andhra Pradesh so that a popular opponent could reclaim his job as chief minister.
But her allies did not give up without a fight. As the 295-member assembly prepared to vote on the reinstatement Thursday, fisticuffs broke out and the delegates hurled microphones at each other. It took 70 plainclothes policemen to restore order.
It was an uncharacteristic and bloody retreat for Mrs. Gandhi. She had watched nervously as demonstrations spread across India this month in protest of the removal of Chief Minister N. T. Rama Rao on the pretext that he had lost his ruling majority in the assembly. Though she denied any involvement in last month's ouster, virtually everyone outside of her party held her responsible for what some critics called the ''murder of democracy.''
With national elections scheduled to take place before Jan. 20, Mrs. Gandhi found the protests draining much of the popular support accumulated in June when she ordered the army to crush an outbreak of terrorism by Sikhs in Punjab. And after 30 days, the chief minister installed by Mrs. Gandhi's allies had been unable to muster a majority in the assembly to form a new government.
That left her with the option of either running the state directly from New Delhi - a move bound to provoke even more demonstrations, despite its constitutionality - or letting Mr. Rama Rao return in triumph.
Mr. Rama Rao, a former film star often described as a charismatic political leader, rode to the governor's residence for the ceremony atop a 40-year-old van he calls his ''chariot of divine enlightenment.'' It was a role he knows well. During his career as an actor, he starred in more than 300 films, often playing the part of a Hindu god. Nearly 100,000 supporters crammed into a stadium to celebrate his victory.
Although Mrs. Gandhi's allies accuse him of ruling with an authoritarian hand and of installing family members and friends in many key positions, Mr. Rama Rao has proved that she cannot match his appeal, at least on his home ground.


End of Document