THE INTRUSION OF TELEVISION IN THE HOSTAGE CRISIS
The New York Times
June 26, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Cultural Desk; Review
Length: 1191 words
Byline: By JOHN CORRY
Body


TELEVISION has been reporting on the hostage crisis; it has been a participant in negotiations to end the crisis as well. At the same time, it sometimes appears to come close to rationalizing terrorism. Television does not mean to do this, but it is implicit in much of the coverage. Show that Shiite Moslems are poor and deprived. Point out that a hijacking, say, or a bombing is the weapon of the powerless. Terrorism is not something just to be deplored, then; it is something to be understood.
The other night, for example, we saw the 31 Shiite Moslems released by Israel. They were surrounded by other Lebanese, celebrating their arrival home. The freed Shiites made speeches. Their listeners, cheering, said the hijackers should not free the captured Americans. Legitimate Lebanese issues seemed to be at stake.
John Corry article on TV coverage of TWA hostage crisis in Lebanon; says TV has been participant in negotiations to end crisis and sometimes appears to come close to rationalizing terrorism; photo (M)
Some commentary has reinforced this. The Rev. Jesse Jackson, appearing on CBS's ''Nightwatch,'' said, ''We should take a hard look at what got us into this situation.'' The problem, he said, was the ''rage'' directed at the United States. On ABC's ''Nightline,'' former Senator James G. Abourezk said the problem was that the United States ''tilted'' toward Israel. ''We are all being instant experts,'' Marvin Kalb said on NBC, and indeed experts have flourished.
Consequently, it has become difficult to regard terrorism as insane, immoral or criminal. Terrorism can be explained; it has a rationale. Moral disapproval gets lost. Meanwhile, the terrorists, or their surrogates, have access to the news broadcasts. The night after the Israelis released their 31 prisoners, we saw some of the American hostages, sitting in a room, being interviewed by a disembodied voice.
''Do you feel well?'' the voice asked. ''Do you eat well and sleep well?'' ''Do you want to be free soon?'' The hostages all said yes. It was an obscene travesty of a news conference, serving no one other than the hijackers. Meanwhile, when we do see terrorists on television we are struck by their ordinariness. How can we deplore people who look very much like us?
Curious arguments have sprung up around this, none of them quite to the point. How did the press behave, for example, at the news conference the Amal held for five hostages last week? Hysterically, of course; photographers and cameramen climbed on tables, stepping on dishes of sweets.
Immediately, network stars denounced this from New York. The dignity of the press seemed to be threatened. Dan Rather told Bob Schieffer on the ''CBS Morning News'' that the behavior in Beirut was ''inexcusable.'' Mr. Schieffer, in turn, said it was ''despicable.'' The issue wasn't the terrorists; the journalists in Beirut had disgraced their colleagues at home.
That kind of behavior just doesn't go; television insists on dignity. Anchormen and prominent correspondents are surrogate Secretaries of State. The night before Mr. Rather berated his rowdy colleagues, he interviewed Nabih Berri, the leader of Amal, on the ''CBS Evening News.'' Diplomacy, once thought to be a matter for professionals, was conducted in our living rooms.
''Berri told me that if Israel agrees to release its Shiite prisoners, a third country could arrange an exchange,'' Mr. Rather said during the interview, which had been taped earlier that day. Then we heard Mr. Berri.  ''If they, they took the 700 to a neutral country, I am ready to send all the Americans here with their plane to the same country, to make the exchange. Yes, I accept that.''
We had the feeling a bargain had been struck. Mr. Rather had not exactly obtained the release of the hostages, but he had told us how it could be done. Television confers a peculiar authority on anchormen. We know them by their personas. Print reporters are anonymous, represented only by words on a page. Anchormen, household icons, are recognized by millions of people.
Therefore, we listen to the anchormen as much as we do to their words. It is not so much what they say as it is that they are saying it. When they speak, it must be important. When Mr. Rather interviewed Mr. Berri, he was not a reporter; celebrity status made him a policy maker. The policy was that Israel had to behave sensibly and release its detainees.
Almost simultaneously, on the ''NBC Nightly News,'' Roger Mudd, filling in for Tom Brokaw as anchor, was talking to Mr. Kalb.
''What, Marvin, is the average television viewer, watching us this evening, supposed to think?'' Mr. Mudd asked. ''Why does not the Israeli Government, why does not the United States Government go ahead and swallow its pride just for a few days to facilitate this release?''
For a moment, Mr. Kalb, ordinarily the most equable of correspondents, looked nonplussed.
''Well, because Governments don't act the way people do,'' he replied. ''People may have friends. It's been said a long time now that Governments don't have friends, they only have interests, and the interests, as defined by the leaders of both Governments, the U.S. and Isreal, is not to appear to be caving in to terrorism.''
Mr. Kalb had recovered, but just barely. In fact, Governments are not supposed to pursue their interests the same way that people do. Governments are supposed to rise above individual interests and look for some greater good. On television, the principal issue - explored, weighed, even negotiated - has been the release of individual people, not the deterrence of terrorism. The television coverage narrows the debate. It looks toward what is immediate, not what lies ahead.
Thus the coverage has placed much of the burden for the release of the hostages on Israel. As Mr. Mudd suggested, it seems to be acting willfully. Why doesn't it just swallow its pride?  Presumably it doesn't because, as Prime Minister Shimon Peres said on a special edition of NBC's ''Meet the Press'' on Sunday afternoon, ''This is the eighth time the Shiites have hijacked a plane.'' The edition was special because it was the second ''Meet the Press'' that day, set up for another interview with Mr. Berri. His voice crackled, sometimes submerged in static, over a telephone connection in Beirut.
Mr. Berri said that he saw no ''connection'' between the release of the hostages and the release of the 31 Shiites by Israel. When Mr. Kalb pressed him, Mr. Berri seemed to become annoyed.
''Are you talking with me like I am the kidnapper?'' he said. ''I am not the kidnapper. I am mediator.''
And so he was, conducting the mediation on television. Later, the NBC correspondents discussed it.
''We're looking at a man in a very difficult position,'' Garrick Utley said.
''He, too, is being held hostage in a sense,'' Bonnie Anderson said.
Presumably we were meant to feel sympathy for Mr. Berri. Possibly we did, but to what purpose? We ought to have felt that terrorism was reprehensible. Television has been exercising its right to pursue the hostage story, and much of its coverage has been fine. But it ought now to back off the story. Its gaze has become misdirected.

Graphic

 
Photo of Shiite hijacker (NYT)


End of Document