The face of terrorism
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
July 3, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 364 words
Byline: Deseret Morning News editorial
Body


   Welcome to office, Gordon Brown. We trust that you now have a better appreciation for the way your predecessor, Tony Blair, seemed a bit fanatical about fighting terrorism.
You can say this much for al-Qaida and its associated network of criminals. They don't have much of a sense for politics. British Prime Minister Blair was forced out of office mainly for his support of American policies in Iraq and elsewhere in the war on terror. A politically savvy enemy might have laid low while a new administration grew complacent and distracted. But this group of terrorists decided instead to attack various parts of Britain as soon as Brown took over at 10 Downing Street.
There's nothing quite like an attack to refocus a nation and recommit new leadership.
But these attacks -- all of which, thankfully, have been diffused before causing much damage -- have a chilling aspect to them, as well. Police began making arrests early this week. Among the suspects are two doctors, one a Palestinian and the other an Iraqi.
This seems to blow holes in a lot of assumptions about what is fueling a fanatical hatred toward the West. Conventional wisdom was that abject poverty was forcing thousands of uneducated and easily influenced men to fight against Western governments because they could see no other options. The long-term solution was believed to be to support policies that would supply ways for these people to grasp the hope of a better life through education and opportunities.
But physicians are not poor. They are not people with limited opportunities. They are well educated. What is worse, given the case at hand, they have been schooled in the need to help people -- which is quite the opposite of killing them.
"It's wrong to suggest al-Qaida are ignorant hill men," a former British army officer told The Associated Press. Indeed.
The attacks against the United States on 9/11 should have taught that lesson. Those terrorists were trained as jet pilots.
What this means is that the civilized world cannot let down its guard. The new British prime minister knows this now. So does President Bush. We hope every serious candidate to replace him late next year understands, as well.

Load-Date: July 3, 2007


End of Document