THE SPEECH: GEORGE McGOVERN;
'CONVERT ARMS RACE INTO A PEACE RACE'
The New York Times
February 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk; Series
Length: 2389 words
Body


Candidates seeking the Presidential nomination make dozens of speeches in their campaigns. The content often varies, depending on where a speech is given and who is in the audience, but a body of material appears, with only slight variation, in nearly every such speech.
These speeches are heard by thousands of people, but their texts are rarely published at length. This is the fourthin a series of texts of such ''basic speeches,'' as collected by The New York Times.
If I were President of the United States, I would take the following 10 steps:
1. Terminate all United States military operations in Central America now.
Fourth in series of texts of 'basic speeches' given by candidates seeking Presidential nomination; notes candidates make dozens of speeches in their campaigns, but texts are rarely published at length; text of speech given by Sen George McGovern; McGovern portrait
2. Bring our marines home from that religious conflict in Lebanon.
3. Begin the nuclear freeze now, including an end to the MX, the B-1 and the shipment of new missiles to Europe. I believe in a strong national defense. But recognizing the hopelessness of an open-ended arms race and the scandalous waste in our present weapons procurement practices, I reject the Administration's request that we escalate military spending by 10 percent each year. I also reject the 5 percent increase each year recommended by other Democratic Presidential candidates. Instead, I call for an overhaul of wasteful military procurement and a 25 percent cut in the Administration's $275 billion spending request.
4. Put unemployed Americans to work building and conserving America - including, by the year 2000, the best railroad system in the world.
5. Restore the dream of home ownership and get the construction industry going again by the provision of a one-time Government-backed mortgage loan of not more than 10 percent.
6. Simplify the present complicated, loophole-riddled tax code by endorsing the Bradley-Gephardt fair tax bill.
7. A Second Chance GI Bill of Rights - this time open to all - that would provide low-cost Government loans for every American who seeks additional education and job training.
8. Stop paying farmers not to produce and begin paying them fairly for their production to win the battle against hunger in America and abroad. A
9. Relieve the states of the burden of welfare and Medicaid costs by full Federal responsibility for these services. This would free state funds to provide greater support for education and crime control.
10. Equal rights for all Americans now, especially for that majority of Americans who are women.
Economic Illness
I do not believe America can be either strong or prosperous with a $200 billion annual Federal deficit, with 12 million of its people unable to find jobs and with good farmers going bankrupt.
I do not blame Mr. Reagan for all the economic problems that face the country. The economy was in trouble before the present Administration came into power. But I am equally sure that the Reagan prescription is not the cure for our economic illness.  His supply-side tax plan will cost the Government an average of $125 billion annually in lost revenues with very little benefit to the average taxpayer.
The Reagan program of military spending is not practical defense. It is a wasteful binge, and it threatens the very vitality of our economy. Current arms spending has now pushed military outlays alone beyond $200 billion a year. The man who promised a balanced budget has combined an unworkable tax scheme with a foolishly conceived arms spending explosion to produce a $200 billion annual Federal deficit.
By any test, Mr. Reagan is the most reckless deficit spender in American history. He has said in the past that I was too liberal; but if I had said in 1972 that a $200 billion annual deficit was acceptable, I wouldn't even have carried Massachusetts.
The deficit is primarily caused by three factors: ill-advised tax write- offs, high unemployment and military waste.
You and I can buy a hammer at the hardware store for $6 or $7. Do you know what the Pentagon pays for that same hammer, custom built to their specifications? $400. $400 for a hammer.
And the same kind of waste is multiplied a million times over in the way the Pentagon procures ships, tanks and planes.
I have no doubt at all that we could cut the Reagan military budget by $75 billion without sacrificing one iota of our real defense needs.
What could we do with that $75 billion now being wasted each year on useless weapons?
Building Up America
We could invest it in putting our unemployed millions back to work building up America.
Just one example: America's railways are falling apart. President Kennedy said at the beginning of the 1960's that we would put a man on the moon by the end of the decade. And we did it. Why not a commitment now to build in America the best railway system in the world by the year 2000? Railways are the best way to move grain and coal and heavy goods. And we need them also for national defense. A modern, efficient rail system is worth more to the American economy and American security than either the B-1 or the MX.
And there is so much else to be done in America with the unemployed: improving the roads and streets, strengthening the bridges, building houses, saving the topsoil. With proper planning and allocations of resources, we can create a useful job for every American who wants to work.
Nothing is more wasteful than unemployment. Each 1 percent of unemployment costs the national Treasury $30 billion in lost tax revenues and paid-out compensation. Ten percent unemployment costs the Treasury $300 billion a year, which explains our present deficit.
So let us convert the arms race into a peace race.
If it is true, as the pollsters are telling us, that Ronald Reagan's popularity has gone up since the tragic killing of American marines in Lebanon and the foolish invasion of tiny Grenada, is it not time to question where our leaders are taking us? Are we being faithful to the founding principles of our nation?
No patriotic American who knows the facts can be proud of Ronald Reagan's conduct in either Lebanon or Grenada.  Protection of Marines
In Lebanon, despite repeated pleas for many weeks by myself and others that American marines be taken out of their sitting-duck position at the Beirut Airport, the Reagan Administration did nothing to either bring the marines home from this impossible mission or to provide for their safety.
Back in the last century when Americans were moving westward, they used to pull their covered wagons into a circle at night as protection against hostile raiding parties. It was a crude and simple procedure, but not even that kind of elementary protection was offered to our marines. Richard Nixon resorted to a more modern version of this technique when he ringed the White House with public transit buses during the peace marches of the late 1960's.
There were no trucks and vehicles parked bumper to bumper around the quarters where our marines were sleeping. There were no effective barricades built around the approaches to the quarters. The sentry on duty didn't even have his gun loaded. In short, from the President on down to the base commander, nobody had enough judgment to take common- sense security measures.
This is a national scandal paid for by the blood of 241 young marines, and that scandal rests in the end with Mr. Reagan, the Commander in Chief.
Former President Carter was depicted as a bumbler because of the Iranian hostage issue; yet no American hostage lost his life during that difficult period. By contrast, 241 American marines who were assigned by Mr. Reagan virtually as hostages at the Beirut airport have lost their lives. Where is the outcry in the press and from the public against this incredible Administration bumbling? Why the double standard in condemning Mr. Carter and praising Mr. Reagan? Have we all been slickered by the great communicator from Hollywood?
 No Reason for Invasion
As for the invasion of Grenada, Mr. Reagan's various explanations are at best confused and inconsistent, if not fraudulent. There was no justification for the invasion of Grenada except for Mr. Reagan and his team to demonstrate how tough they are. But how much toughness does it take for the world's most powerful nation to overrun a tiny island whose native population plus all the foreign visitors could be seated in the University of Michigan stadium?
The President said he sent in 5,000 troops to bring out American students who were attending medical school in Grenada. But nobody has found any evidence that the students were endangered.
The President also said he was interested in spreading democracy and a better life to the people of Grenada instead of letting the Cubans and the Russians build up their influence in Grenada. But if that were the President's purpose, why did he rebuff Maurice Bishop, the recently murdered head of Grenada, when he came to Washington last June trying to work out a cooperative relationship with the United States?
If we wanted to be influential in Grenada, why didn't we send doctors and teachers and even runway construction workers instead of waiting until the Cubans did those things and then sending in our marines and Rangers?
I am one American who sees no inspiration in our invasion of Grenada. I see 18 young American Marines needlessly killed and many others wounded, some of them casualties of an American air strike mistakenly ordered against them by another American military force.
I see a Grenada mental hospital mistakenly bombed and its patients killed in a second U.S. military mistake.
I see unknown numbers of Grenada civilians and Cuban workers killed and wounded.
I see virtually every ally we have around the world condemning the invasion.
I love America and our institutions. As a combat pilot in the Second World War, I gloried in the privilege of offering my life to serve the ends of justice and peace. But the invasion of little Grenada and the needless slaughter of our Marines in Beirut grieves my soul.
Recklessness Abroad
The ill-informed Reagan militaristic approach to the world portends a future of repeated confrontation, interventionism and escalation of hostility. If Lebanon and Grenada are to be treated as success stories, American forces will soon be plunging into Nicaragua, El Salvador and other turbulent hot spots which have been made hotter by the failing and reckless Reagan policies.
Public opinion polls notwithstanding, I am determined to do all in my power to replace the dangerously ill- informed man who now occupies the White House. The eight men now seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination may not be able to match Mr. Reagan's acting ability, but any one of the eight would be a vastly safer and saner bet as the leader of America in the 1980's.
The Reagan Administration has pursued a policy that is now holding America hostage to terrorism, militarism and isolationism.
Terrorism and guerrilla warfare are the new weapons of the developing third world. These are the methods used by radical forces and desperate governments as a cheaper substitute for the sophisticated arms of the more advanced nations. The Reagan Administration's confrontational, interventionist approach to the revolutionary struggles now convulsing the Third World has made us the No. 1 target of third world anger, frustration and terrorism.
No Progress Evident
Nothwithstanding the Administration's rhetoric about reducing terrorism as a first priority, one looks in vain for any evidence of progress on that front.
What are we to say of a civilian Administration that is so militaristic that it has to be warned by our senior military officers against its excessive reliance on military methods to resolve what are essentially diplomatic and political problems?
Meanwhile, the most important foreign policy interest of the United States, the maintenance of effective relations between Moscow and Washington, is at the worst level in many years. The critical arms control negotiations between the superpowers have broken down. Diplomacy has all but ceased between Moscow and Washington.
All of these factors - the reckless dispatch of troops as a substitute for diplomacy, the breakdown of relations with the Soviet Union, the enormous arms spending outburst, the clumsy confrontational approach to the third world - all of this has isolated the United States from much of the rest of the world.
Alienation in Europe
The NATO alliance is under strain and division to an alarming degree - all of our NATO allies taking exception to such Reagan policies as the effort to block the fuel line from the Soviet Union to Western Europe, all of them also taking strong exception to the inexplicable and totally unjustified United States invasion of little Grenada.
The Reagan decision to go ahead with a new generation of missiles in Germany and Western Europe has not only led to the collapse of arms negotiations with the Soviets but has alienated a large portion of the people of Europe who have been our major historic allies.
In Africa, the efforts of the previous Administration to understand the yearnings of this ''black'' continent have been replaced by a groveling before the white minority racist Government of South Africa.
It goes without saying that, in the Middle East, the Camp David peace process has been replaced by increasing strife, terror and death.
In Central America, despite the ''secret'' U.S. war against the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua and a billion dollars of American arms to the Government of El Salvador, increasingly anti-American forces are holding the upper hand.
It is not too much to conclude that during the last three years, the Reagan Administration has followed policies that have produced more terrorism, more militarism, and more isolation of the United States from friend and foe alike. These dangerous developments call for a different foreign policy by the United States.
Soviet-American relations have sunk to such a dangerous impasse that it is imperative above all other foreign policy concerns for the President to initiate a series of meetings with the Soviet leadership designed to reduce the danger of conflict and war. If we are ever to diminish tensions in the world, there must be a dialogue between the superpowers.

Graphic

 
photo of George McGovern


End of Document