THE MIDEAST TURMOIL: TERRORISM; BUSH ORDERS MOVE TO FREEZE ASSETS OF HAMAS CHARITIES - Correction Appended
 The New York Times
August 23, 2003 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1348 words
Byline:   By RICHARD W. STEVENSON and EDMUND L. ANDREWS
Dateline: BURBANK, Wash., Aug. 22  
Body


President Bush ordered the Treasury Department today to block and freeze the assets of six top leaders of the militant Palestinian group Hamas and five charities based outside the United States that administration officials said help finance Hamas. 
     Mr. Bush said he was taking the action in response to Hamas's claim of responsibility for the bus bombing in Israel on Tuesday that killed 20 people. 
 "By claiming responsibility for the despicable act of terror on Aug. 19, Hamas has reaffirmed that it is a terrorist organization committed to violence against Israelis and to undermining progress toward peace between Israel and the Palestinian people," Mr. Bush said in a written statement issued by the White House as the president toured a dam here.
The assets affected in the United States will probably be small, but today's action was politically significant. It is the first time that the United States has gone beyond acting against the military wing of Hamas and tried to shut down the political wing that provides social services and relief assistance.
Mr. Bush's announcement is a victory for Ariel Sharon, the Israeli prime minister, and other officials who have argued for years that charitable groups tied to Hamas serve as a conduit for financing terrorism. And Hamas has been staunchly opposed to the so-called road map, the American-led peace plan that lays out the foundation for creating a Palestinian state in coexistence with Israel.
In taking this action, Mr. Bush risks fueling anti-American anger among Palestinians who not only depend on assistance from Hamas but also see it as an integral part of their lives. Hamas also has close ties to Arab leaders throughout the Middle East, and many of its biggest financial supporters come from the wealthy elite of Saudi Arabia. 
The president's move could also open another rift between the United States and Europe, because European leaders have thus far made a careful distinction between the military and political wings of Hamas. The Europeans contend that the organization's charitable institutions provide much-needed services -- and hope -- to destitute Palestinians.
The United States will need European support if its freeze is to have any practical effect, because four of the five charities cited today are based in European countries while the fifth is based in Lebanon.
In Washington, a senior administration official conceded that the organizations had few if any assets in the United States.
"Money that goes into the right pocket is the same as money that goes into the left pocket," the official said. "We have contended that terrorist organizations like this are committed to terrorism through and through."
European officials were reluctant to comment on the matter today, but no European nation has publicly endorsed the freeze. 
The administration took the action as the United States scrambled to keep Mr. Bush's peace plan from collapsing in the aftermath of bombing on Tuesday and the declaration on Wednesday by Hamas that it considered its declared cease-fire with Israel to be over.
Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, told reporters flying here on Air Force One before the release of the statement on Hamas that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, continued to make calls to officials in the region.
"Our focus is on getting the parties back together so that they can work to resolve these issues, that they can work to address these matters together," Mr. McClellan said.
Asked whether Israel should show restraint in its response to the bombing, he said all the parties, including Israel, "need to keep in mind the consequences of the actions that they take."
But he also suggested that the administration's focus was on pressing the Palestinian Authority and the new prime minister, Mahmoud Abbas, to make good on commitments to begin dismantling terrorist groups.
"I can't emphasize the point enough, that if we are going to move forward, continue moving forward on the peace process, terrorism must end, and people must act to dismantle terrorist organizations," Mr. McClellan said.
Mr. Bush, who has taken an increasingly high profile in the Middle East peace effort and whose rationale for war with Iraq included an assertion that it could help bring peace between Israelis and Palestinians, did not mention the issue in his one public address here.
American officials made it clear that their attempt to increase the pressure on Hamas was based on its apparent role in the Jerusalem bombing. copy
The United States has already frozen the assets of charities in the United States that were tied to Hamas. In December 2001, the government froze the assets of the Dallas-based Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development, accusing it of acting as a front for terrorism. The group had been collecting as much as $13 million in donations in some years, primarily from Muslims in the United States.
The charities cited today are all based outside the United States, and experts said that most of them were fairly well-recognized organizations that help finance a wide variety of social services and relief efforts in the Palestinian territories.
Two of the organizations, the Committee for Welfare and Relief for Palestine in France and the Palestinian Relief Association in Switzerland, have been raising and disbursing money since at least the early 1990's, according to the Treasury Department. 
According to the Treasury Department, the two groups worked with more than a dozen relief organizations in the West Bank and Gaza as well as in Palestinian refugee camps in Jordan and Lebanon.
The Hamas leaders cited by the Bush administration included Sheik Ahmed Yassin, the spiritual leader of Hamas in Gaza, and Abdel Aziz Rantisi, another Gaza official. 
American officials conceded that most if not all of the organizations provided money for relief. But they contended today that the groups also served as fund-raising conduits for Hamas's terrorist activities.
Jonathan Weiner, a senior State Department official under President Clinton who dealt with terrorist financing, said today's action would be a provocative challenge to the European governments.
"It is laying down the gauntlet to the Europeans," Mr. Weiner said. "Here for the first time they have have demanded to go after Hamas's political organization in Europe."
A senior official, speaking on condition of anonymity, insisted today that some European nations had already signed on to the freeze. But administration officials flatly refused to say which nations had agreed to help or even how many were involved.

Chart: "THE MONEY TRAIL -- The 5 Groups Cited by the U.S. for Supporting Hamas"
The United States said yesterday that it wanted to freeze the assets of five groups that raised money on behalf of the militant Palestinian group Hamas.

COMMITTEE FOR WELFARE AND RELIEF FOR PALESTINE and PALESTINIAN RELIEF ASSOCIATION
Based in France and Switzerland, respectively, the two groups are the primary fund-raisers for Hamas. The first works with relief organizations in the West Bank and Gaza. The second collects money from mosques and Islamic centers, which it transfers to Hamas's subsidiaries. Khalid al-Shuli is president of both organizations.

PALESTINIAN RELIEF AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
Based in Britain, the group has been used to hide the flow of money to Hamas, the Treasury said, and is also the fund-raising coordinator for Hamas.

PALESTINIAN ASSOCIATION IN AUSTRIA
Hamas's leader in Austria controls this group. The money is intended to support members of Hamas and is funneled through other charities in Lebanon, the West Bank and Gaza, or other areas of the Middle East, to ensure the transfer of funds is undetected, the Treasury said.

SANABIL ASSOCIATION FOR RELIEF AND DEVELOPMENT
Based in Sidon, Sanabil receives money raised by major Hamas-affiliated charities in Europe and the Middle East and channels it to Hamas. Hamas recruits members from the religious and the poor by extending charity from organizations like Sanabil.

(Source by Treasury Department)(pg. A6)

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


An article on Aug. 23 about President Bush's order to the Treasury Department to block and freeze the assets of Hamas, the militant Palestinian group, misstated the day Hamas formally abandoned its declared cease-fire with Israel. It was Aug. 21, not Aug. 20.
Correction-Date: September 4, 2003

Load-Date: August 23, 2003


End of Document