THE LAST U.S. HOSTAGE;
From Iran to U.S., a Hint of Good Will
The New York Times
December 5, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Column 3;; News Analysis
Length: 1262 words
Byline: ELAINE SCIOLINO,

ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 4
Body


The release of Terry Anderson closes a painful, eight-year chapter of America's experience with hostage taking in Lebanon and removes the most serious obstacle to an improvement in the relationship between Washington and Teheran.
Throughout the period when Americans were held hostage by Iranian-backed groups in Lebanon -- even during the ill-fated deals to exchange arms for hostages -- United States policy was to keep Iran at arms length, resolved that there could be no fundamental change in Washington's attitude until the last American went free.
It now seems evident that the freeing of all the American hostages in Lebanon and the reported deal to let the remaining two Germans go free soon came at the initiative of Iran, which in recent months has repeatedly stated its desire to broaden its economic and political contacts with the West.
The Iranians knew that their welcome in the West awaited the release of the remaining hostages, since it had long been established that the radical Shiite Muslim groups holding the Westerners in Lebanon were financially and spirtually linked to Iran.
 
Bush Is Cautious
 Whatever his ultimate plans for dealing with Iran, President Bush reacted cautiously today. He praised the United Nations, Syria, Iran and Lebanon for their help in freeing the hostages, but noted that the story was not over. Two German hostages are still being held in Lebanon, Arabs and Palestinians are being held by Israel, and information about hostages and prisoners who may have died in captivity has yet to be supplied.
When asked about a possible resumption in relations between the United States and Iran, Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, equivocated in statements that reflected the Administration's ambivalence toward Teheran. "It's impossible to define the future," he replied, but then cited Mr.  Bush's inaugural pledge to Iran that "Good will begets good will." Then he qualified the remark, adding that the Teheran Government has not divorced itself from state-supported terrorism. "Nevertheless, they are still a terrorist state and there's still no change in that," he said.
 
U.S. Ambivalence
 This ambivalence was evident in recent American dealings with Iran. Two weeks ago, the United States paid Iran $278 million for undelivered Iranian-owned, American-made arms that had been prevented from being shipped to Iran after the fall of the Shah in 1979. But also, in recent months, the United States has blocked the sale of British-made planes built with American components to Iran and urged India not to build a nuclear plant for Iran.
Iran was allowed to sell limited amounts of its oil to American companies, but only to help fund a special escrow account at The Hague used to pay American claims stemming from Iran's seizure of the United States Embassy in Teheran in 1979. A number of European governments have declined to sign large projects with Iran, a situation that Iranian officials attributed to American spoiling.
The assassination of a former Iranian Prime Minister, Shahpur Bakhtiar, in Paris this year, the slaying of other Iranian opposition figures around the world, and the death order for the author Salman Rushdie, which Teheran has refused to lift after the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, all contribute to keeping Iran on the State Department's list of countries that support terrorism. But inclusion on the terrorism list does not always mean much more than a number of bothersome economic sanctions.
Syria also remains on the list, yet the Government of President Hafez al-Assad has won praise from Washington for its part in the American-organized alliance against Iraq during the Persian Gulf war and in the American-sponsored Middle East peace talks.
Iran still has "several hundred" revolutionary guards in Lebanon and still finances some of the Muslim fundamentalist groups linked to the captors, American intelligence officials say.
Amid the rejoicing, there also remains an unease that Middle Eastern terrorism is by no means over. There is no certainty that another group, at another time, will not snatch another Westerner from the Beirut streets. Assessments by counterterrorist experts in various agencies of the Bush Administration range from cautious optimism that the groups that held the hostages for so long will now turn to more productive projects to outright cynicism that the political situation in the region may unleash an even more virulent strain of freelance terrorism.
 
A Major Victory
 Nevertheless, today's release represents a major victory: for the United Nations, whose months of quiet, often daring negotiations have paid off; for Iran, whose global image as a reliable political and economic partner is improved; and for the United States, which can now craft a regional policy in the Middle East unencumbered by the wearisome hostage issue.
The negotiations, brokered by the United Nations, were made possible and eventually succeeded because of a confluence of factors that made taking hostages an unprofitable proposition.
The most important reason was that Iran, which enjoyed considerable although uneven influence over the captors of the Americans, decided that its own economic reconstruction and links to the West superseded its radical aims in Lebanon. Teheran's religious leadership, in the aftermath of the Gulf war saw Iraq's defeat as an opportunity to strengthen Iran's own regional stature via more conventional diplomacy and therefore removed its plans for exporting the Muslim revolution from the Government's agenda.
 
Lost of Soviet Aid
 Second, the collapse of the Soviet Union made it apparent that no Arab country would have a Soviet-supplied army with the latest modern technology or would benefit very much from Moscow's patronage. Syria, which for years had used Lebanon for its own terrorist aims, decided to buy into games played by American rules: the coalition in the gulf war and the Arab-Israeli peace process.
Third, a Syrian-Lebanese treaty of cooperation expanded Syria's control over Lebanese affairs, helping to restore stability to the country.
Fourth, the immediate reason for the capture of some of the Western hostages in Lebanon -- and once a non-negotiable demand for their release -- evaporated overnight when, in the confusion of the Iraqi seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, 15 prisoners who were jailed in Kuwait for terrorist activities were set free.
Finally, the relentless efforts of Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar and one of his deputies, Giandomenico Picco, to seize what they perceived as an opening in Teheran and mediate an agreement with all the parties that facilitated the breakthrough.
Still, there has been no resolution of many of the issues that led to hostage-taking in the first place: reducing the influence of the United States in the region, bridging the gap between rich and poor and creating a balance of power with Israel. That reality has led Administration specialists in counterterrorism, granted, the most pessimistic interpreters of hostage-related events, to suspect that the hostage-taking era may not be over.
In the view of the Administration, the release of the last American hostage does not make Lebanon a more benign place. A State Department advisory warning American citizens to avoid all travel to Lebanon is still in place, and United States passports are not valid for travel to, in or through Lebanon. Officials acknowledge that they can give no assurances that more Americans will not be taken hostage. Said one senior Administration official, "They could seize hostages tomorrow."

Load-Date: December 5, 1991


End of Document