The Israeli Air Raid Cannot Be Condoned
The New York Times
October 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk; OP-ED
Length: 634 words
Byline: By Lloyd N. Cutler; Lloyd N. Cutler, a lawyer, was counsel to President Jimmy Carter.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


I am troubled about the idea that a nation whose citizens are victimized by terrorists has the right to hunt and kill anyone it believes to be responsible anywhere he can be found. That is Israel's justification for its air raid on the Palestine Liberation Organization headquarters in Tunisia. While the Administration has reserved judgment on the Tunisian facts, it sometimes supports the principle the Israelis have invoked.
My trouble is not merely that armed reprisals beget even larger acts of terrorism, as we saw Monday with the hijacking of an Italian cruise ship. Nor is it merely that the weight of international law is probably against the hunt-and-kill type of reprisal. My trouble goes much deeper than that.
Hunt-and-kill is a principle we totally reject in our own Constitution and legal system. It is a principle we would never allow any other nation to follow on our territory.
This can be proved by three hypothetical questions:
* If we believe that one of the Iranian hostage-takers or the hijackers of Trans World Airlines Flight 847 had entered the United States, would we allow our Delta Force commandos or the Federal Bureau of Investigation to hunt down and kill him without arrest, indictment or fair trial?
* If the Sandinista Government believed that a contra leader in Miami was responsible for a terrorist incident in Nicaragua, would we tolerate a Sandinista assassination of that leader on a Miami street?
* If the British Government or an Ulster Protestant militia group believed that an Irish-American in Brooklyn had helped to fund or direct an Irish Republican Army attack in Belfast, would we allow them to car-bomb the apartment house where the Irish-American lived?
The answers to these hypothetical questions are self-evident. In every case, we would insist on arrest and either trial under our laws or court-approved extradition for trial where the terrorist act occurred. We would never allow our own Government or foreign nations or groups to kill mere suspects on our territory before trial. Whether or not such an act of reprisal would offend international law, it would most certainly violate our own Constitution and the Bible itself. ''It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him.'' (Acts 25:16, cited by Chief Justice Earl Warren in a Supreme Court case.) How, then, can we assert the right to commit such a crime on the territory of another friendly sovereign state, or condone such action by any other state? I submit that on reflection, we cannot.
It would be bad enough if the reprisal were so surgical that only the suspected terrorist was killed, and that if fairly tried, he would certainly have been convicted. But armed reprisals don't work that way. Do the Israelis seriously contend that in addition to the alleged assassins who are under arrest in Cyprus, all those killed in Tunisia were also criminally responsible, and that all of them were certain to have been convicted in a fair trial? The question answers itself.
Terrorism is the bitter fruit of perceived injustice. It began in Czarist Russia as a principled form of protesting against tyranny by assassinating the tyrant. It is now used to protest against democracies. It has spread beyond killing those in public office to the deliberate slaughter of innocent people.
We can and must deter terrorism, but not by practicing a form of terrorism ourselves. We have got to find a more civilized way. When we can identify suspected terrorists in this or any other law-abiding nation, we cannot punish them before arrest and trial. These are not just procedural niceties. They are at the heart of the liberties that terrorism tries to destroy.


End of Document