THE POSTPONED REVOLUTION OF ROBERT MUGABE
The New York Times
September 6, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk; letter
Length: 386 words
Body


To the Editor:
The visit to the United States of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe should be the occasion of an objective assessment of the situation in his embattled country. The American Zimbabwe Rhodesian Association is maintaining its interest in the present Government in the hope that constitutional governance can be preserved. However, it faces the facts as they are and tries not to engage in fanciful hopes and fantasies. election that was marked by massive intimidation. I personally witnessed the events preceding the election and saw the affidavits that attested to the depredations, the threats and even the killings by more 5,100 Mugabe guerrillas who violated the cease-fire and roamed the countryside in their acts of voter intimidation. Lord Soames, the British Governor, had threatened to restrict Mugabe if he persevered, but his will collapsed when Zambia, Tanzania and Mozambique threatened to continue the war.
AN-A
Since coming to power, Mugabe has put on hold the implementation of the more draconic provisions of the Marxist Manifesto he issued in January 1980. However, he has not abandoned it. His top aides have repeatedly assured his supporters that he needs time and patience to implement his revolution. He must keep, for the present at least, the enterprising white tribe to keep the economy from collapsing, as it did in Machel's Mozambique. However, Government-run radio and television belch forth uninterrupted Communist propaganda.
Mugabe's maintaining his present position also aids him in keeping in line his former partner in the Patriotic Front, Joshua Nkomo, who remains poised and ready to strike. While Mugabe has a Chinese connection, Nkomo is Moscow's real favorite. His forces are intact both in Zambia and in Zimbabwe and are better organized, with Russian advisers.
Some brave Rhodesians, both black and white, have been holding on in observing the Lancaster House agreements, into which they were lured and which sanitized terrorism.
We should not be congratulating ourselves on the situation in Zimbabwe. It represents a victory for Marxism and for terrorism.  Instead we must be careful observers and hope that somehow the efforts of good men will lead to constitutional government.
ROBERT MORRIS, Chairman, American Zimbabwe Rhodesian Association, Mantoloking, N.J., Aug. 21, 1980


End of Document