THE TERRORISM SCENARIO
 Philadelphia Daily News
OCTOBER 15, 2003 Wednesday 4STAR EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: LOCAL; Pg. 06
Length: 519 words
Byline: JOHN M. BAER
Body


OK, HOW ABOUT this?
What if - as suggested by a former aide to a Republican U.S. senator extremely supportive of aggressive domestic anti-terrorism efforts - Mayor Street's bug is about Muslim money and homeland security?
"If they are looking at mosques in big cities and influential Muslims for links to money streams to terrorist groups, they'd say nothing other than, 'It's not campaign-related,' " the former aide says.
Which is what they said.
And, according to reports quoting federal sources, the mayor's probe is about city contracts, and at least one held by a prominent Muslim leader.
Is the idea a stretch?
Yeah, probably.
But is it much more of a stretch than the notion a mayor 25 years in public life without any real public scandal decides in probably his last election to take a trip to the dark side?
I'm not so sure.
There's no question the feds have interest in Muslim groups across the nation as possible sources of terrorist funding.
And while there's no indication Muslim leaders in Philly are being looked at in this way, it seems to me the Bush administration's FBI, Justice, Treasury, et al., looks at anybody any way it wants.
Federal inquiries into Muslim money started two years ago - the same time the probe tied to Street's bug reportedly started - and are described in published accounts at the time as a "broad financial dragnet."
Did a Philly imam get snagged in the net?
Officially, of course, nobody says nuthin'.
But among the few things that now seem solid - and, granted, much of what's reported is "sourced" information - is that Muslim Imam Shamsud-din Ali, a supporter and friend of the mayor with government contracts, a major mosque and allegedly $4 million in "missing" money from a Muslim school he runs, was raided by the feds last week.
This was the day after the mayor's bug was found.
One could draw some reasonable conclusions about whether the raid is related to the mayor's bug and probe.
Plus, indications the mayor's probe is focused on contracts, favoritism or pay-to-play stuff, doesn't preclude the possibility it started with a look at Muslim groups, then led to other places.
And if the feds, from U.S. Attorney Patrick Meehan to Attorney General John Ashcroft, continue to ignore calls - from Street, Sam Katz, Gov. Rendell, this newspaper and others - for public disclosure about the specific nature of the probe, what better cloak to wrap silence in than matters of national security?
Efforts to save the nation from acts of terror easily outstrip sensitivity to a mere mayor's race, which might even explain the seemingly questionable timing of the bug.
Look, we're all about protecting our citizens, regardless of local political consequence. But if our efforts inadvertently cast a cloud over a Democrat seeking re-election in the largest city of a key state in the next presidential race, well, hey, so much the better - a twofer.
Sounds crazy, I know.
But in a race of firebombs that didn't explode and bugs that got debugged, I'm willing to at least suggest we haven't seen it all. *
Send e-mail to baerj@phillynews.com.  
For recent columns, go to
http://go.philly.com/baer. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
Inquirer photo
Are Attorney General John Ashcroft (left) and U.S. Attorney Patrick Meehan behind the bugging?
Associated Press

Load-Date: August 17, 2005


End of Document