The Trouble With Terrorism By Russell Baker
The New York Times
February 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 6; Page 15, Column 1; Magazine Desk
Length: 800 words
Body


It's always seemed odd to me that after a group of terrorists commits a vile and odious deed they rush messages to the public to claim credit for it. Sometimes, competitive terrorists who had nothing to do with the hellishness call up editors or broadcasters and mendaciously claim credit for it anyhow.
This is one of the main reasons I haven't taken up the terrorism profession despite the glamour attaching to it these days. My natural instinct after doing something shameful is not to rush into the street boasting about it but to put on dark glasses and head for the next county, hoping nobody notices I've been in the neighborhood.
Russell Baker examines "The Trouble With Terrorism"Say the cashier at Mannheimer's Delicatesse n gives me a dollar too much in change and I keep it instead of handi ng it back. Do I rush home and phone the networks so they can tell the world I am a chiseler?
Of course not, and neither does anybody else except terrorists.  You and I might happily clutch the dishonorable dollar as a just windfall in an inflation-ravaged world, but if Mrs. Mannheimer dropped by while we were gloating and called us deadbeats and demanded her dollar back, we'd feel thoroughly ashamed, wouldn't we?
I know I would. A terrorist, on the other hand, wouldn't feel ashamed. He w ould seize Mrs. Mannheimer and squirrel her away in a safe hideout, then phone the papers to claim credit for being a kidnapper.
Here's another reason I haven't considered a career in terrorism. I don't think I could stand to kidnap people. Think of the tedium after you've got Mrs. Mannheimer in your power.
First, you have to find a secret place to hide her. You can't keep her in chains at home without having your wife raise an eyebrow, so immediately you have to think about paying a second rent. At New York rental prices, this is suicidal. Better to return Mrs. Mannheimer's dollar, slip her a sawbuck for a promise to keep quiet and send her back to the deli.
But say you're a real terrorist, maybe a leader in the dreaded Lox Escadrille which is waging terrorist warfare against the injustice of delicatessen prices. In that case, I suppose you'd have a secret place to keep kidnapped people. Imagine having to sit there day after day with Mrs. Mannheimer to make sure she doesn't bolt.
I can't even stand watching television more than eight hours at a stretch. Watching Mrs. Mannheimer day and night - oh, boy! Sooner or later, she'd have to be tried by a people's court and convicted of committing outrageous markups on pastrami or cole slaw.
The thought of it cools my enthusiasm for the romance of terrorism. As a member of a people's court, naturally I'd be an idealist and so would have to listen fairly to Mrs. Mannheimer's defense.
She would probably concede that the salami is outrageously overpriced, but defend the markup on the grounds that she has to squeeze the salami buyer a trifle to cover the losses she incurs by keeping a stock of slow-selling pickled pigs' feet.
Just imagining her argument is enough to make me vote ''not guilty'' right now, and of course you can't vote anybody not guilty if you're a terrorist. Terrorists are like Southern judges. They believe that Draconian punishment improves the human race. Poor Mrs.  Mannheimer. I don't hold much hope for her future after the people's court has kicked me out of the Lox Escadrille for lacking principle.
It's lack of principle that disqualifies me for work in terrorism.  Even if I did like to boast about doing vile deeds and would rather watch kidnapped prisoners than Johnny Carson, I'd be incompetent for the work.
I don't think you can succeed in terrorism without a superhuman quantity of principle. You have to believe in your own principles so strongly that you have no strength left to care about anybody else's principles.
The guiding principles differ from group to group. The Ulster Irish proudly commit terrible crimes upon each other for the principle of political justice. Middle Easterners can casually murder children in the cause of international justice. Western European terrorists kill more or less at random out of faith that the human race can be perfected and man led to a state of happiness by having his neighbor hurried to the grave.
To succeed at terrorism you have to come equipped with principles so noble that you're willing to phone the papers and boast about how odiously you've behaved to uphold them. In the past, distasteful conduct in service to lofty principle has been the exclusive right of nations. With the spreading popularity of high-minded terrorism, however, it threatens to become the individual's romantic equivalent of war.
Nations having failed to perfect humanity despite considerable carnage, terrorists have now decided to step in and do the job right. Too bad, Mrs. Mannheimer.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document