The Latest: Terrorism fears not on minds of New Year's crowd
The Daily Cardinal: University of Wisconsin - Madison
January 1, 2016 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 375 words
Body


LAS VEGAS - The latest from New Year's Eve in Las Vegas (all times local):
12:13 a.m.
Sprays of gold glittery fireworks are lighting up the already well-lit Las Vegas.
An eight-minute fireworks show shot from seven casino rooftops erupted on time for 2016.
It's a firework-filled new year.
___
10:05 p.m.
Teresa Fauscette is willing to bet money in this betting capital that terrorists wouldn't target the Las Vegas Strip on New Year's Eve.
The 29-year-old from Tennessee said Thursday night she was not worried in the slightest despite heightened global security concerns and Las Vegas police ramping up staffing and patrols during the event.
Neither was Robert Tafoya of Salt Lake City, Utah, who says the "threat of terrorism is so remote."
The Las Vegas Strip is closed to car traffic for the night. Tourism officials expect 332,000 people to pack the boulevard and fill downtown's Fremont Street.
___
9:15 p.m.
A wide-open Las Vegas Boulevard intersection on New Year's Eve is doubling as a wedding dance floor for a brand new bride and groom.
Bill and Christa Cooper of Kentucky danced their first dance at Flamingo Avenue with a bit of Frank Sinatra crooning in the distance surrounded by family.
The Las Vegas Strip is slowly filling with some of the 332,000 people expected to arrive on the boulevard and in downtown's Fremont Street hours before fireworks explode from several casino rooftops.
Bill Cooper says he proposed to his new bride a month ago in the Eiffel Tower at Paris Las Vegas.
___
11:05 a.m.
A-list performers on New Year's Eve are expected to shine as bright as the eight-minute firework spectacle shot from several towering Las Vegas Strip rooftops.
Bruno Mars at The Cosmopolitan, Maroon 5 at Mandalay Bay and Nikki Minaj at Drai's Nightclub will keep revelers entertained before and after midnight.
Tourism officials expect 332,000 people to crowd the traffic-free Strip and squeeze underneath Fremont Street's massive video canopy on Thursday night.
Partyers also can find a host of tribute bands along downtown's Fremont Street, including Fan Halen, No Duh and Red Not Chili Peppers.
It'll be a near-freezing New Year's Eve come midnight. The National Weather Service forecasts temperatures dropping from the mid-40s to mid-30s by 2016's arrival.

Load-Date: January 17, 2018


End of Document