The New Face of Terrorism
The New York Times
January 4, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 816 words
Byline: By Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon; 

Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon were, respectively, director and senior director for counterterrorism on the National Security Council staff from 1998-99.

By Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon;  Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon were, respectively, director and senior director for counterterrorism on the National Security Council staff from 1998-99.
Body


Waking up in the year 2000 to face nothing worse than the debris in Times Square, some may have decided that Washington had hyped the prospect of an attack by Osama bin Laden and his allies beyond reason.
But that conclusion is wrong. The danger posed by Mr. bin Laden and like-minded radical Islamists will not fade into memory along with fears of Y2K power failures and sewer backups. On the contrary: aggressive intelligence and law enforcement efforts by many countries may have precluded attacks over the last few weeks -- as in Jordan -- but the forces now personified in Western minds by Mr. bin Laden are here to stay.
Most important, even if he were thrown into jail tomorrow, the threat would persist and grow. To understand why, it is important to dispel a few myths about him.
Osama bin Laden's organization is entirely his own creation. Without him, his followers would be lost.
Mr. bin Laden's achievement has not only been to build cells in more than 50 countries, many of them self-sufficient, but to deepen bonds between extremist groups already pursuing terrorism around the globe. Indeed, the men who hijacked the India Airlines flight last month sought the release of three Kashmiri militants, at least one of whom was a leader of Harakat ul-Ansar, a group that trains in Mr. bin Laden's camps in Afghanistan.
In the Caucasus, the small core of Islamists who staged an insurrection in the Russian province of Dagestan earlier this year were led by a guerrilla known as Khattab, a Saudi exile associated with Mr. bin Laden.
Finally, American officials claim that Ahmed Ressam, who was arrested in Port Angeles, Wash., allegedly with a car full of explosives, has ties to the Armed Islamic Group, a guerrilla organization fighting the military-dominated government in Algeria. This group also trains in the bin Laden camps. Mr. bin Laden's feat is to have made all these fighters -- and radicals from a score of other countries -- brothers in arms.
Osama bin Laden sets the worldwide objectives for all Islamic terrorist groups.
True, he picks targets and sets near-term strategy, but the larger agenda predates him and will survive him. Mr. bin Laden has merely tapped into a powerful and growing wave of religiously motivated hatred of the West. This hatred drove Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and Ramzi Ahmed Yousef to mastermind the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993, one of several crimes for which they are now imprisoned in the United States. Indeed, before Mr. bin Laden issued his 1998 fatwa urging Muslims to "kill Americans and their allies," Sheik Rahman called for a holy struggle against American interests around the globe.
These terrorists are highly motivated, not by a cult of personality, but by a world view in which they are the vanguard of a divinely ordained battle to liberate Muslim lands. This outlook, and the violence at its core -- rejected by most modern Islamic authorities and anathema to most Muslims -- reflects how deeply alienated these extremists are.
Without Osama bin Laden's $200 million personal fortune, his followers would be nothing more than fanatical paupers.
Terrorists can now rely on the tens of millions of dollars that flow in annually from sympathetic donors in the Arab world through a complex system of financing.
Terrorist groups rely on contributions from wealthy religious conservatives in the Persian Gulf as well as from money diverted from the zakat -- the mosque collection plate -- on several continents. Money is often funneled through reputable charities into the hands of operatives. For instance, the World Trade Center bombing was financed through money coming from the Alkifah Refugee Center in Brooklyn. And the system of funneling money through charities has improved greatly since then.
In the past, terrorists have typically sought to achieve their political goals through carefully calibrated violence. They knew that excessive brutality would deny them the place they sought at the bargaining table. The Palestinian Liberation Organization under Yasir Arafat is the classic example, and the Irish Republican Army's recent course follows this model.
The terrorists allied with Mr. bin Laden do not want a place at the table; they want to shatter the table. They are not constrained by secular political concerns. Their objective is not to influence, but to kill, and in large numbers -- hence their declared interest in acquiring chemical and even nuclear weapons.
It is just this combination -- religious motivation and a desire to inflict catastrophic damage -- that is new to terrorism.
Before 1990, the State Department's annual terrorism survey noted few religiously motivated attacks. Since then, this number has grown, and with it the number of deaths has increased sharply. That such attacks did not increase during the first days of the new year is no reason to think this trend, or the terrorists, will go away.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 4, 2000


End of Document