THE PRICE OF APPEASEMENT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 28, 1992, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1992 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 2B
Length: 588 words
Body


A year ago, utterly defeated Iraqi forces were retreating from Kuwait under the watchful eyes of American tank crews and President Bush was being hailed as a world leader who had stood tall against unprovoked aggression. Today, however, the image of the resolute commander-in-chief has given way to an impression of an uncertain, inept president who stands for nothing in particular. How could Mr. Bush have changed so drastically?  The answer is that he didn't. The war against Iraq was, from a military standpoint, a stunning success. That there was a war at all, however, is an indictment of President Bush's foreign policy, the area in which he is said to be so astute. It was the George Bush we see today, the man with no apparent convictions, who did so much to make the Iraqi invasion possible. True, Mr.  Bush deserves enormous credit for quickly organizing a virtually global trade boycott of Iraq after Saddam Hussein's tanks rolled into Kuwait in August 1990. But that is testimony primarily to his organizational skills, not the vision and effectiveness of his foreign policy.  Iraq invaded Kuwait because the United States, under Mr. Bush and the man he served as vice president, practiced a policy of appeasement right up to the day of the invasion. It began in the early 1980s when the Reagan-Bush administration arbitrarily removed Iraq from the list of countries engaged in terrorism. Then, the U.S. began covertly helping Saddam Hussein build his war machine by arranging for financial aid, providing intelligence assistance, technological aid and, some say, weapons.
In 1987, the United States entered the Iran-Iraq War on Iraq's side - incredibly, after Iraq attacked a U.S.  Navy ship in the Persian Gulf, killing 37 sailors. All of this, President Bush said as recently as Tuesday, he was proud to support as vice president. After the war ended, the U.S. continued to assist Iraq with agricultural credits and loans, seemingly disregarding intelligence reports about Saddam Hussein's missile and chemical weapons arsenal and all but ignoring documented reports of ghastly human rights abuses against the Kurdish minority.  Two efforts in Congress to impose trade sanctions on Iraq for human rights violations - one in 1989 and another in 1990 - were met with fierce resistance from the Bush administration. In fact, State Department officials were on Capitol Hill doing their best to prevent sanctions on the very day Iraq launched its invasion. And the entire world knows that the U.S.  ambassador to Iraq assured Saddam Hussein that the United States would not intervene in the ''border'' dispute between Iraq and Kuwait. Is it any wonder he thought he could get away with grabbing Kuwait?  After the successful military campaign against Iraq, the president proclaimed that the U.S. and its allies had put would-be aggressors on notice as to what to expect - a lesson all Americans hope was learned well.  There was another lesson, but Mr. Bush plainly has not learned it. Appeasing despots who snuff out political opponents and minorities is not only morally reprehensible but doesn't work. It neither helps maintain the regional balance of power for more than a short time nor encourages outlaw regimes to reform themselves.  Nevertheless, Mr. Bush continues to practice what he thinks of as realpolitik, appeasing China despite its brutal repression of political reformers and getting chummy with Syria, one of the world's leading exporters of terrorism. Where will the Bush appeasement policy lead us next?

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document