The Wrong Beat for American Cops
The New York Times
December 16, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL
Length: 379 words
Body


The Reagan Administration's Central American counterterrorism bill repackages a dubious idea derived from a flawed premise. It would earmark $54 million for hardware and training for police in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama and Costa Rica. The hope is to turn bad cops into good cops under the tutelage of Uncle Sam.
Undeniably, Central America's police, underpaid and often overzealous, could benefit from better training. Most of the money would be spent in El Salvador, where the police are coping with a resurgence of urban terrorism. But it is naive to assume that training alone can ''professionalize'' police in societies where civilian authority is feeble, as in El Salvador, or nonexistent, as in Guatemala. The risk of involving the United States with police forces that are capable of torture or other atrocities far outweighs any benefit.
The risk is real. In Uruguay in the 1970's, American-trained policemen tortured leftist suspects, and guerrillas executed a U.S. adviser accused of complicity. In El Salvador last June, a American-trained SWAT team used excessive force to end a hospital strike. The attackers killed a patient and four police guards whom they failed to recognize.
No American training can overcome a failure of local authorities to control the police. Argentina's experience is instructive. ''Disappearances'' and torture were common when its military rulers were waging a dirty war against terrorism. But police behavior improved dramatically when an elected president took command in 1983. No special training was required to end police lawlessness.
By contrast, El Salvador's well-meaning but weak Government deals as a supplicant with security forces it only nominally controls. It isn't police manuals that need changing so much as attitudes - as happened when President Reagan finally made clear that if death-squad killings didn't cease, U.S. aid would.
In 1974, after the ugly business in Uruguay, Congress barred further aid for training foreign police. Already circumvented in El Salvador, the restriction was lifted this year. Now, in the name of combatting terrorism, the Administration wants to revive police training in a whole region. Unless it can make a better case for the operation, Congress ought to keep it on hold.

Graphic

 
Editorial


End of Document