The Nature of the Terrorism Threat
The Chronicle of Higher Education
August 15, 2008 Friday


Copyright 2008 The Chronicle of Higher Education All Rights Reserved
Section: THE CHRONICLE REVIEW; Pg. 2; Vol. 54; No. 49
Length: 1157 words
Byline: Compiled by EVAN R. GOLDSTEIN
Body


A heated war of words has erupted between two prominent scholars of terrorism. The dispute began in the pages of Foreign Affairs, where Bruce Hoffman, a professor in the security-studies program at Georgetown University, wrote a withering review of Marc Sageman's recent book, Leaderless Jihad: Terror Networks in the Twenty-First Century (University of Pennsylvania Press). Hoffman's main knock on Sageman, a sociologist and former CIA case officer who is now the first scholar in residence with the New York Police Department, is that his book understates the threat still posed by Al Qaeda and its leader, Osama bin Laden.
Sageman argues that while Al Qaeda remains a menace that must be confronted, the real threat to the West is now much more diffuse, homegrown, and self-organizing than it was in 2001. Islamic terrorism has evolved over the past few years into a new wave of largely autonomous Al Qaeda sympathizers -- "bunches of guys," Sageman calls them -- who hatch their plots over the Internet and from within Western countries. Hoffman counters that because Al Qaeda's leadership has reconstituted itself in Pakistan's tribal frontier region, bin Laden and his top deputies should remain the primary focus of American military and intelligence efforts.
So what is the nature of the terrorism threat? And of the divide within security studies? The dispute has been playing out in Foreign Affairs and in the blogosphere.
Bruce Hoffman: Although these informal local terrorist groups are certainly a critical part of the global terrorist network, Leaderless Jihad's salient weakness is its insistence that this dimension represents the entire threat facing the United States today. This shortcoming can largely be explained by Sageman's brusque dismissal of much of the existing academic literature on terrorism  .
Defeating Al Qaeda will require analysis grounded in sound empirical judgment and not blinded by provocative theories, seductive methodologies, or wishful thinking. Moreover, the United States and its allies must refocus their attention on Afghanistan and Pakistan, where Al Qaeda began to collapse after 9/11 but has now regrouped. And they must recognize that Al Qaeda cannot be defeated by military means alone. Success will require a dual strategy of systematically destroying and weakening enemy capabilities -- that is, continuing to kill or capture senior Al Qaeda leaders -- and breaking the cycle of terrorist recruitment among Sageman's radicalized "bunches of guys." Only by destroying the organization's leadership and disrupting the continued resonance of its radical message can the United States and its allies defeat Al Qaeda. (Foreign Affairs)
Marc Sageman: Hoffman portrays Leaderless Jihad as a simple-minded polemic and ignores the subtleties of its arguments. In the process, he neglects its main point, namely, that the threat from Al Qaeda and its progeny has evolved over time. The process of radicalization is still going on but now proceeds in a hostile, post-9/11, wired environment, resulting in a social structure comprised of disconnected groups.   I show how the Internet has enabled a new wave of terrorist wannabes, who now constitute the main -- but not the entire -- threat to the West. However, this new wave has been completely neglected in recent analyses of terrorism; I can find no other source providing a comprehensive examination of this new phenomenon. This is why my book is focused more on the new than the old. Missing the evolution of the threat condemns us to keep fighting the last war.
My work attempts a paradigm shift toward a new, evidence-based standard in terrorism research. Hoffman accurately quotes my description of much of the existing literature as amounting to "nothing more than arguments made for the sake of scoring political points." His review is an excellent illustration of this practice. (Foreign Affairs)
Matthew Levitt, senior fellow, The Washington Institute for Near East Policy: Capturing or killing bin Laden would be a major psychological blow to Al Qaeda (and perhaps more so to the local and independent but like-minded fellow travelers), and it would be a significant accomplishment and morale booster for the Western coalition, but it would do nothing to actually harm, diminish the capabilities of, or undercut support for Al Qaeda. Al Qaeda today has outgrown bin Laden. (UN Dispatch)
Paul Cruickshank, fellow, Center on Law and Security, New York University School of Law: Bruce Hoffman, for my money, is absolutely correct to stress that Al Qaeda Central (i.e. Al Qaeda operatives trained in Pakistan) poses the real danger. A few small "homegrown" attacks are not going to tear apart the social fabric in the United States.
I'm going to take a different view to Matt Levitt on the importance of bin Laden. Since he founded Al Qaeda 20 years ago, bin Laden has been its inspirational force and key unifying figure. The latter role has been especially important. Al Qaeda's ability to launch operations of global scope depends on being able to unite different jihadist factions and groups, but such factions have had a tendency to quarrel with each other -- to disastrous effect -- about even minor theological and ideological differences.  
At a time when Al Qaeda is coming under increasing criticism for its tactics from a range of other jihadist actors, bin Laden is arguably the one figure who has the charisma and appeal in jihadist circles to push back. (UN Dispatch)
Anthony Bubalo, program director for West Asia, Lowy Institute for International Policy: Unlike immediately after 9/11, when anything could be done and any amount of money spent, some tougher intellectual, policy, and resource choices confront not just a future U.S. administration, but other Western governments as well. Against this background, Hoffman vs. Sageman could, insofar as it helps define the nature of the threat, become a touchstone for how those strategic and counterterrorism policy and resource choices will be made. (The Interpreter)
David Betz, senior lecturer, King's College London: The ability to see the threat as multidimensional is not absent among the former U.S. intelligence and current U.S. security practitioners I've spoken to. To a person, they are worried about Al Qaeda Central regrouping in Pakistan, about the threat posed by those jihadists currently fighting in Iraq once they return home or are forced to leave because that front closes, and about the growth of diffuse networks peopled by actors who have been radicalized from the ground up. They understand the connectivity involved within the global jihad.  
They also recognize that the task goes beyond protecting the U.S. homeland or U.S. personnel overseas to protecting U.S. interests. And that means engaging not only with Al Qaeda Central at one end and the diffuse network of homegrown radicals at the other, but with all of the actors and groups in between. (Kings of War)

Load-Date: August 14, 2008


End of Document