THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
A Two-Week Journey of Fear
The New York Times
March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk
Length: 324 words
Byline: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim
Body


What started March 2 as a Pakistani domestic flight from Karachi to Peshawar became a terrifying journey into the twilight zone of political terrorism. It finally ended last night on the tarmac in Damascus, Syria.
March 2 hijacking of Pakistani airliner culminating in release of 54 political prisoners reviewed
After enduring 13 days aboard the cramped Boeing 720, longer than any other hijack victims, more than 100 exhausted passengers and crew members were freed by the three Pakistani terrorists. Their release came afterPakistan, accepting whittled-down terrorist demands, freed 54 political prisoners and flew them to Syria. The 54 initially flew on toward Libya, which had agreed to grant asylum to both prisoners and the hijackers. But Libyan Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi abruptly changed his mind, and the plane changed course, refueling in Athens and then returning to Syria, which offered to make good on the Libyan promise of asylum.
For the hijacked passengers, Damascus was the second unscheduled stop. The first was Kabul, Afghanistan. There, the terrorists released 28 hostages, mostly women and children, and began negotiating the fate of the rest while Soviet troops stood by at the airport. On March 6, the hijackers fatally shot one of the hostages, a Pakistani diplomat assigned to Teheran. Three days later, they forced the plane to fly to Damascus. There they freed a flight attendant, two American women and two ill Pakistani men but set repeated deadlines to begin killing their remaining hostages, beginning with three American men.
The terrorists' identity remained murky. President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan said they were members of the ''armed wing'' of the opposition Pakistan People's Party, whose longtime leader, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was overthrown by General Zia in 1977 and executed two years later. The hijackers denied this. Their leader gave the nom de guerre of ''Alamgir,'' meaning ''conqueror of the world.''


End of Document