THE WORLD;
Venting Some Mideast Pressure
The New York Times
May 18, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 280 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim, James F. Clarity and Richard Levine
Body


The Reagan Administration sought last week to avoid strained relations with two of the most powerful Arab nations, Saudi Arabia and Syria, in quite separate situations.
The Administration was trying to overcome the Congressinal vote against the sale of $354 million in arms to Saudi Arabia.
Much of the Congressional opposition to the sale is also strongly pro-Israel. The President is expected to veto the Congressional resolution against the sale, but seeks enough supporters to prevent the two-thirds vote needed to override the veto. The President invited leaders of American Jewish organizations to meet with him tomorrow at the White House, where he was expected to ask them to soften their opposition.
The problem with Syria involves terrorism. After the United States attacked Libya last month, Mr. Reagan indicated the United States might also attack Syria if that country could be proved to have sponsored a terrorist act. Early last week, British and West German investigators said they had strong evidence that Syria plotted a terrorist bombing in West Berlin and an attempt to place a bomb aboard an El Al airliner in London. On Tuesday, a State Department official said the United States ''has no reason to doubt'' Israeli accusations that Syria plotted the El Al incident. On Wednesday, the White House seemed to change its tone on Syria, saying it would be ''premature'' to conclude that Syria was guilty.
Administration officials also said they were pleased by reports that Syria was trying to help gain the release of five American and nine French hostages missing in Lebanon. Mr. Schultz said the raids on Libya had made Syria ''think hard'' about supporting terrorism.


End of Document