The going rate for French hostages
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
December 11, 1987, Friday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 26A; EDITORIAL
Length: 506 words
Body


Because it's almost impossible to pollute a cesspool, French    diplomats may be telling the truth when they say that they "have not    polluted French foreign policy" by making a hostage deal with Iran.
 
     The diplomats certainly cannot deny that French foreign policy has    suddenly become more expensive. The government is paying dearly for the    release of two French journalists who had been held hostage in Lebanon    for almost a year, and the rest of the civilized world may pay a    terrible price as a consequence of the French accord with international    terrorists.
    According to the best reports available, here's the going French    cash rate for the release of two hostages: It begins with a    $ 330-million lump sum that the French prefer to characterize as partial    repayment of a nearly forgotten 13-year-old loan, rather than    out-and-out ransom to Iran. In addition, a British newspaper has    reported that France will provide an unspecified amount of new    financial "aid" to the Beirut region where the hostages had been    held.
 
     The payoff isn't limited to cash. According to other reports,    France has promised to reduce its role in protecting tankers in the    Persian Gulf and to provide indirect help to Iran in circumventing an    international arms embargo designed to bring an end to the Iran-Iraq    war.
 
     Even those concessions to terrorism aren't as contemptible as the    French government's direct bartering in human lives. As part of the    deal, an Iranian embassy official, accused of masterminding a series of    Paris bombings last year, was allowed to return to Tehran. It now turns    out that the French capitulation went even further: French authorities    also have begun rounding up and expelling members of an Iranian exile    group that opposes the Ayatollah Khomeini. The Iranian regime, which    has gone to great lengths to assassinate or otherwise silence    anti-government exiles around the world, surely appreciates the French    government's help in identifying and isolating a likely group of    targets. Thus does France simultaneously reward terrorism and punish    terrorism's opponents.
 
     Some French officials have attempted to defend their cowardice by    arguing that other governments have made similar secret deals with    terrorists. While it's true that the Iran-Contra scandal represented a    serious aberration in American anti-terrorism policy, the subsequent    investigation of that scandal has helped to reinforce the original    policy. So far, there is no indication that the French government    intends to submit its own disastrous decision to similar scrutiny.
 
     The French hostage deal is the first clear-cut violation of the    anti-terrorism agreement forged last year among the major western    industrialized nations. If the French government can't be shamed into    doing what's sensible and right, its partners in that agreement should    consider more tangible ways of punishing it for this act of selfish    duplicity.
 

Load-Date: November 19, 1992


End of Document