THE 'CURSE' OVER ULSTER;
News Analysis
The New York Times
December 10, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk; analysis
Length: 786 words
Byline: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times
Dateline: LONDON, Dec. 9
Body


Once again Northern Ireland and the violence that scars daily life there has seriously embarrassed a British government and heightened the sense of national futility.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who stresses at every opportunity that Ulster is an integral part of the United Kingdom, with citizens sharing all the rights and responsibilities of other Britons, had hoped that the new Ulster parliament would put the province on the road to local self-government. Now she finds herself in the position of having forbidden members of that parliament to travel to London, the capital of the country of which they are said to be fully fledged citizens.
''It is a cursed place,'' one minister said this afternoon. ''No matter what we do there, it turns out to be another calamity.''
LONDON, Dec. 9 - Once again Northern Ireland and the violence that scars daily life there has seriously embarrassed a British government and heightened the sense of national futility.Invitation Stirs Storm
The latest tale of woe began 10 days ago, when Kenneth Livingstone, the leader of the Greater London Council, this city's local government, invited two leaders of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the outlawed Irish Republican Army, to visit him here. There was a storm of protest, but Mr. Livingstone, a combative Labor left-winger whom the popular press habitually calls ''Red Ken,'' stuck to his guns.
''We cannot continue with the absolute hopelessness of going on like this year after year with one horrifying bomb after another either in Ireland or in London,'' he said. ''The Government has to try to find some way of bringing the conflict to an end. To continue to refuse to talk to these groups just prolongs it.''
The visit was to have taken place next week. But on Monday night a bomb went off in a discotheque in Ballykelly, near Londonderry, killing 16 people, including 11 British soldiers. Responsibility for the attack was taken by the Irish National Liberation Army, an offshoot of the Irish Republican Army. The attack brought to 2,264 the number of people killed in Ulster-related violence since 1970, and because of the size of the toll it produced an unusually intense political reaction.
As a result, the Home Secretary, William Whitelaw, decided Wednesday night to ban the visit here of the two Sinn Fein leaders, Gerry Adams and Daniel Morrison. Acting with the approval of Mrs.  Thatcher, he issued orders on the basis of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which empowers him to exclude anyone who ''is or has been concerned, whether in Great Britain or elsewhere, in the commission, preparation or instigation of acts of terrorism.''
 
Decision Called 'Nonsense'
Mr. Morrison was quick to point out the anomaly involved. He said it was ''a nonsense'' for Britain to bar people that it maintained belonged to the same country.
A number of politicians of all parties, including those with former responsibility for Northern Ireland, said Mr. Whitelaw had acted correctly, given advice from the police that the visit ''would have furthered the ends of terrorism.'' But some of them also said privately that Sinn Fein had been handed a propaganda victory.
''The terrorists have been given just what they wanted,'' commented Mrs. Shirley Williams, president of the Social Democratic Party.  Ulster's Protestant politicans, the foes of the I.R.A., were outraged for a different reason. Harold McCusker, the Unionist Member of Parliament for Armagh, denounced the Government's action as ''breathtaking hypocrisy'' and asked why, if Mr. Adams and Mr.  Morrison were a threat to safety in London, they were allowed to ''walk the streets of Belfast with impunity.''
 
Laborite Backs Move
Michael Foot, the leader of the Labor opposition, who had tried to persuade Mr. Livingstone to cancel the visit before the Ballykelly bombing, backed Mr. Whitelaw's decision. He said that ''no one, including the Home Secretary, can be sure that lives might not be at risk if the visit went ahead.''
Mr. Livingstone announced that he would travel to Northern Ireland on a private visit next year. It was understood he would see Mr.  Adams and Mr. Morrison there. In a statement, the council leader asked, ''If, as the Government claims, the Sinn Fein representatives are involved in terrorism, why haven't they been arrested?''
In Belfast, Sinn Fein was reported to be considering a new test for Mr. Whitelaw.  Another of their leaders, Owen Carron, was elected 16 months ago as a member of the British Parliament for Fermanagh and South Tyrone. He has never taken his seat. But if he decided to come to London to see Mr. Livingston, the Home Secretary might find it hard to ban a person who had been legitimately elected to the House of Commons.


End of Document