The bomb in Chelsea
Daily News (New York)
September 19, 2016 Monday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 26
Length: 310 words
Byline: NLVL
Body


The injuries inflicted on 29 people in the Chelsea bomb explosion vividly highlight how close New York came to suffering mass casualties in an apparent act of terror. This time, poor workmanship brought a more merciful fate than was surely expected.
While the motivation for the attack is still unconfirmed, the NYPD has initial grounds to see the all too familiar hands of terrorists. The investigation is proceeding at full throttle and the picture may change.
Whatever the truth, there is a high probability that the perpetrators will be identified and run to ground.
Unfortunately, there is an even higher probability that there is more, and likely worse, to come.
The threat of evil has well-schooled the NYPD and FBI in the arts of prevention and response. Often, though, elected officials and aspiring politicians are less steady amid uncertain facts.
Soon after the explosion, for example, the Republican presidential nominee said that a bomb had gone off. He proved to be right, but he may well have been proven wrong.
Still worse, Donald Trump seized on the event for political advantage with talk about having to get tough, clearly implying that the explosion was the work of radical Islamists. But was it?
With the United Nations in town, with ISIS claiming responsibility for a stabbing spree in Minnesota, with the detonation of a pipe bomb before a running race in New Jersey, everyone and his or her brother can see the possibilities. But only the possibilities.
Terrorism is the use of violence to achieve a political or social end. Although terrifying, a revenge attack is not terrorism, nor is run-of-the-mill madness.
With this bombing, New York and America again stand warned about the need for vigilance and unrelenting intelligence-gathering. It is clear, too, that there is no rush to declare any event as terrorism until the facts are established.

Graphic

 
NLVL

Load-Date: September 19, 2016


End of Document