The educational assassination of a terrorist
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
July 2, 2012 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2012 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: VIEWS & NEWS; Pg. 11
Length: 861 words
Byline: ERIC ROZENMAN, Special To The Tampa Tribune
Body


BY ERIC ROZENMAN
Special To The Tampa Tribune
There was a lesson in the assassination of al-Qaeda'sNo. 2 leader, Abu Yahya al-Libi, in Pakistan early last month. Not that the Obama White House wants to learn it, any more than did the Bush administration.
U.S. officials have insisted, since al-Qaeda's Sept. 11, 2001, destruction of the World Trade Center and attack on the Pentagon, that a small group of extremists was trying to hijack Islam. In the after-action report on al-Libi's killing, they ought to consider his religious credibility not only among al-Qaeda followers, but also with other Islamist sympathizers.
News reports described al-Libi as "an Islamic scholar" who had undertaken advanced theological studies. According to the U.S. Rewards for Justice program, he used his "religious training to influence people and legitimize the actions of al-Qaeda." Al-Libi employed "esoteric religious arguments" in videos and other outreach to attract followers and justify acts of savagery.
In this he was little different from the one-time American mosque preacher Anwar al-Awlaki, assassinated in a U.S. drone strike in Yemen last year. Also a senior al-Qaeda operative and charismatic Internet radicalizer and recruiter, al-Awlaki, like al-Libi, possessed credibility as a religious authority.
Three days after al-Libi's death, Raja Lahrasibi Khan, 58, was sentenced to 71/2years in prison. The Pakistan-born Chicago cab driver, an American citizen, pled guilty to trying to send money to a terrorist with al-Qaeda links for overseas attacks. His case is one of scores of Islamic terrorism episodes in the United States since 9/11, including the attempted 2010 Times Square car bombing and the 2009 Fort Hood massacre.
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and others repeatedly warn of the danger of "self-radicalization" via the Internet, jihadist videos, itinerant preachers and other means. But they still refuse to consider the scope of the radicalizing agent itself.
Instead of more accurate, if generalized, labels like "Islamo-fascism" the Bush administration proclaimed a faceless "war against terrorism." Obama's Defense Department further undermined public understanding and support with its completely disembodied "engaging in overseas contingencies."
It is true that America is not at war with Islam, despite the charge by recruiters like al-Libi. Yet it is undeniable that perhaps the most energetic trend in contemporary Islam is at war with us. Hence our tiptoeing, via the vague "Islamism," toward the accuracy of "political Islam" as the enemy.
Which brings us to Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In April, he reportedly ordered a review of U.S. military training material to eliminate allegedly anti-Islamic selections. This was applauded by the Council on American Islamic Relations, a derivative of the Muslim Brotherhood, the widespread anti-Western, anti-Christian, anti-Jewish movement gaining strength throughout the Middle East. Spurned by the FBI, CAIR advises other governmental agencies.
If studying Islamic extremism's roots in mainstream Islam is taboo, how do we understand, track and neutralize lone wolves and fringe movements? An influential trend within Sunni Islam is the puritanical Wahhabi school. It is dominant in Saudi Arabia, home of 15 of the 19 9/11 hijackers. Saudi support, financial and material, reportedly underpins many American Islamic schools and mosques.
Most Muslims are not terrorists, even though today most terrorists -- and their victims -- are Muslims. But neither is there a broad movement within Islam, Sunni or Shi'a, actively delegitimizing radicals.
Perhaps Sunni Islam's most influential cleric has been Sheik Yusuf al-Qawadari, whose al-Jazeera satellite television programs reach tens of millions. "Spiritual guide" of the Brotherhood, al-Qawadari hopes for the conversion of Europe to Islam and a Muslim-led genocide of the Jews.
Refusal to understand the roots of his popularity parallels Pentagon and White House denials of what motivated Maj. Nidal Hasan, charged with murdering 13 and wounding 32 others at Fort Hood. His personal calling card identified him as a "Soldier of Allah." Fear of castigation as "Islamophobic" reportedly kept colleagues from blowing the whistle on Hasan.
The day after al-Libi's death, eight Muslims filed suit to stop the New York Police Department's counter-terrorism surveillance of mosques and Muslim-owned businesses in New Jersey. They charged bias and civil rights violations. New Jersey's attorney-general had ruled the NYPD effort legal, and police insisted it was part of keeping the city safe from post-9/11 attacks.
Now a court will have to do what two consecutive administrations have not: Tell us if we're permitted to try to learn what motivates the enemy, and, if so, how widespread that motivation is and how to encourage countervailing forces.
The writer is a Washington, D.C.-based news media analyst and the Washington director of the Boston-based Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America.
Copyright © 2012, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

Load-Date: July 3, 2012


End of Document