The terrorism monster under our kids' beds
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 13, 2001, Thursday, Metro Edition


Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. 19A
Length: 642 words
Byline: Lori Sturdevant; Staff Writer
Body


RSEC:             The Cold War was the monster under my childhood bed.
      At age 7, I had nightmares about Nikita Khrushchev parading up my South Dakota street. At age 9, during the Cuban missile crisis, I pleaded with my parents to put a bomb shelter in our basement.
     On the day the school principal tersely announced that John Kennedy had been shot, I ran all the way home. I was certain that Soviet bombs would fall any minute. I wanted to die with my family.
   When the Soviet Union collapsed, my relief was for my children. They would not have to grow up afraid of fire falling from the sky.
     Or so I thought. That changed with the look in my daughter's eyes as she watched TV with me Tuesday morning, and saw the second plane strike the World Trade Center.
     Every American's sense of security dissolved in lower Manhattan dust Tuesday. But grownups knew this sort of fear before, in 1941 or 1962 or 1963. The young are stinging from its raw unfamiliarity.   
     She's as old as I was the day JFK died. There is no shielding her from the news or its implications. She cried when she heard that the towers fell. She stayed as close to the classroom radio as her teacher would allow. She made a pact with a friend to talk on the phone Tuesday night, in the hope that by speaking their worries aloud, they would stave off nightmares.
Lend an ear
     In that, she was doing the right thing, assured Marti Erickson, director of the Child, Youth and Family Consortium at the University of Minnesota and a local font of child-rearing wisdom.
     "It's good for children to be able to talk about their feelings, and to know that it is important to tell someone they love about feelings of fear and sadness and anger," Erickson said.
     Her advice: Don't be dismissive of children's feelings about Tuesday's suicide bombings. Don't tsk, tsk or call them silly when fear blends with children's illogic in unusual ways. Make the time and space in the next few days to hear what's on their minds.
     Tuesday's news will probably hit children as hard if not harder than any of the scares and sorrows their parents endured in the 1960s, Erickson said. Baby boomers never saw America bombed. Our kids just did. When the Soviet missile-bearing ships turned around in the Atlantic in 1962, the crisis ended. Who can know when Tuesday's faceless, nameless enemy is squelched?    
     "I don't think this is a one-time incident," warned Kathleen Sweet. She teaches criminal justice at St. Cloud State University and is an authority on terrorism and aviation security. "There will be persistence on the part of the fanatical individuals and groups who want to harm the United States. We can't kill all of them."
    This nation must root out Tuesday's perpetrators and their protectors. It must improve airport security _ and Sweet attests that there is much room for improvement. Then it can expect the next attack to take the form of a virus in our computers or a poison in our water supply. Retaliation is terrorism's standard operating procedure. Violence really does beget violence.
     America's ability to prevent a recurrence of the unthinkable may depend on its citizens' willingness to think longer and harder about the unthinkable than they have since the Cold War. That is not an assignment for 10-year-olds. But it will be part of the portfolio of adult American citizenship that will be waiting for them when they grow up. It is our duty to carry it for them until they do.
     The terrorism monster that moved under our children's beds on Tuesday is likely going to settle in for a long stay. We have to teach them to live with the beast without letting it overcome reason and swallow liberty. It's a lesson we can teach only by example.
_ Lori Sturdevant is a Star Tribune editorial writer and columnist. She is at
lsturdevant@startribune.com.  

Load-Date: September 14, 2001


End of Document