The Days of the Jackal
The New York Times
July 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL
Length: 537 words
Body


In a brazen operation last week, a political exile in London was kidnapped, drugged and jammed into an air crate labeled diplomatic baggage. But the culprits weren't working for Libya's Colonel Qaddafi; they were apparently agents of the Nigerian military regime led by Gen. Mohammed Buhari, a man with a moderate's reputation. And held as accomplices were three citizens of Israel, where terrorism is the foulest political word.
Editorial on thwarted attempt to kidnap Nigerian political exile Umaru Dikko in London and return him to Nigeria; holds incident is evidence that terrorism is spreading and threatening civilization everywhere and norms that resolve disputes--diplomatic courtesies and immunities--are being exploited for primitive vendettas
What bitter evidence that terrorism is not just a disease of the most despised ideologies. It is spreading and threatening civilization everywhere. From Rangoon to Athens to Rome, Paris and London, these are days of the jackal. The very norms that civilized nations invented to resolve their disputes - diplomatic courtesies and immunities - are being exploited for primitive vendettas.
Sadly, despite all their cries of alarm, civilized nations have failed to agree on even the simplest steps to deter terrorists and punish governments that sponsor and harbor them.
At last month's London summit talks, the industrial democracies said they were ''disturbed'' by the ease with which terrorists moved across boundaries and promised closer coordination in intelligence. That, however, remains only a pious aspiration. There is no centralized file listing known terrorists or fugitives, like Mehmet Ali Agca, who wandered freely through Europe before he shot the Pope. Security services hoard their secrets and except for random ''red notices'' distributed by Interpol, there's no real pooling of information.  The London declaration also pledges cooperation in the expulsion of known terrorists, including those disguised as diplomats. After the Libyan Embassy in London was turned into a lethal bunker by such ''diplomats,'' Britain urged the democratic countries to blacklist them out of their embassies. The United States expressed interest in the idea but still has no official opinion about it.  Instead of feasible and practical measures, the Reagan Administration advocates making it a crime for an American citizen to ''act in concert'' with terrorist organizations. But that only threatens association with unpopular groups without striking at acts of terror. Nor does it even try to distinguish between helping terrorism and rebellion.  These are not easy problems. No one, for example, has found a satisfactory punishment to fit a bizarre crime like the abduction of Umaru Dikko, the Nigerian exile. If Nigeria is guilty, its embassy could be closed, but Britain would still have to deal with Africa's most populous nation. Britain can expel any guilty ''diplomats'' and even try their accomplices; but what if these turned out to include an arm of the Israeli Government?  The odium of exposure remains the best available response to these outrageous acts. But more effective remedies are needed, particularly by the most open and therefore most vulnerable societies.


End of Document