THE TWIN TOWERS: Terrorism;
Blast Shatters the Illusion That U.S. Soil Is Immune From Assault
The New York Times
March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 39; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1402 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

By RICHARD BERNSTEIN
Body


For many years, particularly as terrorist bombs exploded in Europe and the Middle East, one question that experts constantly asked themselves was why Middle Eastern terrorists so seldom struck on American soil.
It seemed, as one expert put it, that the United States enjoyed a kind of "immunity" from the terrorism that afflicted France, Germany and Lebanon. Maybe it was because there were plenty of American targets abroad for terrorists to attack. Maybe it was because, whether deserved or not, the United States had a reputation for good law enforcement and for a willingness to retaliate for terrorist attacks, as it did with a bombing raid against Libya in 1987.
Now, however, the assault on the World Trade Center appears to have changed that. With the arrest last Thursday of a man with ties to a Muslim fundamentalist group, experts say, the bombing of the trade center appears to be the first episode of Middle East terrorism on such a scale to take place on American soil, and the first time the entire terrorist panoply of events -- the scenes of horror, the disruption of life, the huge economic costs -- had taken place here.
 
Several Interpretations
 And yet, while agreeing that a terrorism threshold had likely been crossed, specialists are unsure how to interpret this event.
Specifically, the question is this: Was the bombing in New York a genuine expression of Middle Eastern terrorism reaching for the first time across the Atlantic, possibly masterminded by one of the terrorist networks long established abroad?
Or is a less portentous interpretation correct: that the episode was an ad hoc operation carried out by a group of fanatical amateurs in this country unrelated to any larger international terrorist strategy?
"On American soil, this is the first incident of its kind," said Sa'ad AbuKhalil, a scholar in residence at the Middle East Institute in Washington.
Mr. AbuKhalil and other experts say that, of course, American targets have been singled out by terrorists before. Diplomats, for example, have been killed in Europe and the Middle East, and bombs have been smuggled onto airplanes, such as the one that destroyed the Pan Am jet that exploded over Scotland in 1988. There have also been internal settlings of scores within terrorist groups carried out inside the United States.
And on Thursday, an official of the Palestine Liberation Organization went on trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on charges that he planted bombs that failed to detonate in New York City in 1973.
 
Familiar Technique
 Several specialists pointed out that the trade center bombing was reminiscent of a terror technique all too familiar to Lebanon: a vehicle packed with explosives and planted next to or underneath a building. That was the method used by a suicide bomber who drove a car bomb underneath the American Marine barracks in the suburbs of Beirut in 1983.
"I think a threshold has been crossed, because even if the guys who do these things are madmen, they don't distill their madness from thin air," said Edward Luttwak, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. They get their specific inspiration, Mr. Luttwak said, "from a kind of terrorism political science," which tells them when and where to mount operations.
 
Network of Sympathizers
 The trade center blast also shares characteristics with terror episodes in other Western countries, especially the series of attacks that shook Paris in 1986. Those bombings, which claimed 10 lives and 162 wounded, were believed, after a long police investigation, to have been masterminded by pro-Iranian groups retaliating against France for its support of Iraq in the Iran-Iraq war. The terrorists came from abroad, but they used a large network of sympathizers living in Paris whom they "activated" at the appropriate time.
At the time of the Paris bombings, many asked why similar attacks did not take place in the United States. After all, as Israel's biggest ally and as the Great Satan in Iranian eyes, there was always a motive for attacking this country. But unlike France, the United States had a clearer and more consistent policy of not meeting terrorists' demands.
In addition to the perception that American law enforcement was more vigilant toward terrorists than that of France, there had been less Muslim immigration to this country and thus less of a network of sympathizers who could be activated to support the actual terrorist groups.
Some of this, specialists say, may have changed. There has in the last few years been a substantial immigration of Muslims to the United States, some of whom are fundamentalists who could potentially be used to form terror networks here. In recent weeks, Israel has warned the United States that Hamas, the fundamentalist group on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, is actually controlled by groups in this country.
 
Violence Encouraged
 The man arrested in the twin towers bombing, Mohammed A. Salameh, is said to have been a follower of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, an exiled Egyptian whose presence in this country, and his open encouragement of political violence against his enemies, represents a clear example of the spread of Islamic fundamentalism across the Atlantic. Law-enforcement agents, though, have offered no evidence linking the sheik to the World Trade Center bombing.
Mr. AbuKhalil, noting that the twin towers bombing came on the second anniversary of the liberation of Kuwait, said there has been a series of incidents that could have spurred Muslims to act against the United States now.
 
'Perceived Indifference'
 "You can't belittle the extent to which Muslims were furious about the gulf war," Mr. AbuKhalil said.  "And then you have other things, like the cancellation of the elections last year in Algeria to the indifference, if not outright acquiescence, of the West." The reference was to the abrogation of election results in Algeria following a victory by the Islamic fundamentalist party.
"There is the perceived indifference of the West to the plight of Muslims in Bosnia," Mr. AbuKhalil said, "and the continuing plight of the Palestinians. You have all the conditions for major terrorist problems in the United States.
"In a way the gulf war is not over," Mr. AbuKhalil said. "The United States fought the gulf war on its own terms, on its own scale and in ways it knows. Now you will have the expression of the anger of Muslims on their terms, on their scale and in ways that they know."
However, other experts perceive enough differences with the more standard operations of professional terrorists to make them doubt that the twin towers bombing marks the extension of genuine Middle East terrorism to the United States. They think, as Robert Hunter of the Georgetown University Center for Strategic and International Affairs, put it, that "it could have been a one-time thing with a few people acting for themselves."
 
Important Differences
 There are, in this sense, important differences with European terrorist actions. In France, for example, the campaign involved five bombings during September 1986, none of them followed by immediate arrests of suspects. It was months after the campaign ended before the French were able to make any arrests in the case.
By contrast, the apparent amateurishness of the tower bombing had none of the earmarks of the highly sophisticated European operations.
 
A New Threshold
 Another hypothesis is that the bombing in New York may have been a local operation, unconnected with foreign groups or governments, but it might nonetheless represent the crossing of a new threshold.
"I think it's very much of a watershed," said Bruce Hoffman of the Rand Corporation.
"From what we now know," he said, "it appears to have been an amateurish operation. But in another respect, despite ineptitude, the terrorists were able to assemble a large bomb, to kill people, and to disrupt the city. They were also able to generate a large amount of publicity. What worries me is that there's a message in that that will not be lost on terrorists abroad.
"We have the illusion that we are immune to terrorism and terrorists abroad see us that way," Mr. Hoffman said. "Now terrorists abroad may say, 'If this is what the second string was able to accomplish, imagine what a first-string terrorist group could do.' This incident may ironically make the United States a more attractive target for terrorism than in the past."

Graphic

 
Photo: Experts in international terrorism are now faced with the difficult task of trying to determine if the bomb blast at the World Trade Center on Feb. 26 was caused by Middle Eastern terrorists or was an ad hoc operation carried out by a group of fanatical amateurs from a local base. (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times)

Load-Date: March 7, 1993


End of Document