THE (SUCCESSFUL) IRISH RESPONSE TO TERRORISM AMERICANS SHOULD REFLECT ON WHAT WORKED AND WHAT DID NOT WORK TO DEFEAT 30 YEARS OF TERROR
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 21, 2001 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 925 words
Body


In the wake of the worst terrorist attack in history, Americans are engaged in a crucial debate about how best to defeat terrorism. As a backdrop to this debate, it is important to remember that terrorism is not new and that it has been defeated in the past, most notably in Northern Ireland.
 For nearly 30 years, the Irish and British people fought some of the most brutal terrorism imaginable waged by extremist groups of republicans and loyalists. The good news is that, despite countless setbacks during those years, wholesale terrorism in Ireland has ended. Even though this terrorism was much more local than the Al Qaeda murder campaign, it may be helpful for Americans to reflect on what worked and what did not work to defeat it.
*First, all terrorism must be unreservedly condemned, regardless of whether it is motivated by hate or by a political cause. This may seem obvious, but some people have a tendency to be "sneaking regarders" of violence and must be confronted.
 Terrorism is not only a crime against humanity, it is also politically counterproductive. For example, the progress made by the Irish civil rights movement in the late 1960s was obliterated by IRA terrorism in the 1970s. As Northern Ireland was sucked into a vicious cycle of tit-for-tat violence, public bitterness grew and political reform and compromise were delayed for years.
 *Second, there may be some lessons for Muslims in the response by Irish people who found themselves wrongly branded as terrorist supporters by victims of IRA atrocities. We had to demonstrate by word and by deed that we were not only opposed to terror, but also would work actively to end it, whatever the cost in terms of personal security. Families and friends became divided over the issue of violence versus nonviolence as we insisted there could be no moral ambiguity.
 *Third, we should always ensure that the security response to terrorist murder is precise and surgical. Avoid crude "shows of force" that punish innocent civilians and entire communities. It took many years before the British security forces realized that measures against entire communities such as indiscriminate arrests and harassment or the Bloody Sunday shootings in 1972 actually boosted support for terrorism.
 *Fourth, allocate massive diplomatic, political and financial resources to reduce support for extremism and terrorism. The "recruiting sergeants" of terrorism are alienation, poverty, misguided idealism, hatred, isolation and ignorance.
 After years of diplomacy, the Irish government, with help from the U.S. government and lawmakers such as Sens. Ted Kennedy and Daniel Patrick Moynihan and former Speaker Tip O'Neill, finally persuaded the British government to tackle the underlying causes of alienation amongst nationalist extremists. Indeed, in the 1970s Irish diplomats often found themselves operating on two fronts, denouncing terrorism and also criticizing successive British governments for dragging their feet on necessary reforms in the police force and government of Northern Ireland.
 Obviously, "Muslim terrorism" is far more complicated in its global reach and origins than "Irish terrorism." But its eradication requires the same principles of a sustained and intensive diplomatic and economic response involving scores of countries.
 The values shared by the free world have never been so important and America is once again being called on to mobilize the world as the champion of these values, just as it did against fascism after Pearl Harbor.
 The difference this time is that it will not be a conventional war against enemy countries, but an anti-terrorist global coalition against elusive and cowardly groups.
 We must also mobilize the United Nations to secure a "New Deal" for developing countries that promotes tolerance and justice and reduces alienation. On the home front, we should remember that the vast majority of the 6 million Muslims living in America share our values. We should reach out to them.
 Mary Robinson, the U.N. human rights chief, said in response to vicious anti-Semitic protests at the Durban Racism Conference, "I am a Jew." We, too, should affirm, "We are Muslims." Peace-loving Muslims should proclaim, "We are Americans."
 Muslims, for their part, could create an International Muslim Fund to promote peace, reconciliation and nonviolence in the Middle East. The Ireland Fund was established in 1976 in part to provide a counterbalance to some Irish Americans who misguidedly supported IRA terrorism. Today it is the largest overseas Irish group working for peace in Northern Ireland and has raised over $135 million for the cause of peace, culture and charity. More importantly, the Ireland Fund provides the global diaspora of 70 million people of Irish descent with a positive focus for their love of Ireland.
 Muslims, too, need a positive global platform to celebrate their culture and civilization and to prevent the hijacking of their race by the ogres of hate. Together, all races and creeds can reaffirm our common values of decency and tolerance and our determination to create a better world for our 6 billion fellow human beings.
 The great Irish poet Seamus Heaney gives us hope with these words from "The Cure at Troy":
 History says, don't hope
 On this side of the grave.
 But then, once in a lifetime
 The longed-for tidal wave
 Of justice can rise up,
 And hope and history rhyme.
 So hope for a great sea-change
 On the far side of revenge.
 Believe that a further shore
 Is reachable from here.
 Believe in miracles
 And cures and healing wells.

Notes

Ted Smyth is a director of the Ireland Fund and was an Irish diplomat for 16 years. He lives in Edgeworth.

Load-Date: September 22, 2001


End of Document