The terrorism designer label
University Wire
October 12, 2007 Friday


Copyright 2007 Pipe Dream via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 594 words
Byline: By Jonathan Schwartz, Pipe Dream; SOURCE: SUNY-Binghamton
Dateline: BINGHAMTON, N.Y. 
Body


Iran and the United States are in a state of war. It's not a war of violence, although many suspect that Iran is the driving force behind much of the violence that our troops currently encounter in Iraq. It's actually a war of words, a battle for world opinion and support. The winner will be whichever government can act the least belligerently toward the other and whichever leader can convince the world that the other guy is more at fault.
The U.S. Senate, a true gathering of the elite brain trust in our country if there's ever been one, voted in favor of a resolution to designate the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, the official defense of the Iranian revolution, as terrorists. Any constructive purpose behind this resolution is beyond comprehension. Are they under the impression that the rest of the world will suddenly come to their side now that the other guy's troops are not an army, but a group of terrorists?
I'm surprised they even had time for such a resolution with their time so preoccupied passing economic sanctions. In response, the Iranian foreign ministry and parliament have joined together in declaring that the CIA and U.S. Army are terrorists as well, guilty of seeking to overthrow regimes through the use of violence. Since we declared their army to be terrorists first, they get to walk away looking like the helpless victim trying to defend itself from the imperialist American war machine. Advantage: Iran. Now let's take a closer look at the actions of the two leaders, the charismatic yet horribly misguided Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and George W. "The Decider" Bush.
Over the last few weeks, Ahmadinejad seems to be winning this battle of wills. When he came to New York and spoke at Columbia University, Ahmadinejad, by all accounts, remained cool and calm during his speech, despite being referred to as a "petty and cruel dictator" about a minute before coming on stage. Columbia University President Lee Bollinger contradicted his own call for open and honest dialogue by preemptively trashing someone everyone in the crowd obviously already hated. To say, "I feel all the weight of the modern civilized world yearning to express their revulsion at what you stand for," before supposedly giving Ahmadinejad the chance to explain himself makes it look like one of two things: the crowd either wouldn't accept any of the things the Iranian president would say during his speech, even if they were true, or worse -- that they'd be too ignorant to judge the man individually and needed to be told ahead of time how to react.
This is not exactly the kind of message we should be trying to send to the rest of the world. On the other hand, Bush's sentiments toward Iran have been well-documented throughout the media, with little change in recent weeks. He maintains that force is an option on the table to prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons if continuing economic sanctions don't do the trick. He dismisses all overtures of compromise on this matter and continues to sow the seeds of hatred toward America throughout the Muslim world. And while his Iranian counterpart has made efforts to reach out to the American people, Bush seems content to stay on his inflexible present course of threatening rhetoric. If diplomatic relations between two countries are like a game of chess, right now Iran is playing like Kasparov, and we're playing like the fourth grader who can't sit still in his chair or concentrate on the game because a squirrel is eating an acorn right outside the window.
(C) 2007 Pipe Dream via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 12, 2007


End of Document