The Latest: Feds say terrorism arrests made in 2 states
The Northern Star: Northern Illinois University
January 7, 2016 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2016 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: FROM AP; Pg. 1
Length: 288 words
Body


SACRAMENTO, Calif. - 6:20 p.m.
Federal authorities in Texas have charged an Iraqi refugee with attempting to support the Islamic State.
They unsealed the indictment in Houston on Thursday as authorities in California charged a Syrian refugee with lying about his travels to fight in Syria.
The arrests feed a national debate over whether the United States is doing enough to screen refugees from Syria.
The U.S. Attorney's Office in Houston says 24-year-old Omar Faraj Saeed Al Hardan of Houston was indicted Wednesday on three charges of trying to provide material support to the Islamic State.
The criminal complaint unsealed in Sacramento, California, accuses 23-year-old Aws Mohammed Younis Al-Jayab of traveling to Syria to fight alongside terrorist organizations and lying to investigators about it.
Authorities say both men are Palestinians born in Iraq.
___
5:19 p.m.
Authorities say they have arrested two people on terrorism-related charges in California and Texas.
A criminal complaint unsealed Thursday accuses a Sacramento man of traveling to Syria to fight alongside terrorist organizations and lying to investigators about it.
The U.S. Attorney's Office in Sacramento says 23-year-old Aws Mohammed Younis Al-Jayab, an Iraqi citizen, was arrested Thursday morning in Sacramento.
He is charged with making a false statement involving international terrorism.
Meanwhile, the governor and lieutenant governor of Texas praised the arrest in Houston of what Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick called a terror suspect.
Patrick says in a statement that the arrests may have prevented a terror-related event.
Federal officials say a separate arrest in Milwaukee that grew out of the Sacramento investigation is not related to national security.

Load-Date: January 8, 2016


End of Document