The key to fighting terrorism is knowing how they are
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 28, 1996, Sunday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 04R
Length: 537 words
Byline: ANDREW J. GLASS
Body


WASHINGTON a A decade has passed since a top-level team from the Reagan White House went to Iran to swap a planeload of arms for American hostages. In preparing for that ill-fated mission, the CIA found that it had nobody in its ranks who spoke Farsi, the native tongue. So a former agent, George Cave, was brought out of retirement, to accompany the visitors from Washington.
Since that time, Washington's capacity to puncture the evil arc of hatred that stretches from Algeria to Pakistan has, if anything, receded further. White House aides accuse House Speaker Newt Gingrich of having a political agenda. But the Georgia Republican is dead right in accusing the spymasters of "not doing a good job interpreting the future."
After four decades, the CIA has lost much of the keen edge that once drove an elite group of operatives, in Winston Churchill's words, "to set Europe ablaze" behind Nazi lines. It is too big, too layered and too much set in its ways.
It's altogether possible, for instance, that Anthony Lake, the White House security adviser, needed a report on who it is that might be driven these days to blowing U.S. passenger jets out of the sky. That report must pass through eight layers of review, including one by CIA Director John Deutch, before it goes to the White House. Ask yourself how many imaginative or controversial lines of argument can survive such a process?
I suggested to the presidential adviser that there is indeed a pattern that can be found among potential radical Islamic terrorists in such places as the Scottish countryside, Saudi Arabian barracks and, perhaps, the southern shore of Long Island. It is one of retribution and revenge. Rarely, if ever, is the payback proportional to the perceived injustice.
Lake took my point, although he argued there was probably more to it than that. At least my theory a which would draw attention to an anti- terrorism trial now underway in New York a did not have to go through eight levels of official scrutiny.
President Clinton has skirted the CIA to place the FBI in charge of the nation's counterterrorism efforts. He has asked the Congress for an added $ 7.5 billion in law enforcement spending a an increase of 17 percent a to meet current threats. In theory, the FBI plays a coordinating role; in practice, bureaucratic turf battles rage on.
The key to success in the war against the terrorists lies not in examining checked baggage between Atlanta and Athens. Rather, it lies in funding and training an elite core of undercover agents and analysts with the skills to penetrate a hidden world and root out an enemy.
 
Once such intelligence is at hand, a payback signal must be sent.
A decade has also passed since the Libyans bombed a bar in Berlin which served as a hang out for U.S. troops. President Reagan responded by bombing the Libyan capital, including the tent where Moammar Gadhafi and his family were thought by the CIA to be sleeping.
The message got through: for several years thereafter, there were no signs of any serious terrorist incidents spawned by Libya. It is, however, a message that must be repeated anew to keep the terrorists' dirty business in check.
 
(Andrew J. Glass is Washington bureau chief for the Cox Newspapers.)

Load-Date: July 29, 1996


End of Document