THE REGION IN SUMMARY;
The Libyans Next Door
The New York Times
January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 6, Column 4; Week in Review Desk
Length: 328 words
Byline: By Richard Levine and William C. Rhoden
Body


Englewood, N.J. could certainly use the nearly $14,000 a year that the chief Libyan delegate to the United Nations offered last week, but the city fathers would rather take it in taxes than accept it as a gift.
The delegate, Ali A. Treiki, offered the money in lieu of taxes on the $1 million mansion the Libyan Mission recently purchased. Mr.  Treiki requested the same sort of property tax exemption that United Nations diplomats have been routinely granted in New York City suburbs.
Englewood, N.J. could certainly use the nearly $14,000 a year that the chief Libyan delegate to the United Nations offered last week, but the city fathers would rather take it in taxes than accept it as a gift.
Englewood officials balked, informally at first and officially last week. The City Council passed a resolution advising the city assessor to deny the exemption, and another measure to ask the Federal courts to annul the sale because the Libyans had failed to notify Washington of it. Such notification will be required in the future under the Foreign Missions Act of 1982, but it was not required when the Libyans bought the place.
Mr. Treiki said principle was at stake. Tax exemptions for diplomatic residences were ''part of an agreement between the United Nations and the United States,'' he said, and Englewood's action undermined the concept of diplomatic courtesy.
Some city officials have admitted that their opposition was due in part to Washington's charges that Libya supports terrorism. M.T.  Mehdi, president of the American-Arab Relations Committee, called it ''a case of ugly anti-Arab racism.'' But Englewood Mayor William Sommers maintained that his oppositon stemmed from financial considerations and potential safety and traffic problems. In any case, Mr. Treiki may now appeal the matter to Bergen County tax authorities. If they turn him down, the issue could be taken up by a state court.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Treiki


End of Document