The Wrong Answer to Terrorism
The New York Times
March 13, 1996, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 545 words
Body


With the first anniversary of the Oklahoma City bombing approaching next month, Congress and the White House are pressing to complete action on new antiterrorism legislation. In haste to demonstrate their resolve in an election year, President Clinton and lawmakers from both parties are ready to approve steps that would dangerously erode American liberties. Combating terrorism is vitally important, but it should not threaten long-established rights of privacy, free speech and due process.
Last June the Senate rashly passed the Comprehensive Terrorism Protection Act of 1995. The bill contained some reasonable measures, including an increase in F.B.I. staff and revisions in Federal law that would make it easier to trace bombs and impose harsher penalties for dealing in explosives.
But the legislation also authorized intrusive new surveillance powers for law enforcement agencies, crackdowns on aliens and an ill-advised blurring of the line between military and police forces. To assure passage, Mr. Clinton unwisely agreed to withdraw his objections to incorporating a change in habeas corpus standards that would limit death row appeals in Federal courts.
A corresponding bill under consideration in the House this week does not include some of the most troubling Senate provisions, like the expanded role for military forces in domestic law enforcement. But House members who take their constitutional vows seriously should eliminate or modify other damaging provisions in the bill.
Among other dubious steps, the House bill would grant the Secretary of State expansive authority to brand foreign groups and their domestic affiliates as terrorists, thereby making it a crime for Americans to support the group's activities, even if they are perfectly legal. Members of designated terrorist groups would be barred from entering the country to speak, reviving a discredited practice that was discarded in 1990 with repeal of the McCarthy-era McCarran-Walter Act.
Under the House legislation, the Attorney General would be given unchecked authority to elevate ordinary state and Federal crimes to acts of terrorism, carrying sentences ranging up to death. The F.B.I., which already has ample authority to pursue terrorists, would get new powers to obtain phone and travel records without having to establish that a suspect seemed to be engaging in criminal activity. Government wiretap authority would be expanded, with reduced judicial oversight.
The proposed change in habeas corpus would undermine the historic role of the Federal courts in correcting unconstitutional state court convictions and sentences. If Congress is determined to make this alteration, it should at least address the question separately and carefully, rather than tagging it onto an antiterrorism bill.
These objectionable measures are not included in a promising alternative bill proposed by three Democratic representatives -- John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, Jerrold Nadler of New York and Howard Berman of California.
Americans were shaken and angered by the explosion that shattered the Federal building in Oklahoma City and killed 169 people. Congress is right to give Federal law enforcement agencies more money and manpower. Diminishing American liberties is not the solution to terrorism.

Load-Date: March 13, 1996


End of Document