The Iran Policy Was Wrong, Too
The New York Times
December 10, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 562 words
Body


Acknowledging finally that mistakes were made, President Reagan concedes only that the ''execution'' of his Iran policy was flawed. He and his aides talk as if their policy were sound because their objectives were noble.
Who could quarrel with the goals of encouraging moderate elements in Iran, thereby stopping terrorism, freeing American hostages and ending the Iran-Iraq war? But policy is much more than ends. It encompasses means as well. It entails judgments about feasibility and risks. The President's Iran policy should be weighed by this whole standard. By it, that policy must be judged as fatally flawed.
Administration officials speak in hushed tones about evidence of ''moderate elements'' in Iran whose objectives coincided with Washington's in matters of terrorism and peace. Which moderates could receive arms secretly, without the knowledge of Ayatollah Khomeini and his Islamic totalitarian state? Who could have advised the President that providing more arms to Iran would make the mullahs more likely to seek the peace with Iraq that Washington desires? It has all the earmarks of a setup to trade hostages for arms and kidnap more hostages for more arms.
From what is known now, the intermediaries in Iran hungered for American arms and got them. American emissaries said ''Give us our hostages back,'' and Iranian intermediaries answered ''Send arms.'' The emissaries persisted with thoughts of parallel interests against the Soviet Union, and the intermediaries answered ''Send arms.''
Did these moderates curtail Iranian support of terrorism in return? Mr. Reagan says yes; Secretary of State Shultz and other officials say no. Did they help in releasing the hostages? Yes, three of them. But three others were kidnapped in the meantime. The Administration's policy impels such horrible human arithmetic. Could Robert McFarlane and Oliver North really have thought that when they flew into Teheran with a planeload of arms that their presence would be known only to ''moderates''? On such judgment was this policy based.
Beyond grossly miscalculating the chances of success, the Administration apparently gave little thought to the consequences of failure. The officials involved had to assume that their secret would be revealed one day. Little foresight or insight was needed to understand that this would mean total loss of credibility.
What would allies think about the Administration's entreaties to block all arms to Iran? How plausible would it be to insist on a policy of never bargaining with terrorists? Would Congress lightly forgive the flouting of law and consultation? How quickly would such a sudden contradiction confuse, even inflame a public that has learned to despise the cruel zealots of Iran?
These likely consequences glow so brightly that even if the policy had succeeded in freeing the hostages, it would still have produced a failure over all.
No wonder Mr. Reagan says ''I want to speak to you about something else, not the policies themselves, but how they were carried out.'' That turns the spotlight away from the substance of his policy and puts it entirely on process. Mr. McFarlane contends that the fault lay in trying to formulate and execute a policy too sophisticated for the public. That blames democracy for the shortcomings of leaders. For sure, the process faltered. But the policy was also wrong. From the start.


End of Document