THE DAY ON WALL STREET: Renewed fear of terrorism spooks buyers
 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
November 18, 2003 Tuesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2003 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: Business;
Length: 423 words
Byline: TOM WALKER
Body


The ever-present threat of terrorism resurfaced to roil the stock market Monday, depressing share prices for the sixth time in the last seven sessions.
Terrorist attacks in Turkey over the weekend, a new tape allegedly from deposed Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein and reports that Tokyo could be an al-Qaida target combined to dampen buying enthusiasm.
Wachovia senior strategist Larry Wachtel said Monday's session was the product of "tired blood and worrisome global conditions."
AJC
"In the ninth month of the bull market, stocks no longer are on the bargain counter, and the big-money crowd lacks incentive to press their bets," said Wachtel. "This is the sixth day in the past seven sessions that stocks have given ground, so the tired-blood syndrome is not exactly new."
Merger activity dominated the corporate news.
Travelers Property Casualty announced it will merge with St. Paul Cos. in a $16 billion stock deal that will create the nation's second-largest insurer.
Auto parts maker ArvinMeritor said it will increase its hostile takeover bid for rival Dana Corp. Dow Jones News Service said Dana's board is evaluating the new offer.
And Sun Microsystems announced plans for a partnership with chip maker Advanced Micro Devices, designed to help the companies compete better against larger producers such as Intel.
In earnings news, Lowe's shares fell 72 cents to $57.91 despite a 33 percent rise in third-quarter profits that also beat analyst expectations by 3 cents a share. Larger rival Home Depot fell 72 cents to $35.47.
On the economic calendar, the Commerce Department said America's businesses boosted their stockpiles of unsold goods in September for the first time in six months. Analysts took that as a sign that companies may be more confident about the economic recovery. Economists were expecting inventories to be flat in September.
An economic index compiled by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York showed a much bigger than expected rise in industrial activity in the New York region in November.
Only three of the 30 stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average posted gains: aerospace giant Boeing by 1.3 percent, aluminum maker Alcoa by 0.7 percent and consumer products company Procter & Gamble by 0.3 percent.
The Dow fell as much as 139 points during the session, but late buying trimmed the loss to 57.85 points. The index closed at 9,710.83.
The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index fell 6.72 points, or 0.6 percent, to 1,043.63, and the mostly technology Nasdaq composite index fell 20.65 points, or 1.1 percent, to 1,909.61.

Graphic

 
Graphic: TODAY'S PROFIT REPORTS
Georgia company*
..................… Per share
Company forecast
BJ's Wholesale..........27 cents
Home Depot*........… 46 cents
Saks................… 3 cents
Staples............… 32 cents
Zale..............… -35 cents
Source: Dow Jones News Service

Load-Date: November 18, 2003


End of Document