The imperial presidency
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
January 21, 2007 Sunday


Copyright 2007 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 487 words
Byline: Dahlia Lithwick
Body


Why is the United States poised to try Jose Padilla as a dangerous terrorist long after it has become clear that he was just the wrong Muslim in the wrong airport on the wrong day? 
Why is Washington still holding hundreds of detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, long after years of interrogation and abuse have established that few, if any, of them are the deadly terrorists they have been held out to be? 
I once believed that the common thread here is presidential blindness -- an extreme executive-branch myopia that leads the chief executive to believe that these futile measures are integral to combating terrorism; a self-delusion that precludes Bush and his advisers from recognizing that Padilla is a chump and Guantanamo Bay is just a holding pen for a jumble of innocent or half-guilty wretches. 
But it has finally become clear that the goal of these efforts isn't to win the war against terrorism; indeed, nothing about Padilla or Guantanamo Bay moves the country an inch closer to eradicating terrorism. The object is a larger one: expanding executive power, for its own sake. 
A scrupulously reported piece on the Padilla case is illuminating: On Jan. 3, Nina Totenberg of National Public Radio interviewed Mark Corallo, who was spokesman for then-Attorney General John D. Ashcroft, about the behind-the-scenes decision-making in the Padilla case -- a case that has lolled through the federal courts for years. 
According to Totenberg, when the Supreme Court sent Padilla's case back to the lower federal courts on technical grounds in 2004, the Bush administration's sole concern was preserving its constitutional claim that it could hold citizens as enemy combatants. That's why Padilla was dragged back to the lower courts. 
This need to preserve new legal ground also explains the continued operation of the detention center at Guantanamo Bay. This month marked the fifth anniversary of the camp that -- as then-Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld claimed in 2002 -- houses only "the worst of the worst."  
Now that more than half of them have been released (the best of the worst?) and even though only about 80 will ever see trials, the camp remains open. Why? Civil rights groups worldwide and even close U.S. allies such as Denmark, England and Germany clamor for its closure. 
But Guantanamo Bay stays open for the same reason that Padilla stays on trial. Having claimed the right to label enemy combatants and detain them indefinitely without charges, the Bush administration cannot retreat from that position without ceding ground. 
The president is as much a prisoner of Guantanamo Bay as the detainees are.  
This newfound authority -- to maintain a disastrous Guantanamo Bay, to stage rights-free tribunals and to hold detainees forever -- is the kind of power that Richard M. Nixon could have only dreamed about and cannot be let go. 
Dahlia Lithwick covers legal affairs for Slate, the online magazine. 

Load-Date: January 21, 2007


End of Document