The terrorism continues
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 4, 1995, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 10A; EDITORIAL
Length: 434 words
Body


Two more murdered clinic workers, another five people wounded by gunfire. The  shootings at two neighboring abortion clinics last week in Massachusetts  illuminate a frightening truth about the deadly war against abortion: Women  exercising their legal right to obtain abortions and other health services,  along with the doctors and other employees and volunteers who work to honor  that right, are not safe.
Terroristic violence by the lunatic fringe of the anti-abortion movement is  not letting up. And it is not limited to Florida, as two deadly attacks in  Pensacola may have lulled people into believing. Efforts to stop it, including  the federal clinic access protection law that went into effect last year,  haven't been enough.
CLINIC
Clinic workers testifying in Congress last fall said attacks and threats  had become more violent than ever since Dr. David Gunn was killed outside a  Pensacola clinic in 1993. Dr. John Britton and his volunteer escort, James  Barrett, died from shots outside another Pensacola clinic last year. Clinic  owners spoke of frustration at trying to get anyone to enforce the new federal  law, which makes obstruction of entry to an abortion clinic a crime punishable  by a potential life sentence and stiff fines. And even if the new law were  vigorously enforced, it does nothing to provide physical protection at the  clinic door.
President Clinton finally has ordered all U.S. attorneys to take  responsibility for making clinics more secure. He ordered prosecutors to work  with federal, state and local authorities, and he also asked Attorney General  Janet Reno to determine whether further actions are warranted.
It is tragic that so many had to die before Washington began to respond  forcefully. When a British tourist was shot to death on a Florida highway last  year, the state quickly acted to post security officers at every single rest  stop. The cycle of violence at abortion clinics should have received similar  attention before now. It is also past time for federal authorities to become  more aggressive in investigating threats against abortion providers, using  some of the same tactics employed to combat other national conspiracies.
In the wake of the latest horrors, the National Conference of Catholic  Bishops is considering supporting Cardinal Bernard Law of Boston in his plea  that all clinic protests be halted, to calm the frenzy and reflect on the  insanity of committing murder in the name of the "pro-life" movement. Some  fanatics have already rejected the cardinal's plea, but such a reasoned call  could help defuse the growing danger. 

Load-Date: January 6, 1995


End of Document