THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: RESPONSE TO TERROR; Clark Attacks Bush Strategy On Terrorism As Mistaken
 The New York Times
December 23, 2003 Tuesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 745 words
Byline:  By EDWARD WYATT
Dateline: FLORENCE, S.C., Dec. 22  
Body


Gen. Wesley K. Clark on Monday blamed "bad leadership" by President Bush for the nation's heightened antiterrorism alert status, saying that it was a "strategic mistake" to shift resources to Iraq from the hunt for Osama bin Laden in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
     "A wise leadership would not have put us into Iraq at this time," General Clark told reporters after serving hot meals at Manna House, a nonprofit agency in this city in the northeastern part of the state. "Instead we'd have concentrated on Osama bin Laden." 
 The comment came on a day when several candidates for the Democratic presidential nomination took issue with the administration's financing of antiterrorist programs on the local level.
General Clark did not fault the Department of Homeland Security for raising the alert on Sunday to orange from yellow. Because there was no way to know the intelligence behind the alert, he said, the administration should be given the benefit of the doubt on that decision.
"But that doesn't change the reality," General Clark said. "We knew who attacked this country on 9/11 and it was not Saddam Hussein. It was Osama bin Laden and his terrorist network." 
"We should have gone after that network and we should have gone after it directly instead of taking half the United States Army and putting it in Iraq and using $150 billion and distracting us from our world leadership in the war on terror," he said. "It was a strategic mistake. I just hope that we'll be able to protect this country and we don't have more Americans who will suffer as a result of the president's bad leadership."
General Clark has proposed spending $40 billion in his first two years in office to improve domestic security. The money, which would come from rolling back Bush tax cuts for people earning more than $200,000 a year, would help police and fire departments pay for equipment and staffing to prepare for attacks.
In Davenport, Iowa, the campaign of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts released a plan to deal with the threat of terrorism in this country. It includes an Orange Alert Fund to help local governments pay for increased precautions when the alert level is raised; a program to educate Americans about responses to various terrorist threats; improved airport security for cargo planes; and resources to hire 5,000 local police officers trained to deal with terrorist emergencies.
"When the threat of terrorism is increasing, I'll do more than simply issue an orange alert," Mr. Kerry said in a statement. "As president, I'll make sure that towns and cities don't have to bear all the burden of increasing security, a price tag that can weigh in at several million dollars a day."
In Keene, N.H., Senator John Edwards of North Carolina said Americans had trouble with what the color-coded warnings mean.
"I have to say, in fairness to the administration, I understand what they're doing," Mr. Edwards said. "I mean, if they get some information, that may indicate that there may be some kind of an attack. But the reality is, if you're not telling people specifically what they should do, it's hard for the information to be useful."
Mr. Edwards's campaign issued a statement accusing the administration of not providing enough antiterror money for emergency workers. 
Campaigning in Storm Lake, Iowa, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri made the same accusation, saying most police officers and emergency response teams lacked adequate training and equipment.
"Every time we go on one of these orange alerts that we're on now, we have to bring people on to do overtime," Mr. Gephardt said. "We're not training them. We're not giving them the equipment they need. Bush talks a lot about this, but he doesn't play a very good game."
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut praised the decision to raise the alert status. "They made the right decision," he said in Manchester, N.H. "They had enough intelligence information to make me worry about the possibility of another terrorist attack and a serious one."
Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont who was criticized for saying Saddam Hussein's capture had not made America safer, declined to comment Monday morning when asked by a reporter about the change in alert. But a few hours later, a voter asked: "If we're all safer" because of the capture, why the orange alert? Dr. Dean grinned.
"I don't know," he told several hundred people in Exeter, N.H. "I'm not the guy who's in charge of orange alert."      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 23, 2003


End of Document