The Nation in Summary;
Two Allies Go Their Own Way On El Salvador
The New York Times
August 30, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 381 words
Byline: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron
Body


The Reagan Administration has called El Salvador's civil war a ''textbook case'' of Communist subversion, but many of Washington's allies hold a different interpretation. Mexico has long sought to promote negotiations to end the conflict. Last week, joined by the new Socialist Government of France, it recognized El Salvador's guerrilla-led opposition as ''a representative political force'' entitled to take part in negotiations.
Mexico and France issue joint statement recognizing guerrilla-led opposition in El Salvador as "representative political force"
The joint statement was presented to the current President of the United Nations Security Council. Diplomatic sources said Mexico and France were considering calling for a Security Council meeting to discuss ways of ending the Salvadoran conflict, which has taken more than 20,000 lives in the past 18 months.
The Salvadoran junta refuses to sit down with the guerrillas or their civilian arm, the Democratic Revolutionary Front. Washington is arming the junta to defeat the guerrillas while endorsing elections that would exclude them. The State Department called the action by France and Mexico ''unhelpful'' but not ''a complete disaster'' because it did not rescind recognition of the junta or accord the rebels equal standing with the regime.
The announcement came just as Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. was accusing Salvadoran leftists of resorting to ''straight terrorism'' - and sources ''outside Salvador, led first and foremost by Cuba,'' of aiding the guerrillas. Other Adminstration officials disclosed last week that Washington was considering a variety of countermeasures against Havana, including setting up a radio station to be beamed at Cuba.
The Government also intends to make it increasingly difficult for American concerns and their foreign affiliates to sidestep a trade embargo imposed on Cuba 20 years ago. The Administration has already asked for authority to use the Navy and Coast Guard to prevent any further attempts by Cuba to deport people to the United States. Last year, 125,000 Cubans, including convicted criminals and other undesirables, were shipped out from the port of Mariel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron


End of Document