THE CRASH OF TWA FLIGHT 800 HOW DID IT HAPPEN ? AUTHORITIES TRYING TO DETERMINE IF IT WAS ACCIDENT OR TERRORISM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 19, 1996, Friday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 836 words
Byline: Kiley Armstrong
Body


NEW YORK (AP) - A specter of doubt shrouded the deaths of the 230
people aboard the Paris-bound TWA jet after it exploded in flaming
chunks and corkscrewed into the ocean: Was it an accident or a
terrorist act?
President Clinton urged Americans not to immediately assume that
Wednesday night's crash of Flight 800 was the work of terrorists.
Officials said there had been calls claiming responsibility for the
crash, none of them credible.
Still, there were widespread suspicions that terrorists were behind
the second-worst U.S. airplane crash, which killed all 212 passengers
and 18 crew members.
"While all the evidence is not yet in, early signs clearly point to a
possibility of terrorism," said Rep. Benjamin Gilman, R-N.Y.,
chairman of the House International Relations Committee.
The FBI's terrorism task force took the lead role in the
investigation, but officials stressed that did not imply any
conclusion about the cause of the crash. The task force will work
alongside the National Transportation Safety Board, which routinely
investigates airline accidents.
At Kennedy Airport and airports in Paris and Rome - the plane's final
destination - shellshocked relatives of the victims were ushered into
private areas and comforted by counselors and clergy. Two busloads of
people arrived in New York from Montoursville, Pa., where townspeople
mourned the loss of 16 members of the high school French club and five
chaperones.
Coming on the eve of the Olympics, the crash cast a pall on athletes,
organizers and tourists in Atlanta, where security measures were
already tightened in advance of the Games.
Several miles off Long Island's coastline, remnants of the plane were
piled aboard the Coast Guard cutter Juniper - a piece of the tail, a
sink, less identifiable bits of metal and wood. Also piled up were
remnants of the lives: a poetry anthology, a post card written in
German.
On the search front
By late Thursday, searchers had recovered more than 125 bodies, many
of them charred.
Refrigerator trucks were brought to East Moriches, where a temporary
morgue was set up. Body parts and corpses were brought to the shore on
rafts, and workers in white jumpsuits put them in body bags.
A law enforcement official said he was told by the FBI that, based on
eyewitness accounts from Air National Guard pilots, investigators "are
leaning more towards the possibility that it was a bomb that caused
the plane to explode."
"A fireball fell from the sky," said the official, who spoke to The
Associated Press on the condition of anonymity. "What would have
caused that?  We know there was nothing on board, other than fuel,
that could have caused that huge an explosion."
Greek officials said the jetliner had passed multiple security checks
at the Athens airport earlier the same day.
Finding the culprit could take time. It took seven days for
investigators to determine conclusively that a bomb blew Pan Am Flight
103 out of the air Dec. 21, 1988, over Lockerbie, Scotland. A total of
270 people were killed, including 11 on the ground.
TWA's Flight 800 exploded off the coast of New York's trendy summer
playground about 8:40 p.m. Wednesday, breaking into flaming chunks and
crashing into the sea. The number of victims was raised by two to 230
Thursday night by the airline.
Capt. Steve Snyder, of Stratford, Conn., was in the pilot's seat,
doing a routine check of the performance of Capt. Ralph Kevorkian, of
Garden Grove, Calif., who was in the first officer's seat, said TWA
spokesman Mark Abels. Both were described as veteran 747 captains. "We
actually had two captains at the controls," Abels said.
Witness accounts
Two crews of New York Air National Guard flights witnessed the
explosion.
The crews "saw the fireball twisting as it came down, leaving a
corkscrew trail of smoke," said Lt. Col. Chuck Stueve, who talked to
them afterward. One crew radioed a mayday to the Coast Guard.
Civilian boaters swarmed to the scene, snagging flotsam and delivering
it to investigators ashore.
Racing over the glassy black water on a calm, dark night, Brian
Kelly's boat was one of the first to get there. "It became very real
when we saw the boat right next to us pull out that first body. It was
a lady with a white skirt," Kelly said.
Boater Frank Panzarella, of Dix Hills, who lugged ashore a flight
attendant's jump seat and two doors that apparently came from an
overhead compartment, said the Coast Guard was especially interested
in his other find: a soot-covered hinge, apparently from one of the
compartments. Police whisked Panzarella away.
Appleton, Wis., high school teacher Irene Rence, who had fumed while
she waited in Chicago Wednesday afternoon because her plane to New
York was delayed, missed connections to the ill-fated flight.
"Thank God for bad weather!" she said Thursday, recalling how she
finally got to Kennedy Airport four hours behind schedule, too late to
make the plane for Paris.
The crash was the second major airline disaster in slightly more than
two months, following the May 11 Florida Everglades crash of a ValuJet
DC-9 that killed all 110 people aboard.

Load-Date: July 19, 1996


End of Document