THE WAR ON IRAQ WAS TO COMBAT TERRORISM; SADDAM'S WEAPONS WERE SECONDARY
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 5, 2003 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 744 words
Body


The failure of the Bush team to produce any weapons of mass destruction in Iraq is becoming a big, big story. But is it the real story we should be concerned with? No. It was the wrong issue before the war, and it's the wrong issue now.
 Why? Because there were actually four reasons for this war: the real reason, the right reason, the moral reason and the stated reason.
The "real reason" for this war, which was never stated, was that after 9/11 America needed to hit someone in the Arab-Muslim world. Afghanistan wasn't enough. Because a terrorism bubble had built up over there -- a bubble that posed a real threat to the open societies of the West and needed to be punctured. This terrorism bubble said that plowing airplanes into the World Trade Center was OK, having Muslim preachers say it was OK was OK, having state-run newspapers call people who did such things "martyrs" was OK and allowing Muslim charities to raise money for such "martyrs" was OK. Not only was all this seen as OK, there was a feeling among radical Muslims that suicide bombing would level the balance of power between the Arab world and the West, because we had gone soft and their activists were ready to die.
 The only way to puncture that bubble was for American soldiers, men and women, to go into the heart of the Arab-Muslim world, house to house, and make clear that we are ready to kill, and to die, to prevent our open society from being undermined by this terrorism bubble. Smashing Saudi Arabia or Syria would have been fine. But we hit Saddam for one simple reason: Because we could, and because he deserved it and because he was right in the heart of that world.
 And don't believe the nonsense that this had no effect. Every neighboring government -- and 98 percent of terrorism is about what governments let happen -- got the message. If you talk to U.S. soldiers in Iraq they will tell you this is what the war was about.
 The "right reason" for this war was the need to partner with Iraqis, post-Saddam, to build a progressive Arab regime. Because the real weapons of mass destruction that threaten us were never Saddam's missiles. The real weapons that threaten us are the growing number of angry, humiliated young Arabs and Muslims, who are produced by failed or failing Arab states -- young people who hate America more than they love life. Helping to build a decent Iraq as a model for others and solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are the necessary steps for defusing the ideas of mass destruction, which are what really threaten us.
 The "moral reason" for the war was that Saddam's regime was an engine of mass destruction and genocide that had killed thousands of his own people, and neighbors, and needed to be stopped.
 But because the Bush team never dared to spell out the real reason for the war, and (wrongly) felt that it could never win public or world support for the right reasons and the moral reasons, it opted for the "stated reason": the notion that Saddam had weapons of mass destruction that posed an immediate threat to America. I argued before the war that Saddam posed no such threat to America, and had no links with al-Qaida, and that we couldn't take the nation to war "on the wings of a lie." I argued that Bush should fight this war for the right reasons and the moral reasons. But he stuck with this WMD argument for PR reasons.
 Once the war was over and I saw the mass graves and the true extent of Saddam's genocidal evil, my view was that Bush did not need to find any WMDs to justify the war for me. I still feel that way. But I have to admit that I've always been fighting my own war in Iraq. Bush took the country into his war. And if it turns out that he fabricated the evidence for his war (which I wouldn't conclude yet), that would badly damage America and be a very serious matter.
 But my ultimate point is this: Finding Iraq's WMDs is necessary to preserve the credibility of the Bush team, the neocons, Tony Blair and the CIA. But rebuilding Iraq is necessary to win the war.
 I won't feel one whit more secure if we find Saddam's WMDs, because I never felt he would use them on us. But I will feel terribly insecure if we fail to put Iraq onto a progressive path. Because if that doesn't happen, the terrorism bubble will reinflate and bad things will follow. Bush's credibility rides on finding WMD's, but America's future, and the future of the Mideast, rides on our building a different Iraq. We must not forget that.

Notes

Thomas L. Friedman is a syndicated columnist for The New York Times (thfrie@nytimes.com).  

Load-Date: June 5, 2003


End of Document