THE AFTERSHOCKS OF TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 19, 1996, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT Edition


Copyright 1996 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 16C; EDITORIAL
Length: 373 words
Body


As Americans observe the first anniversary of the bombing in Oklahoma City, other places across the world are reeling from the consequences of terrorism. On Wednesday, a bomb exploded in a residential section of London; fortunately no one was injured. On Thursday, at least 18 people lost their lives in Cairo when gunmen opened fire on a group of tourists lining up to board a bus. Over the past week, more than 120 people in Lebanon have died as a result of Israel's retaliation for Hezbollah's terrorist attacks against Israelis, Thursday's attack on a U.N. base being the most deadly.
The bomb blast in London was reportedly the work of the Irish Republican Army and is the fourth explosion since the IRA ended its 17-month cease-fire on Feb. 9. Most analysts believe the timing of the bomb was significant: It came a day after Britian announced laws for the elections preparatory for all-party talks on the future of Northern Ireland. The IRA opposes such elections, and the IRA's political wing, Sinn Fein, has articulated legitimate concerns. The solution, though, is not to resort to violence to express that opposition. That threatens the entire peace process. As Irish Premier John Bruton aptly said, "In a peace process, there is no half-way house between violence and peaceful politics."
In Egypt, the attack on Greek tourists presumably by Muslim terrorists came as a shock. Terror attacks, in general and on tourists in particular, had dramatically declined over the past year, largely due to a severe crackdown by the Egyptian government. Tourism, a critical source of foreign currency, was on the rebound. That will probably change now.
The Egyptian government will probably crack down severely again. But this incident should be a reminder that repression won't necessarily extinguish the problem. Muslim extremism in Egypt is linked both to the abysmal poverty of millions of Egyptians and their inability to get redress through the political system. Those must be addressed if the attraction of extremist groups is to be dulled.
Finally, U.S. diplomat John Ross is headed to the Middle East, and Secretary of State Warren Christopher may follow, to try to achieve a cease-fire in Lebanon and to salvage a fragile peace process.

Load-Date: April 19, 1996


End of Document