THE ROOTS OF TERRORISM ARE FOUND IN BRUTALITY OF SHATTERED CHILDHOOD
The New York Times
September 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk
Length: 2017 words
Byline: By DANIEL GOLEMAN
Body


THE route of the terrorist from childhood to a specific violent act is emerging in rich detail from new research. Researchers have found the making of a terrorist involves a unique interplay between the beliefs and dynamic of the terrorist group and the psychological makeup of its members.
The most important new data come from detailed interviews with and psychological tests of more than 500 members of terrorist organizations who are still at large, and with more than 100 who have been imprisoned for terrorist attacks in this country and abroad. Many of those studied were first interviewed in a study of children growing up in an atmosphere of violence, as in Northern Ireland.
Those studied range from terrorist factions of the Irish Republican Army and the Palestine Liberation Organization, to the lone survivor of the attack on Lod airport in Israel. Most recently, researchers have been studying ''Comrades,'' the black youths in South Africa who attack and kill other blacks they accuse of aiding the Pretoria Government.
The research was a major a topic at a meeting of the American Psychological Association in Washington last week. While there are many factors that give rise to terrorism, psychological researchers, naturally enough, focus on the emotional factors that lead one person rather than another to become a terrorist.
Of course, no generalization will fit every terrorist. What seems the essence of terrorism to one person may seem embodiment of patriotism to another. But, in general, the experts consider terrorists to be people who, in the name of what they consider a lofty moral cause, engage in indiscriminate acts of violence that victimize or instill terror in innocent people.
It is the cold-bloodedness of terrorists, their aloofness from the pain they cause their victims, that makes them seem a breed apart from normal people. But the research shows that most terrorists are not suffering from any particular psychological disorder. The experts say terrorists must be understood not just in terms of their individual psychology, but also in terms of the larger forces influencing their lives.
''There is a meeting of personal and historical forces at work'' in breeding the fanaticism that leads to terrorism, said Robert Jay Lifton, a psychiatrist at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, who has studied many kinds of extremists. ''Fanaticism breeds on social upheavals, such as the loss of traditional ways or devastating war, that leave people feeling dislocated, as though they and their world were falling apart.
''The loss of traditions that give meaning to life leaves people prey to extreme ideologies,'' he said. ''Clinging to some absolute truth brings a sense of stability and relief.''
''The hallmark of the fanatic's ideology is an apocalyptic vision that divides the world into good and evil,'' said Mortimer Ostow, a psychoanalyst on the faculty of the Jewish Theological Seminary.
This vision of the world, according to Dr. Ostow and others, is espoused in the doctrines of virtually all terrorist groups, including those as diverse as the Baader-Meinhof Gang in West Germany, Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge in Cambodia and the Ayatollah Khomeini's Party of God in Iran.
This view of a world split into good and bad joins with a strong sense of hopelessness felt by those who become terrorists, research shows. For many children who later join terrorist groups, the sense of hopelessness turns into burning rage, according to data collected by Rona Fields, a clinical psychologist in Alexandria, Va., who has tested more than 200 children, mainly in Northern Ireland, Palestinian refugee camps and the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Dr. Fields, who has spent 20 years interviewing and administering psychological tests to terrorists and children around the world, said she has later met many of the children she tested after they have joined terrorist groups.
In one test, in which children are shown pictures and make up stories about them, these children were unable to conjure hope even in imagination, she said. ''In their fantasy stories, terrible things happen to children, and there is nobody, including their mother and father, who can help,'' Dr. Fields said. ''In the stories of most healthy children, the same sorts of predicaments almost always end with a happy rescue.''
''These children fixate on an infantile sense of impotent rage, a rage which stays with them as they grow to adulthood,'' Dr. Fields said. ''Along with that rage they have neither the expectation nor hope of being anything other than powerless for the rest of their lives.''
But terrorist groups offer a way of looking at the world that both explains the present feelings of hopelessness and offers a way out.
''They describe a current or imminent conflict between the forces of good and evil, in which, though the forces of evil will prevail at first, they will ultimately be defeated by the forces of good,'' Dr. Ostow said. ''That victory will mark the end of the present era, and the initiation of a new era of peace, harmony and general exaltation.''
What sets these visions apart from similar religious beliefs is the idea that terrorists must act to bring this new era about and that any kind of action is justified. The terrorist's action will make the crucial difference. This, for example, is the view that impels Shiites in Lebanon to engage in suicide bombings.
When terrorists are led to brutality in the service of their cause, they see themselves as acting to save the world, some experts say. This, plus the rage that fuels their beliefs, leads to a callous attitude toward their victims, whom they sees as enemies in a vast drama of good and evil, the experts say.
''The coldly calculating bomb-planter or assassin is impervious to the restraint of ordinary emotions, like empathy or compassion,'' said William Dember, a psychologist at the University of Cincinnati. ''His ideology deadens his emotions.''
For many of the children who later become terrorists, the only adults who seem able to control their destiny and who offer positive models are those who belong to the terrorist groups, Dr. Fields said. In this respect, the new recruit finds solace in joining the group. The group and its leaders play the psychological role of a strong, protective parent.
''The fanatic needs a strong identification with a leader who offers him psychological strength he lacks,'' said Marvin Zonis, a political scientist and psychoanalyst at the University of Chicago. ''It provides a sense of wholeness he does not have on his own. Khomeini played upon his followers' sense of being victimized and rootless.''
Another finding emerging from the studies is that an unusually high proportion of those who have actually performed terrorist acts had, as young children, suffered a severe illness that brought them to the verge of death.
''Of the convicted terrorists we studied, close to half had a history of life-threatening illness,'' said Dr. Louis J. West, a psychiatrist at the University of California at Los Angeles, who studied terrorists from Europe and the United States. In those areas of the world, he said, only about 5 percent of most adults had survived such close brushes with death.
With his colleague, the late Jeanne Knudson, Dr. West analyzed in-depth interviews and psychological assessments of more than 100 convicted terrorists.
Psychologists have long observed, Dr. West said, that ''being so close to death at an early age, and spending so long immobilized in bed, is terrifying for a child.''
''The effect frequently is for the child to grow to adulthood with a denial of the risk of death,'' he said. ''Having come so close to it, he needs to prove to himself that he is not at risk of dying. Unconsciously, that can lead him to put himself in high-risk situations, like a hijacking, to prove he'll survive.''
While a bleak and angry outlook is typical of those who grow up in circumstances of oppression, many more people share such feelings than ever join the terrorist groups. The difference for those who do join, Dr. Fields said, is a critical incident that propels a person to take the next step.
For many of those who Dr. Fields first interviewed as children and who later joined terrorist groups, the key moment came when they were arrested in a broad police sweep and were tortured or brutalized in prison. In other cases, the brutality was directed at someone close to them.
''For boys, their treatment in prison almost invariably included threats of emasculation and genital torture,'' Dr. Fields said. ''The experience is a terrible blow to their identity as men, one which they redeem by joining these groups.''
For others, the immediate psychological motive to join seemed to be a combination of guilt and the wish for revenge. Dr. Fields examined Palestinian children who survived the 1982 massacres by Christian militiamen at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Lebanon, a month after the event. When she had tested boys there before the massacre, she found that they resented the military training they were forced to take from the age of eight, and that they were particularly antagonistic toward the members of the Palestine Liberation Organization who gave them the training.
''After the massacre, the boys felt both grief and intense guilt about their earlier feelings of resentment,'' Dr. Fields said. ''Psychologically, they somehow felt responsible for what had happened, and felt the only way they could make amends was by taking the place of those who had been killed. They were left with a monomaniacal obsession with revenge.'' Many of these children, she said, have since become recruits for terrorist units within the Palestinian movement.
Not all those who seek to become terrorists are accepted for that role, Dr. Fields said. Along with a burning anger, a terrorist needs to be able to keep his impulses under control until the right moment.
''The leaders of terrorist groups ''do not want the hotheads,'' said Dr. West. ''A terrorist needs self-control.''
Those who train terrorists, Dr. West said, seek recruits who are more emotionally stable than others in the group, and who are willing to follow rules and able to develop strong bonds with their comrades. Under the stress of a terrorist act, such as a hijacking, those bonds within a small unit of terrorists are more crucial than the initial commitment to the movement's ideals, according to Dr. West.
That is why terrorist groups tend to form into small cells of from 8 to 12 members who form ''family-like'' bonds. ''Before the group goes on a terrorist mission, they see only their own group members. They are isolated from everyone else, especially their own families, so they can focus 100 percent on the mission,'' Dr. West said.
Terrorist groups often borrow techniques used in more conventional military training. ''The training for these missions is intensely stressful, so that when it comes to desperate circumstances, even if the terrorists have second thoughts about the ideology, the bonds with their fellows will carry them through,'' Dr. West said. ''At that point, they feel they could not face life if they let down their comrades.''
The organizational style of terrorist groups varies greatly, from the anarchic to the highly structured, according to Dr. Fields. The more experienced a group and the more politically sophisticated its leadership, the more it tends to engage only in carefully planned and well-targeted missions, such as many of those carried out by the Vietcong.
The young terrorists in South Africa's black townships exhibit the most naive level of political understanding, according to some experts. The terrorists there do not belong to any central organization, but arise among groups of friends in the townships, who act simply from their sense of rage, without any clear political agenda.
''They have an anarchic, childish political view that sees power and violence as the same,'' said Dr. Fields. ''If they understood politics better, they would see that they have other options, like organizing the community, that might be more effective.''

Graphic

 
photo of Dr. Rona Fields (NYT/Jose Lopez) (page C8)


End of Document