The U.S. v. the Sheik
The New York Times
August 27, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section A;; Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Column 1;; Editorial
Length: 601 words
Body


Attorney General Janet Reno surely made a popular call when she approved the indictment of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and 14 others on charges of conspiring "to levy a war of urban terrorism against the United States," and other crimes.
Since the deadly February bomb attack at New York City's World Trade Center, New Yorkers especially have felt vulnerable to international terrorism. For many, the sheik, with his inflammatory preaching and the bloody deeds attributed to his followers, has come to symbolize the danger.
In the short run, the indictment could provoke further terrorism. And its dependence on a rarely used law and on the taped testimony of a government informant may make it vulnerable in court.
Still, given the legal options available to her, the Attorney General's popular call was also the right call. Fear of new violence from Mr. Abdel Rahman's supporters cannot justify overlooking evidence of his criminal involvement. And putting him on trial in the United States is more likely to produce trustworthy information and assure due process than extraditing him to Egypt or deporting him to Afghanistan.
 Federal investigators still have not been able to pin any direct involvement in overt terrorist actions on Sheik Abdel Rahman. Prosecutors instead brought charges under a seditious-conspiracy law first used against die-hard Confederates after the Civil War.
These charges were backed by testimony from the informant, some of it on tape, that appeared to place Mr. Abdel Rahman in discussions of the political and religious implications of potential bombing targets. The indictment also accuses him of conspiring to assassinate President Mubarak of Egypt during a planned official visit to New York.
Mr. Abdel Rahman, whose main goal all along has seemed to be the overthrow of secular government in his home country of Egypt, was tried on similar terrorist conspiracy charges there more than a decade ago and was acquitted. After that he spent time in the Sudan and Pakistan, helping the C.I.A.-backed Islamic rebels in Afghanistan. Despite being on a list of excludables, he was repeatedly granted visas to enter the United States -- visas approved, as it happened, by C.I.A. agents assigned to the U.S. consulate in Khartoum, the Sudan.
Some of the crimes in the indictment, notably the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, were committed before Mr. Abdel Rahman took up residence in this country. Nevertheless the indictment names him as a leader of the purported terrorist organization.
The overt acts of terrorism described in the indictment were said to be carried out by lower-level operatives. Since some of the alleged organization's members remain at large, there's at least a chance of further incidents. And since the indictment asserts that one of the accused conspirators, El Sayyid A. Nosair, plotted further terrorist acts after his imprisonment, even detention seems no guarantee of deterrence.
Two months ago Ms. Reno decided not to seek indictment of Mr. Abdel Rahman, reasoning that an unsuccessful prosecution might do more harm than none at all. What later changed her mind was more careful study of the available evidence and the realization that conspiracy charges would allow prosecutors to admit evidence in court that might otherwise be ruled out.
In the end, she and her top advisers, including Mary Jo White, the U.S. Attorney for New York's Southern District, made a politically and legally sound judgment. By putting their faith in American law and American courts, they best served the interests of justice, due process and the fight against international terrorism.

Load-Date: August 27, 1993


End of Document