THE WORLD ;

The New York Times
June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 427 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger
Body


Reagan Tries
 
Moderation
 
With Moscow
The backdrops were Irish, French and British last week, but President Reagan was nonetheless speaking to the Russians - and to American voters concerned about relations with Moscow. Addressing the Irish Parliament in Dublin, he offered to take up a Soviet demand for a NATO declaration renouncing the use of force, if Moscow would negotiate on NATO proposals which, he said, would ''give concrete new meaning to that principle.''
A similar combination has been promoted at the Stockholm conference on European security and confidence-building by the group of countries that call themselves neutral and nonaligned. Previously, the United States has rejected the declaration, saying it would merely repeat United Nations commitments and might draw NATO into a pledge not to be first to use nuclear weapons.
At memorial services in Normandy, Mr. Reagan called for ''reconciliation with the Soviet Union,'' paying tribute to 20 million Russians who died in World War II. But he also criticized the Soviet troops in Eastern Europe, saying they were ''uninvited, unwanted, unyielding, almost 40 years after the war.'' East-West relations came up again when Mr. Reagan met with leaders of the most powerful Western countries at the economic summit in London. They called for speedy resumption of the suspended Geneva negotiations on arms control, taking note of United States willingness to resume the talks without preconditions. The Western leaders also endorsed the opening toward the Soviet proposal for a new commitment to renounce the use of force that Mr. Reagan had suggested in Dublin.
Early reactions from Moscow were not encouraging. The Novosti press agency there insisted Mr. Reagan had said ''nothing new'' in Dublin. And Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader, repeated Moscow's refusal to resume the arms control talks at Geneva unless the United States dismantles its new nuclear missiles in Western Europe.
The Western leaders also discussed international terrorism, but they were evidently unable to agree about how to combat it. The official statement merely reported ''support in the discussion'' for closer coordination among police and security organizations and a ''review'' of the sale of weapons to countries that support terrorists.
Without naming Libya, but clearly referring to the recent shooting in front of that country's People's Bureau in London, they expressed serious concern at ''the increasing involvement of states and governments in acts of terrorism, includng the abuse of diplomatic immunity.''


End of Document