The Summit by the Bay
The New York Times
October 15, 1998, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 466 words
Body


The Wye Plantation on Maryland's Eastern Shore does not have the same ring as Camp David, but events there over the next few days may affect the Middle East as much as the Camp David accords did two decades ago. Israeli and Palestinian leaders meeting at the Chesapeake retreat can put the Middle East back on a course toward peace. It is an opportunity they must not misplay.
Nominally, the talks between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, will be about arrangements for an overdue Israeli troop withdrawal from part of the West Bank. But they are really about reviving the basic Oslo formula by which Israel agreed to grant the Palestinians land and self-government in exchange for guarantees of peace and effective cooperation against terrorism. The talks may be the last chance to keep the Oslo timetable on track toward a comprehensive settlement next year.
Tireless American diplomacy has brought the two sides close to agreement on the Israeli withdrawal and on Palestinian measures against terrorism. Mr. Arafat has agreed in principle to accept Israel's tentative offer of a further 13 percent of West Bank territory, with 3 percent designated as a nature preserve to limit residential construction. The Palestinians reasonably want this new territory to be coherent, not a string of isolated enclaves.
As a condition for withdrawing, Israel rightly insists that the Palestinians live up to security commitments they have repeatedly broken. There can be no excuse for half-hearted efforts to prevent and punish terrorism. Washington has proposed a plan for close American vetting of Palestinian security measures. Israel should accept this plan.
The two sides will also discuss releases of Palestinian prisoners, opening an industrial park and airport in the Gaza Strip and free-passage corridors between Gaza and the West Bank. These tangible benefits can help overcome the resentment and poverty that fuel Palestinian terrorism, and should have been approved by Israel long ago.
Israel and the Palestinians may also need to extend beyond next May the timetable for negotiating the difficult remaining issues of a final peace accord -- the future of Jewish settlements, arrangements concerning Jerusalem and possible Palestinian statehood. Mr. Arafat should disavow any intention to abandon the talks and to proclaim the creation of an independent Palestinian state come May. It is equally imperative that Ariel Sharon, the new Israeli Foreign Minister, not let his aversion to the Oslo plan undermine the negotiations.
America's role in convening these talks has been vital, but only Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Arafat can assure their success. To do so, both must rise above petty maneuvering and blame-mongering and recommit themselves to a realistic peace.

Load-Date: October 15, 1998


End of Document