The outcome of U.S. errors & weakness
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 1, 2014 Monday


Copyright 2014 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 583 words
Byline: By Ralph R. Reiland
Body


New York Times columnist Roger Cohen became the newspaper's acting foreign editor on Sept. 11, 2001, the day that suicidal extremists from al-Qaida delivered the deadliest terrorist attack on U.S. soil in American history, killing nearly 3,000 people and inflicting more than $10 billion in property and infrastructure damage. 
Now, 13 years later, Cohen in his Aug. 26 column, "The Making of a Disaster," focuses on what went wrong for the U.S. and its allies in the war on terror "after the expenditure of so much blood and treasure" and currently faced with "the recorded beheading of the American journalist James Foley, with the promise of more to come." 
Cohen states that "the list of American errors is long" regarding military and political policies dealing with terrorism. 
Starting with "Bush's ill-conceived and bungled war in Iraq," Cohen moves to a catalog of the Obama administration's geopolitical blunders, beginning with the "prolonged spate of dithering over the Syrian war during which Obama declared three years ago that "˜the time has come for President Assad to step aside' without having any plan to achieve that." 
There was, additionally, the associated "lack of resolve in Syria that saw Obama set a red line on the use of chemical weapons only to back away from military force when chemical weapons were used," plus "an inability to see that no one loves an Arab vacuum like jihadi extremists, and a bloody vacuum was precisely what Obama allowed Syria to become." 
There was, likewise, U.S. "inattention, until it was too late, to festering sectarian conflict in a broken Iraqi society left to its fate by a complete American withdrawal." 
The woeful summary of America's performance: an "ill-conceived and bungled war" and a sequel of presidential "dithering." 
The result? "The chicken that came home to roost from the Syrian debacle is called ISIS," states Cohen, a threat that developed and expanded by way of "American weakness." 
"But the deepest American and Western defeat has been ideological," warns Cohen, referring to an analysis by Ghaffar Hussain at the Quilliam Foundation, a British research group that contests religious extremism. 
With an estimated 500 to 800 British Muslims headed for Syria and Iraq to enlist in the jihadi ranks, Cohen quotes Hussain on the allure of terrorism: "Many young British Muslims are confused about their identity, and they buy into a narrow framework that can explain events. ISIS makes them feel part of a grand struggle. If you don't have a concerted strategy to undermine their narrative, their values, their worldview, you are not going to succeed." 
Not so long ago, the United States had a straightforward leader who employed a concerted and unyielding strategy to undermine the narrative of America's adversaries. America's "experiment in liberty" is the "last, best hope of man," declared Ronald Reagan in a 1983 speech. The Soviet Union, in contrast, was "the focus of evil in the modern world," he stated, an empire seeking to entrap mankind in "totalitarian darkness," preaching the "supremacy of the state" and declaring the state's "omnipotence over individual man." 
New York Times columnist Anthony Lewis labeled Reagan's speech as "dangerous" and "primitive." Celebrated historian Henry Steele Commager (born in Pittsburgh, 1902) called it "the worst presidential speech in history." 
Ralph R. Reiland is an associate professor of economics at Robert Morris University and a local restaurateur (rrreiland@aol.com). 

Load-Date: September 3, 2014


End of Document