The Terror We Inflict On Others
The New York Times
May 29, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 2; Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 5; THEATER
Length: 698 words
Byline: By ERIN E. ARVEDLUND
Dateline: MOSCOW 
Body


PASSENGERS glumly wait out a bomb scare at the airport, while back home their husbands and wives commit adultery and co-workers hang themselves. A grandmother plots the death of her daughter's ''ethnic'' husband, while her grandson terrorizes the neighbors.
 The play ''Terrorism'' was first staged in Moscow in 2002, then mounted to acclaim the following year at London's Royal Court Theater Upstairs. It is now playing in New York at the Clurman Theater/Theater Row. 
  There are no explosions onstage -- except metaphorically. Rather, the play depicts the sort of terrorism that ordinary people inflict on one another, and the fears that allow people to terrorize in everyday life. ''Terrorism'' depicts people disappointing and then punishing one another; bosses and colleagues mutually terrorized in the banal setting that is corporate life; and law enforcement officers, those society places in charge of its protection, privately mocking our vulnerability. 
 The play's chief hero is billed simply as ''Passenger,'' a man who in the first scene races to an airport only to face long delays from suspected suitcase bombs on the runway. In the second scene, the Passenger's wife and her lover do battle -- sexually and literally -- back at the apartment, while in the third, the hero's employees grapple with a shocking workplace suicide by one of their colleagues.
 ''It's a complex structure,'' said Oleg Presnyakov, the elder of the two brothers who wrote the play. ''But in each of them is this fear. The hero goes on a trip, leaves his wife at home. She then invites over her lover, and after that the hero launches some sort of mechanism of aggression.'' 
 In later scenes, a grandmother schemes how to break up her daughter's marriage to an ''ethnic'' son-in-law by poisoning him, and local police investigating a gas explosion swap wickedly perverse photos of the victims.
 Since their first play appeared in Russia's capital city, the Brothers Presnyakov have become ''something of a trademark,'' wrote the local English-language daily The Moscow Times in a review last year. They also penned ''Playing the Victim,'' another savage look at the unraveling of society amid violence. 
 ''Terrorism'' resonated with audiences in England and Spain, the duo said, given recent attacks like the Madrid train bombing. ''But we wrote the play before then, and we haven't changed anything. The play can be put on anywhere,'' Oleg added. ''It has universal appeal.''
 Wearing identical red plaid jackets, Oleg, 35, and his brother Vladimir, 31, sat for an interview at Akademiya cafe just across from Moscow's famed Stanislavsky method acting school and the Chekhov theater. They tend to speak as ''we'' most of the time. As for the jackets, Vladimir explained, ''It's easier to find each other that way.'' 
 Born and brought up in the Siberian city of Yekaterinburg, they both attended Gorky Ural State University. Oleg defended a dissertation on Andrey Bely, the Russian Symbolist author, and taught literary theory. Vladimir did post-graduate work and taught psychology at the university, where they created a youth theater dedicated to experimental works.
 The terrorist attacks at the Moscow theater and the deadly siege at a school in Beslan in southern Russia give the play plenty of resonance for Russians, but the brothers believe that the ''CNN effect'' of broadcasting terrorism has spread these fears to a global audience.
 Americans in particular will identify with Passengers One and Two, who in the final scene talk about the senselessness of violence against the innocent -- and yet come to realize that still, neither one trusts the other. 
 ''People are very informed about what's happening in the world, but it seems to us it's important that people be conscious of the idea and not fence off or partition their fears,'' Vladimir said. But the main goal was to prompt reflection on the individual's role in creating and perpetuating a kind of terrorism in daily life, Oleg said. 
 ''The people who build thick walls around themselves, they are indefensible,'' Oleg said. ''But the person who wants to overcome this fear, more than anything, should concentrate his view on himself.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Oleg, left, and Vladimir Presnyakov wrote ''Terrorism,'' now showing in New York.     

Load-Date: May 29, 2005


End of Document