The True Nature of Terrorism
The Chronicle of Higher Education
September 16, 2005, Friday


Copyright 2005 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR; Pg. 55
Length: 847 words
Body


To the Editor:
Labeling what Steven Best does as terrorism is extreme and dilutes the acts that are really terrorism -- e.g., the mass killing of innocent people ("Speaking for the Animals, or the Terrorists?," The Chronicle, August 5).
Destroying property and committing acts of violence never achieve the desired outcome. Nobody wins, except perhaps the media. … Acts of violence do not, and never will, speed up long-lasting change; they serve only to divide people.
We have processes for effecting change in this country. Although they may not be as sensationalist as destroying property, and although they may take a while to accomplish the end result, changing laws and educating the public are the best routes for making long-lasting change.
Leslie Johnson
Executive Assistant to the Chancellor
Antioch University
Yellow Springs, Ohio
***
To the Editor:
The argument in this case has nothing to do with animal rights or the Animal Liberation Front. It has solely to do with Steven Best's words and actions.
In any society -- but particularly in our current fear-ridden one -- protection of speech and thought must be stretched to its outermost limits. And I think Professor Best's behavior comes well within those limits.
Donald Mintz
Professor Emeritus of Music History
Montclair State University
Montclair, N.J.
***
To the Editor:
I was happy to see your article on one of the more interesting and controversial scholar-activists at work today. Your readers should look at Steven Best's Web site (http://www .drstevebest.org) and The Postmodern Adventure (Guilford Press, 2001), which he wrote with Douglas Kellner, if they want to understand the theoretical and political underpinnings of how he has come to stand where he does. …
Clearly, Best has come out in Marcusian fashion as the latest in a line of Frankfurt School theorists who take very seriously the philosophic challenge not just to understand the world, but to change it. Ultimately, change will come about only with a qualitative change in the relations between culture and nature, on the one hand, and human and nonhuman animals, on the other. …
Richard Kahn
Ph.D. Candidate in Education
University of California
Los Angeles
***
To the Editor:
About 11 years ago, Paul R. Gross and I published a book that made some very critical comments about Steven Best for propounding pseudoscientific nonsense about physics, chaos theory, and so forth. … Elsewhere in the book, we had some unflattering things to say about animal-rights activism, but we were unaware, at that point, how fiercely Best would embrace that cause.
That said, let me address the immediate question at issue: What, if anything, should his institution do about his arguably intemperate actions on behalf of the ALF and its saboteurs? My answer is that the proper course of the University of Texas at El Paso is to do nothing in particular. The default assumption has to be that Best is merely giving his opinions on the state of the world, albeit with inside information. He has an absolute right to do so.
If Best is vulnerable to criminal prosecution, that is not for the university to decide. Being an academic does not confer any particular immunity on him. But, by the same token, being an academic institution does not confer any particular ability on the university to judge whether the law has been transgressed. This is simply not a game that universities ought to play. … Their job is to keep open a forum for ideas without placing any of them off limits.
Norman J. Levitt
Professor of Mathematics
Busch Campus
Rutgers University
Piscataway, N.J.
***
To the Editor:
Steven Best is a courageous and provocative thinker. His unequivocal commitment to principle merits admiration. …
It is sublimely perverse to suggest that animal-rights activists are terrorists. Professor Best's activism is grounded in opposition to the indiscriminate destruction of life. Only in America, where property is sacred and life is cheap, could that opposition be so cunningly conflated with terrorism. The comparison would be laughable if the scale and sorrow of animal suffering today were not so heartbreaking.
Leana Stormont
Iowa City
***
To the Editor:
As the child of Jewish survivors of Nazi-occupied Poland, I am particularly sympathetic to Steven Best's apt comparison of the animal-rights and abolition movements. One of my epiphanies on the road to becoming a vegetarian happened while seeing images of piles of cow bodies that were to be incinerated in response to England's mad-cow outbreak. The pictures put me in mind of pictures I had seen of atrocities during the Holocaust. …
That Professor Best is entitled to free speech is not the question here, although it is frightening in this post-9/11 era that there are those who think otherwise. The onus is upon anyone who works in education to question state-sponsored curricula and instead engage students in the active process of critical thinking. The responsibility is compounded for someone teaching philosophy. …
I applaud the fact that Best is acting on his beliefs, not just philosophizing about them. …
Debbie Taus-Kahn
Los Angeles

Load-Date: September 13, 2005


End of Document