The Calendar
The New York Times
March 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 649 words
Byline: By Barbara Gamarekian
Body


Monday
The daffodils are popping up along Rock Creek Park. But there is not likely to be much evidence of spring fever around the capital this week as Congress and Administration officials wrestle with the budget, the economy and unrest in Latin America, especially in El Salvador.
Foreign Minister Yoshio Sakurauchi of Japan, on his first foreign trip since his appointment last November, meets with President Reagan today and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. tomorrow. It's expected they'll discuss world issues in general as well as sensitive trade relations.
Calendar of this week's events in Washington
White Collar Crime: It is called ''the $40 billion ripoff'' and it goes under scrutiny at a two-day meeting of the American Society for Industrial Security. 8:30 A.M. Shoreham Hotel.
Yellow Rain: The Administration makes public its report on chemical warfare by the Russians in Afghanistan, Laos and Cambodia. Likely to stir controversy, doubts, denials. 11 A.M. State Department.
Floor Agenda: The Senate will continue debate on the ''Overhauling of Administration Procedures Act.'' That's bureaucratese for regulatory reform.
African Focus: The Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Chester Crocker, will be the leadoff witness before the Senate Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism on the reports that Cuba, the Soviet Union and East Germany may be fomenting terrorism in South Africa. 9:30 A.M., Room 2228, Dirksen Office Building.
Money Talks: Should banks be able to offer depositors a short-term certificate that can compete with money market funds? That is the question the Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee will take up when it meets at the Treasury Department. 3:30 P.M. Cash Room.
 
Tuesday
The President flies to New York to receive the Charles Evans Hughes Gold Medal, awarded by the National Conference of Christians and Jews for ''courageous leadership in government, civic and humanitarian affairs.'' 7 P.M. New York Hilton.
Looking It Over: The House subcommittees on Inter-American Affairs and International Economic Policy and Trade hold the first of a series of four joint hearings on Mr. Reagan's Caribbean Basin initiative. Administration witnesses to appear. 2 P.M., Room 2172, Rayburn Building.
Holding the Line: With gasoline and heating oil prices down and the recession biting hard into business activities, hopes are high that the Consumer Price Index for February, due out today, will show a rise as low or lower than the 0.3 increase recorded in January.
On the Bench: The Supreme Court will utilize electronic equipment for the first time when a deaf lawyer uses a special computerized device allowing him to argue on behalf of a client. The client is a deaf fourth grader seeking to force her Westchester County school district to provide a sign-language interpreter. 10 A.M.
Hot Debate: It's expected in Room 2228 of the Dirksen Office Building at 3:30 P.M. when the Senate Judiciary Committee tries to give final shape to the Voting Rights Act.
 
Wednesday
The Democratic National Committee begins final consideration of proposals for a more perfect Presidential nominating system. Newly suggested rules would provide for a shortened primary process and insure the inclusion of more party and elected officials. Shoreham Hotel.
 
Thursday
President Reagan meets with President Sandro Pertini of Italy, who is here on an official visit. He'll also be entertained tonight at a White House dinner by two Americans of Italian descent who have made it big, Perry Como and Frank Sinatra.
Dealing With Dying: Several hundred legal and medical experts, theologians, academics and bioethicists gather for a three-day conference on questions surrounding the terminally ill. National Presbyterian Center.
 
Friday National Commission on Social Security holds second meeting in study of Social Security reform. 9:30 A.M., Room 5110, Dirksen Office Building.

Graphic

 
Illustrations: drawing


End of Document