THE TERRORIST MEND
The New York Times
June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk; Review
Length: 1176 words
Byline: By DAVID FROMKIN; David Fromkin is an international lawyer who has written on terrorism. His history of the creation of the modern Middle East is scheduled for publication early next year.
Body


ALCHEMISTS OF REVOLUTION
Terrorism in the Modern World. By Richard E. Rubenstein. 266 pp. New York: Basic Books. $17.95.
TERRORISM is indeed a plague that imperils the modern world. A reliable guide to its causes and cures would be of inestimable value. Richard E. Rubenstein, a professor at the Antioch School of Law in Washington, promises but does not provide one. His concise book, ''Alchemists of Revolution,'' is immensely readable and exceptionally well written, but it manages to get major points wrong, including the meaning of the quoted phrase that serves as its title.
''Years ago, Karl Marx pilloried the terrorists, calling them 'alchemists of the revolution,' '' Mr. Rubenstein tells us. But in fact the ''alchemists of the revolution'' whom Marx denounced were not terrorists as such, but all who propose to initiate a proletarian revolution before the masses are ready.
Mr. Rubenstein devotes much of his book to addressing those who seek a working-class revolution, and focuses on the question of whether terrorism is an effective strategy for bringing such a revolution about. He defines terrorism in a narrow and special sense, useful perhaps in conducting this particular line of inquiry, but unhelpful in conducting any other. He sees terrorism as the violence of small groups whose aim and claim is to represent the masses. The strategy of terrorism, as he describes it, is to start a fight into which the masses, caught in a crossfire, will be dragged, however unwillingly, in opposition to the authorities.
Aligning himself with Leon Trotsky, Mr. Rubenstein pictures terrorism solely as an activity of the intelligentsia, resulting from their isolation at certain places and times. But in fact terrorist campaigns are sometimes initiated by people who are not members of the intelligentsia. Algeria, scene of one of the most successful terrorist campaigns of the 20th century, provides a case in point. The Algerian terror campaign of the middle 1950's, intended to win independence from France, was launched by the nine historic founders of the revolutionary organization known as the F.L.N.; none of them, according to Alistair Horne's authoritative ''Savage War of Peace,'' was an intellectual.
Mr. Rubenstein's account of the Algerian uprising is confused. So is his account of events in the Far East: thus the ''kidnapping of Chiang Kai-shek by Red guerrillas'' to which he refers must mean the Sian incident, in which Chiang was taken prisoner, not by Reds or guerrillas, but by one of his own warlord commanders. MR. RUBENSTEIN reaches the conclusion, based on his analysis of terrorists and terrorism in various parts of the world, that terrorism is not an effective strategy for achieving a social revolution. ''No terrorist act has ever mobilized the masses,'' he writes. True, government by the working class has never been brought about by terrorism; but it seems only fair to point out that it has never been brought about by any other means either.
Mr. Rubenstein argues that the tendency of terrorism is to bring about nationalist rather than socialist revolutions. He seems to deplore this when addressing readers who advocate social revolution, but to sympathize with nationalists when addressing the rest of us.
He argues - correctly, in my view - that terrorist groups have a life of their own, independent of the Libyan, Syrian, Iranian or other governments that may find it useful at times to sponsor them; and sensibly, he points out that ''retaliation based on the principle of collective responsibility for terrorist actions follows precisely the adversary's script.'' But he founders when he goes on to argue that terrorists are just like you and me.
To think of Khomeini-inspired suicide squads as different from ourselves, he contends, ''is essentially racist, since it assumes that 'civilized' Westerners, when aroused, do not seek martyrdom. . . . In the United States, military martyrs are given the Congressional Medal of Honor posthumously.'' Are there any United States troops who seek martyrdom? If so, I wonder who they are. I have known soldiers who aspired to win the Medal of Honor, but none who hoped to win it posthumously. In his classic study ''The Face of Battle,'' John Keegan finds a number of principal reasons why Western troops have performed feats of valor on the battlefield -and a thirst for martyrdom is not among them.
Only someone with at least some sympathy for terrorism is likely to provide an understanding of the terrorist mind, and that makes it a pity that ''Alchemists of Revolution'' is not as helpful as it is provocative. In part the problem is Richard Rubenstein's narrow definition of his subject. It excludes much of what we - and even he - commonly refer to as terrorism. Terrorism takes its name from the policy pursued by Robespierre and his Jacobin colleagues during the French Revolution. But that was the policy of a government; therefore, in the Rubenstein definition, it was not terrorism. Confusingly, the Rubenstein classification also makes terrorists out of some who were not, such as the Spanish nationalists of the early 1800's whose activities gave us the word guerrilla. His definition blurs the important distinction between guerrilla warfare and terrorism, impairing our understanding of both.
Indeed, it seems to me that Mr. Rubenstein misses the essence of terrorism: that it is a strategy that aims to achieve its ultimate objectives not through violence but through terror. That is what distinguishes it from all other strategies. Someone who shoots a government official out of hatred is an ordinary murderer; but someone who shoots a government official, about whom he may have no feelings at all, in order to goad a frightened government into reacting in a self-defeating way, is a terrorist. In the first case the violence accomplishes what its perpetrator desires. In the second the violence in and of itself accomplishes nothing that its perpetrator really cares about; it is only the fear generated by the violence that can bring about what he wants.
So the terrorist is always in the ironic position of killing or maiming people not even he has any particular desire to hurt. That is why newspapers often describe terrorist carnage as senseless, and why terrorism is a uniquely horrible strategy: its victims, often chosen at random, are history's innocent bystanders.
Is there any way to eradicate the evil of terrorism? Believing American imperialism to be its cause, Mr. Rubenstein argues that ''no effective response [to terrorism] is possible within the boundaries set by conventional liberalism and conservatism.'' He appeals to the American people (as opposed to their leaders) to force a radical change: ''Our policy must be to uproot the causes of terrorism by putting an end to American-sponsored oppression of classes, nations, and ethnic communities, and by permitting young intellectuals to be reunited through collective action with their people.'' Readers will judge for themselves the merits of this diagnosis and of this prescription.


End of Document