TheCall Christian prayer event opens; Detroit Muslims on edge
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
November 12, 2011, Saturday


Copyright 2011 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P15A
Length: 466 words
Byline: Jeff Karoub, The Associated Press
Body


DETROIT - A group that counts Islam among the ills facing the nation began a 24-hour prayer rally Friday evening in an area with one of the largest Muslim communities in the United States.
The gathering in Detroit at Ford Field, the stadium where the Detroit Lions play, started Friday evening and is designed to tackle issues such as the economy, racial strife, same-sex relationships and abortion. However, the decade-old organization known as TheCall has said Detroit is a "microcosm of our national crisis" in all areas, including "the rising tide of the Islamic movement."
Leaders of TheCall believe a satanic spirit is shaping all parts of U.S. society, and it must be challenged through intensive Christian prayer and fasting. Such a demonic spirit has taken hold of specific areas, Detroit among them, organizers say. In the months ahead of their rallies, teams of local organizers often travel their communities performing a ritual called "divorcing Baal," the name of a demon spirit, to drive out the devil from each location.
"Our concern is that we are literally being demonized by the organizers of this group," said Dawud Walid, executive director of Council on American-Islamic Relations' Michigan chapter, which last week urged local mosques and Islamic schools to increase security. "And given the recent history of other groups that have come into Michigan ... we're concerned about this prayer vigil stoking up the flames of divisiveness in the community."
The Detroit area has between 150,000 and 200,000 Muslims.
As with many other Christian groups, TheCall and its adherents believe Jesus is the only path to salvation. While they consider all other religions false, they have a specific focus on Islam - largely in response to the Sept. 11 al-Qaida terrorist attacks, terrorism overseas and fear that Islam, which is also a proselytizing faith, will spread faster than Christianity.
TheCall is modeled partly on the Promise Keepers, the men's stadium prayer movement formed in the 1990s. TheCall's first major rally was in September 2000 on the national Mall in Washington, drawing tens of thousands of young people to pray for a Christian revival in America. Co-founder Lou Engle has organized similar rallies in several cities, including a 2008 event at San Diego's Qualcomm Stadium two days before Election Day to generate support for Proposition 8, which banned gay marriage in California.
Theologically, Engle is part of a stream of Pentecostalism that is independent of any denomination and is intensely focused on the end times.
Ellis Smith of Detroit's Jubilee City Church said attendees won't be "praying against Muslims," but rather "against terrorism that has its roots in Islam."
"We're dealing with extremism," he said. "We're against extremism when it comes to Christians."

Load-Date: November 14, 2011


End of Document