Theological Discussion on Testifying Emerges in Terrorism Case
The New York Times
August 8, 1999, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk 
Section: Section 1; ; Section 1; Page 33; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 910 words
Byline: By BENJAMIN WEISER 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
Body


In refusing on Thursday to release a Florida man jailed for declining to testify before a grand jury, a judge cited an unusual source: the Koran.
"Hide not testimony," wrote Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan. "He who hideth it, verily his heart is sinful. Allah is aware of what ye do."
The reluctant witness, Ihab M. Ali, 36, of Orlando, Fla., had refused to testify before a grand jury investigating the bombings of the United States Embassies in Africa last August. He had told Judge Patterson that the Koran taught Muslims to do nothing that "will cause harm to innocents." Testifying, he said, would be regarded by his community as "a major sin" and "a betrayal of our beliefs as Muslims."
The Government, of course, sharply disagreed. In one hearing last month, a Federal prosecutor, Patrick J. Fitzgerald, read aloud from the Koran, quoting its admonition not to hide testimony, and another that "witnesses must not refuse when they are summoned."
If the proceedings before Judge Patterson began to sound like a religious studies seminar, it was not surprising. The contempt case -- the first known to have occurred in the investigation of Osama bin Laden, who authorities suspect is the mastermind of the bombings -- has touched on the sensitive issue of how the Government treats Muslims in the United States. Some critics have charged that the Government's investigation into terrorism has unfairly targeted Muslims, an assertion the Government roundly denies.
The Government has not said why it wants to question Mr. Ali. The most recent indictment in the case shows that prosecutors suspect that some of Mr. bin Laden's associates have been active in Florida.
Mr. Ali told Judge Patterson that his refusal to testify was rooted in his distrust of the Government, transcripts show, and he said that his view was reinforced by the depiction of Muslims in news reports and in entertainment media. He cited the movie "The Siege," which he said "stereotyped Muslims always as being terrorists, fundamentalists."
Experts on Islamic law said they disagreed with Mr. Ali's interpretation of the Koran.
One noted scholar, Khaled Abou El Fadl, who teaches at the University of California at Los Angeles School of Law, said he tended to agree that Federal law enforcement discriminated against Muslims. But he added, "The Koran specifically says that even if the testimony is going to lead to harming someone, as long as it's the truth, you must say it."
Mohammed Al Hanooti, an imam at a mosque in Falls Church, Va., disagreed. He testified last month in support of Mr. Ali, telling Judge Patterson that Islamic law "gives him the right to abstain from giving testimony in case it hurts him or it hurts any other Muslim."
Mr. Ali, who is being held in a small, ninth-floor cell in the Metropolitan Correctional Center, segregated from the general jail population, told the judge that further confinement would not change his mind.
"I would rather endure the punishment in this world," he said, "in jail or under any conditions, rather than go endure the punishment in the hereafter, which is everlasting."
In one hearing last month, the prosecutor, Mr. Fitzgerald, tried to undermine Mr. Ali's position with a series of questions about hypothetical situations.
"If you saw a non-Muslim person kill a Muslim," Mr. Fitzgerald asked, "would you testify about that in an American courtroom?" Mr. Ali said he would. In several other scenarios outlined by the prosecutor, Mr. Ali also said he would probably testify.
Mr. Fitzgerald asked how Mr. Ali reconciled those responses with his refusal to cooperate in the investigation of the embassy bombings, which killed 223 people, including Muslims.
"Because it's different," Mr. Ali said, "because here you have Muslims of all different nationalities or different countries being targeted."
In refusing to release Mr. Ali, Judge Patterson wrote that he hoped that more jail time would encourage Mr. Ali to reconsider his position. On the civil contempt charge, Mr. Ali may be held for up to 18 months, and possibly longer, unless the judge concludes he will not change his mind.
For now, though, the judge and the witness appear at loggerheads in interpreting the Koran. At one point, Mr. Ali told the judge that he was afraid that if he testified, members of his family, who live in Egypt, might be harmed by Mr. bin Laden. He said the Government's offer of the witness protection program was not enough.
"Whatever protection they might offer, no matter how grand it may be," Mr. Ali said, "I doubt very much that they will give me protection on the day of judgment, when I'm confronted with my Lord."
Judge Patterson reminded Mr. Ali that the grand jury was secret, and that his testimony would not be disclosed. But Mr. Ali noted that when he was first held in contempt during a secret appearance in Federal District Court in May, a newspaper article quickly reported it.
Perhaps, Judge Patterson suggested, the issue of his family's protection was then moot. "I don't know whether they use this expression in Egypt," the judge said, "but it seems to me the water is over the dam."
"Let's hope not," Mr. Ali replied. "Otherwise, millions will drown."
The judge tried to make his point slightly differently. "Maybe I should say the horse is out of the barn," he said, saying he could not see how unjust harm could come from truthful testimony.
Mr. Ali remained undeterred. "I stand by my reasons," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 8, 1999


End of Document