These days, coping with terrorism goes with job
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
July 3, 2007 Tuesday


Copyright 2007 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 657 words
Byline: Marjorie Cortez Deseret Morning News
Body


   It used to be that the new guy on the job could coast his first week or so. I mean there's a ton of forms to fill out, orientations to attend and, in some cases, training to undergo. The time just flies.
I used to joke that my favorite day of work on any job was the first day because an employer's expectations are so low. Work? Hey, the "new person" has barely figured out where the restroom and the vending machines are, let alone perform any meaningful work.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown didn't get such a grace period. His first days on the job were marred by a fiery attack on Scotland's Glasgow, foiled car bombings and the deaths of three soldiers in Iraq. There's no employee handbook to consult on such matters.
Now we learn that doctors from Iraq and Jordan were among the eight suspected terrorists arrested by British authorities in this wave of terrorist activity. Great! Now very well-educated people, who know a lot about chemistry and bioagents, are alleged to be part of terror attacks.
Still want the job, Prime Minister Brown?
Some terror experts say the reason the attacks were unsuccessful was that the terrorists, who may or may not be tied to al-Qaida, are inept amateurs. Seemingly, such talk would only fuel people with radical ideologies. As Americans are painfully aware after the Oklahoma City bombing, it doesn't take a physician's know-how to assemble a weapon that can kill a lot of people and fell a large office building.
Coping with the prospect of terror goes with the job, these days. Perhaps the motivation behind this wave of terror is to prompt Brown to scale back Britain's involvement in the Iraq war, even pull out completely. Thus far, Brown appears to be concentrated on tracking down terrorists involved in the Glasgow attack and the thwarted car bombings. Meanwhile, Brown has raised the national-security alert to the highest level, "critical," which means greater security in airports and other crowded venues and increased numbers of automobile searches.
Brown, it seems, is in a bigger fix than former Prime Minister Tony Blair. Blair, for good or for bad, has been a strong ally in the U.S.-led war in Iraq. Brown has said he will shift from Blair's support of the war. But if he moves now, it could telegraph to Islamic extremists that terrorism is an effective tool in shaping Brown's foreign policy.
To his credit, Brown has sent strong signals that he will hold the line against terrorism. Some of his first official acts were to name a number of Britons to high-level security positions. This occurred before the attacks. He also has proposed to extend to 90 days the amount of time a suspect can be held without charges.
Americans would be naive to believe that terrorists will not attempt to disrupt the succession of the U.S. government after the fall 2008 elections. Just as baby boomers became accustomed to the specter of nuclear attack, so must the succeeding generations cope with the reality of terrorism.
In truth, Americans should have paid attention to this new reality long before the Sept. 11 attacks on America. The writing was on the wall in 1993 when terrorists detonated a car bomb underneath the World Trade Center in New York killing six people and injuring 1,000 others. The attack came just weeks after President Clinton was sworn into office, which in hindsight may have been radical Islam's first test of Clinton's mettle.
Throughout America's history, every generation has had to live with some degree of uncertainty. Just as my grandparents came of age worrying about communism and my parents lived with the threat posed by dictators such as Adolph Hitler, my children have to live with risk of terrorist attack. Unlike previous generations, though, there's seemingly no end to this madness. Marjorie Cortez, who felt more secure when America's enemies were more readily identifiable, is a Deseret Morning News editorial writer. E-mail her at marjorie@desnews.com

Load-Date: July 3, 2007


End of Document