They might be watching you, but that's not such a bad thing
University Wire
September 12, 2007 Wednesday


Copyright 2007 The BG News via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 821 words
Byline: By Jason Snead, The BG News; SOURCE: Bowling Green State U.
Dateline: BOWLING GREEN, Ohio 
Body


The War on Terror is definitely a unique fight, but then again in the history of the United States, terrorism is also a unique phenomenon, spread in secret by individuals and word of mouth. We can therefore no longer hide behind the pretense that our enemies are "over there," blessedly isolated from our homes and families.
If anything, the recent plot uncovered in Germany has cast light on the depth and the horror of the reality we face today. In that conspiracy, it was not newly arrived peoples from the Middle East but native-born Germans who planned to carry out merciless and murderous attacks against their own country. How are we to address the fact that our enemies might be within, recruiting from afar a nation's own citizens to be foot soldiers in an undeclared and immoral war?
The answer seems to be obvious: surveillance. Nearly every nation on Earth uses surveillance as a means of national security and public safety.
But what of domestic surveillance, that secretive and privacy-invading practice aimed at monitoring suspected citizens? The practice is not new, and has been used by presidents, ordered by Congress and upheld in the courts for centuries, especially during times of armed conflict. Those who object to the government monitoring the activities of the people do so on Constitutional grounds, citing basic rights and privileges, but does the Constitution truly defend against the practice of domestic surveillance?
The fourth amendment of the Constitution grants protection against "unreasonable searches and seizures" against the citizenry. Its goal was obviously to prevent the federal government from exerting an authoritarian will on the people through harassment and arrest, to the gain of those in power. But, the Constitution also vests in the government the responsibility, and thus the authority, to "provide for the common defense" and to "promote the general welfare." So, therefore, it would seem that the Constitution, in its genius simplicity, has provided a framework to examine the practice of domestic surveillance and determine if it is indeed constitutional.
There seem to be two criteria by which surveillance may be judged to arrive at a conclusion. First, is the surveillance being undertaken for the benefit of the citizens, or the benefit of those in power? And second, is the surveillance unreasonably infringing upon, as the fourth amendment puts it, the "persons, houses, papers, and effects" of those being monitored?
It would seem, through all rational interpretations of the actions of the government, that the targets of the domestic surveillance have been those who have been in contact with known or suspected terrorists, or who are themselves suspected of being terrorists. While it is true that the government has admitted to the mishandling of information, this speaks only to the need for some form of oversight tailored to the unique time in which we live.
Plus, at no apparent point has the government intentionally targeted purely political groups or dissidents, or engaged in a mass "witch hunt" aimed at establishing its authority over the population. And when evidence is gathered implicating citizens, they are addressed by the civilian court system with full due process.
Does domestic surveillance, as it is practiced, constitute an unreasonable search? Currently those who are subject to domestic surveillance are those who have in some manner indicated they may be linked to terrorism. Given the recent happenings in Germany it is hardly unreasonable to assume that one's identity as an American is not singularly powerful enough to prevent a citizen from turning on their own people. Put another way, examine the situation from the perspective of a person contacting a known or suspected terrorist overseas, warranting surveillance on the communication. If the communication is harmless, made so by the ignorance of one to the terrorist status of the other, then the only thing lost is the privacy of one individual in one conversation or e-mail. However, if the message contains inherent malice, the gains made could be one day measured in the safety of countless lives. In the modern age, where terrorism can spread through phone calls and e-mails, communication with known or suspected terrorists is a reasonable cause to implement surveillance.
The spread of terrorism presents a clear and present danger to our lives, our people and our nation. It is a unique threat and may only be challenged in its insidious spread by some form of surveillance. While it is necessary, and it is I argue constitutional, it is also dangerous. Even for a government with the best of intentions and the purest beliefs an unchecked hand can become just as dangerous as the evils we are fighting today. But the need for oversight is not synonymous with the ending of domestic surveillance, as to do so would surely be to invite disaster.
(C) 2007 The BG News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 12, 2007


End of Document