They armed up to terrorize dissenters
The Philadelphia Inquirer
January 22, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright 2020 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. A11
Length: 802 words
Body


In 2020, some images of modern America are so shocking that even a nation of political ranters with our incandescent Twitter accounts can be stunned into near numbness. So it was on Monday - not coincidentally, the national holiday to honor the legacy of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. - as first dozens, then hundreds, then thousands of armed, overwhelmingly white men streamed onto the grounds of Virginia's state Capitol in Richmond.
On a day set aside to celebrate a fighter for peace and human rights who was shot and killed in Memphis, Tenn., on April 4, 1968, with a .30-06 Remington rifle, our social media streams were filled with middle-age white men in absurd camouflage, wearing helmets or flak jackets, some (illegally) covering their faces with masks, with assault rifles or grenade launchers or weaponry to shoot down a small aircraft strapped to their bodies.
The event - part of a just-OK idea to make the King holiday a "Lobby Day" to allow citizens to air their grievances, which increasingly has become a gun-lobby day in the last few years - was a rally led by the Virginia Citizens Defense League that drew an estimated 22,000 to a state capital on total lockdown, with guns banned from the fenced-in site of the actual event. Most attendees milled around outside the fences - armed to the teeth, waving their long guns to see who had the biggest one. When the event ended early Monday afternoon, there was a palpable sigh of relief both in Richmond and around a nation that had just watched the armed hijacking of MLK Day.
The front page of Tuesday's Washington Post summed up a lot of the postrally media coverage with its headline, which read, "Virginia gun rights rally is passionate but peaceful," and which sounded like someone was pointing an AR-50 at the headline writer.
To use a popular buzzword of 2020 by way of 1920, I'm here to call "malarkey" on the popular notion that what went down in Richmond was "peaceful." On the contrary, America - although we may be too frightened to even admit it - just witnessed arguably the most successful use of terrorism on U.S. soil in nearly a generation, even if this time was nonlethal.
Plans for a counter-demonstration by progressive groups - the same kind of folks who pushed back against the now-notorious hate marches through nearby Charlottesville, Va., in 2017 - were scrubbed because of fears that someone would get hurt, much as Heather Heyer was run over and killed by a white supremacist at that event. One local activist tweeted to "please, please encourage anyone you know who is thinking about counter protesting this event to stay away from downtown [R]ichmond on [M]onday."
Terrorism? People were terrified. People who owned businesses in downtown Richmond shuttered their doors for the day. Folks who live in the immediate neighborhood of the protests left because they were scared of the gun-toters and what might happen. One of the legislators who was supposed to be lobbied on "Lobby Day" - Lee Carter, a democratic socialist and a progressive backer of new gun safety laws - instead went to a "safe house" because he had received so many death threats from these "patriotic Americans."
Think about the rights that we hold most dear as Americans. The right to move around freely from place to place, to assemble in public and to hold rallies to air grievances, and to counter people one disagrees with by exercising free speech and giving the opposing point of view. American citizens were deprived of those basic rights on Monday - on Martin Luther King Jr. Day, of all days - by an intimidating, bullying, armed mob. Do not dare call this "peaceful."
The fact that an armed mob roamed unrestrained through an American state capital on the eve of President Donald Trump's sham impeachment trial was no accident. They are all ruling by fear and intimidation, and America will end as any kind of moral force if we don't come up with a way to stop them.
Many people are doing what they can to fight back. In particular, I applaud citizens like the folks of Moms Demand, who spent Monday phone-banking Virginia lawmakers and encouraging those who are voting for sensible gun laws. And those lawmakers have done exactly that this week, voting down right-wing proposals that would have increased the risks of gun violence. That's courage, but I'm still worried that it's not enough.
This week would be a good time to channel the ferocity of King, who stood up to bullies with nonviolence and won more victories against entrenched white supremacy than anyone dreamed possible. MLK understood that an absence of tension, also known as silence, was the path to injustice. He also would have called out the violent intimidation of Monday's mob for what it was - terrorism - and so should we. wbunch@inquirer.com
215-854-2957 will_bunch

Load-Date: January 22, 2020


End of Document