Things you should know today: 11/14/18
The Daily Universe: Brigham Young University
November 14, 2018 Wednesday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; Pg. 1
Length: 298 words
Byline: Lilian Whitney
Body


Mom of Utah shooting victim: Gun owner should be prosecuted
A photograph of University of Utah student and track athlete Lauren McCluskey, who was fatally shot on campus, is projected on the video board before the start of an NCAA college football game between Oregon and Utah Saturday, Nov. 10, in Salt Lake City. (AP Photo/Rick Bowmer.)
The mother of the recently killed University of Utah track athlete Lauren McCluskey said the man who lent a gun to her daughter's killer should be prosecuted. "It is a great responsibility to own a gun," Jill McCluskey tweeted Tuesday, Nov. 13. 
The person who lent Lauren's killer the gun needs to be prosecuted. It is a great responsibility to own a gun. #ForLauren
- Jill McCluskey (@jjmccluskey) November 13, 2018
Overheating machines complicate Florida's recount battle
Employees at the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections office feed ballots through a machine as they count votes during a recount, Tuesday, Nov. 13, 2018, in West Palm Beach, Fla. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)
Overheated tallying machines in Palm Beach County, Florida, have mismatched election results. Workers have been forced to recount 174,000 early voting ballots, delaying election results.
Israeli defense minister resigns over Gaza cease-fire deal
Palestinians gather in front of a destroyed building that was hit by Israeli airstrikes, in Gaza City, Tuesday, Nov. 13, 2018. (AP Photo/Hatem Moussa)
Israeli defense minister Avigdor Lieberman resigned Wednesday, Nov. 14, protesting a cease-fire Israel reached with Gaza militants. Lieberman claimed the cease-fire was a "surrender to terrorism" and that he could no longer serve a government that endorses it.
Thanksgiving gone wrong
Learn from the mistakes of favorite Studio C characters how not to ruin your Thanksgiving next week.

Load-Date: November 14, 2018


End of Document