Thinking Right; Profiling criminals, terrorists
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
August 14, 2006 Monday
Online Edition


Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 0
Length: 449 words
Byline: JIM WOOTEN

Staff
Body


Monday, August 14, 2006, 07:31 AM
The gods of political correctness long ago determined that profiling criminals, terrorists and other perpetrators of evil is a really bad thing because it subjects innocents who fit the profile to more intense scrutiny than, say, grandma or the mom with three kids in tow. This PC ban on profiling is an example of the liberal view that the masses of ordinary people are not to be trusted. If allowed to think that practicing Muslims who are male, between the ages of 17 and 40 and who are of Arab or Middle Eastern descent fit the terrorist profile, well, the unwashed might think badly of all young men who fit that profile.
The reality is, though, that those who do fit it have a track record: the murders of 11 Israeli athletes at Munich in 1972, the murder of 241 U.S. servicemen in the bombing of Marine barracks in Beruit in 1983, the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, the attack on the USS Cole in 2000 that killed 17 sailors, 9/11, a series of bombings across Europe, and the most recent plot that was, thank God and British counter-terrorism efforts, thwarted before thousands of bodies were rained over the Atlantic Ocean.
Connect the dots. Clearly there is a group that should be subjected to higher scrutiny. We are after all fighting a war against terrorism, and a specific variety of terrorism, as President Bush said. "This nation is at war with Islamic fascists who will use any means to destroy those of us who love freedom, to hurt our nation." A former Israeli security officer with El Al, the national airline, Leo Gleser, said "In Israel we use profiling. That means you learn your enemy, learn the way he is going to attack you, and once you know that, you build up your system."
Profiling is a must. It's pointless to give equal scrutiny to grandma. Inspection time and secruity personnel are limited. Yes, we should apologize in advance to the innocents who are inconvenienced by the attention that comes with profiling. The profiling no-no came originally with race and even there the PC prohibition has come to mean that when a guy robs a bank, we frequenly are given all manner of description of the suspect --- height, weight, how he was dressed --- but not the obvious, whether we're looking for a white guy in a red shirt or a black guy in a red shirt.
Apologize, if need be. But profile. When slim, handsome, middle-age white guy conservatives start blowing up planes, I'll cheerfully go to the airport an hour early and submit to strip-search if necessary to calm fellow passengers and to discourage potential bombers.
http://www.ajc.com/opinion/content/shared-blogs/ajc/thinkingright/entries/2006/08/14/profiling_criminals_terrorists.html

Load-Date: March 25, 2008


End of Document