THINK ABOUT TERRORISM GLOBALLY - AND PREPARE LOCALLY;
WHY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS ESTABLISHED A UNIT NEAR HARRISBURG TO CONFRONT;
TERRORIST ATTACKS.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 4, 1998, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 854 words
Byline: CHARLES L. CRAGIN
Dateline: LOS ALAMITOS, Calif.
Body


In his best-selling novel "The Cobra Event," author Richard Preston delivers a spine-chilling portrayal of how a biological weapon, if cunningly deployed by a terrorist, might initially go undetected and wreak havoc on a major U.S. city, causing thousands, even tens of thousands, of horrific deaths.
That the stuff of fiction is not so far removed from reality is clearly illustrated by the 1995 Tokyo bombings, when fanatical members of a religious cult dropped canisters of sarin gas, a lethal chemical agent, into subway trash bins, killing 12 people and injuring thousands more. Here at home, the Oklahoma City and World Trade Center bombings have helped shatter the illusion that America's relative geographical isolation lends it a similar degree of separation from the global scourge of terrorism.
These events, both real and imagined, help underscore the fact that weapons of mass destruction (known as WMD) today constitute one of the greatest threats the world has ever known. They are, as Secretary of Defense William Cohen has often remarked, truly "the poor man's atomic bomb" - easy to make, easy to acquire, easy to transport, catastrophically lethal when used.
To help federal and state agency partners deal with the consequences of a domestic terrorist attack involving chemical, biologi cal or nuclear weapons, President Clinton announced the establishment and locations of ten Rapid Assessment and Initial Detection (RAID) teams - one which will be located in Ft. Indiantown Gap, northeast of Harrisburg.
The RAID teams will use National Guard and Reserve forces front and center in the Department of Defense's response plan for WMD terrorism on U.S. soil. The goal in providing military assistance is not to supplant, but to support, local authorities. Nevertheless, if one of these weapons were used by terrorists on U.S. soil, the resources and energies of local first responders, along with those of their counterparts at the state level, may be quickly overwhelmed or exhausted.
The men and women of our National Guard and Reserve are ideally suited for this critical mission. They live and work in nearly 4,000 communities across the country; they are familiar with local emergency response plans; and they have well-established links to the fire, police and emergency medical personnel who are always the first to arrive at the scene of any incident.
With the additional training and equipment called for in Secretary Cohen's plan, our guardsmen and reservists will soon be available to support local, state and federal authorities in managing the consequences of a WMD incident.
Should a weapon of mass destruction actually be used, responders will confront unique and daunting challenges. Survivors of an incident will need medical assistance. That assistance will have to be immediate and massive. Survivors will need information on where and how to get additional help. Specialists will have to identify the nature of an attack and restrict access to hazardous areas. Others will be needed to decontaminate those areas, and rescue and medical personnel will need to perform their missions of mercy without themselves becoming casualties.
The Ft. Indiantown Gap RAID team will be on call to deploy rapidly in the event of a terrorist attack anywhere in the state of Pennsylvania and throughout the region.
The team will assist local first responders in determining the precise nature of an attack, provide medical and technical advice, and assist with the identification and arrival of other state and federal response assets. Each RAID team will consist of 22 highly skilled, full-time National Guard personnel who will act as the tip of our military response spear. After President Clinton signs this year's defense bill into law, the members of the teams will be hired and begin extensive and rigorous training, with the teams to be fully operational by 2000.
Complementing and supporting these rapid response teams will be up to 170 specially trained and equipped decontamina tion and reconnaissance units, drawn from within the existing Reserve component force structure, which will soon be provided with additional training and equipment to enable them to perform a domestic WMD response mission.
*
Secretary Cohen has said the next attack may come to our shores "in a bottle or a briefcase."
If terrorists release bacteria, chemicals or viruses to harm Americans, we must have the ability to identify the pathogens or substances with speed and certainty, and we must have the ability to treat victims and turn them into patients.
Our goal is to have in place an effective, integrated and flexible response mechanism, able to respond to a wide range of unconventional threats against our homeland. The Guard and Reserve now stand at the center of these efforts to support America's firemen, police and emergency medical technicians if or when the unthinkable occurs. Their purpose will be to protect our citizens, save lives and help manage the awful aftermath of mankind's most insidious and deadly weapons.
Charles L. Cragin is the principal deputy undersecretary of defense for personnel and readiness.

Load-Date: November 6, 1998


End of Document