This is no way to a two-state solution
Chicago Daily Herald
March 17, 2010 Wednesday
L2 Edition


Copyright 2010 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14
Length: 637 words
Body


What can you say about a 19-year-old woman who participates in a terrorist attack in which 38 people, 13 of them children, are killed? The answer, if the woman is Palestinian and the dead are Israelis, is heroine or martyr— and if she is Dalal Mughrabi, you name a school, camp, and last week, a square in the West Bank town of El Bireh after her.
It will be the fitting venue for those who furiously single out Israel for allegedly killing civilians in violation of rules of warfare. Hypocrisy Square would be its appropriate name.
The dedication of Dalal Mughrabi Square was low-key. This is because the Palestinians, unlike the Israelis, had the wit not to be so crude while Vice President Joe Biden was more or less in town.
In contrast, the Israelis honored Biden by announcing that even more building projects would be constructed in East Jerusalem. This was done to reassert Israel's claim to all of Jerusalem, and to impede a revival of peace talks.
Still, even in the Middle East, reality is more important than perception. If the term "confidence-building measure" is employed, what confidence can Israelis have in a people and leaders who honor the 1978 murder of innocents? I am aware that terrorism is the warfare of the weak and I am aware that Jews used terrorism against the British before Israel became a nation in 1948. But even those rare instances were directed against the military and when they were not — the massacre of Arabs at the village of Deir Yassin — they were condemned by the Zionist leadership. To my knowledge, there is no square in Israel named for the mass murderers of civilians. Palestinian society, in contrast, honors all sorts of terrorists.
This is not a minor point. The veneration of terrorists says something unsettling about Palestinian society. An Israeli can recognize the legitimacy of Palestinian aspiration and appreciate the depth of the calamity that befell them in 1948. The Palestinian intellectual Constantine Zurayk coined the term "al-Nakba" (the disaster) for their 1948 debacle — and there is no doubt it was. But for Palestinians, that disaster has only been compounded by an Arab intransigence and belligerence that played into Israel's territorial ambitions, particularly the annexation of East Jerusalem. The adulation of Dalal Mughrabi and other terrorists is bound to give your average Israeli parent a certain pause: Is this the state we want next to us? Didn't pulling out of Gaza produce steady drizzle of rockets and, in due course, another war?
Editorialists around the world were quite right to bash the government of Binyamin Netanyahu for its in-your-face rebuke to Biden — even though, as the analyst Stephen P. Cohen explains, the decision by right-wing ministers was meant also as a rebuke to Netanyahu himself.
It would have been nice for those same editorialists to have paused in their anti-Israel jihad to wonder a bit about the virtually simultaneous Palestinian veneration of terrorists. In fact, the determination in the West, particularly Europe, not to hold Palestinians morally accountable for terrorism — as well as their commonplace anti-Semitism — is a repugnant form of neocolonial mentality in which, once again, the Palestinians are being patronized. I dare say the Brits would have reacted differently if a square in Belfast had been named for some IRA terrorist.
Washington's response to the Israeli government's announcement of additional housing was both harsh and appropriate — an "affront" and "insult," David Axelrod, Obama's senior adviser, called it. The incessant march of West Bank settlements and housing has to stop if there is any chance of reaching the vaunted two-state solution. At the same time, though, one of those states has to stop exalting terrorists.
Stop the settlements. Rename Dalal Mughrabi Square. Now let's talk.

Load-Date: March 17, 2010


End of Document