This Week’s Mail Bombs Are No Surprise
The New York Times 
October 25, 2018 Thursday 11:35 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 941 words
Byline: Eyal Press
Highlight: They are examples of stochastic terrorism — individually random, but these days, statistically predictable.
Body


What role does inflammatory rhetoric play in inciting acts of terrorism and violence? This question has been thrust into the headlines after explosive devices were sent to former President Barack Obama, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the New York offices of CNN, the Westchester home of George Soros and at least five other locations, all frequent targets of vitriolic right-wing criticism.
“These terrorizing acts are despicable,” the White House announced on Wednesday in response to the spate of bomb threats. But as the anniversary of another act of homegrown terrorism suggests, they are also unsurprising. 
The event in question was the murder of Barnett Slepian, an abortion provider from the Buffalo suburb of Amherst who, 20 years ago this week, was shot while standing in his kitchen by James Charles Kopp, an anti-abortion extremist.
Dr. Slepian’s murder was not an isolated act. It came amid a wave of violent terrorism targeting abortion providers in the mid-1990s, including a series of shootings and sniper attacks that took the lives of six doctors and clinic workers. It also came after years of increasingly confrontational protests at Buffalo WomenServices, the clinic where Dr. Slepian worked.
The anti-abortion protesters in Buffalo, as elsewhere in the country, claimed to be nonviolent, invoking the example of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and portraying themselves as defenders of innocent life. But their abrasive rhetoric and tactics sent a different message. Not infrequently, women arriving for appointments at Buffalo WomenServices and other clinics in Western New York were screamed at and harassed. The physicians who provided them with care were likewise verbally threatened and denounced as “killers” and “mass murderers,” sometimes at demonstrations in front of their homes.
It was a bullet, not those words, that ended Dr. Slepian’s life. But by repeatedly using rhetoric that demonized abortion providers as monstrous “baby killers,” the protesters increased the likelihood that someone in their ranks would eventually decide using lethal force to stop them was justified. 
In recent years, a term has begun to circulate to capture this phenomenon — “stochastic terrorism,” in which mass communications, including social media, inspire random acts of violence that according to one description “are statistically predictable but individually unpredictable.” In other words, every act and actor is different, and no one knows by whom or where an act will happen — but it’s a good bet that something will.
When a drifter named Robert Lewis Dear opened fire on a Planned Parenthood clinic in Colorado Springs in 2015, killing three people and injuring nine, anti-abortion activists like David Daleiden described Mr. Dear as a “madman” acting on his own. A few months earlier, however, Mr. Daleiden had released a series of undercover videos that falsely suggested Planned Parenthood sold fetal organs for profit. The videos had a powerful effect, causing a surge of threats against doctors and abortion clinics and potentially explaining why the organization became a target of Mr. Dear’s wrath. (“Kill the babies, that’s what Planned Parenthood does,” he announced in court.)
Not surprisingly, Mr. Daleiden’s effort to disavow responsibility for the shooting in Colorado Springs rang hollow to Planned Parenthood, which knows all too well that incendiary language can spur extremists to act. Before he was murdered, Barnett Slepian knew this as well. 
“The members of the local nonviolent, anti-abortion community may continue to picket my home,” he wrote in a letter to The Buffalo News in 1994. “They may continue to scream that I am a murderer and a killer when I enter the clinics at which they ‘peacefully’ exercise their First Amendment right of freedom of speech. They may do all of the above to me and other abortion providers of this community. But please don’t feign surprise, dismay and certainly not innocence when a more volatile and less restrained member of the group decides to react to their inflammatory rhetoric by shooting an abortion provider.”
We don’t yet know who sent the pipe bombs to various high-profile Democrats and a news media outlet in recent days, much less the motives. What we do know is that all of the recipients have frequently been demonized by prominent voices on the right, most notably President Trump. 
On Wednesday, Mr. Trump issued a call for unity and declared that “acts or threats of political violence of any kind have no place in the United States of America.” 
Yet it is Mr. Trump who has called journalists “scum” and “enemies of the people” (and who recently suggested that Representative Greg Gianforte, who body-slammed a reporter for The Guardian, was “my kind of guy”). It is Mr. Trump who ran a campaign ad depicting George Soros as part of a cabal of globalists — all of whom happened to be Jewish — who have “bled our country dry.” It is Mr. Trump who suggested that “Second Amendment people” might have to “do” something if his opponent in the 2016 Presidential campaign, Hillary Clinton, got to pick judges they did not like.
These are just words, some would say. But words have consequences, especially when they are stated repeatedly by influential figures and sound distinctly like dog whistles to extremists who might well feel emboldened to act on them. Now more than ever, no one should feign surprise or innocence about this.
PHOTO: The Time Warner Center in Manhattan, home to CNN&#39;s New York offices, was evacuated Wednesday after a mail bomb was intercepted. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jeenah Moon for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 27, 2018


End of Document