THIS IS PATRIOTISM?
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 21, 2003 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL ; Pg. B6
Length: 588 words
Body


LIBERTY VS. SECURITY
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT is preparing to ask Americans to surrender more of their rights in the war against terrorism, even though it hasn't shown that the rights we've already surrendered have made us safer.
Attorney General John D. Ashcroft has a draft of a sequel to the 2001 Patriot Act that would grant the government startling new powers to deport, secretly imprison, wiretap and spy on citizens and noncitizens. The bill, dubbed the Super-Patriot Act by its critics, is antithetical to a government of constitutionally protected rights and is an abject surrender to the intimidation of terrorists.
Americans and Congress should dig in their heels and make it clear that we will not surrender our freedom to megalomaniacs like Osama bin Laden, or to politicians whose response to terror is an assault on our freedom.
The Justice Department was surprised earlier this month by the leak of the draft bill -- officially called the Domestic Security Enhancement Act of 2003. A Justice Department spokeswoman said the department had not decided how to proceed on the bill, but critics fear it that will be introduced during a period of fear.
The bill would:
* Authorize secret arrests of terrorism suspects, thus institutionalizing Mr. Ashcroft's practice of refusing to release the names of people detained after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Mr. Ashcroft is challenging a court order requiring that he release the names.
* Permit the attorney general to wiretap Americans without a court order during the 15 days after a terrorist attack or after Congress passes a resolution authorizing the use of force. Such wiretaps now are permitted only when Congress declares war.
* Allow the government to strip the citizenship from Americans who are suspected of terrorism, even if they are merely aiding the legal activities of a terrorist group. Currently, the government cannot involuntarily take away an American's citizenship -- or the rights that confers.
* Set up a DNA database of "suspected" terrorists, broadly defined. Currently, the government can collect DNA from people convicted of crimes, but not suspects.
* Expand the power of the government to withhold information available under the Freedom of Information Act -- notably, information concerning the dangers of chemical plants to their surrounding communities.
* Allow the attorney general to deport legal immigrants if he believes their presence is inconsistent with national security.
When Mr. Ashcroft proposed the first Patriot Act within days of the Sept. 11 attack, Congress swooned, and adopted it without careful consideration. Congressional leaders promised to follow up with a more cold-eyed assessment. But Mr. Ashcroft has stymied those efforts by refusing to provide information sought by Congress.
Congress must not be so compliant this time. It should hold full-scale hearings, and insist that Mr. Ashcroft make a convincing case for additional authority.
Last week, Mr. Ashcroft boasted of having made "monumental" progress against terrorism, citing more than 100 terrorism-related convictions. But a recent study by Syracuse University researchers found that most of the terrorism-related cases were minor ones, such as document fraud, identity theft and immigration violations. The median sentence for these crimes of "terrorism" was a whopping two months.
Mr. Ashcroft has been much more adept at writing our freedom out of our laws and in rounding up immigrants than he has been in ferreting out al-Qaida cells and prosecuting proven terrorists.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; Photo - Eye looking through a keyhole

Load-Date: February 21, 2003


End of Document