Thomson prison picked?
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 12, 2009 Saturday


Copyright 2009 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 2
Length: 759 words
Byline: HENRY C. JACKSON The Associated Press
Body


The leaked memo can be viewed at www.biggovernment.com. THOMSON, Ill. - He had just walked in the door late Friday night, fresh from officiating a high school boys basketball game, when he took the phone call from the TH. Jerry "Duke" Hebeler, village president of Thomson, Ill., hadn't heard the buzz about a draft memo leaked to a conservative Web site and the implications for his sleepy northwest Illinois community. 
"I'm always the last to hear," he said. It sounded like good news for Thomson. In a joint statement on Friday, U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., and Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn said the memo signals "the administration has narrowed its focus" to the Thomson Correctional Center - in the running to house Guantanamo terrorist suspects. "Even though the final decision has not been made, we are encouraged by this development," they said. "We will continue working with the White House, the Defense Department and the Justice Department to address important questions regarding security and job creation, and finalize this agreement." The document was posted on a conservative Web site known as Big Government, which described it as a Justice Department memo. A White House official described the memo as "pre-decisional," stressing that a final decision has not been made. The official was not authorized to discuss the document and would speak only on condition of anonymity. The Thomson Correctional Center was one of several potential sites evaluated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons but has emerged as a leading option to house detainees held at a Navy-run prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Closing the facility is a top priority for President Barack Obama. He has said he wants terrorism suspects transferred to American soil so they can be tried for their suspected crimes. The Thomson Correctional Center was built by Illinois in 2001, with designs on improving the local economy. State budget problems have kept the 1,600-cell prison from fully opening. At present, it houses about 200 minimum-security inmates. The prison's scant work force is far from the hundreds of jobs promised to the Carroll County community, in a region of the state struggling with unemployment exceeding the nation's jobless rate of 10 percent. An earlier report claims a federal takeover of the prison could bring as many as 3,000 jobs to the Thomson area, economic development that would ripple into neighboring Jo Daviess County and beyond. Many local officials, as well as Durbin and Quinn, have cheered news that the Thomson facility might be selected. But some lawmakers also have voiced opposition to the idea that terrorism suspects would be brought to Illinois. Earlier this year, Rep. Mark Kirk, a suburban Chicago Republican seeking Obama's old Senate seat in 2010, has asked elected officials to write Obama opposing a plan that would bring terrorism suspects to Illinois. Kirk has said that doing so would make the prison and the state targets for terrorist attacks. Hebeler said Thomson has received overwhelming support from its neighbors on both sides of the Mississippi River, saying they, too, believe activating the prison would provide a brighter future for its citizens. "We want our families to have opportunities close to home so they won't have to look for jobs somewhere else," Hebeler said, reading from a recent letter he sent to Quinn and other Illinois politicians. But the village president said he does not take lightly the security issues associated with the potential of housing dangerous military detainees. "I would never chase jobs if I thought it would jeopardize the safety and security of my family, friends and neighbors," he said, reading from the letter. "I do not want to be involved in partisan politics. I want what's best for the village of Thomson and surrounding communities, on both sides of the river." It's not clear how many detainees from Guantanamo would be transferred to U.S. soil or when. Obama had originally set a closing date for the Guantanamo Bay prison on Jan. 22, but the administration has acknowledged that deadline is no longer likely to be met. If Thomson is chosen, it would likely be purchased by the Federal Bureau of Prisons and run primarily as a standard federal prison. However, a portion of the facility would be leased to the Defense Department to house a limited number of Guantanamo detainees. While encouraged, Hebeler said he's been waiting years for the fulfillment of the prison's promise. "I won't believe it until final ink is on the seal," he said. M.D. Kittle contributed

Load-Date: December 12, 2009


End of Document