Thomson bill seeks to fight eco-terrorism on UC-Davis crops
University Wire
September 1, 2000


Copyright 2000 The California Aggie via U-Wire
Length: 707 words
Byline: By Karli Kane, The California Aggie
Dateline: Davis, Calif.
Body


Several attacks of vandalism to research crops during the 1999-2000 school year at both the University of California at Davis and University of California at Berkeley campus' have prompted action from state legislators.
State Rep. Helen Thomson (D-Davis) authored a bill mandating more severe punishment to persons who willfully destroy agricultural research crops. The bill, Assembly Bill 2510, passed the California State Senate last week and is currently on its way to the governor's desk.
The bill, which was passed unanimously by the state Senate, mandates that any person who destroys an agricultural research crop intentionally will be liable for twice the value of the damaged crop.
U. California-Davis
While AB 2510 is not strictly limited to genetic research crops, it does not include crops used purely for production and consumption purposes. Only those crops involving research are incorporated into this new bill.
"Current civil law … does not notice the greater intrinsic value of a unique agricultural test crop and a traditional row crop growing in one's fields," Thomson stated in a press release. "Because research and test crops are designed to be progenitors of improved and unique strains, the value of those crops should be greater than the crop product that is not the subject of research and testing."
The value of damaged crops will be determined by the courts per each individual case, but reimbursement could include costs associated with research and development.
"Prosecution in any vandalism case is left up to the jury and courts," Chris Tapio, a legislative consultant from Thomson's office said. "You have costs of things that need to be replaced, but sometimes those costs are hard to determine. This bill makes suggestions of what to replace, it gives some direction to the courts."
According to Tapio, because this bill deals with civil rather than criminal charges, retribution costs could possibly include tuition or lost wages for graduate students' projects that are damaged.
"The purpose of the civil courts is to make a person who has been harmed whole again," Tapio continued. "So if a graduate student could make a strong enough case, then damages could include tuition or lost wages."
Although this bill does not specifically apply to university-related agriculture, Thomson was inspired to author the bill after the acts of vandalism directed at several UC campuses during the past year. In addition, the bill does not apply to private companies, which already have the right to seek damages in civil courts.
"This is a bill that doesn't apply to exclusively private research," Tapio said. "The reason for that is we were trying to address the damage to academic freedom. Students who are scared by vandals, or feel too threatened to continue their research were the concern. The threat to academic freedom is key."
According to Tapio, there were no public objections made against the bill from any of the groups who have taken responsibility for past acts of vandalism, such as Reclaim the Seeds, or from any other groups opposed to agricultural genetic modification and research.
In addition to threatening academic freedom, a press release from Thomson's office cites vandalism groups who commit acts of ecological terrorism as restricting valuable information from both researchers and activists alike.
UCD Dean of the College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences Neal Van Alfen, who testified in support of this bill, noted that the UC system as a whole is in support of the bill.
"This bill certainly sends a message that the people of California are opposed to these acts of vandalism," Van Alfen said.
Van Alfen, who said he is not aware of any further contact from vandalism groups regarding this bill, added that UCD does an extensive amount of research in the field of agricultural genetics and the knowledge gained is imperative to the continuation of the field.
"We're trying to understand genes, and so we're doing a lot of research on plant genetics," Van Alfen continued.
None of the vandals from last year's incidents have been caught, although the group Reclaim the Seeds took credit for attacks at UCD.
(C) 2000 The California Aggie via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 1, 2000


End of Document