Thousands are fleeing Syria as fighting surges Assad insists there is no civil war, blames ' terrorism.'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 10, 2012 Saturday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2012 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A10
Length: 447 words
Byline: By JOHN HEILPRIN ZEINA KARAM Associated Press
Body


BEIRUT • As many as 11,000 people fled Syria in 24 hours, some of them desperately clambering through a razor-wire fence into Turkey on Friday to escape fierce fighting between rebels and government forces for control of a border town.
The exodus is a sign of the escalating ferocity of the violence, which has killed more than 36,000 people since March 2011. Despite the bloodshed, embattled President Bashar Assad insisted there was no civil war in Syria, saying in a rare TV appearance that he was protecting Syrians against "terrorism" supported from abroad.
The flood of Syrians into neighboring Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon was "the highest that we have had in quite some time," said Panos Moumtzis, the U. N. refugee agency's regional coordinator for the region.
About 2,000 to 3,000 people are fleeing Syria daily, and the recent surge brings the number registered with the agency to more than 408,000, he said.
During the 24-hour period that began Thursday, 9,000 Syrians crossed into Turkey - including 70 who were wounded and two who then died, U.N. officials said. Jordan and Lebanon each absorbed another 1,000 refugees.
The largest flow into Turkey came from the fighting at Ras al-Ayn in the predominantly Kurdish oil-producing northeastern province of al-Hasaka. The town hugs the border, practically adjacent to the Turkish town of Ceylanpinar.
On Thursday, rebels captured a border crossing between the two towns, Ceylanpinar's mayor, Ismail Aslan, said by telephone.
Rebels overran on Friday three security compounds in the town belonging to the military intelligence, air force intelligence and general intelligence directorate agencies, according to the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an opposition activist group.
Regime forces shelled rebel positions Friday morning, Aslan said. Regime tanks were also moving in to join the fight, according to another opposition activist group, the Local Coordination Committees.
Syria's more than 2 million Kurds, long marginalized, have largely stayed out of the fighting, although some have taken part in demonstrations against Assad. But like other minority groups, they have increasingly been drawn into the fighting.
The rebel push on Ras al-Ayn, an ethnically mixed town inhabited by Kurds, Arab Muslims and Christians, was likely to inflame tension with the Kurds who fear out the fighters.
Video from Turkey's Anadolu news agency showed Syrians jumping over and climbing through the razor-wire fence on the 566-mile border to cross into
Others fled into Turkey farther west along the border, trying to escape fighting at the Syrian town of Harem in Idlib province, which has seen intense battles in recent days.

Graphic

 
 Photo by ASSOCIATED PRESS This image taken from video obtained from Shaam News Network shows a woman on Friday carrying a child running away from the scene of shelling in Qouriyeh, Syria.  

Load-Date: November 10, 2012


End of Document