THOUSANDS OF INNOCENTS LANGUISH IN HARSH PERUVIAN PRISON SYSTEM
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 22, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3A
Length: 740 words
Byline: Lynn F. Monahan
Body


LIMA, Peru (AP) - Nancy Ruiz Nano is, by most accounts, a humble,
uneducated maid who has no understanding of politics. She may even be
mildly retarded.
In September 1992 - only a month into her new job as a live-in
housekeeper - she was arrested in Lima when anti-terrorism police
captured her employer, who later admitted being a leader of the Shining
Path guerrilla movement.
Now the 34-year-old woman is serving a life sentence without parole for
terrorism at Yanamayo prison on the bleak, bitterly cold Andean plain.
Human rights groups say hers is one of the worst cases of guilt by
association in Peru's 16-year war against leftist guerrillas.
They say Ruiz Nano is only one of at least 700 innocent people serving
time in Peruvian jails or detained awaiting trial under Peru's harsh
anti-terrorism laws.
Ruiz Nano was convicted by the same justice system that on Jan. 11
handed down a life sentence to New York native Lori Berenson, who was
accused of aiding another leftist rebel group.
Berenson has vigorously expressed her solidarity with the rebel cause,
if not with violence, and may have been involved in their movement. But
her summary trial before a secret military court and her drastic
sentence has focused an international spotlight on the unsavory side of
Peru's successful anti-insurgency campaign.
"Many have defined the legal process as Kafkaesque," human rights
lawyer Miguel Jugo said. "People don't know how or why they're involved
and yet many times end up convicted."
Experts say 90 percent of those tried for terrorism are convicted.
In contrast to Ruiz Nano's case, Berenson, 26, has received worldwide
attention as a young American caught up in a nightmarish judicial system
that offers none of the due process guarantees common to Western
democracies.
Berenson was sentenced in a military courtroom facing a judge and two
prosecutors, all wearing hoods to hide their identities and protect them
from reprisals. Masked soldiers armed with automatic rifles stood guard.
After Berenson's conviction, the U.S. State Department called on Peru to
assure her an open trial in a civilian court on appeal. In the closed
court that tried Berenson, her attorney had only a few hours to review
the case against her and could not cross-examine prosecution witnesses.
But in Peru, few criticize the government's extreme measures, especially
in the case of Berenson, who a few days before her sentencing publicly
defended the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement she is accused of
helping.
"There have been hundreds of cases of people condemned to life in prison
and nobody has said anything," Diego Garcia-Sayan, executive director
of the Andean Jurists Commission, said. "Why would they say something
now just because it's a foreigner and an American?"
President Alberto Fujimori's get-tough stand against terrorism is highly
popular in Peru. Harsh measures for dealing with accused terrorists are
seen as a necessary evil.
Peruvians are quick to point out how peaceful the major cities are now
compared to the car bombings and assassinations of the late 1980s and
early 1990s. Some 30,000 people have died in political violence since
1980.
Since the anti-terrorism measures were imposed in 1992 and captured
rebels began receiving stiff sentences, other types of human rights
violations, such as illegal executions and disappearances, have declined
sharply.
"Before, they would grab someone and he would disappear because they
feared he would be freed later by a judge," Garcia-Sayan said. "Now the
person will definitely be sentenced. So there's no need to eliminate
him."
About 7,000 people are in Peruvian jails convicted or awaiting
sentencing on terrorism charges filed since the government began its
crackdown in 1992, according to the Peruvian Human Rights Association.
At least 10 percent of them are innocent, human rights groups say.
In addition to those, more than 1,000 people have been freed around the
country through appeals, they say.
Even Fujimori has admitted that innocents have been unjustly jailed, and
he has promised to review cases.
The Rev. Hubert Lanssiers, a priest who heads a quasi-government
commission appointed last year to help innocents in prison, said legal
hurdles have slowed efforts to win freedom for others.
He predicted that more unjust convictions will be reversed and drastic
penalties reduced as the threat of terrorism declines.
Garcia-Sayan said the severity of Peru's anti-terrorism laws is a direct
result of the Shining Path's indiscriminate violence.

Load-Date: January 22, 1996


End of Document