THREATS AND RESPONSES: TERRORISM; Kenyan Asks U.S. and Britain To Ease Their Security Alert
 The New York Times
May 24, 2003 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 667 words
Byline:  By ALAN COWELL 
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya, May 23  
Body


A senior Kenyan official urged the United States and Britain today to ease a security alert in East Africa, insisting that his country had "nipped in the bud" potential terrorist operations in Somalia and Kenya, at one point sending forces by helicopter to seize a suspected member of Al Qaeda in Mogadishu, the Somali capital.
     "This country is not as unsafe as the world is meant to believe," said the official, Foreign Minister Stephen K. Musyoka. He said that during the Mogadishu raid in March, antiterrorist forces captured a senior Qaeda suspect now believed to be in custody in the United States. 
 Mr. Musyoka denied reports from outside Kenya that the raid -- which he first disclosed to the Kenyan Parliament in March -- had been mounted by the Central Intelligence Agency. 
"These were our people, our helicopters," he said. "We nipped one in Mogadishu and handed him over to the United States." 
Other officials said the raid had been mounted by Kenyan forces with allied groups among the feuding militias in Somalia. In mid-March, the suspect was identified as Suleiman Abdalla Salim Hemed. He is also said to have used the alias Isse, and some reports in the news media here have identified him as a Yemeni citizen. American officials have declined to comment on the raid.
The minister's remarks were apparently intended to reinforce Kenya's argument that the United States and Britain should ease their recent terrorism alert because the authorities here are contributing to efforts to identify and apprehend terror suspects.
The alert, which has led to the suspension of British Airways flights and warnings to Americans and Britons to avoid travel here, has rankled many Kenyans, who see themselves as caught up in a conflict not of their own making. It has also dealt a damaging blow to Kenya's vital tourism business.
The interview with Mr. Musyoka came two days after Kenyan counterterrorism officers in Mombasa said they had seized four more people linked to Al Qaeda. The Daily Nation, a Kenyan newspaper, said the arrests were made after telephone numbers of the four suspects were found in "the diary of a prime Al Qaeda suspect arrested outside Kenya early this year," apparently the same person Kenya says its forces arrested in Mogadishu.
The detainees included a woman who taught at an Islamic school and an employee of the Kenya Ports Authority, which controls access to the key port of Mombasa, The Daily Nation said. Two of the detainees were reportedly released today.
Kenya has been the target of terrorist attacks twice since 1998, when the American Embassies here and in neighboring Tanzania were bombed, killing over 200 people. Last November a suicide bomb attack on an Israeli-owned hotel near Mombasa coincided with a failed attempt to bring down an Israeli airplane with shoulder-fired missiles. 
"We have been hit twice," Mr. Musyoka said. "You can't run away from the fact that you end up on the same side as the United States. We are both victims."
Last week, however, citing a heightened terrorist threat across East Africa and in Kenya in particular, the United States and Britain advised citizens to avoid the region. After British Airways suspended flights here, potentially crippling the tourism industry, the Israeli airline El Al followed suit. The origins of the alarm have not been fully explained in Washington or London.
Shortly before the alert, Kenya's internal security minister, Christopher Murungaru, said a leading Qaeda suspect from the last two terrorist attacks in Kenya, identified as Fasul Abdallah Mohamed, might be at large here.
A Western official said the alert resulted from a broader sense that an attack was imminent.
Mr. Masyoka said the United States and Britain might "have had credible fears, but they could have been addressed."
"We thought it was a bit of an overreaction" when the travel advisories were announced and the United States offered its diplomats voluntary evacuation, he said. "We think there are more unsafe destinations." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 24, 2003


End of Document