THREATS AND RESPONSES: ACCUSATIONS; Report Says U.S. Human Rights Abuses Have Eroded Support for Efforts Against Terrorism
 The New York Times
January 15, 2003 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 497 words
Byline:  By JOEL BRINKLEY 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14  
Body


International support for the campaign against terrorism is weakening because of human rights abuses by the United States, Human Rights Watch charged in a report published today.
     The report, the group's annual survey of human rights issues worldwide, cited the Bush administration's detention of so-called enemy combatants without formal charges or access to lawyers, closed-door deportation hearings of terrorism suspects and the refusal to abide by the Geneva Convention in the treatment of prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, among other examples. 
 "The United States is far from the worst human rights abuser," said Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, a private advocacy group. "But Washington has so much power today that when it flouts human rights standards, it damages human rights causes worldwide."
The White House did not comment in detail, but a spokesman, Scott McClellan, said: "The United States is the world's leader when it comes to promoting human rights. And while we are fighting terrorism, we are also recommitting ourselves to the fight for freedom, dignity and human rights."'
The report is replete with examples of other countries that Human Rights Watch said had shirked their commitment to human rights, and the group asserted that, in many cases, those countries had used America's recent behavior as an excuse.
An example of the evidence that support for the campaign against terrorism is slackening, said Tom Malinowski, a director in the group's Washington office, was the elections last year in Pakistan, in which Gen. Pervez Musharraf was elected president.
"The radical anti-American party gained huge support in part, we assert, because Musharraf repressed the moderate center, and the United States did not call him on it," he said. By suppressing its criticism of General Musharraf, the administration may actually have weakened his hand and fueled anti-American sentiments in Pakistan, the group said.
"To fight terrorism, you need the support of the people in countries where terrorists live," Mr. Roth said. "Cozying up to oppressive governments is hardly a way to build those alliances."
The report said: "Even when the U.S. government does try to promote human rights, its authority is undermined by its refusal to be bound by the standards it preaches to others. From its rejection of the Geneva Conventions to its misuse of the 'enemy combatant' designation, from its threatened use of substandard military commissions to its misuse of immigration laws to deny criminal suspects their rights, Washington has waged war on terrorism as if human rights were not a constraint."
The report also accused Washington of withholding criticism of abuses by numerous friends and allies, including Russia, Israel and Malaysia.
"The overriding message sent by these U.S. bilateral actions," the report said, "is that human rights are dispensable in the name of fighting terrorism." The result, it said, has been "a copycat phenomenon." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: January 15, 2003


End of Document