THREE CHEERS FOR MORAL CLARITY;
 ON QUESTION OF COMBATTING TERRORISM, KEEP MATTERS BLACK AND WHITE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
January 2, 2003 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 730 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


In the next step in the war on terrorism, we're likely in the coming months to invade Iraq in ways that will terrorize civilians there. So this is a useful moment to step back and critically examine moral clarity, President Bush's byword, a concept that tends to stiffen the backbone of conservatives but make liberals fidget.
 Is it fair to present the war on terrorism as a parable of good (us) vs. evil (them)? Grenville Byford reflected the skeptics' view in a Foreign Affairs essay last summer, arguing that moral clarity is more apparent than real and that "the sooner the rhetoric is retired the better." Highly nuanced intellectuals tend to poke three kinds of holes in moral clarity:
 1) Terrorism is in the eyes of the beholder. President Reagan declared the African National Congress a terrorist group not long before its leader, Nelson Mandela, won the Nobel Peace Prize. Meanwhile he described Jonas Savimbi, who everybody else thought of as a terrorist, as Angola's Abraham Lincoln. Oops. And speaking of our national heroes, what about our radical forebears in the American Revolution who burned the homes of British loyalists? Were they terrorists?
2) Wiping out terrorists is sometimes unhelpful. Even if we could agree on what constitutes terrorism, it's often not obvious what we should do about it. Pakistan has done more than Iraq to support terrorism (in Kashmir), but instead of invading Pakistan, Mr. Bush has quite sensibly sent aid -- for bolstering President Pervez Musharraf is the best hope for ending the violence. Circumstances vary, so sometimes we kill those engaged in terrorism, and sometimes we invite them for state visits.
 3) In crude military terms, terrorism often works. New methods of killing people initially provoke outrage but eventually are often accepted. Henry V used longbows at Agincourt, outraging the French. British redcoats marching in neat columns were appalled by sneaky Yankees hiding behind trees. After Guernica, aerial bombing was condemned as barbaric, and in World War II the West condemned Germany's V-1 and V-2 missiles as terror weapons.
 Likewise, in pessimistic moments I fear that al-Qaida-style terrorism could become another terrible "advance" in military history. Other radical groups are no doubt enormously impressed that for only about $400,000, al-Qaida inflicted hundreds of billions of dollars' damage on the United States. Vietcong military theorists predicted something like Qaida-style urban guerrilla warfare, and there's a risk that it is what the future looks like.
 All these problems reflect what the British scholar Adam Roberts refers to as "genuine doubts" about the term terrorism. Reuters news service refuses to describe people as terrorists -- outraging those all over the globe who are sure that's what their enemies are.
 The objections leave moral clarity somewhat tattered. But ultimately terror's potential for becoming the methodology of every desperate organization makes it doubly important that we do all we can to delegitimize it -- which is why I ultimately come down strongly in favor of President Bush's campaign for moral clarity. At a Harvard conference early this year, one of the few ideas to combat terrorism that seemed vaguely practical was this notion of mobilizing public opinion worldwide to stigmatize terrorism.
 Ideally, any private group should know that if it kills civilians, it will become a pariah and discredit its own cause. The next Savimbi, Begin or Arafat should know that violence against civilians will not propel him into a presidential mansion, but into infamy.
 Perhaps it is hopelessly naive to seek to make terrorism a universal taboo; perhaps a nuanced moral clarity is a contradiction in terms. Yet there is a precedent: After World War I, leading countries delegitimized the use of poison gas. Attacking attitudes isn't as dramatic as blowing up terror training camps, but ultimately could be more effective. Even an incomplete and inconsistent campaign against terror may foster enough public revulsion that frustrated Basques, Tamils, Palestinians or Americans will think twice before they seek redress with bombs.
 So at the new year, historically an opportunity for ethical reflection, it's time to raise a toast to moral clarity, however scarred it may often be by nebulousness, inconsistency and even hypocrisy, as still preferable to moral opacity.

Notes

Nicholas D. Kristof is a syndicated columnist for The New York Times (nicholas@nytimes.com).  

Load-Date: January 2, 2003


End of Document