THREAT SHOWS PLO STILL BACKS TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 10, 1989, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3C
Length: 498 words
Byline: A.M. Rosenthal
Body


NEW YORK Consider the following sequence of events. (l) On Dec. 15, Yasser Arafat, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization, renounces terrorism.  Within hours, the United States announces it is ready to talk with the PLO.  (2) On Dec. 29, Elias Freij, mayor of Bethlehem and one of the most respected Arab officials in the West Bank, suggests a one-year truce in the intifada, provided that Israel releases about 2,000 Palestinian prisoners. The Israelis quietly make it known they are ready to talk about the deal - seriously.  (3) On Jan. 2, Arafat broadcasts a murder threat: ''Any Palestinian who proposes an end to the intifada exposes himself to the bullets of his own people and endangers his life. The PLO will know how to deal with him.'' (4) On Jan. 3, Mayor Freij withdraws his suggestion and says it is up to the PLO to make all decisions. He decides it is best not to be seen for a while.  Arafat's murder threat against the mayor of Bethlehem shows that the PLO still relies on terrorism, not only against Israelis but against any Palestinian who dares step out of line and make an independent suggestion for dealing practically with the Israelis.  The threat to the mayor is totally in line with a policy the PLO began when it was founded in 1964. That is to use terror to ensure that no other organization or movement has a chance to build support among Palestinians opposed to Israeli occupation, but who might favor a solution not based on the PLO and its covenant.
The covenant calls for elimination of the Israeli state. The PLO might not have a monopoly if Palestinians had a decent period without PLO terror.  Terror has been an essential weapon of the PLO - against Israelis at home and abroad, against Palestinians, against non-Israeli Jews in foreign synagogues and against American and other Western planes, ships and embassies.  The Arafat murder threat also shows why so many Israeli officials pay more attention to what the PLO says to Palestinians and other Arabs than what it says to American diplomats in Geneva or American Jews in Stockholm.  Not only Israelis believe the PLO has yet to put terrorism behind it. King Hussein of Jordan is not taking any chances either. The PLO tried to kill him before.  He knows it would try again if he suggests Israeli-Jordanian talks about a union between parts of the West Bank and his own largely Palestinian country - an idea he once thought entirely sensible.  One day that may be the solution, because it is ethnically and strategically logical. Yitzhak Shamir and other members of Likud who are reluctant to give up any territory are not fond of the idea. But they do not kill Israelis who suggest it.  The United States decided to deal with the PLO on the basis of Arafat's word that the PLO renounced terrorism and any hopes of eliminating Israel - without waiting one day for proof.  Arafat's murder threat helps answer the question of why Israel declines to take the same step and risk its existence.

Load-Date: October 23, 1993


End of Document