THREAT PROMPTS RECALL OF TURKEYS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 23, 1990, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 17A
Length: 603 words
Body


A supermarket chain in Tucson, Ariz., removed all turkeys from its stores and offered refunds after a man called a local television station and said he had injected some turkeys with cyanide.  Police said Thursday afternoon that no evidence had been found that any turkeys sold by Smith's Food and Drugs had been injected with the poison.  Reporter-anchor Barbara Grijalva of KOLD-TV took a call Wednesday from a man who said he ''had a problem with Smith's,'' KOLD producer Rob Daniels said.  The man said he had injected some of the turkeys on sale at Smith's with cyanide but did not say which Smith's stores were involved or when he poisoned the turkeys.  SOURCE: AP ROMANIA HEADLINE: Crowds Demand Ouster Of President Thousands of anti-government protesters demonstrated in Bucharest Thursday to demand Romanian President Ion Iliescu's resignation.  They marched to government headquarters denouncing the ruling National Salvation Front and its leaders as neo-Communists - a constant opposition theme since the front came to power in a bloody popular uprising last December.  ''The NSF will make Romania bankrupt,'' they chanted. ''Down with Iliescu, down with communism, resignation, resignation.'' About 2,000 research workers marched separately to demand more research funding and measures to halt the emigration of scientists.  SOURCE: Reuters SOVIET UNION HEADLINE: Train-Bus Collision Kills 19 A train and bus collided Thursday on a railroad crossing in the Ukrainian city of Donetsk, killing at least 19 people and injuring 13, Tass reported.  The Soviet news agency said that the bus driver had tried to cross the railroad tracks in front of the oncoming train, ignoring red lights and signals from a railroad worker.
The bus driver was not hurt in the collision, Tass said.  The Railway Ministry is investigating, the report said.  SOURCE: Associated Press RIGHT-WING TERRORISM HEADLINE: Europeans Seeking Investigation The European Parliament has called for an investigation of the activities of secret anti-communist organizations set up in the 1950s to counter a possible Soviet invasion of Western Europe.  In a resolution passed by a vote of 65-41 with 13 abstentions Thursday, the Parliament also asked the 12 governments in the European Community to look into the possibility of links between the network of secret groups and right-wing terrorism in Europe over the last two decades.  The network was organized by West European intelligence agencies to carry out sabotage and surveillance in case of a Soviet invasion. It involved hundreds of operatives with access to extensive caches of weapons, according to recent disclosures by West European officials.  Some officials have suggested that the organization, called ''Gladio'' after its Italian code name, was involved in right-wing terrorism during the 1970s, especially in Italy.  SOURCE: Associated Press MONGOLIA HEADLINE: Communists Replace Leaders Again Mongolia's Communist Party on Thursday elected a new slate of leaders for the third time in less than a year, reflecting fast-paced political changes in the Soviet-bloc nation.  The party also reaffirmed Mongolia's close ties with the Soviet Union and warned that anti-Soviet sentiment, now openly and widely expressed, was not in Mongolia's own best interests, China's official Xinhua News Agency reported.  Xinhua filed its dispatch from the Mongolian capital of Ulan Bator, where the Mongolian party's Central Committee has been meeting. The party's formal name is the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party. Mongolia lies between the Soviet Union and China.  SOURCE: Associated Press

Load-Date: October 18, 1993


End of Document