THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY; Bush Tells Congress to Move Quickly on Terrorism Insurance
 The New York Times
October 2, 2002 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 780 words
Byline:  By STEPHEN LABATON with JOSEPH B. TREASTER 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1  
Body


President Bush urged Congressional leaders today to resolve their differences by the end of the week and adopt legislation to protect the insurance industry from losses from future terrorist attacks.
     At a meeting in the White House, Mr. Bush asked House and Senate lawmakers working on the legislation to reach an agreement quickly, saying that lack of affordable terrorism insurance was costing hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
 Both the House and the Senate have adopted measures intended to make terrorism coverage widely available at affordable prices by limiting the liability of the industry. But the House and Senate approach the issue differently, and administration officials and Senate Democratic leaders have been squabbling over a largely symbolic provision that would limit the ability of terrorism victims to sue for punitive damages.
Prospects for legislation had dimmed as lawmakers, already preoccupied with legislation on homeland security and Iraq, prepared to leave town soon for the final weeks of the campaign season. Despite months of intensive lobbying by the insurance, real estate and financial services industries, the legislation has stalled largely over punitive damages. 
The lawmakers have not reconciled the two bills. In the House version, the federal government would be required to make loans to the insurers to pay most of the cost of terrorist attacks that result in more than $1 billion in damages. Under the Senate bill, the government would pay 80 percent of losses up to $10 billion and 90 percent above that. The House bill gives the treasury secretary discretion to decide whether to actually require the insurers to pay back the loans, presumably leaving the costs to be paid by taxpayers.
Mr. Bush did not express a preference for either measure today but emphasized that it was important for the lawmakers to quickly come to agreement. His top aides have insisted that the limitations on punitive damages remain in any final legislation.
"This is a way for us to work together to put people back to work here in America," Mr. Bush said. He said that more than $15 billion in construction projects have stalled because developers cannot get affordable insurance. 
Mr. Bush's push for the measure reflects a no-lose political strategy. If Congress reaches an agreement on the measure, he can rightly claim credit for it. If it fails, he can blame Congressional Democrats, and in particular the Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, for the failure.
White House officials say Mr. Bush is planning to make a speech about the issue later this week before representatives from labor, real estate and financial services.
Reports of the true dimensions of the insurance problem are anecdotal and conflicting. Several construction projects that Mr. Bush highlighted earlier this year as being stalled are now under way, while others are clearly encountering problems.
While the administration has been campaigning for nearly a year for the legislation, the issue took on new urgency last week when Moodys' Investors Service downgraded its ratings on some of New York's most prominent buildings, including Rockefeller Center, the headquarters of Citigroup, and two major structures in Times Square, the Conde Nast building and the Marriott Marquis.
Still, in a sign that there is no consensus about the dimensions of the problem, Fitch Ratings said that after reviewing about a dozen loans on individual buildings and groups of buildings -- about the same number reviewed by Moody's -- it felt only three should be downgraded because of inadequate terrorism coverage. One of the buildings was an office tower at 280 Park Avenue, which Moody's had also downgraded.
A third ratings agency, Standard & Poor's, said last June that it did not anticipate changing ratings on any commercial real estate loans because of lack of terrorism insurance since it was virtually impossible to calculate the risks of another attack.
While the insurance, banking and real estate industries have been campaigning hard for government help, they concede that the lack of terrorism coverage so far has had less impact on the economy than they predicted immediately after the World Trade Center attack.
In Richmond, Va., John B. Levy, the president of John B. Levy & Company, a real estate investment bank, said government help on terrorism insurance would welcome. But he said that terrorism insurance was not the only thing slowing the real estate business.
"Terrorism coverage is but one reason that people are rethinking new projects," he said. "There are a lot of other reasons, including increased vacancies, declining rents and uncertain corporate financial strength."      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 2, 2002


End of Document