THREAT CANNOT BE STOPPED BY FINGER-POINTING
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 5, 2004 Monday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Commentary; Pg. B7
Length: 550 words
Byline: John C. Danforth
Body


TERRORISM
* Issue of terror makes the November election critical to the nation's future.
Eric Mink's column of March 31 reduces the most important issue of our time to an attack on the character of President George W. Bush. How America responds to terrorism must be the dominant subject of this election year, eclipsing the perennial issues of the economy, health care and education. More serious than any threat we have ever faced, terrorism deserves the urgent and thoughtful attention of all of us.
In a year when a presidential candidate lumps his opponents together under the label "liars and crooks," the tone of Mink's column is not unique. But one hopes for a higher level of discourse.
The fact is that the blame for Sept. 11, 2001, does not rest on Pre sident Bush or President Bill Clinton or National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice or CIA Director George Tenet, and the finger-pointing of recent weeks is nothing more than politics. The blame rests solely on terrorists who hijacked our planes and flew them into our buildings.
Sept. 11 was a defining date in American history because before that day almost none of us ever imagined such horrors on our own shores. Now that it is clear that terrorists destroy American buildings and take American lives and threaten American values, we must respond.
How we respond is an appropriate -- indeed, essential -- matter for debate in an election year because, more than any other election in my lifetime, this election will decide our future. But debate must be more than character attacks and finger-pointing.
My own view is that President Bush's response to terrorism is correct. Hardening domestic targets is important, but we will never install enough metal detectors or search enough packages to make us safe. We must arrest terrorists, or we must kill them. We must seize their assets. We must retain the option of attacking countries that harbor them. We must attack terrorists before they attack us. This is the Bush Doctrine.
When the consensus of our intelligence experts tells us that rogue countries have weapons of mass destruction that they have used in the past and may use in the future, passivity does not suffice. We must, where appropriate, use military force. In my view, on the basis of what we knew at the time, we were right to attack Iraq. And when we do use force, we must never put our troops in harm's way without the resources they need to do their job.
Hopefully, the civilized world will stand with us in the war against terrorism. But the unwillingness of the U.N. Security Council to enforce its own resolutions on Iraq and the recent election in Spain show that the support we receive falls short of our hopes.
The question we must answer is whether America is prepared to use its own power against terror, even when other countries do not support us. President Bush believes America must retain its right to act. Others would defer to the United Nations.
How America should confront terror is, by far, the preeminent issue before our nation. It is a much bigger issue than differences on specific tactics, and it is certainly bigger than the blame game played by campaign organizations. It concerns fundamental public policy, indeed national values. And it deserves the serious and respectful consideration of all of us.

Notes

COMMENTARY/ A FORUM FOR OTHER VOICES, IDEAS AND OPINIONS/ John C. Danforth, a Republican who represented Missouri in the U.S. Senate (1976-1995), is a partner at the law firm Bryan Cave LLP.

Graphic

 
PHOTO

Load-Date: April 5, 2004


End of Document