THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE MONEY TRAIL; Fake Goods Support Terrorism, Interpol Official Is to Testify
 The New York Times
July 16, 2003 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 595 words
Byline:  By DAVID JOHNSTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 15  
Body


Groups like Al Qaeda and Hezbollah have turned to trafficking in counterfeit consumer goods, like fake Nike shoes, Sony stereo equipment and Calvin Klein jeans, says the top official at Interpol, who is scheduled to testify about the issue on Wednesday at a Congressional hearing.
     "The link between organized crime groups and counterfeit goods is well established," states the written testimony by Ronald K. Noble, the secretary general of Interpol, to be presented at the House Committee on International Relations. "But Interpol is sounding thealarm that intellectual property crime is becoming the preferred method of funding for a number of terrorist groups." 
 The booming international trade in phony consumer goods has long been known and its links to terrorist groups often suspected by government agencies. But Congressional officials said that Mr. Noble's testimony was the first by a senior law enforcement official to conclude emphatically, on a global basis, that the trade in counterfeit consumer products financed terrorism.
Mr. Noble's appearance is the first time an Interpol secretary general has testified to a Congressional panel. A former senior official at the Justice and Treasury Departments, Mr. Noble took over in 2000 at Interpol, which coordinates information among police and security services in 181 countries.
Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois and chairman of the International Relations Committee, states in his prepared remarks that intellectual property crimes and terrorism have until recently been thought of as separate issues. 
"Law enforcement and the intelligence community have been telling us that a growing concern is the convergence of different types of illicit activities in order to further the gains of clandestine activities and operations," Mr. Hyde said in his written statement.
In his testimony, Mr. Noble said that the trade in illegal products ranged widely, from counterfeit cigarette trafficking by paramilitary groups in Northern Ireland to ethnic-Albanian extremist groups in Kosovo where Mr. Noble said a "significant proportion" of consumer goods like computer software, shoes and clothes were fakes.
In the United States, investigators have said the trade in counterfeit products flourishes in cities like New York, Los Angeles and Miami, where phony products with well-known brand names are sold in shops and by vendors on the streets. The Federal Bureau of Investigation estimated in 2002 that the cost to American businesses was $200 billion to $250 billion a year.
"Trafficking in counterfeit goods is a relatively easy criminal activity," Mr. Noble's testimony said. "A terrorist could make profit solely from sales of counterfeit or pirated goods and does not need to be involved in the actual production or fabrication. Thus there are relatively low entry costs and the illicit profit margins are high."
Larry C. Johnson, a consultant on international product counterfeiting, who is also scheduled to testify at the hearing, states in his prepared testimony that over the years traditional financial support from countries in the Middle East and elsewhere had dried up.
"Consequently, terrorist groups turned to a variety of activities, including charitable contributions, narcotics trafficking, cigarette smuggling and I believe selling counterfeit products," Mr. Johnson said.
But Mr. Noble said that law enforcement agencies around the world had generally not aggressively investigated such crimes, which often carry relatively low fines and prison sentences when offenders are convicted. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 16, 2003


End of Document