THREATS AND RESPONSES: GUANTANAMO TRIBUNALS; Families of 2 British Terrorism Suspects Oppose Military Trials by the U.S.
 The New York Times
July 5, 2003 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 1044 words
Byline:  By SARAH LYALL 
Dateline: LONDON, July 4  
Body


The families of two British terrorism suspects who are likely to be tried by military tribunals in the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, expressed outrage today at what they said was American high-handedness and flouting of international law, and added that they doubted that the men would receive fair trials.
     The family of a third person, an Australian, confirmed that he, too, had been identified by the authorities. Britain and Australia were allies of the United States in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and both have urged Washington to expedite the cases against their citizens. 
 Today the British government called on the United States to conduct the tribunals with fairness on issues like access to lawyers, standards of evidence and the right to appeal in the case of a guilty verdict.
"Clearly we want the Americans to give us assurances that the international minimum standards of fair trials will be met," a spokesman for the Foreign Office said in an interview.
The spokesman, speaking on condition of anonymity in accordance with government policy, said Britain would "raise the strongest possible objections" to the imposition of the death penalty on any prisoners found guilty. 
But the government has stopped short of demanding that the two Britons selected by the Bush administration as candidates for the tribunals -- Moazzam Begg, 35, and Feroz Abbasi, 23 -- be returned home to face trial here.
"The fact is that I can't alter the legal processes in the U.S.," Baroness Symons, a Foreign Office minister, told BBC Radio earlier today. "America has decided that they want to be the detaining power and that they want to hold the trials there, and it is now up to us to have a very vigorous discussion with the U.S. about securing a fair trial for the individuals involved."
Neither the British nor the American government released the names of the six people selected to be the first prisoners likely to face the tribunals. But the families of the British prisoners on the list -- two out of a total of nine Britons being held at Guantanamo -- confirmed they had been contacted by the authorities.
The Australian, David Hicks, is a high school dropout, former ranch hand and convert to Islam in his late 20's. He was seized by Northern Alliance forces in Afghanistan more than two years ago and has been detained by the United States since then.
In an odd tug of war, United States officials asked Australia to take custody of him earlier this year for prosecution at home, but Australian officials said that there was no evidence that he had violated Australian law and that they did not want him. So he remained at Guantanamo, charged with no crime.
His lawyer, Stephen Kenny, told the BBC today that Mr. Hicks's appearance before a military commission was something akin to a "show trial."
The tribunals, whose members have not yet been appointed, are empowered to try non-American suspects. About 680 foreign citizens are being held without charge at Guantanamo Bay under suspicion of being members of Al Qaeda or of engaging in international terrorism. An undisclosed number of others are being held at undisclosed locations throughout the world.
While the two Britons and one Australian identified today do not appear to be important terrorist figures, American officials said on Thursday that they believed that the first group of people charged would be low-level suspects who, in exchange for plea bargains, might be persuaded to divulge information about the workings of Al Qaeda or about other, higher-level operatives.
In Birmingham, Mr. Begg's father, Azmat, said he had been told late Thursday by the Foreign Office "that my son had been designated to stand trial with another five persons."
Although he was glad, he said, to hear news that something was happening, as his son has been held in limbo for months, he said he had grave concerns about the tribunals.
"I was very depressed, very unhappy and very much worried because the judge is from the military, the prosecution is from the military, the jury is from the military and even his solicitor is from the military," Azmat Begg told the BBC. "Everything is being done by the military, so it is not going to be a fair trial."
Mr. Begg said he had received an ominous message from his son saying that he was going to do "something drastic which was going to affect the whole family." He said he worried that this might mean that his son had made a false confession to secure better treatment, or at least a resolution to his long months of doing nothing and being charged with nothing at Guantanamo Bay.
"Most probably he has admitted the things which he has not done," Mr. Begg said. "I am 100 percent sure that he has not done anything wrong."
America's policy of detaining people suspected of being members of the Taliban or Al Qaeda without charging them or granting them prisoner of war status under the Geneva Convention has proved a vexing and embarrassing issue for Britain, America's staunchest ally and most vocal apologist in the war against terrorism.
In the BBC interview, Lady Symons said Britain was very much at odds with the United States on the issue of the tribunals.
"It isn't something we would be able to do in this country," she said, "because of course we would want to ensure that there is a separation between government on one hand and the judiciary on the other.
"However, the Americans have said that this is the way they are intending to proceed, and it now behooves on the government to vigorously pursue the issues about access to lawyers, about standards of evidence and about any appeals procedure."
Louise Christian, the lawyer for Feroz Abbasi, 23, the other Briton designated by the Americans to stand trial, called the plans for a military trial "victor's justice" and said Mr. Abbasi's mother, Zumrati Juma, was "absolutely devastated" at the news of her son's fate.
Mr. Abbasi has been detained at Guantanamo Bay for 18 months and spent some six months before that in custody in Afghanistan, his family said.
"We are horrified that the British government is allowing this to happen," Ms. Christian told the Press Association. "It shows they have absolutely no influence over the U.S. and have been able to do nothing for their citizens."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Feroz Abbasi, left, and Moazzam Begg are British citizens accused by the United States of terrorism and are being held at Guantanamo Bay. They are likely to be tried by military tribunals, their families say. (Photographs by Associated Press) 

Load-Date: July 5, 2003


End of Document