Threat of terrorism in Albania suspends U.S. embassy activities;

The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
August 15, 1998, Saturday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: NATION/WORLD,
Length: 317 words
Byline: A Tribune wire report;
Body


TIRANA, Albania - The State Department urges Americans to leave Albania and evacuates most of its  embassy staff.
The United States suspended normal activities at the U.S. Embassy and arranged for most embassy  employees to leave the country Friday after receiving a serious threat of a terrorist attack  against Americans in Albania.
The State Department also urgently advised other Americans here to consider leaving and issued a  formal warning from Washington "against all travel to Albania."
The abrupt warnings come in the wake of several arrests in recent days of suspected Islamic  militants here as part of a widening crackdown by U.S. and Albanian intelligence officials on  alleged extremists suspected of involvement in terrorist activities outside of Albania, according  to official sources.
An Egyptian terrorist group financed by a fugitive Saudi Arabian Islamic fundamentalist is now  the leading suspect in the twin bombings at the U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, according to  U.S. law enforcement and intelligence officials.
The investigation into the bombings took a major step forward Friday as Kenyan and Tanzanian  officials agreed to allow key pieces of evidence - including parts of the flatbed truck believed to  have carried the Nairobi bomb - to be taken to the United States for analysis.
Officials and terrorism experts in Washington, however, who agreed to speak only on the  condition of anonymity, said intelligence evidence increasingly suggests the synchronized bombings  may have been the work of an Egyptian terrorist group supported by Osama bin Laden, a wealthy  member of a prominent Saudi family who now lives in Afghanistan.
The attacks "have the fingerprints of Egyptian Islamic Jihad," said Vincent Cannistraro, a former  head of counterterrorism operations at the CIA.  Information from Knight Ridder Newspapers and The Washington Post was used in this report.

Load-Date: August 17, 1998


End of Document