Three weeks after the Libya raid, a negative verdict
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
May 7, 1986, Wednesday


Copyright 1986 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: Opinion; Pg. 18
Length: 760 words
Byline: By Pat M. Holt; Pat M. Holt, former chief of staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, writes on foreign affairs from Washington.
Body


THE dust has settled enough so that we can avoid snap judgments about the Reagan response to Libyan terrorism. After three weeks, the verdict is negative.
On the plus side, the air raid on Libya made the President and a good many of his fellow citizens feel better. That is important. But a more important test of a policy is whether it works; on that score, the Reagan counterterrorist policy flunks.
There is more terrorism rather than less. Bomb threats against American diplomatic missions have doubled to 12 per day, and those are only the threats the State Department finds ''credible.'' American cultural centers have been closed in Sudan and Pakistan. Airlines are seeing their transatlantic business evaporate. European restaurateurs and hotelkeepers face a bleak summer.
Except for laid-off airline employees, few Americans are likely to worry about European distress. Except for the British, European governments have been slow to support tough counterterrorist measures. One thing to be said for the raid is that it did get the Europeans' attention. Europe is doing more now, especially in watching Libyans and restricting their movements, than it was willing to do before.
Nor will many Americans lose sleep over the fact that the Russians are upset, even to the point of canceling Foreign Minister Shevardnadze's meeting with Secretary of State Shultz to plan the next summit. The Russians will probably get over that. A more important consequence of the raid may be a Soviet naval base, air base, or both in Libya. This is something the Russians have not
had, and it would put them smack in the middle of the southern Mediterranean, across from Europe.
Libya is not the only - perhaps not even the principal - source of terrorism in the world. Palestinians were terrorizing the Middle East when Colonel Qaddafi was still wandering around in the desert. President Reagan has recognized this aspect of the problem and has threatened reprisals against Syria and Iran, as well as Libya. This points to one of the reasons the Reagan policy is mistaken. If you bomb Libya and it doesn't work, and then you bomb Syria and it doesn't work, and then you bomb Iran and it doesn't work, where do you bomb next? And meanwhile, what side effects have you produced?
Another worrisome question arises. Is the administration using counterterrorism as its all-purpose justification for hitting regimes it does not like? The Reagan antipathy to Libya, Syria, and Iran is well known, and fairly reflects the feelings of most Americans. The other night the President also tied the Sandinista government of Nicaragua to what he called ''the international terror network.'' If a bomb goes off in a Central American airport, is this the excuse the administration has been looking for to hit Managua?
When compelling evidence was acquired implicating the Libyan government in terrorism, the President had ready at hand a far better instrument for dealing with it than the Air Force and the Navy. This is the intelligence community, and it is a wonder that the President and his director of central intelligence did not think of it; they have certainly been quick enough to use it in other circumstances.
Intelligence could have appropriately been used in Libya for two objectives. One would have been to overthrow Qaddafi and to replace him with a more reasonable government. There is some evidence that this was tried.  The other objective would have been to use our vast resources for collecting intelligence to provide forewarning of terrorist attacks. We had such forewarning, a little too late, in the case of the Berlin nightclub.
But instead of exploiting our collection capabilities, the administration seriously weakened, if it did not destroy, them when it revealed how good they were. Officials probably thought they had to do this to establish the credibility of their charge of Libyan sponsorship. But when they said that we were reading Libyan diplomatic messages, they as much as told the Libyans to get new codes that we cannot read.
Intercepting and decoding communications is one of the best ways to collect intelligence, but there are others. They complement and supplement one another. It may take a very long time to recover from this setback; meanwhile we will have less forewarning. If we had persevered down the road of collecting intelligence and taking preventive measures based on it, we would probably have found a more effective answer. But it would have been a long, hard road. We could not have bragged about it or presented a macho image to the world.


End of Document