Three turn aspirations into inspiration
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 13, 2007 Tuesday
2 Tampa Edition


Copyright 2007 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TAMPA & STATE; Pg. 4B
Length: 300 words
Byline: JOSE CARDENAS
Dateline: CLEARWATER 
Body


 Some top area African-American law officers encourage SPC students.
 Times Staff Writer
The panel of three high-ranking law enforcement officials - one city, one state and one federal - dished out valuable career information to St. Petersburg College students Monday.
But the FBI special-agent-in charge, the Florida Department of Law Enforcement special agent and the Clearwater police captain were inspirational in one other way, too.
Carl Whitehead, Jacquelyn Hodges Bradway and Anthony Holloway are accomplished black law enforcement officials.
The idea was to highlight contemporary African-Americans as role models, said Denotra Showers, who leads the Clearwater campus student support services program.
"We have looked at individuals in the past who have paved the way," Showers said about previous events marking Black History Month. "What we would like to do is look at individuals who are (current) leaders."
It worked.
"I was first surprised that the FBI was headed by an African-American," student Nikia Smith, 22, said of Whitehead, who heads the bureau's Tampa office. "It was more inspirational to me personally than informative."
Whitehead, 50, has led the FBI Tampa office for four years.
Bradway, also 50 and based in Lakeland in Polk County, became a special agent for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement in 1980.
Holloway, 44, worked his way through the Clearwater Police Department to become a captain.
The three mixed practical career advice to students with insight into gangs, terrorism and other challenges facing law enforcement agencies.
The FBI once concentrated on investigating domestic federal crimes, Whitehead said. But since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the agency's first priority is preventing terrorism.
"On that day, it all changed," Whitehead said.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, DOUGLAS R. CLIFFORD - Times: Carl Whitehead, special-agent-in-charge of the FBI's Tampa office, listens to questions from St. Petersburg College students.
Correction:

Load-Date: February 13, 2007


End of Document