Threat of terrorism still very real in America
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
August 15, 1995, Tuesday, City Edition


Copyright 1995 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; THE WORLD; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 753 words
Byline: JACK R. PAYTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


The security alert at airports in New York and others cities around the  country reminds us - should we need reminding - that the threat of Middle  East-inspired terrorism is still very real and very much with us.
Public attention, understandably, has focused on America's home-grown  radicals and malcontents since the deadly Oklahoma City bombing four months  ago. Law enforcement and intelligence officials, however, have never let their  attention shift completely away from what they consider a more consistent  source of danger - Middle East extremists.
That's why the airport security precautions are especially tight in the New  York area where federal agents are holding a Palestinian businessman they  suspect is a leading official and fund-raiser for Hamas, the outfit that  opposes peace between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
ALERT
The businessman, Mousa Abu Marzuk, was arrested in New York on July 25 as  he returned to the United States from a trip to the Middle East. Authorities  are in the process of extraditing him to Israel, where he is accused of  organizing terrorist attacks to derail the peace process.
Until he stands trial, it's too early to say whether Marzuk is a  cold-blooded terrorist as the Israelis claim or a well-meaning fund-raiser for  legitimate Hamas humanitarian activities as his supporters maintain. And in  any case, his guilt or innocence isn't why our airports are on terrorist  alert.
The reason for the alert is that the FBI and police counterterrorism units  have apparently come across evidence that some of Marzuk's supporters are  threatening an airport attack, probably with a car bomb. Police are also  worried that friends of Sheik Omar Rahman and the other extremists accused of  blowing up the World Trade Center in New York in 1993 might also be planning  an airport attack of some kind.
Whoever the would-be attackers might be trying to save, U.S. officials  aren't taking any chances.
At the three major airports serving New York City, curbside luggage  check-in has been canceled. Passengers have to take their bags through a metal  detector inside the terminal before they can check them. Unattended luggage is  quickly removed from the building and only passengers with tickets are being  allowed inside. New York police describe their efforts as the strictest  security crackdown since the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
These are inconveniences, but in the great scheme of things, minor ones.  Similar security precautions are the norm in Western Europe and much of Asia,  and they are nothing compared to the security at airports in the Middle East.
Marzuk, the man apparently at the center of the commotion, isn't your usual  terrorist suspect. Until a few years ago, the well-dressed 44-year-old  businessman lived not far from me in a quiet suburban neighborhood in northern  Virginia outside Washington, D.C. Neighbors say he kept to himself, never  talked politics and traveled a lot. His business cards listed him as chairman  of a company that turns out to have never existed.
Whatever Marzuk really did for Hamas in the Israeli-occupied territories,  there's no denying that he was affiliated with the group and that Hamas has  carried out some of the bloodier attacks against Israelis as well as  Palestinians who disagree with its extremist policies.
Marzuk's supporters, however, argue that just because he was an official of  Hamas and raised money for the group doesn't mean he was involved in  terrorism. In addition to eliminating its enemies, they say, Hamas also has  educational programs and helps run hospitals and clinics in the  Israeli-occupied territories. Collecting money for these programs should be  okay.
The argument is similar to the one used by backers of Gerry Adams, the  leader of Sinn Fein, the supposedly respectable front organization for the  Irish Republican Army that uses terror as one of its tools to get the British  out of Northern Ireland.
Try as I might, I can't find this argument very convincing, whether's it's  made for Gerry Adams or Mousa Abu Marzuk. President Clinton may buy it and  invite Gerry Adams to dinner at the White House, but the way I see it when  people work with or collect money for an organization they know kills innocent  civilians as a matter of policy, they cannot themselves be considered total  innocents.
Stepped-up airport security checks may be a pain in the neck, but they're  a small price to pay for standing by principles, not to mention possibly  preventing a terror attack.

Load-Date: August 16, 1995


End of Document