Threat of home-grown terrorism remains very real real real
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
October 18, 1998, Sunday sunday sunday


Copyright 1998 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P14A P14A P14A
Length: 1025 words
Byline: Richard Jones Knight Ridder Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Body


ATLANTA - Gazing down at the spot where Alice Hawthorne fell on that
terrifying, neon-lit night two years ago - a night that turned a
celebration of the best of the human spirit into a grim reminder of
its worst - the sadness, the anger, the confusion, the fear welled up
inside Teri Chernosky all over again.
"You still can't believe it," Chernosky, 44, said the other day while
standing in Centennial Olympic Park, where two Julys ago, a bomb blast
killed Hawthorne, injured more than 120 others, and shook the world.
"It does make you feel kind of like you're not safe anywhere, not even
in a place like this. Now to find out it was an American that did
it." Chernosky didn't have to finish the thought.  thought.  thought.
For many Atlantans, who have placed a brick "Quilt of Remembrance" in
Centennial Park to honor victims of the blast, last week's news that
authorities had formally charged fugitive Eric Robert Rudolph in the
Olympic bombing came as little comfort.
Indeed, after Wednesday's announcement by Attorney General Janet Reno
that Rudolph - already being sought in a fatal Alabama abortion-clinic
bombing - was now wanted in the Olympic attack and two other
explosions in Atlanta, the bombings seem more horrible to some here
and reawakened anxieties of what home-grown terrorism may be yet to
come.
And that threat, say investigators in the Olympic bombing, remains
very real. Even perhaps from Rudolph himself.
"Mr. Rudolph is still at large. The acts with which he's been charged
portray the level of danger and threat he poses while he remains at
large," said John Killorin of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms' Atlanta office. "That threat cannot be lifted until he is
safely apprehended and brought to trial.
"We don't fully understand what he might choose to do. He's a bomber
that hits for multiple motives," Killorin said, noting that the
targets included another abortion clinic and a gay nightclub. "So,
caution is the watch word and he's a threat until he's apprehended."
Atlantans and others in the Southeast seem well aware of that threat.
"I was in Germany when the (Olympic) bombing happened," said Odell
McClain, 37, of Hampton, Ga., who was visiting Centennial Olympic Park
with Chernosky last week. "And it's funny, when we went over, we were
worried something was going to happen in Europe, not here. It was an
eye-opener."
After officials incorrectly fingered one suspect after the July 27,
1996, Olympic pipe-bomb attack, a few people wondered aloud whether
they had charged the right man this time.
"How do they know it's him?" asked Dorothy Krause, a state worker who
lives in North Georgia. "I don't know if it has been proven that it's
him. I hope that if it is, he gets justice."
To be sure he does, officials in Georgia and North Carolina along with
the FBI have exhaustively investigated the case. More than 20,000
interviews have been conducted. Investigators have reviewed more than
19,000 photographs and 1,400 videotapes from spectators who were in
Centennial Park in hopes of catching a glimpse of Rudolph near the
blast site.
Federal officials are offering a $ 1 million reward for Rudolph's
capture and have set up a toll-free number (1-888-ATF-BOMB) for anyone
with information. And as many as 200 officers are searching the
mountains of western North Carolina where Rudolph, 32, is believed to
be hiding.
"We are attempting to make sure that no lead, no matter how seemingly
insignificant, is overlooked," said Woody Enderson, an inspector with
the Southeast Bomb Task Force.
Such attention to detail is especially understandable after
investigators initially - and, they now admit, incorrectly - focused
on park security guard Richard Jewell as a suspect. Jewell was never
charged, and the FBI eventually cleared him of any wrongdoing. But the
embarrassment over the Jewell affair - coupled with several lawsuits
against media outlets who Jewell said smeared him - has lingered.
In announcing the Olympic park charges against Rudolph, whom
authorities were already seeking in the Jan. 29 bombing at a
Birmingham abortion clinic, authorities - without being specific -
said they had a raft of evidence that points to Rudolph's involvement.
The Birmingham bombing killed a police officer and injured a clinic
worker.
He has also been charged in the January 1997 bombing of the Sandy
Springs Professional Building, home of the Atlanta Northside Family
Planning Service, and the bombing of the Otherside Lounge in Atlanta a
month later.
In both those cases, authorities believe Rudolph placed two bombs -
one to inflict the initial damage, and a second to injure police and
rescue personnel as they arrived. Four people were hurt when the
second device went off at the Sandy Springs building. Police were able
to remove the second bomb at the Otherside before it exploded.
Rudolph was last seen near his North Carolina home Jan. 30, and those
who study terrorism say officials chose to charge him last week to
reenergize their case.
"The point of counterterrorism is you've got to fight back on
publicity grounds," said Stephen Gale, a terrorism expert at the
University of Pennsylvania. "They're hoping someone will come forward
now that they've charged him."
That someone, Gale said, could be one of Rudolph's friends or even a
relative who might approach investigators in much the same way the
brother of Unabomber Ted Kaczynski gave authorities the information
they needed to solve that case.
Authorities received letters decrying abortion and homosexuality
signed "Army of God" after the Birmingham and Otherside bombings.
Using handwriting samples obtained in a search of Rudolph's house,
investigators were trying to determine whether he had written the
letters.
If so, Gale said it would certainly fit the pattern of many
terrorists.
"Terrorism is a way of applying leverage," he said. "It's used by
people who are alienated, who are extremely frustrated."
Gale cautioned against underestimating Rudolph, and said there may be
many other Eric Robert Rudolphs with which to contend.
"How many fringe groups are out there?" he asked. "We almost always
regard these people as fruit loops or looney tunes, but in order to
combat them you must take them seriously." seriously." seriously."

Load-Date: October 20, 1998


End of Document