THREATS AND RESPONSES: CONVICTION TALLY; Report Finds U.S. Misstated Terror Verdicts
 The New York Times
February 22, 2003 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 378 words
Byline:  AP 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21  
Body


Federal prosecutors inflated their success in terrorism-related convictions last year by wrongly classifying almost half of them, the General Accounting Office has found. 
     Over all, 132 of 288 convictions reported as international or domestic terrorism or terrorism-related hoaxes were found by investigators to have been wrongly classified as such for the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, the accounting office, the investigative arm of Congress, found. 
 The Department of Justice "does not have sufficient management oversight and internal controls in place to ensure the accuracy and reliability of terrorism-related conviction statistics included in its annual performance reports," the agency said in a report that was released on Wednesday.
The report, in response to an article in The Philadelphia Inquirer that raised concerns about the conviction statistics, sheds light on the effect of public pressure on the department to crack down on terrorism after Sept. 11, 2001. 
The accounting office said the inaccuracies hampered Congress's "ability to accurately assess terrorism-related performance outcomes of the U.S. criminal justice system," information that would be crucial to such Congressional endeavors as approving the department's budget requests.
The agency said the Justice Department and the prosecutors who report to it had since enacted changes to correct the figures and ensure that future annual reports would be accurate.
The agency said the discrepancies resulted partly from different definitions of terror-related cases used by the department and by the federal prosecutors whose data are included in the department's annual performance report.
The department, for example, has typically reported more terrorism-related convictions than the prosecutors because it included convictions obtained in international, federal and state courts, the agency said.
The United States attorneys included only federal convictions, the report said.
But the statistics related to both groups were overstated nonetheless, particularly after the Sept. 11 attacks, the study found.
In the five years before that, there were an average of 35 terrorism convictions reported annually. In the year afterward, the report said, prosecutors reported 160 terror convictions. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 22, 2003


End of Document