Threats of terrorism make the season wary
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
December 23, 1999, Thursday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 546 words
Byline: By Connie Cass Associated Press Writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Americans aren't just searching for the perfect last-minute gift this holiday season. They're also on the lookout for suspicious packages.
As the Year 2000 approaches, government officials from President Clinton to local police are issuing reminders to be on the lookout for warning signs of terrorist attack, especially in large crowds.
But, they insist, that shouldn't spoil anyone's plans for holiday festivities. The mixed message is bound to leave some people feeling jittery as the first fireworks go off.
"We certainly don't want to unnecessarily alarm people," Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder said Wednesday as he gave the latest update on the FBI's efforts to ferret out terrorists who might be planning attacks on U.S. soil.
"They ought to go about their holidays and enjoy themselves and make the most of it," counseled President Clinton, who is inviting everyone to a giant outdoor bash on the National Mall. But he added an ominous caveat: "If they see anything suspicious, report it immediately."
An FBI statement issued early Thursday warned that it had received "unsubstantiated information that individuals may be planning to send bombs in small parcels to addresses in the United States" from Frankfurt, Germany.
"Out of an abundance of caution, the public is being promptly alerted to this information," the statement said. "The public should be cautious with parcels originating from or bearing Frankfurt, Germany, postal markings or stamps when the sender is unknown or unfamiliar to the recipient. Questionable packages should not be handled and local authorities should be notified."
Some Americans were already heeding the warning.
Retiree Ann Gilbert, visiting Washington from Florida, insisted, "I'm not too worried." Yet she avoided the subway, Smithsonian and other crowded sites just to be on the safe side.
Since an Algerian man was caught allegedly trying to bring bombmaking equipment across the Canadian border into Washington state last week, the government has stepped up security at border crossings, federal buildings and airports.
At North Carolina's Raleigh-Durham International Airport, tow trucks were hauling off dozens of unattended cars outside terminals, and security guards were taking extra care examining baggage.
Nolie Jenkins and other airline passengers -- some of the 300,000 expected to pass through the airport from this week through Jan. 3 -- welcomed the tighter security measures.
"I don't normally fly on holidays, so I appreciate it," Jenkins said as she waited for a flight to Indianapolis on Wednesday. "I'd like to see the National Guard out here, I'm such a fraidy-cat. Anything to help protect us."
At Chicago's O'Hare airport, travelers have been warned to expect longer lines and increased towing of cars improperly parked. The Federal Aviation Administration said more bomb-sniffing dogs and uniformed officers would be checking baggage at airports across the country.
"We are increasing police officers, canine presence," said Lauren Stover, spokeswoman for Miami International Airport. "We're really spending big bucks to upgrade security. This is not just about the annual holiday travel."
Such measures, coming on the heels of concerns about Y2K computer failures, are sure to dampen some holiday spirits.

Load-Date: December 23, 1999


End of Document