THREATS AND RESPONSES: JAKARTA; U.S. Praises Indonesia For Its Fight On Terrorism
 The New York Times
February 17, 2003 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 690 words
Byline:  By RAYMOND BONNER 
Dateline: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Feb. 16  
Body


The American Embassy here is now full of praise for Indonesia's fight against terrorism, in a marked departure from the sharp criticism leveled by American officials at the government here for nearly two years.
     After denying there was a terrorist threat here and calling travel warnings alarmist, the Indonesian police in recent months have rounded up more than two dozen suspected terrorists, including several men thought to be senior Qaeda operatives in Southeast Asia. The police have also increased security at the American Embassy and at residences of American diplomats, as the United States has been demanding. 
 "Progress on every one of our benchmarks has been extraordinary," the American ambassador, Ralph L. Boyce, said in a letter last week to American diplomats.
While Americans at home have been warned to buy duct tape and bottled water to prepare for terrorist attacks, Mr. Boyce wrote that "there has been no new credible threat information against the official American community" in Indonesia for nearly two months. A copy of the letter was provided to The New York Times by a recipient.
Mr. Boyce wrote that he and his staff believe that the security situation here has "so dramatically improved" that it would be appropriate to allow the families of American diplomats to return. They were ordered out of the country after an attack on two nightclubs in Bali last October.
There is one sticking point, however -- the increased possibility of a war with Iraq.
"The prospect of war with Iraq casts a cloud of uncertainty on our situation that warrants extreme caution," Mr. Boyce wrote. "Previously friendly, moderate leaders have warned that war might unleash an enormous anger against the American community that could turn violent."
The cloud and the anxiety hang over all of Southeast Asia.
In general, Southeast Asian nations oppose the war, even more strongly if the United States acts unilaterally.
Only Australia, under its conservative prime minister, John Howard, has strongly endorsed the American position with an offer of troops. But even there, the public opposition to the war is growing. On Sunday, more than 250,000 people marched in Sydney against the war, and more than 100,000 in Adelaide. Given Australia's small population, these are proportionally stronger displays of opposition to a war than in New York or Europe.
A senior Singaporean official said that the Bush administration's policy in Iraq was changing perceptions of the United States in the region.
It is accepted that the United States is the lone superpower, but until now it had been seen as a "benign superpower," he said. Now, he said, the United States has made clear that it will act unilaterally whenever it deems appropriate, and that is contributing to a perception of American arrogance.
"Everyone is worried," said a senior law enforcement official in Singapore, where the government is not accustomed to allowing anything to get out of control.
"If the war is over quickly and there are few civilian casualties, the response may be muted," he said. But if it is prolonged, "it will be more and more difficult for us to hold the ground."
Large anti-American demonstrations are expected in Malaysia, and the American Embassy there has plans to evacuate dependents should the protests get out of hand.
But the source of greatest concern to the United States in the region has been Indonesia, which has a Muslim population of more than 200 million and where thereis a pervasive conviction, even among intellectuals and moderates, that America's campaign against terrorism is really a campaign against Islam.
A week ago, 50,000 Indonesians marched peacefully to the American Embassy to express opposition to a possible war.
"Demonstrations, while still completely peaceful, are growing larger and more frequent," Mr. Boyce said in his letter. "While we have responded with an unprecedented public diplomacy campaign putting senior embassy officials in every available press outlet to make our case on Iraq, it is clear that Indonesian political leaders and the general public are going to continue their staunch opposition to U.S. policy." 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 17, 2003


End of Document