Three Arrested In Sunday's Suicide-Attack On IRG: Iran
RTT News (United States)
October 21, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 390 words
Body


(RTTNews) - An Iranian media report says that authorities have arrested three persons in connection with Sunday&apos;s suicide-attack at a sports complex in the town of Pisheen in Sistan-Baluchistan province, where the Revolutionary Guards were preparing to meet Shi&apos;ite and Sunni tribal leaders.
Tuesday, Iran&apos;s Fars news agency quoted a top Iranian prosecutor as saying that the three persons were apprehended in Sistan-Baluchistan in the country&apos;s south-east where the attack occurred. He also said the suicide bomber has been identified as an Iranian national.
The attack killed 42 persons, including 15 members of Iran&apos;s elite Revolutionary Guards. Previous official figures had put the death toll of guard commanders as seven.
The arrests came as Iran stepped up pressure on Islamabad, stating that the group which launched the deadly week-end suicide-attack on its Revolutionary Guards commanders was based in Pakistan and had links with that country&apos;s intelligence agency, the ISI.
In a strongly worded statement, Tehran also demanded extradition of Abdolmalik Rigi, the chief of Pakistan-based Sunni group Jundallah, or Soldiers of God, and said that a high-level team would travel to Islamabad to present proof of the involvement of the group in the attack.
Media reports in Iran also quoted General Mohammad Ali Jafari, the Revolutionary Guards chief, as vowing to "retaliate" against U.S. and British intelligence agencies that he says helped the attackers.
The Pakistani, U.S. and British governments have condemned the attack and denied any involvement.
Meanwhile, an Iranian lawmaker from the western city of Eslamabad-e Gharb has called on President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to freeze all financial aid to Pakistan. Islamabad was due to receive about $300 million in aid from Tehran, most of which was to be in the form of counter-terrorism assistance.
Accusing the Pakistani Intelligence Agency (ISI) of being the main supporter of terrorism in the region, Heshmatollah Falahat-Pishe, a member of Iran&apos;s Parliamentary Committee on National Security and Foreign Policy said until Islamabad demonstrates its sincerity in controlling its borders, the country should be nor be provided any Iranian aid.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document