Three-day conference explores crime, media and culture
Indiana Statesman: Indiana State University
September 19, 2013 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2013 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 538 words
Body


The fifth annual international crime, media and popular culture studies conference will be held next week, multiple disciplines will gather to discuss current issues in the media in relation to crime and terrorism.
Speakers will present topics covering depictions of offenders in the media to new and clever forms of vandalism such as yarn-bombing, an artsy fad of using knitting in place of spray paint.
From Monday to Wednesday, paper presentations will be in the University Hall Theatre, but panel discussions will be held in the Dede conference rooms in Hulman Memorial Student Union.
Conference coordinator and Indiana State University criminology professor, Franklin Wilson, brought the conference with him when he came to ISU in 2009.
He said all students and faculty are welcome to attend.
"Come and participate, make some comments, ask some questions," he said. "The conference has grown every year, in fact, this year it will host more than 100 attendees from 16 countries and 27 different states."
Wilson said the conference aims to promote interdisciplinary cooperation between practitioners of law enforcement and the academic community who study it.
He also hopes the conference can help students realize facts about crime rather than the impressions portrayed by the media which frequently over-exaggerate it.
"The FBI just recently released its crime report that said that crime has been steadily decreasing for the last 30 years," Wilson said. "But if you look at modern media, about 53 percent of programming is crime related."
ISU Police Chief Bill Mercier said he hopes to attend the conference if his schedule will allow it.
"This conference is a great opportunity for students," he said. "Though I focus more on the hands-on portion of criminal justice, I believe this conference will have many interesting viewpoints for discussion."
Mark Hamm, Maggie Rumler, David Polizzi, and Mandy Reid are four ISU professors that will be participating in discussions and presenting their papers at the conference.
Hamm will be discussing drone warfare and the legal questions of stochastic terrorism, which is the process of relaying violent rhetoric to people who may actually commit acts of terrorism.
"Terrorism by definition has to have a political motive," he said. "Definitions matter; in criminology we are very careful about applying labels."
Hamm also looks forward to introducing his colleague from La Trobe University, Melbourne Australia, Ramón Spaaij, as he discusses "Lone Wolf Terrorism as Performance."
As for the other ISU professors, Rumler will cover female lone wolf terrorists, while Polizzi and Reid will talk about Phenomenology of visible crime and rape culture respectively.
Department Chair of Criminology, DeVere Woods, is excited ISU will host the conference again this year.
"I really look forward to our department bringing in a diverse group of academics from around the world," Woods said. "It is such a great opportunity for our students to meet and interact with some of the authors they have read in their coursework."
The conference is free and everyone is welcome and encouraged to attend.
For a rough itinerary and list of scheduled speakers visit http://www.indstate.edu/ccj/popcultureconference/.

Load-Date: September 20, 2013


End of Document