THREATS AND RESPONSES: MATERIAL WITNESS; Federal Prosecutors Charge Pakistani in Brooklyn With Supporting Terrorism
 The New York Times
August 9, 2003 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 870 words
Byline:  By BENJAMIN WEISER
Body


Federal prosecutors in Manhattan yesterday charged a Pakistani man living in Brooklyn with supporting terrorism, saying he had tried to help an associate of Al Qaeda in Pakistan obtain the necessary travel documents to enter and possibly remain in the United States.
     The defendant, Uzair Paracha, 23, has been held since March as a material witness in the government's investigation of terrorism. 
 Prosecutors said that during a meeting in an ice cream shop in Karachi this year, Mr. Paracha was asked by the Qaeda associate to impersonate him in the United States to give the impression that the Qaeda associate was still in the country. The man told Mr. Paracha to deposit money in his bank account, to use his credit cards, and to close a post office box he held in Maryland.
The Qaeda associate, who had previously been in the United States, also asked Mr. Paracha to pose as him in communications with American immigration authorities, in the hope of obtaining travel documents to re-enter the United States, prosecutors said.
The government did not say what they believe the Qaeda associate planned to do in the United States, but they said Mr. Paracha, who arrived in the United States last February, was aware of the man's links to the terrorist group.
The Qaeda associate told Mr. Paracha that "brothers" like him were needed, and that "different people provided different levels of assistance" to Al Qaeda, according to a criminal complaint filed in Federal District Court. The Qaeda associate is identified in the complaint only as CC-1.
"Paracha believed that CC-1 was attempting to recruit him into Al-Qaeda," notes the complaint, which is signed by a special agent of the F.B.I., Janelle M. Miller, a member of the Joint Terrorist Task Force.
Two people said yesterday that CC-1 is believed to be a former Baltimore resident named Majid Khan, whom law enforcement officials have said is a suspected Al Qaeda operative captured recently in Pakistan.
Attorney General John Ashcroft said in a statement, "This case demonstrates that Al Qaeda will go to great lengths to enlist support here in the United States."
In court, Mr. Paracha sat quietly next to his lawyer, acknowledging to a magistrate judge that he understood his rights.
The judge, Andrew J. Peck, ordered Mr. Paracha held pending a bail hearing next week. A federal prosecutor, Karl Metzner, had said the government was seeking detention because there was a risk of flight and of danger to the community.
After the hearing, Mr. Paracha's lawyer, Anthony L. Ricco, said his client was "a little shaken, but he's doing okay." He said his client would plead not guilty.
"We're going to take the position that Uzair Paracha was manipulated into this situation," he said. "It's pretty clear, I think, to everyone involved that there was a great deal of manipulation involved here. And it'll be a real tough question as to whether or not he had the intent to commit this crime as charged."
Many members of Mr. Paracha's family were in attendance in the courtroom. Afterward, Mr. Ricco described the family as large and close-knit. He said family members "were really quite shocked" that Mr. Paracha had been charged.
"He's a young person who has never been in trouble in his life," Mr. Ricco said. "He's never belonged to a religious organization or even a political organization." Mr. Ricco called his client, who has an M.B.A. from Pakistan, "very bright" but naive.
This week, Mr. Ricco said he expected his client to be charged with providing material support to a terrorist conspiracy whose goal included obtaining chemical weapons. Prosecutors made no mention yesterday of chemical weapons, and one official played down the issue, saying there was no such evidence.
The complaint says that investigators found in a search of Mr. Paracha's house in Brooklyn documents in the name of the Qaeda associate, including a Maryland driver's license, Social Security card, a bank card and a key to his post office box. There was also a document with handwritten instructions including "always call from pay phone," "put some money in my account" and "use at any gas station."
The complaint says the Qaeda associate also told Mr. Paracha that he wanted to invest $200,000 in a business in Karachi where Mr. Paracha had worked.
"Paracha was advised not to ask any questions about the money," the complaint says, because the Qaeda associate was a supporter of Osama bin Laden. Mr. Paracha, who was interviewed by American investigators, said he "believed the funds to be Al Qaeda money," and that the Qaeda associate "wanted to keep the funds liquid and to be able to retrieve them on short notice."
The complaint also does not mention Mr. Paracha's father, Saifullah, a Pakistani businessman who is said to have also been taken into custody. The father, working with an American partner in New York, runs a company that exports clothing from Pakistan to the United States.
Farhat Paracha, the mother of Uzair and wife of Saifullah, said in a phone interview from Karachi this week that neither family member was involved in terrorism. "No way," she said of Uzair. Of Saifullah, she said: "He's not a terrorist. He's a generous person who helps everybody who comes to him."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Uzair Paracha, 23, has been held since March as a material witness. (Photo by Associated Press) 

Load-Date: August 9, 2003


End of Document