THREATS AND RESPONSES: TERRORISM; Kenya to Charge 4 in Attacks Last Fall at a Beach Resort
 The New York Times
June 24, 2003 Tuesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 740 words
Byline:  By MARC LACEY 
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya, June 23  
Body


Four people will be charged with murder this week in connection with the terrorist attacks last November at a beachfront resort in Kenya that killed three Israeli tourists and 11 Kenyans, government officials said today.
     Several other suspects have been arrested in recent days in sweeps related to terrorist threats in Kenya, which has been hit by two deadly attacks linked to Al Qaeda over the last four years, the authorities said. 
 Justice Minister Kiraitu Murungi told reporters today that recent complaints by the American ambassador to Kenya, Johnnie Carson, that Kenya was not doing enough to counter terrorism had played a part in the decision to announce the arrests.
The suspects in the Mombasa attacks include three people with ties to Fazul Abdullah Muhammad, an operative of Al Qaeda who is wanted in both the 1998 bombing of the American Embassy in Nairobi and the Nov. 28 Mombasa attacks, officials said.
The suspects are Muhammad Kubwa, the half-brother of Fazul Abdullah Muhammad's wife; Mr. Kubwa's father, Kubwa Muhammad; and Abud Rogo Muhammad, a cousin, officials said. The fourth suspect was not named, and the nationality of none of them was specified.
The Mombasa attack was aimed at Israeli tourists who had been visiting Kenya's typically tranquil coastline. Suicide bombers rammed a four-wheel-drive vehicle packed with explosives into the Paradise Hotel, which was crowded with Israeli visitors. Minutes earlier, assailants attempted to bring down a chartered Israeli jet with two shoulder-fired missiles. Both missiles missed their target.
The murder suspects, whose exact roles were not disclosed today, had been taken in for questioning by the police numerous times since the bombing. Philip Murgo, Kenya's director of public prosecutions, said they had been charged with minor offenses several weeks ago but, because of fresh evidence, they would be charged with murder on Tuesday or Wednesday of this week.
Additional suspects are still being sought, investigators said.
Kenyan officials have complained bitterly in recent weeks about the travel bans that the American and British governments have imposed on Kenya over fears of a looming terrorist attack. The Americans have also announced the temporary closing of the embassy here because of what officials call credible threats of terrorist acts in the county.
The moves have devastated this East African nation's tourist industry, the major source of foreign currency.
Mr. Murungi, the justice minister, also announced a plan to submit to Parliament this week a tough new antiterrorism law that will allow the police to detain suspects for up to 36 hours without the presence of their attorneys. Mr. Murungi said American officials helped them draft the law.
"The government wishes to dispel any notion that it is not adequately addressing the issue of, or the rising threat of, international terrorism," Mr. Murungi said.
Ambrose Murunga, a former police investigator who has been involved in antiterrorism investigations in Kenya, said the government needed to do far more to improve its antiterrorism fight.
He said he doubted whether most customs officials or other civilian workers would know the difference between a rocket launcher and a piece of construction equipment.
"I bet top immigration officials can't even name the three most wanted terrorists in the world, let alone identify them," Mr. Murunga said in a newspaper commentary last week.
Kenyan officials acknowledged today that they needed to improve their training of airport workers and others although they insisted that they had solid evidence to back the latest arrests of suspects in the Mombasa bombing.
A cellphone belonging to Fazul Abdullah Muhammad is believed to have led to the arrests, according to Kenyan investigators. Mr. Muhammad left the telephone with his wife, Amina. Investigators said they traced calls on the phone that raised their suspicions.
Kenyan officials disclosed nothing today about the suspects arrested in connection with recent terrorist threats, although the police have been rounding up people by the dozens in the Eastleigh neighborhood of Nairobi, which is home to many Somali immigrants.
Kenya's long, porous border with Somalia, a country considered an ideal hiding place for terrorists, is considered one of its vulnerabilities in getting a grip on the problem.
Last week, Kenyan officials announced the suspension of all flights between Kenya and Somalia.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Map of Kenya highlighting Mombasa: Attacks in Mombasa last year killed 3 tourists and 11 Kenyans.      

Load-Date: June 24, 2003


End of Document