Threats of war, terrorism further undermine airlines;
The ailing carriers have cut ticket prices on many routes, but some expect their finances to worsen in the coming months.
 Philadelphia Inquirer
February 21, 2003 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C01
Length: 1012 words
Byline: By Tom Belden; Inquirer Staff Writer
Body


When airlines advertised round-trip fares of less than $200 between Europe and any U.S. city last week, the meaning was clear: The double threat of war with Iraq and terrorism at home is creating bargains for travelers and misery for the carriers.
Already weakened by $17 billion in losses the last two years, the airlines' financial condition will grow even worse over the next few months, industry officials and analysts said recently.
US Airways and United already are in bankruptcy. With the outbreak of war or domestic terrorism, "the likelihood of additional bankruptcies would certainly increase, at a faster rate than it otherwise would," said Michael Wascom, a spokesman for the Air Transport Association trade group.
War would "exacerbate an already serious problem for American [Airlines] and for the whole industry," said American spokesman John Hotard, whose company lost $3.5 billion in 2002.
Industry officials will not or cannot estimate how much their revenue or passenger loads would fall during a war or its aftermath, which could be more turbulent than the 1991 Gulf War. In 1991, transatlantic traffic fell precipitously when the war started, and ended down 12.3 percent for the year compared with 1990, the Federal Aviation Administration said.
All traffic for U.S. airlines was down 1.4 percent in 1991, the first time it had declined from the year before since the birth of commercial aviation.
This time around, airlines are in worse financial shape than they were 12 years ago.
Besides the carriers' having fewer passengers, a Middle East war could push jet-fuel prices up. Fuel costs are most airlines' second-largest expense, after labor, and filling up aircraft tanks cost U.S. carriers $12.7 billion last year. The trade association estimated that a war could add an additional $1.5 billion in costs in 2003.
Those ultra-low fares to Europe were part of a short-lived promotion last week to fill at least some seats on airplanes that otherwise might be virtually empty if war breaks out.
But business is not bad on all the airlines' routes. The lowest round-trip fares available to some popular Caribbean islands are at a typical high-season level of $400 to $550. (The advertised fares do not include $87 in tax on all international tickets.)
Industry watchers say prices for both international and domestic travel are likely to remain at or below last year's level for the rest of 2003 - a clear reflection of how tough it is to get people to think about traveling for either business or pleasure when the economy is weak and the populace jittery.
"I think what we're seeing is postponement of plans," said George Hamlin, senior vice president of Global Aviation Associates, a consulting firm in Washington. "If you have a choice of taking a vacation in the next 60 days or not, you will probably postpone it."
If the 1991 Gulf War is any guide, "at the moment war starts, the U.S. government will start to warn U.S. citizens away from traveling overseas," predicted Hal Rosenbluth, chief executive of Rosenbluth International, the Philadelphia-based travel-management company.
The industry observers said they believed airlines with extensive international networks would see business decline the most, while carriers that get all or most revenue from domestic flying would be hurt less. In the Gulf War, airlines cut their transatlantic flight schedules 20 to 25 percent, and industry officials say similar reductions in service could be made this time.
Already, domestic low-fare airlines, including AirTran, JetBlue and Southwest, are the only consistently profitable carriers in the industry these days.
US Airways - which has two-thirds of the business at Philadelphia International Airport - could fare better than some of its larger rivals because most of its flying is in this country, said Kevin P. Mitchell, chairman of the Radnor-based Business Travel Coalition.
Some analysts believe that the constant news reports about Iraq and domestic terrorism are adding to the airlines' woes, causing an incalculable number of would-be passengers to postpone or cancel travel plans.
"The media has just kept it in everybody's face," said John V. Pincavage, an aviation financial consultant in Westport, Conn.
Morten E. Beyer, chairman of the Morten Beyer & Agnew consulting firm in Arlington, Va., said there had been far more buildup to a war than there was in 1991. "This time you have [the Bush administration] issuing warnings and it isn't helping a bit," he said. "It's creating more hysteria and depressing the inclination to travel."
In a survey released last week by the Association of Corporate Travel Executives, a third of the 250 business-travel managers questioned said just the threat of conflict in the Mideast had prompted their company to reduce international travel. An actual conflict would cause 82 percent of the companies to curtail foreign travel, they said.
Half of the managers said yes when asked whether the travelers at their companies "have expressed concern about being abroad in the face of developing hostilities."
Virtually all the travel managers - 99 percent - said their companies had contingency plans in place to evacuate employees or to make them more secure in the event of war or a major terrorist attack. Only 37 percent of the companies had such plans in place before 9/11.
Through the gloom, some people in the travel business are managing to stay optimistic.
For Apple Vacations, the Newtown Square company that is one of the nation's largest sellers of air-and-hotel travel packages, business is roughly the same as it was in the winter of 2000-2001, which the travel industry calls its last normal, pre-9/11 year. And selling vacations to warm-weather destinations has been boosted by the coldest, snowiest winter in years.
"People are booking later. People aren't sure what to do," said John Mullen, Apple's president and chief executive. "But one thing that's been very helpful is the weather. People are saying 'I've got to get away.' "
Contact staff writer Tom Belden at 215-854-2454 or tbelden@phillynews.com  

Load-Date: February 21, 2003


End of Document