THREATS AND RESPONSES: ARAB ALLY; Saudis Brush Aside Criticism Of Record Against Terrorism
 The New York Times
December 4, 2002 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1126 words
Byline:  By JAMES DAO 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3  
Body


The government of Saudi Arabia brushed aside criticism of its efforts to combat terrorism today, asserting that it, too, had been a major target of Al Qaeda's violence and that its close cooperation with Washington to stem Islamic extremism had gone unnoticed and unappreciated.
     During a news conference to unveil Saudi initiatives against terrorism, Adel al-Jubeir, a senior foreign policy adviser to Crown Prince Abdullah, lashed out at the kingdom's critics, arguing that Americans had been consumed by anti-Saudi sentiments that bordered on hate. 
 The Saudi effort, detailed in an eight-page report released today, includes freezing 33 bank accounts containing $5.5 million, requiring all Saudi charities to undergo audits and creating a financial intelligence unit to investigate money-laundering. The report also said Saudi Arabia had questioned more than 2,000 people and detained about 100 others on suspicion of aiding terrorists. The Saudi initiative was first reported in Tuesday's Washington Post.
The United States praised the report, saying it showed that the Saudis were moving in the right direction, but experts said not many of the measures it detailed were new.
Mr. Jubeir, a polished diplomat who was in turn defensive and combative at the news conference, also argued that Osama bin Laden had purposely deployed a large number of Saudis during the Sept. 11 attacks -- 15 of the 19 hijackers were Saudi citizens -- to "drive a wedge" between Washington and Riyadh.
"And the irony of it is, those who are most critical or hostile toward Saudi Arabia in the United States are playing right into his hands," Mr. Jubeir said. "Bin Laden, if he's dead, is laughing at them from his grave. If he is alive and sitting in a cave, he's doing the same thing."
"If, instead of 15 of the 19 hijackers, you had only two or three Saudis on the planes, does anyone in this room think that Saudi Arabia, that our people, that our faith, that our educational system would have been subjected to this severe and outrageous criticism, which borders on hate?" he said. "As somebody who's lived in the United States for almost 20 years, I have never seen this side of America."
Mr. Jubeir's remarks today followed a report last week that about $2,000 from the wife of Saudi Arabia's ambassador to the United States may have ended up in the hands of two of the Sept. 11 hijackers. Congressional and administration officials said the report demonstrated that Riyadh had been lax about regulating charities used as conduits to finance terrorists. 
The Bush administration is also preparing to make a formal request to Riyadh to use Saudi air bases if there is an American-led invasion of Iraq, and to ask the Saudis to step up oil production if a conflict causes a worldwide shortage.
Though American officials say they expect the Saudis to let American-led forces use their bases, Mr. Jubeir was coy about how Riyadh would respond to such a request. "We will not make a decision until the time comes and until we have weighed all of the options," he said.
American officials and terrorism experts said much of the eight-page Saudi document released today was a repackaging of measures under discussion or under way for months.
But administration officials nevertheless praised the Saudis for taking a more public, aggressive stand even though it was likely to anger conservative Muslims back home.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell praised Saudi efforts today, calling them "impressive." But he said they would need to take further steps to curb the flow of money.
In comments aboard a flight to Colombia, where he is to meet with the new president, Alvaro Uribe Velez, the secretary said of the Saudis: "Could they do more? Yes. Will there be more things we will ask them to do? Yes."
Similarly, several independent experts raised questions about the initiatives, arguing that Saudi Arabia has often failed to fulfill its promises to crack down on terrorists and their financiers. 
"There's a lot of smoke here," said Matthew A. Levitt, a senior fellow in terrorism studies at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "There's nothing concrete enough to indicate how they will implement it, so as to make sure it has teeth."
The new report also failed to win over Saudi Arabia's leading critics on Capitol Hill. 
"They are in denial," said Senator Richard C. Shelby, an Alabama Republican who was on the Senate Intelligence Committee and is expected to become chairman of the Banking Committee next month. "They're hoping this issue will go away. But I don't believe it's going to go away. A lot of people in America realize that there are just too many unanswered questions about powerful people in Saudi Arabia either wittingly or unwittingly helping to finance terrorism."
Congressional officials said one of Mr. Shelby's first actions as Banking Committee chairman would be to hire investigators to look into the financing of terrorists by banks and charities in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere.
Mr. Jubeir argued today that Saudi Arabia had been the victim of terrorism for longer than the United States -- and just as big a target for Qaeda attacks. "Ultimately," he declared, "it is our two countries that are in the crosshairs of Al Qaeda." 
For that reason, he added, Saudi Arabia has worked closely with the United States to track down terrorist financing and interrogate terrorist suspects. Those efforts have included freezing accounts belonging to Wael Hamza Jalaidan, a bin Laden aide, and to the Balkan branches of a Saudi-based charity, Al Haramain Islamic Foundation, he said.
But he argued that Americans remained unaware of Saudi Arabia's actions because the Saudis had not promoted them. "This is about to change," he said, indicating plans for a new Saudi public relations blitz.
Bush administration officials said today that a total of $121 million in suspected terrorist funds had been frozen worldwide, $36 million in the United States. Though the $5.5 million frozen by Saudi Arabia represents less than 5 percent of that total, American officials said they considered the Saudi effort "substantial."
One State Department official said the Saudis were "bold" to announce antiterror initiatives when American policies in the Middle East are deeply unpopular throughout the Persian Gulf region. But the official also said it could be months before it became clear whether the Saudis' plans were real or window-dressing.
"At this point," the official said, "we've got the pillars and the load-bearing walls. Now we need to see that the long-term commitment is there, that they will take an active role instead of waiting to be prompted every couple of weeks by a high-level American visit. That's something that we're not going to know for months."      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 4, 2002


End of Document