THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE KASHMIR CASE; Judge Upholds Release of a Terrorism Defendant
 The New York Times
July 4, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 355 words
Byline:  By The New York Times 
Dateline: ALEXANDRIA, Va., July 3  
Body


A federal judge agreed today that a man accused of supporting a Kashmir terrorist group should be freed from custody pending trial.
     Officials said they expected that the defendant, Hammad Abdur-Raheem, would be released by Friday with an electronic monitoring bracelet and other restrictions. 
 But at the same time, the judge, Leonie M. Brinkema of the United States District Court for Eastern Virginia, ruled that another defendant in the case, Mohammed Aatique, should not be freed on bail.
Judge Brinkema upheld an earlier ruling by a federal magistrate judge, Theresa Buchanan, that Mr. Aatique should be held. Ruling on an appeal by his lawyers, Judge Brinkema said that Mr. Aatique, a Pakistani who the authorities say spent time at a terrorist training camp, has "significant ties" to his home country and might try to flee there if released.
The split decision sent a somewhat unclear message about the latitude the Justice Department will be given in seeking to incarcerate terrorist suspects. It is highly unusual, especially since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, for a suspect in a terrorism case to be released on bail. But in ordering Mr. Abdur Raheem's release, Judge Brinkema said, "Each one of these defendants has to be evaluated on his own merits."
Mr. Abdur-Raheem and Mr. Aatique are among 11 men -- 8 in the United States and 3 in Saudi Arabia -- who were charged last week with organizing a paramilitary group in the Washington area to support efforts to drive India out of Kashmir. The men have maintained their innocence, saying that the F.B.I. mistook their weekend paint ball sessions for war games and that it has harassed them because they are Muslims.
Judge Brinkema scheduled the men's trials for November to avoid the specter of a trial around the time of the second anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
On Wednesday, Magistrate Judge T. Rawles Jones Jr. ruled that Mr. Abdur-Raheem and three of the other men arrested last week should be freed from custody on the grounds that they did not pose a sufficient threat to the community and were not likely to flee the Washington area if they were released. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 4, 2003


End of Document