Three BJP members shot dead in held Kashmir
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 30, 2020 Friday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 459 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


"Three militants came in a local vehicle belonging to a local militant identified as Altaf". They have been identified as Umer Rashid Beigh and Umer Ramzan Hajam.
However, they said that the trio succumbed to their injuries.
"We have provided PSOs and security to 157 BJP workers, and almost 30 have been provided with guards and we will provide more security to those who have severe threat perception".
On a question as to whether the attacks on BJP activists - instances of which have increased over the last few months - were carried out at the local level by the militants or did the ultras get orders from Pakistan, the IGP said this was part of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism.
"All three of them were brought dead", Dr. Asima, Medical Superintendent Qazigund, was quoted as saying by local news agency GNS. "Senior police officers reached at the crime spot", the police said in a statement. I also appeal to the protected persons not to go to hard areas in the night without the gunmen and follow the SOP, he said.
Militants this year have killed eight BJP leaders and workers in Kashmir.
In a similar attack in Bandipora in July, a BJP leader, his father and brother were killed by the ultras.
On August 6, a BJP sarpanch, Sajad Ahmad Khanday, was killed in Qazigund, in Kulgam district.
Uriah Hall accuses UFC champ Israel Adesanya of 'looking for easy fights'
Uriah is the focus now, and after that, we'll see the next steps, we'll talk to Dana, we'll see what's doable and what's not". Do you think Anderson Silva will continue fighting after his fight with Uriah Hall? "I try do to the best show for my fans".
Police had provided adequate security for the BJP workers and leaders and some of them were even provided secure accommodations at various locations across Kashmir.
Condemning the killings, Lieutenant Governor Manoj Sinha said the "perpetrators of violence are the enemies of humanity and such cowardly acts can not be justified".
Lieutenant Governor, Manoj Sinha to expressed anguish over the killings, he said that the perpetrators of violence are the enemies of humanity and such cowardly acts cannot be justified.
Law shall take its course and the guilty shall be dealt with sternly, he added.
He assured all the possible help from the government to the bereaved families.
He also conveyed his heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family members and prayed for eternal peace to the departed souls.
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, head of the BJP, condemned the killings: "They were bright youngsters doing excellent work in Jammu and Kashmir". The were dynamic workers.
Earlier Thursday, police detained several pro-India Kashmiri politicians who oppose the new land laws as they tried to protest the policy in the region's main city ofSrinagar.

Load-Date: October 31, 2020


End of Document