Threat of multiple wars, terrorism requires a stronger military
USA TODAY
September 11, 2003, Thursday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 645 words
Byline: Ben Stein
Body

The United States has been attacked viciously by foreign aggressors twice in our history, on Dec. 7, 1941 and on Sept. 11, 2001.
After the first attack, the United States put more than 10 million men and women in uniform, raised taxes and went on a war footing to win -- all to preserve our country and way of life. After the second attack, by Islamic terrorists, we proclaimed we were on a war footing. But we did not increase the size of the military in any meaningful way. We did not raise taxes, but had a significant tax cut. To pursue our war against terrorism, we invaded Afghanistan and quickly won. More recently, we invaded Iraq and quickly won.
Now, we are charged with peacekeeping and nation building in those two places. These are worthy tasks. The terrorist regimes in Afghanistan and Iraq had to go. But we have stretched a much too small military to the breaking point. The United States has virtually no reserves to use if North Korea should invade the South, or if China should invade Taiwan or if we need to fight in Iran or anywhere else.
To be sure, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld has said often on talk shows that he has enough resources. He will make do, he says, by streamlining and changing doctrine. But doctrine does not catch and kill al-Qaeda terrorists. Soldiers do that. Doctrine cannot interdict North Korean ships carrying nuclear arms. Ships and sailors do that. Streamlining does not get fuel into jets for long distance missions. Money and human beings and weapons do that. The truth is that Rumsfeld needs money -- and a lot more of it.
Multiple wars possible
We do not have enough troops to fight a war anywhere besides Iraq, and other wars are always a possibility. Our Air Force, Navy and Marine airplanes are rapidly wearing out. Our Navy grows steadily smaller as ships are retired and we do not replace them. Our Army equipment is often from the Vietnam era. In a word, we're facing a war with terrorists and are pitifully under armed. We do not have a military big enough to pacify Iraq, guard against Iran and North Korea, keep peace in the Balkans and in Afghanistan, and be ready for the powder kegs of South America.
This has got to be fixed. We need a military far larger than our roughly 1.5 million member active force. We need new equipment in large quantities and high qualities. I love tax cuts. But "defense is greater than opulence," as economist Adam Smith said. It is unfair to our soldiers to have tax cuts here at home while they use aging equipment when they fight our wars.
We spend about 4.5 cents of every national dollar of economic product on defense. During the Cold War we spent more than 10 cents of every dollar on defense. During World War II, we spent close to half the national product on defense. Surely we can spend far more than we do without breaking the bank.
In fact, if we do not spend more, have a bigger and better equipped military, we will have no bank to defend. Let's start with a serious raise in military pay to draw in more recruits, and then supply them better. We are facing a foe who seems to grow steadily more vicious. There are a lot of other foes who will become more dangerous if they sense vulnerability.
Use our strengths
We have all of the advantage in terms of men and women, modern technology and a strong nation at home to back the military. Let's not hesitate to use our strength to protect ourselves. The lesson of 9/11, among others, is that it can happen here, and the lesson of Iraq is that it takes a lot of fighting to win a war.
For the sake of our military, for the sake of our nation, for the sake of posterity, let's take this war seriously and fight it with both hands, not with one tied behind our back.
***
 Ben Stein, a member of USA TODAY's board of contributors, is a celebrity judge on Star Search and appears on Fox News Channel discussing the stock market.

Load-Date: September 11, 2003


End of Document