Tibetan Leaders Pray for 9 Who Self-Immolated
The New York Times
October 20, 2011 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15; WORLD BRIEFING ASIA
Length: 385 words
Byline: By RICK GLADSTONE
Body


The top two leaders of Tibet's government-in-exile publicly prayed on Wednesday for the nine Tibetans who have immolated themselves over the past seven months to protest China's Tibet policies, provoking an angry response from Beijing, where a government spokeswoman called the prayers a promotion of terrorism.
The prayers were led by the Dalai Lama, Tibet's spiritual leader, and Lobsang Sangay, the recently elected prime minister of the government-in-exile, which is in Dharamsala, India. The action was their most prominent display of solidarity yet for the nine Tibetans, all from a restive Tibetan area of Sichuan province in western China. Five of them died, according to Tibetan advocacy groups, including a nun, the only woman among the group, who set herself on fire on Monday. The others were monks or former monks.
The Web site of the Dalai Lama, a 76-year-old Nobel laureate, showed photographs of him and hundreds of robed monks praying at his Tsuglakhang Temple in Dharamsala for ''those who have died and others who have been injured'' in the immolations, a relatively new form of protest among Tibetans who have resisted China's sovereignty over the former Himalayan kingdom.
Mr. Sangay was quoted by news agencies as saying at the ceremony that ''we pay homage to their courage and stand in solidarity with their indomitable spirit.''
China considers the Dalai Lama a subversive threat to its control of Tibet, which the Chinese occupied in the 1950s forcing him into exile, and it bans acts of homage to him in Tibet and adjoining areas of China populated by ethnic Tibetans. The Dalai Lama has said he wants autonomy rather than full independence for Tibet and opposes what he calls China's harsh repression of Tibetan religion and culture.
China's state-run press has barely mentioned the self-immolations, which the Dalai Lama himself has previously said are in conflict with Buddhist precepts on the sanctity of life. But China's Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, denounced both the self-immolations and the solidarity prayers for them during a regular press briefing in Beijing. ''As we know, such splittist activity at the cost of human life is violence and terrorism in disguise,'' she told reporters.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 20, 2011


End of Document