Tightened national security draws criticism from right, left
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
September 11, 2011 Sunday


Copyright 2011 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A6
Length: 494 words
Byline: By Lou Grieco Staff Writer
Body


In the days after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, U.S. District Judge Walter H. Rice offered a warning that Americans needed to protect our civil liberties.
"We're the strongest country in the world because of our civil liberties," he said. "And if not for freedom, what ideal would we be fighting for."
A decade later, Rice said that the country has done, for the most part, a good job of balancing security and liberty. But like others across the political spectrum, he wonders whether the nation moved too far on issues such as warrantless searches and wiretapping.
"I think we have compromised some of our rights under the Fourth Amendment in the name of national security," Rice said.
The USA Patriot Act passed in October 2001 with strong bipartisan support in Congress. But since then, it has drawn criticism from the left and right.
Opponents have criticized the indefinite detentions of immigrants and terrorism suspects and warrantless searches. Some provisions have been ruled unconstitutional, but the Patriot Act lives on: President Barack Obama signed a four-year extension in May.
"On the federal level, we're in worse shape," said University of Dayton School of Law professor Tom Hagel, who added the Patriot Act had "done violence" to the Fourth and Fifth Amendments.
Because the actions done under the Patriot Act are often classified themselves, there is no way to monitor what is happening or if those powers are being abused, Hagel said. "You don't know what the government is doing," he said. "That scares me."
The post 9/11 push led to a massive expansion of the U.S.'s intelligence apparatus, with more than 1,200 state and federal agencies now dealing with intelligence issues surrounding terrorism, he said. "You just know human nature, that some of those people are going to abuse it," Hagel said. "It always happens."
The American Civil Liberties Union notes the National Security Agency can daily monitor 1.7 billion emails, phone calls and other communications.
Mike Brickner of the ACLU of Ohio said the anniversary offers an opportunity to rethink the Patriot Act and other issues.
"We're a country that did engage in torture and holding people indefinitely," he said, adding the move to a "surveillance state" has brought in more but not necessarily better information.
"When you're investigating terrorism, you're really looking through that proverbial haystack," Brickner said. "We have made that haystack much bigger."
Rob Scott, an attorney and Dayton Tea Party founder, said "a true conservative would have problems with a lot of things that the Patriot Act did."
While it was signed by President George W. Bush, it was very "anti-conservative," because it expanded government intrusion into people's lives.
"We have to have some form of privacy," he said. "They should have to justify why they want to listen to my phone calls. The reason we have a Constitution and a Bill of Rights is the protection of citizens from the government."

Load-Date: September 14, 2011


End of Document