TILTING AT WINDMILLS Bush to choose sunsets
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
August 21, 2005, Sunday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P3E
Length: 761 words
Byline: Charles Peters
Body


THE Bush administration plans to create two new commissions, the Sunset Commission and the Results Commission, that are designed, according to Charles Hunt of The Washington Times, "to evaluate all federal government agencies and eliminate those that did not perform as promised." I've always believed in the need for this kind of evaluation, but I hate to see it performed by the Bush gang. The same applies to another effort of the administration that I would ordinarily applaud - its attempt to make pay raises more dependent upon performance and less on seniority.
The problem is that what the Bushies regard as effective performance by an agency or an employee is likely to be quite different from what makes sense to many of the rest of us. For example, in the Bush team's eyes, the more a regulatory agency deregulates, the better. And the White House's idea of an employee who deserves promotion is John Bolton. Employees of the Department of Homeland Security seem to share my concern. In a recent survey, they were asked if they believed that the department's personnel decisions were based on merit. Only 20 percent answered yes.
---
The news about the FBI has not been heartening. On June 6 came word that for at least two years before its computerized case management system crashed, there was ample evidence that it was a turkey. On June 7, members of the 9/11 Commission, who have formed a private group to continue operating as anti-terrorism watchdogs, said, according to The Washington Post, that "the FBI has stumbled badly in its attempts to remake itself." On June 10, the Post said that according to a report by the inspector general of the Department of Justice, "the FBI missed at least five chances to detect the presence of two of the hijackers" before 9/11. On June 20, the AP reported that FBI managers admitted that "expertise about the Middle East or terrorism was not important in choosing the agents they promoted to top jobs."
George Bald, the FBI's anti-terrorism chief, said "his first terrorism training came 'on the job' when he moved to headquarters to oversee the counter-terrorism strategy two years ago." When asked about his knowledge of the Middle East he said, "I wish that I had it. It would be nice."
Lack of expertise was also a problem with the FBI computer project, as were frequent management turnover and design changes - including 36 to the contract alone. What happens is that when new managers come in, they want to put their stamp on the project by making changes before they know what they are doing. Gradually, they realize the project is a disaster waiting to happen, and become determined to get out at least one step ahead of the sheriff: "Send me anywhere, I'll go to Butte!"
---
In a recent issue of The New Yorker, Jeffrey Goldberg compared the power of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee to that of the AARP and the National Rifle Association. If that strikes you as incredible, consider a conversation he had with an AIPAC insider in which Goldberg asked if AIPAC's influence had diminished. "A half-smile appeared on his face, and he pushed a napkin across the table. 'You see this napkin?' he said. 'In 24 hours, we could have the signatures of 70 senators on this napkin.'"
---
American sugar beet farmers are in the news because they are threatened by CAFTA, which may result in reducing the restrictions on the import of foreign sugar. I must admit I have a soft spot in my heart for sugar beets. The reason is that in my seventh-grade geography class, when I was asked about the crops grown in a state or country and was in doubt about the correct answers, I found that "sugar beets" was the one most likely to be accepted by the teacher. It may not have been first, second or third, but it almost always made the list. Success with that answer meant that "beet sugar" was an absolute lock as an answer to the next question, which was what does the state or country produce?
---
Whenever the Watergate story resurfaces and its heroes are celebrated, a couple of names are usually left out. One is that of Frank Willis, the guard who discovered the break-in. The other is E.J. Bachinski, the Post police reporter who got hold of one burglar's address book, which connected the burglars to Howard Hunt and the White House. Bachinski saw the potential dynamite, gave the information to Bob Woodward and the rest is history. Without either of these men, there would never have been a Watergate scandal.
Peters is the founding editor of The Washington Monthly and president of Understanding Government.

Load-Date: August 22, 2005


End of Document