Time to get creative about communicating values
The Goldendale Sentinel (Washington)
December 19, 2012


Copyright 2012 SmallTownPapers, Inc.
 All Rights Reserved
SmallTownPapers, Inc.
Copyright 2012 The Goldendale Sentinel


This content, including derivations, may not be stored or distributed in any manner, disseminated, published, broadcast, rewritten or reproduced without express, written consent from STPNS
Length: 279 words
Byline: The Goldendale Sentinel staff
Body


Solutions to the horror of public shootings are being suggested in waves in recent days, some elsewhere on this very page. The sheer callousness of the murder of so many people, particularly children, has clearly hit a nerve in this jaded society
Shootings have become a kind of psychic terrorism, like the terrorism employed by extremist groups around the world but in this case arising not from some political or "religious cause. (The ultimate oxymoron, of course, has to be "holy war.") Rather, with public shooters, the terrorism is the snap of sanity into a mental/spiritual disturbance that holds to no reason other than some perverse revenge against whomever can be struck down. It is terrorism nonetheless.
Some solutions offered are profound observations on the waywardness of an increasingly secularized society that bases its morality on situational relativity rather than on something Absolute. Would that such solutions would work, and as wonderful as it would be if they did, society at large more and more disdains the simplicity of traditional values (society would call them "primitive"). It's time for a new approach to educating higher values, one more suited to the times.
The world today moves incredibly fast. Information and images of every kind are available to most people on the planet. Most of the available cultural information is not of a caliber that would lift the human spirit to its noblest. But information of that nature preferred in a 20th-century model is likely to be dismissed by those who pride themselves as cultural mavens.
It's time for creativity to rise to new creative heights, commensurate with the spiritual heights this world needs.

Load-Date: June 13, 2014


End of Document