Time to unite in battle against world terrorism;
 The libel that Islam promotes terrorism is dispelled by Clinton.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
September 22, 1998, Tuesday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1998 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 317 words
Body


The international criminal who uses terror to pursue his aims should not think the world is distracted because of President Clinton's and other world leaders' problems of the moment. Clinton's address to the U.N. General Assembly on Monday should have disabused anyone of that.
The president, in his ninth speech before the world body, called on the member states of the United Nations to think in "new terms of terrorism." What once were random acts, carried out by desperate people, now are more likely to be coordinated attacks made possible by technological a
dvances unknown to previous generations of terrorists.
The terrorist's weapons now are as likely to be chemical or biological agents as guns or bombs. It is time, the president said, for the world to unite in the battle against terrorism, rather than each country going its own way.
Every nation, Clinton said, should withhold sanctuary from terrorists, refuse support for their activities, and accept the reality that terrorists will use weapons of mass destruction if they can get their hands on such. He urged all nations to sign an anti-terror convention, enact stronger laws against terrorism in their own jurisdictions, and promote stricter international standards for airport security.
Clinton also condemned the libel that Islam foments or tolerates terrorism, and made it clear that the United States does not believe that.
"Some may have the world believe that almighty God himself, the merciful, grants a license to kill. But that is not our understanding of Islam. There is no inherent clash betwen Islam and America. Americans respect and honor Islam," the president said, and he is right.
The United Nations remains the best forum for combating terrorism, which was a proper theme for the opening of the 53rd General Assembly. It is, as the president said, "a threat to all humankind."
The nations of the world need to treat it as such.

Load-Date: March 28, 2000


End of Document