Time Warp, 2004: President Bush holds rally at stadium after national convention
The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pennsylvania)
August 26, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright 2020 The Times-Tribune
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 300 words
Byline: Brian Fulton, The Times-Tribune, Scranton, Pa.
Body


Aug. 26--     Aug. 26--Sept. 3, 2004: President George W. Bush took a page out of his opponent's playbook, traveling from the Republican Party's National Convention in New York City to Northeast Pennsylvania to speak at Lackawanna County Stadium in Moosic.
His opponent, Sen. John Kerry, had spoken in Scranton on July 30 following the Democratic National Convention in Boston.
After receiving his party's nomination, Bush and his wife, Laura, flew from New York and stayed overnight at the Woodlands Inn and Resort in Plains Twp.
The president's morning speech before an estimated crowd of 10,000 to 12,000 people centered on ownership. Bush said he wanted to focus on increasing home ownership across the country and help people get control of health insurance costs. The president also addressed Social Security benefits and the need to control terrorism in the world. The first lady joined him on the stage.
Anticipating a large number of protesters coming to the stadium, Lackawanna County court set up a special courtroom to handle arrests if the protesters got unruly.
However, a total of eight protesters showed up. No arrests were made, so the special courtroom was not used.
This was Bush's third visit to the area. While a candidate for president in 2000, he held a rally on Sept. 5 of that year at Community Medical Center, Scranton, to promote his senior citizens prescription drug plan. His next visit came on Jan. 16, 2003, when he spoke about the cost of medical malpractice insurance. That event happened at University of Scranton's Byron Recreation Center.
Contact the writer: bfulton@timesshamrock.com;
570-348-9140; @TTPagesPast on Twitter
___ (c)2020 The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) Visit The Times-Tribune (Scranton, Pa.) at thetimes-tribune.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Load-Date: August 26, 2020


End of Document