Time to punish Pakistan aggression against India

The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
July 3, 1999, Saturday


Copyright 1999 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A12
Length: 306 words
Body


With the help of Afghan Taliban terrorists, the renegade Pakistan army has committed blatant aggression against India. The Pakistani lie - that it only gives diplomatic and moral support to Islamic terrorists - has been exposed by the American, British and German demands that it withdraw its forces from the Indian part of Kashmir.
The Western media now confirm that the weapons and equipment used by the aggressors come from Pakistan.
They also acknowledge the existence of hundreds of training camps in Pakistan where terrorism and murder is taught in the name of Islam.
Recently, Israel destroyed bridges and power stations in Lebanon because terrorists from Lebanon killed two Israelis with rockets.
Not too long ago, the U.S.-led alliance expelled Iraq from Kuwait militarily.  To punish its aggression and terrorism, Iraq was debilitated with long economic sanctions.
The Pakistan government has systematically and brazenly sponsored murder and terrorism in India for more than a decade without any retaliation.
Pakistan's prime minister has clearly said that such aggressions will happen again and again.
This is a classic case of diminishing responsibility.
After silently suffering Pakistani terrorism and aggression for decades, India can now justifiably take military action for its long-term security.
As Pakistan seeks to blackmail the civilized world with its nuclear weapons, it forgets that its capability is not decisive. Unless Pakistan is taught a permanent lesson for its blatant aggression, it will continue to foster and spread terrorism year after year.
The fundamentalist Islamic-Pakistan-Taliban nexus poses severe threat even to the West and the entire humanity.
The world can help in this fight against terrorism by declaring Pakistan a rogue and terrorist state, and by imposing severe sanctions on it.
Mac Kher
Bloomington

Load-Date: July 7, 1999


End of Document