TIME FOR ANOTHER MEETING OF DEMOCRACY'S BOARD MEMBERS
The New York Times
June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk
Length: 969 words
Byline: By LESLIE H. GELB
Body


WASHINGTON
 
 T HE annual ''economic summit'' set for this week in London has become the central policy- making and coordinating arena for the industrialized democracies. ''Even if there are few concrete accomplishments from the 10 years of summitry,'' said an Administration official involved in the preparations, ''it concentrates the minds of the leaders on common problems once a year.''
The sweep of the meeting this week, according to officials and foreign diplomats here, extends from international debts and deficits to East-West relations, next steps on the Persian Gulf crisis and dealing with terrorism. Before undertaking such an agenda, President Reagan flew to Ireland Friday for a three-day pilgrimage to the land of his ancestors. He was also to participate in ceremonies marking the 40th anniversary of the Normandy landings on Wednesday.
Article on agenda for economic summit meeting in London of world's seven leading industrial democracies; graph (M)
The summit meeting is the only forum in which a manageable group of heads of government (the United States, Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan) get together regularly to discuss economic, political and military questions. The meeting has also come to symbolize and reflect the state of relations in the Western world: the domestic political pluses the leaders gain from their display of unity; the growing interconnection of their economies; the increasing concern about getting along with the Soviet Union; and the built-in difficulties of arranging the defense of common interests in the third world.
Participants have come to recognize that their differences on these issues go beyond conflicts in policy and have become structural. By and large Administration officials and foreign diplomats understand this means that differences cannot be covered over by words, that agreed-on solutions will be very rare, and that almost no matter what the United States does, Europeans and Japanese will find themselves at odds with Washington.
In recent years, for example, Washington's partners have complained about high American interest rates, which draw their capital to American markets and slow their economic recovery. But not so long ago, the other six were equally worried about the undervaluation of the dollar, which made their exports less competitive than American goods in the world market. No matter which way they turned or Washington moved, there was a conflict.
The NATO meeting in Washington last week dealt with some of these issues, but the participants seemed under no illusions that they had taken matters very far. A number of them - the Foreign Ministers of the United States, Britain, West Germany, Italy and France - were already pointing toward the more important summit forum as the place to get at Soviet- American relations in particular.
A declaration after the NATO meeting on East- West relations sought to balance the Reagan Administration's insistence on military strength and awareness of the Soviet threat with the concern of the allies to restore detente with Moscow ''through dialogue and cooperation.'' American and foreign diplomats said that Britain was circulating for the Economic Summit a ''Western Charter,'' described as yet another effort to try and lock the Administration into attempting serious negotiations with Moscow. As a high Administration official put it, ''the other leaders still see Reagan as trigger-happy, and he still sees them as too eager to make unilateral concessions to the Soviets, and this split vision remains at the center of things.'' An example of split vision came last week from the Netherlands, which had been scheduled to deploy 48 medium range missiles in 1986. In an effort to appease strong internal opposition, the Government said it might accept missiles two years later, depending on whether there was an arms agreement by then with Moscow.
The NATO Ministers also set the stage for a summit discussion on the war between Iran and Iraq. Little progress was reportedly made on a joint approach. The Administration chided the others for doing little to help Saudi Arabia and other threatened by Iranian attacks on shipping in the Persian Gulf in response to Iraqi attacks on shipping to and from Iran.  NATO has never been able to get together on joint action outside the North Atlantic area. And last week's NATO statement once again underlined ''the responsibility of all states to prevent the transfer of East-West differences to the third world.'' Nonetheless, officials here continued to say that if shipping in the Gulf area is shut down, London and Paris are prepared to take military action. But they would strongly prefer to let diplomacy take its course, stay in the background, and not escalate events into an East-West confrontation.
Diplomats here also related that Britain would raise the issue of state-sponsored terrorism at the summit. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher will be seeking to strengthen joint action against terrorism and to check any Administration thoughts of preemptive military action against the offending states.
The seven leaders will be basking in the publicity of meeting with each other. Looking like a world leader and bowing toward Western unity is still considered to be good politics, particularly in an election year. White House aides were telling reporters that Mr. Reagan was adopting a ''laid back'' attitude toward a meeting they characterized as having a ''modest'' agenda. The meeting will also have modest results, according to British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who saw no ''dramatic new initiatives'' and ''certainly no miracles.'' Over the years, those at the summit have built in an anti-failure mechanism by realizing that the best they can do is to keep their differences from getting out of hand.

Graphic

 
chart of the big seven's share of the world


End of Document