Time to ‘give peace a chance'more change in Cuba
USA TODAY
April 17, 2015 Friday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2015 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 14A
Length: 368 words
Body


In another step toward normalizing relations with Cuba, President Obama announced Tuesday that he plans to take the country off the list of states sponsoring terrorism.
It's about time. One of the more ridiculous episodes in our country's history finally is coming to an end. This step should have happened decades ago.
Kevin Bastian
I hope this is the real deal. I'd love to step back in time and visit Cuba.
Jay Sample
So all you have to do to be taken off the terrorism list is stay clean for six months and promise not to do it again? That's what President Obama mentioned in his announcement.
Mike Palestis
Human rights in Cuba are under the scrutiny of Human Rights Watch. The group accuses the Cuban government of systematic human rights abuses, including arbitrary imprisonment and unfair trials.
Cuba limits freedom of expression, association, assembly and the press. Concerns also have been expressed about the operation of due process. Does Obama care? Apparently not!
Jim Antista
All the United States has done with its isolationist policy is perpetuate the current regime. The opening of relations with Cuba likely will cause more changes in five years than 50 years of the isolationist policy. This is the right move.
Terry Mayer
Meanwhile, Cuban people and dissenters are persecuted and jailed.
Alexander Ruiz
I do not support Cuba harboring cop killers  or other violent criminals.
However, without diplomatic relations, how do people suggest we remedy that? The years of sanctions have accomplished squat.
Robin O'Bryan
Time to ‘give peace a chance'
Twitter
We asked our followers what they thought about taking Cuba off the list of state sponsors of terrorism.
Removing Cuba from the state sponsors of terrorism list is long overdue and an important step toward normal relations.
@RepBarbaraLee
Why not "give peace a chance"? If the Cubans prove unworthy, they can always be put back on the terror list.
@durga1008
Removing Cuba is an important step in normalizing relations, and ensuring peace and security in our hemisphere.
@JimmyCLewis
Finally, some sanity and rationality to U.S. foreign policy. Open doors will foster change in Cuba.
@mnoormo1
Follow @USATOpinion or #tellusatoday on Twitter for more discussions. 

Load-Date: April 17, 2015


End of Document