TIME OF TERROR; POLITICAL VIOLENCE, FROM 1800'S RUSSIA TO THE TRADE CENTER
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 14, 1993, SUNDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: WAR PAGE; Pg. 1B; PROFILE HISTORY OF TERRORISM
Length: 1507 words
Byline: Harry Levins Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body


HISTORY SUGGESTS that by and large, terrorism is a failure - so far, anyway.
The historians agree that in our era, terror has worked only three times: in Palestine in the '40s, in Cyprus in the '50s and in Aden in the '60s. In each case, the British packed up and went home, which is what the terrorists wanted.
Otherwise, terrorists have generally failed to throw out colonialists, or overturn governments, or bring capitalism to its knees, or whatever.
Which isn't to say that terrorism doesn't pay off at some level.
A year from now, the average New Yorker will no doubt be nagged by uncertainty as he walks into the World Trade Center to do business.  Terrorists would claim this small loss of certainty, this small loss of faith in a stable society, as a small victory.
But small victories mean little in the big picture. There, terrorism tends to show itself for what it is - a tool of the weak.  The Beginnings
If you define "terrorism" loosely enough, you can trace it way back. The Greeks philosophized about killing tyrants; in ancient Israel, the Jewish Sicarri put talk into action against the Roman occupiers. Two long-ago bands of violent Asians achieved immortality of sorts by lending their names to other languages: Persia's Assassins and India's Thugs.
But the word "terrorism" appeared only in the wake of the French Revolution in the late 18th century. Curiously, nobody accused enemies of the revolutionary government of terrorism. Instead, the government itself used it.
"The Reign of Terror," they called it, when Maximilien Robespierre and his Committee of Public Safety started executing enemies of the revolution - and those suspected of being enemies of revolutions, and those who someday might be enemies of the revolution, and so on.
After a few bloody months, the Reign of Terror ate its own children.  Robespierre himself went to the guillotine, and things calmed down. But he left a legacy for the 20th century - state terrorism, practiced so efficiently by Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler.
To most of us, however, the word "terrorist" evokes an image of a bearded bomb-thrower. In fact, the first modern terrorists were Russians who wore beards and threw bombs. The editorial cartoonist's caricature stuck.
The terrorists began their explosive crusade in the 1870s. (They started making noise shortly after the invention of dynamite, which surely is no coincidence.) Some of them wanted to rid Russia of its autocratic czarist government; others wanted to rid Russia of government, period.
This anarchistic mania spread into western Europe and even to the United States, claiming the life of President William McKinley. Anarchism also gave rise to a body of murky philosophy that has fascinated political scientists ever since.
Overall, the anarchists made a bigger impression on the academics than they did on the world. True, Russia eventually rid itself of the czar, but it took World War I and the October Revolution - quite a bit more than a few dynamite bombs.  Aiming At Colonialists
By fighting World War I, Europe shot itself in the gut. Europe so weakened itself that it lost its world leadership - and, eventually, its colonies.  But mostly, the Europeans refused to go home gracefully. That stubbornness lighted the fuse on nationalistic terrorism.
The British felt the heat close to home, in Ireland. Violence against the British in Ireland had been a fact of life for centuries, but in 1916 the violence organized itself as an uprising.
After four years of insurgency, the British threw in their hand. They gave Ireland back to the Irish - except for the six northernmost counties, collectively called Ulster. There, the Protestant majority insisted on remaining under the British crown.
The diehard minority in the Irish Republican Army wouldn't have it. They started ambushing Ulster border guards and blowing up Ulster custom stations.
That sort of violence falls into the category of guerrilla warfare, and the IRA never got very far with guerrilla warfare. The IRA's members were outlaws in the Catholic south and Catholics in the Protestant north. In other words, they played a weak hand on both sides of the border.
In the late '30s, the IRA drifted into England, and true terrorism. IRA hands planted bombs in London railway stations, killing people at random - people who knew little about the Irish problem and cared less.
That was deliberate; terrorists know that in a society with an unfettered press, a few mangled corpses will publicize a cause much more efficiently than tons of pamphlets. "Propaganda by deed," they call it.
In today's London, more than half a century later, bombs still go off - and life still goes on. Once, the IRA put its hopes on terrorism as a decisive strategy. Now, terrorism is just another ugly fact of life.  Ideological Outbursts
Except in a few places like Cyprus in the '50s, terrorism against colonialists usually fails to win liberation by itself. Usually, as was the case in Algeria, a guerrilla war is also needed.
Even so, nationalistic terrorism tends to generate some support among some people. That's not often the case with another brand of terrorism common to our age - ideological terrorism.
Ideological terrorism surfaced in the late '60s, that turbulent decade.  Mostly, it hit the liberal and affluent nations of western Europe. Italians had to put up with the Red Brigades; Germans relived Bonnie and Clyde with the Baader-Meinhof Gang.
Nobody, least of all the terrorists themselves, seemed to know quite what the goal was. The terrorists tended to be young, liberal, affluent and fed up with capitalism. Those who sympathized with them called them idealists in a materialistic age. Their critics called them bored brats.
The public had to pay attention when these terrorists dynamited American military posts in Germany or kidnapped Italian politicians. But few people paid the terrorists any kind of homage.
In South America, the ideological terrorists called themselves "urban guerrillas," a misnomer. Real guerrillas limit their violence to military targets, while "urban guerrillas" like Uruguay's Tupamaros use violence indiscriminantly and mindlessly.
Generally, the "urban guerrillas" failed. The Tupamaros managed to oust a government - but got as a replacement a military junta that turned on the Tupamaros and crushed them.
Americans got a taste of ideological terrorism from the Symbionese Liberation Army, a West Coast splinter group with such vague and fuzzy goals as "the unity in love of all oppressed peoples."
The SLA might have died of terminal anonymity had its members not kidnaped Patricia Hearst in 1974. Hearst was a granddaughter of press baron William Randolph Hearst, and her kidnaping gave the SLA what every terrorist group craves: massive doses, perhaps overdoses, of publicity.
But the SLA soon came to no good end, its members imprisoned or dead of gunshot wounds suffered in last-stand shootouts with the police. Like other ideological terrorists (the Weather Underground, for example) the SLA sank into the intellectual bog from which it had risen.  A Message From Above
Islam arose in the 7th Century under the prophet Mohammed and exploded out of the Arabian peninsula. After the prophet's death, Islam split at swordpoint into factions over the question of succession.
The majority faction became what we know today as Sunni Muslims; like most majorities, they generally look at life in positive terms. The minority became the Shiite Muslims; like so many minorities, the Shiites have a grimmer outlook.
When newspapers write about "Islamic fundamentalists," they generally mean Shiite Muslims. The Shiites despise secularism; they say governments in Islamic nations should follow Islamic law. The Shiites also recoil from Western culture, with its heavy doses of sex, alcohol and materialism.
The terrorists among them have scored some successes. In Iran, for example, terroristic acts like the takeover of the American embassy in 1979 all but wiped out Western influence inside the country's borders.
Similarly, radical terrorism pushed Westerners out of Lebanon. The truck bomb that killed 241 U.S. Marines outside Beirut in 1983 just took the heart out of any effort to tame the place. Lebanon stands today as a living testimonial to the scorched-earth approach, but it's free of Westerners.
The radicals have done less well with what academics call "transnational terrorism," or action outside their own borders. This means hijacking TWA jetliners, holding hostages on a cruise ship in the Mediterranean, and so forth.
Such acts have a short-term payoff. They certainly attract publicity for the terrorists' cause, and they tend to make Westerners feel less secure and thus less cocky.
The long-run outlook is less positive for the terrorists. Americans and Europeans have long since accustomed themselves to some of the inconveniences that terrorists bring about - security checks at airports, for examples.
By now, it's hard to think of a time when there weren't such checks, and travelers no longer grumble at the time and hassle.

Graphic

 
PHOTO; (1) Photo by Reuters - New York City rescue workers helping a victim of the explosion Feb. 26 at the World Trade Center in New York. The blast killed five people and injured hundreds. (2) Photo by AP - A demonstrator hurling a flaming Molotov cocktail toward British security troops in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, in August 1985. Acts of violence have occurred in the country since 1915.

Load-Date: September 29, 1993


End of Document