Time for Reappraisal
The New York Times
November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 14, Column 5; Editorial Desk; Letter
Length: 456 words
Body


To the Editor:
Numerous questions about President Reagan's secret arms deals with Iran remain unanswered.
The first relates to the Administration's contention that arms deals with Teheran go back only 18 months. With Washington's consent and probably encouragement, Israeli shipments of spare parts for U.S.-made weapons to Iran date back possibly as early as 1980, when the Iran-Iraq war started.
The Reagan Administration has previously approved direct sales of militarily useful items to Iran, such as jeeps in 1984. Export controls were tightened that September after outstanding claims by U.S. companies against Teheran had been settled.
President Reagan contends that selling arms to Iran could help end Teheran's war with Iraq. That's like saying that to extinguish a fire one had best throw in a couple of firecrackers. With U.S. economic and intelligence assistance to Iraq, however, the arms transfers to Iran appear more like a policy to prolong the war and prevent victory by either side.
Secondly, criticism of the arms sales has focused exclusively on Iran, a Government widely considered to have humiliated the U.S. But most objectionable should be the notion that improving relations with any country is best accomplished by dispensing weapons. Under this Administration, military power has become a cornerstone of foreign policy: friends and others we want to influence receive arms; foes get bombed or invaded. Can the U.S. offer the world nothing else than means of destruction?
Finally, the Iranian episode should teach us about the uses and abuses of the term ''terrorism.'' Because charges of ''support for international terrorism'' are vague and seldom substantiated, they facilitate inflating and de-emphasizing the ''terrorist threat,'' like flipping a lightswitch on and off. Thus, President Reagan defends his Iran deal by saying that Iranian-sponsored terrorism against Americans ended since the arms transfers began. A few days later, the terrorism charge is resurrected by his aides. The ''incontrovertible proof'' of Libyan involvement in a West Berlin disco bombing was suddenly transformed into evidence of Syrian ''masterminding.''
The Administration has been put on the defensive because of the immense dislike of the Iranian regime. Had the Democrats been equally determined to challenge policies toward Nicaragua and South Africa, for example (just as indefensible as the gun running to Iran), U.S. foreign policy might be on a more sensible and principled footing.
Let us hope the Iran episode will lead to a reappraisal of the means and goals of foreign policy and the proper use of Presidential powers and privileges.
 
MICHAEL G. RENNER
   Research Associate
   World Policy Institute
   New York, Nov. 24, 1986


End of Document