TIMELY G-20; WORLD LEADERS DISCUSS A RESPONSE TO TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
November 17, 2015 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2015 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. A-6
Length: 336 words
Body


President Barack Obama's attendance Sunday at the G-20 summit provided him and the other leaders a timely opportunity to consult on how to respond to the terrorist attacks in Paris, along with other topics of lasting importance.
Besides the United States, some of the other nations meeting in Antalya, Turkey, were Russia, China, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy, Canada and Saudi Arabia. French President Francois Hollande, who was dealing with the aftermath of Friday's assault, did not attend.
Overshadowing the economic conference was the Paris tragedy. Mr. Obama and Mr. Putin huddled one-on-one to discuss Syria, where the Islamic State group, which took credit for Friday's killings, has a stronghold and where the U.S. and Russia are flying parallel bombing missions. The two leaders reportedly agreed on a Syrian-led government transition, with talks to be overseen by the United Nations.
The Russians called the Obama-Putin meeting"constructive," and it was certainly useful that they talked, given their frosty relations over matters such as Ukraine and Syria.Mr. Putin also met with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Syria. Mr. Erdogan, like Mr. Obama, wants Syrian President Bashar Assad to go; Mr. Putin has said that's a matter for Syrians to decide.
As the summit ended Monday, Mr. Obama called the Islamic State "the face of evil" and said the U.S. would intensify its airstrikes in Syria and step up aid to local ground forces. Mr. Putin said it was imperative to cut off the Islamic State's ability to get money from oil smuggling. Related to the Paris attacks is the question of what, if anything, European nations will do about immigration. The general view of G-20 leaders was that the policy should not be affected by the Paris events: the Islamic State's cruelty is exactly what the migrants have been fleeing.
Mr. Obama continues his trip to the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in the Philippines and then Malaysia, where more discussions, no doubt, on terrorism will take place.

Load-Date: November 17, 2015


End of Document