Time to forget the 'years of lead'? // Italy debates issue of amnesty for terrorists of Red Brigades
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
February 10, 1988, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 21A
Length: 1072 words
Byline: RUTH E. GRUBER
Dateline: ROME
Body


ROME - A crumpled-looking, middle-age Italian smoking a pipe stepped    off a flight from Montreal last month, adding drama to an already    emotional new chapter in one of postwar Italy's most tormented sagas.
 
     Franco Piperno, a physicist, had spent the past five years in exile    in Canada and he was returning - on his own volition - to appeal a    10-year jail sentence passed upon him as one of the chief ideologists    of the left-wing terrorism that convulsed Italy in the 1970s and early    L '80s and left hundreds of dead and injured.
 
     Piperno's return Jan. 17, almost exactly 10 years after Red    Brigades terrorists kidnapped and assassinated former Prime Minister    Aldo Moro, came in the midst of an extraordinary public debate on    whether the state should now pardon the terrorists who are in jail, and    thus close the book on the bloody period known here as "The Years of    Lead."
 
     The issue has been front-page news for weeks after some leading    politicians and churchmen expressed open support for a "political    solution" to the terrorist problem - including an amnesty or at least    reduction of sentences - as proposed by Red Brigades founders Renato    Curcio and Mario Moretti, both serving long jail terms.
    "The attitude that the state can and must have in order to    contribute to closing definitively a season of violence must certainly    start from the ascertainment that terrorism has failed but must also be    merciful," Christian Democratic politician Flaminio Piccoli, a leading    proponent of amnesty, said at a meeting on the subject.
 
     Calls for an amnesty have prompted reaction from all sides,    including protests from family members of victims and an open letter    from former President Sandro Pertini saying a firm "no" to any    pardon.
 
     Private acts of pardon, especially from Catholics, are not new.
 
 Aldo Moro's daughter even visited her father's killers in jail.
 
     But making a private act into a public policy is different,    particularly in the face of complaints that the state has done little    to help families of victims who were killed or disabled.
 
     "If someone commits a crime he has to pay," said Bianca Berizzi    Galli, widow of a judge and criminologist assassinated in 1980.
 
     "Amnesty seems to me an excess, an absurdity, a mockery in the    face of those who have suffered. … I don't feel like pardoning the    assassins of my husband. Moral pardon is a fact of one's conscience and    should not be exploited," she said.
 
     Some commentators, including some political figures, go so far as    to say that those backing an amnesty have been duped by terrorists who    only want to get out of jail and resume their fight.
 
     "It's still too soon," said Maria Silvia Rossa, whose labor    organizer husband was killed in 1979. "And then, who's to say that    under the ashes there's not some flame and that the Red Brigades won't    come back? Not under the same name, perhaps, but maybe their younger    brothers."
 
     Public opinion polls are clear on the matter. A survey in Europeo    magazine said 66 percent of those polled were against a general amnesty    or other clemency for terrorists. Seventy-three percent said they were    afraid of a resumption of terrorism in Italy.
 
     The "years of lead" in Italy refers to the years in which the Red    Brigades and other splinter terrorist groups that grew out of the    political upheavals of 1968 attempted to wage an "armed struggle"    against the state based on complicated sociological theory. "Lead" is    slang for bullets.
 
     At the same time, extreme right-wing terrorist groups also took    their toll.
 
     Since 1969, more than 400 people in Italy have died in 14,000    terrorist attacks and more than 1,100 were injured. Of the dead, 149    were killed by left-wing terrorists, 26 by right-wing terrorists, 63 by    international terrorists and 181 by no clear-cut group.
 
     In 1978, the year Aldo Moro was killed, there were 2,379 terrorist    attacks registered in Italy, leaving 35 people dead. In 1979, the year    in which most attacks took place, 24 died in 2,513 attacks.
 
     By comparison, in 1987 there were eight terrorist attacks in Italy,    leaving two dead - including Gen. Licio Giorgieri, shot down a little    more than a year ago in the last left-wing political assassination.
 
     There are nearly 850 people held on terrorism charges; more than    170 are on the run.
 
     The latest arrest occurred late last month. Antonino Fosso, 30, who    had been at large since 1981, was arrested near the home of a leading    Christian Democrat, Ciriaco de Mita. Police believe Fosso and a group    of Red Brigades may have been plotting an attack on De Mita.
 
     The question of a possible amnesty has ripped open wounds that were    only partly healed in the first place, and has called into question the    government's earlier methods in combatting terrorism, which included    use of informers who were released or given light sentences for turning    state's evidence.
 
     Supporters of clemency point to the fact that informers who have    confessed to multiple homicides are free and on the street, while    others convicted of lesser crimes are behind bars.
 
     One of the prime examples of such an informer is Marco Donat    Cattin. Like many Red Brigades terrorists, he is from a well-to-do    Catholic family, the son of veteran Christian Democrat politician Carlo    Donat Cattin, who is Italy's health minister.
 
     Marco killed three people in 1979, two of them in political    assassinations. He was sentenced to only eight years in jail. Now free,    he served seven years, the last two in either semi-liberty or house    arrest.
 
     Franco Piperno's re-entry into Italy has added more fuel to the    controversy over amnesty. He was whisked away by police as soon as he    stepped off the plane, but gave a number of TV interviews before his    return.
 
     In these, he made no move toward rejecting his philosophy. He held    the state responsible for the "years of lead," and outraged public    opinion by equating the terrorists killed by police with victims of    terrorist assassination.
 
     "He reminded me of those Japanese soldiers who continued to fight    in the jungle 30 and 40 years after the war was over," said a    Communist party deputy, Luciano Violante. "He's completely out of    tune."
 
    

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Former Prime Minister Aldo Moro.

Load-Date: November 10, 1992


End of Document