Times Sq. race-slay susp's confession OKd
Daily News (New York)
December 5, 2018 Wednesday
1STAR Edition


Copyright 2018 Daily News, L.P. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; CS; Pg. 28
Length: 301 words
Byline: Shayna Jacobs

NEW YORK DAILY NEWS
Body


A Manhattan jury will hear the shocking, hours-long video confession of a hate-harboring white supremacist who admitted to fatally knifing a random man in Times Square in a plot to massacre black men last year.
Justice Laura Ward ruled that the footage of James Harris Jackson nonchalantly discussing his evil plan to eliminate half of interracial couples he saw on the street is legally admissible and will be part of the prosecution's evidence at his trial - expected early next year.
Jackson, 30, told cops he considered his one and only victim Timothy Caughman "practice" for what was to come.
He instead surrendered to police before carrying out his malicious manifesto after allegedly stalking and murdering Caughman with an 18-inch sword in March 2017.
In his deranged words, he told detectives that mixed-race couples were "were the main crux of (his) problem."
He targeted his 66-year-old victim even though he was solo on the sidewalk - not paired up with a white woman.
Jackson's lawyers argued he should have been given an attorney at the precinct and that the recorded interview should have been tossed.
"Under the totality of the circumstances, on several specific occasions he requested an attorney," one of his attorneys, Patrick Brackley, said of the ruling.
"Therefore the statement in its entirety should have been suppressed as obtained in violation of Mr. Jackson's constitutional right to an attorney."
But Ward's decision said Jackson, a Baltimore native who served in the Army, did not ask for an attorney until an hour in and it was not "unequivocal."
He's charged with first-degree murder (in furtherance of an act of terrorism), second-degree murder as a hate crime and as an act of terrorism, and weapons possession.
Jackson faces life in prison without parole if convicted on the top count.

Load-Date: December 6, 2018


End of Document