Time for talks to be over, needs to act on terrorism: PM Modi
The Sentinel
February 18, 2019 Monday


Copyright 2019 Omega Printers & Publishers Pvt Ltd, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 374 words
Body


Guwahati: Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Monday that time for talks were over and that world needs to act on terrorism now after he had a talk with Argentina President Mauricio Macri who is on a three-day visit to India.

Modi after a talk with Argentina President said that hesitating from taking actions against terrorists is also kind of encouraging terrorism. "Being a part of G 20 countries, It's also important that we implement 11 point agenda of Hamburg Leaders Statement. India and Argentina will issue a special declaration on terrorism today," Modi said.

Argentina President supported Modi's view and said that he was pleased to be working with India to fight terrorism.

Macri also conveyed his condolences to the victims of the Pulwama attack where more than 40 CRPF jawans have been martyred and living five injured. "We condemn every kind of terrorist attack and am pleased to work together to fight this scourge on mankind," said Macri.

PM Modi said that his government will give a free hand to soldiers to punish the masterminds of the attack.

Two Jaish-e-Mohammad militants have been killed in the ongoing encounter. A commander who was the mastermind behind the Pulwama attack of February 14 in which more than 40 CRPF jawans have been martyred has reportedly been killed in the encounter.

In the encounter in South Kashmir district, four army personnel including Major have also been martyred in the ongoing encounter. It has been reported that Kamran, a Pakistani terrorist believed to have masterminded the terror attack in Pulwama and a local militant named Hilal have been killed in the gunfight in Pinglan area.

However, situation in Jammu has improved on the fourth day after the terrorist attack on CRPF jawans on February 14 at Pulwama in Jammu & Kashmir. After the incident, local authorities have announced curfew in the area which will be lifted for three hours between 2 pm to 5 pm in South Jammu city.

However, Modi said that if someone teases new India, it will not let it go unpunished.

After the talk, with Macri, the two countries signed 10 Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) providing for deeper cooperation in a range of areas including information and communications technology, nuclear energy and agriculture.

Load-Date: February 18, 2019


End of Document