Tips on terrorism risk-free, Ashcroft assures citizens
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
July 26, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 366 words
Byline: By Jesse J. Holland Associated Press writer
Body


WASHINGTON -- Attorney General John Ashcroft says a new government program that asks Americans to report suspicious activity won't create an Orwellian database that could be used against innocent citizens.
Instead, Operation TIPS will be "a clearinghouse for people who think they see something" suspicious, Ashcroft told senators Thursday.
Operation TIPS -- Terrorism Information and Prevention System -- is being developed by the Justice Department and is set to get under way this summer.
It is a part of the Citizen Corps, an initiative announced by President Bush in his State of the Union address, and is designed to enable the public to participate directly in homeland security.
Operation TIPS plans to give millions of American truckers, train conductors, ship captains, utility employees and others "a formal way to report suspicious terrorist activity," according to its government Web site.
Those people are crucial because "they are regularly in the public," Ashcroft said. "They can spot anomalies -- things that are different -- (such as) truck drivers seeing things happen that don't usually happen."
The program is already generating controversy on Capitol Hill.
The Homeland Security Department legislation moving through Congress includes language that would prohibit programs such as Operation TIPS within the new department.
Ashcroft also defended his proposal to immediately destroy government records of people who buy guns, disputing a congressional report that said his idea could help criminals get firearms illegally.
Other "records that are maintained can be used to detect the illegal purchases," the attorney general said.
Ashcroft last year suggested shortening from 90 days to no more than one business day the time during which the government keeps records on people who try to purchase firearms.
But the General Accounting Office, Congress's watchdog agency, said one-day destruction of records would mean that the FBI would not be able to go back and check for fraudulent transactions or mistaken approvals.
Ashcroft said government agencies such as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms could still track down illegal gun purchases through the firearm dealer information.

Load-Date: July 26, 2002


End of Document