TIRES 'FOSSIL FOOLS' TARGETS; MORE THAN 100 VEHICLES IN MADISON HAD TIRES DEFLATED IN WHAT SOME CALL "ECO-TERRORISM."
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, Wisconsin)
April 2, 2008 Wednesday
ALL EDITION


Copyright 2008 Madison Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B1
Length: 490 words
Byline: By SANDY CULLEN , scullen@madison.com,  608-252-6137
Body


A new twist on April Fools Day - dubbed by some Fossil Fools Day - fell flat for more than 100 Madison residents who discovered Tuesday that someone had let the air out of their tires.
Driving the message home, notes such as "happy fossil fools day - drive less" were left on the windshields of many of the apparently randomly targeted cars parked along or near Monroe, Williamson and Langdon streets, police said.
Monica Vaughan, spokeswoman for Rising Tide North America - a network of groups and individuals "who take direct action to confront the root causes of climate change," according to its Web site - said it was likely associated with Tuesday's international day of action against the fossil fuel industry.
While some people were calling it "eco-terrorism," Madison police spokesman Joel DeSpain said, "I don't think it's to that degree. I would say it's more someone's play on the April Fools Day and trying to incite dialogue."
If no permanent damage was done to the vehicles, those responsible, if caught, would likely be ticketed for disorderly conduct, DeSpain said.
Chor Vang, a dispatcher for Schmidt's Auto, estimated that by 6 p.m., service crews had reinflated tires on 100 to 120 vehicles, and calls were still coming in.
"There was a lot of upset people," said dispatcher Sarah Conroy. Because of the high number of people affected, Schmidt's dropped its cost for the service call from $40 to $20 "to make their day a little easier," Conroy said.
Also on Tuesday, eight demonstrators rode bicycles to the Bergstrom Hummer dealership just off the Beltline to share with rush-hour motorists their objections to the United States' consumption of world oil resources, as well as what they described as an oil-driven war in Iraq.
Demonstrator David L. Williams said that "until the shoe really starts to pinch more," most Americans aren't going to do anything to change their consumption habits.
"We're just the harbingers of that, hopefully," Williams said.
While most of Tuesday's actions worldwide targeted the fossil fuel industry itself, "solutions to climate change need to come from communities," Vaughan said, adding that whatever people feel is appropriate action "is their own decision and choice."
Whether it's opposing construction of coal-fired power plants - such as one being built near Charlotte, N.C., where eight protesters were arrested Tuesday - or "targeting the consumer culture of a well-to-do community," Vaughan said, "I'm glad that people feel empowered to confront the problem they see before them."
Not everyone was so enamored of the tire prank, which Vang said targeted all types of vehicles - though SUVs tended to have all four tires deflated, while many sedans had just two flats.
Vaughan said she received an angry e-mail from one Madison resident - who donates 300 hours a year to fighting for the environment and was on the receiving end of the tire prank - who wrote, "You targeted the wrong person."

Load-Date: April 3, 2008


End of Document