To Argentina's Credit, Both Kinds
The New York Times
September 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 400 words
Body


In the space of one week, Argentina has taken two important steps toward healing the damage it inflicted upon itself during the most disastrous decade in its history. The democratic mandate that President Raul Alfonsin won last year came burdened with two legacies: the enduring effects of lawless state terrorism, and near-bankruptcy.
By completing a painfully exhaustive investigation into the ''disappearances'' of more than 9,000 people and agreeing to economic sacrifices sought by the International Monetary Fund, Argentina has gone far to redeem its credit, moral and financial.
Domestic terrorism was not just an Argentine phenomenon in the 1970's, the new human rights report notes. But in Argentina, ''the armed forces responded with a terrorism infinitely worse than that of the combatant.'' The commission left it to the courts to pass judgment on individual military officers. It focused on the larger issue of systematic state terrorism, a ''technology of hell.''
The agents of sadism also presided over the gigantic run-up in Argentina's foreign debt. Other Latin countries borrowed beyond their means in the 1970's, but hardly any were as able to impose order on their economies with such awesome repressive force. Yet this unbridled power was not used to forge economic strength but only to loose an orgy of irresponsibility. By the time President Alfonsin took office, the debt had reached $45 billion, two- thirds of the country's total gross domestic product. Interest alone consumes more than half the foreign exchange generated by exports of goods and services.
In its agreement with the I.M.F., Argentina has committed itself to restraints designed to reduce inflation from 1,200 percent to 150 percent in a year. Some analysts doubt whether this is possible, and Argentina still must come to terms with foreign commercial banks. Yet Buenos Aires is bound to make a sincere effort or risk a cutoff of its credit and trade, especially as other Latin debtors show progress in bringing their economies into line.
The deeper significance of the two events is that they symbolize the Alfonsin Government's willingness to face up to a bitter national past. For too long, the country was locked in a sterile alternation of regimes that blamed their predecessors for all problems. Argentina is now, laudably, coming to terms not only with past cruelty and present creditors, but with itself.


End of Document