To Combat Terrorism: A Call for a New Marshall Plan
The New York Times
January 21, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; LETTER
Length: 275 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Crisis in France Seen as Sign of Social Ills'' (front page, Jan. 15):
The horrific lives of Muslim teenagers and young men in France, described in agonizing detail in your article, have radicalized many of these youths. Poverty-stricken, jobless and without hope, living with their parents and siblings in shacks that lack water and electricity, lacking a vision of a better future: It is hardly surprising that their anger turns to violence.
This is not an excuse but an explanation, and most youths living under such conditions do not turn to violence.
France is by no means the only country with this problem. The Middle East is perhaps the worst caldron, and hopeless youths can be found around the world. To combat the ensuing violence, we have turned to military solutions, at an exorbitant cost in blood and treasure. Perhaps it is time to rethink our strategies.
After World War II, with much of Europe destitute and in danger of falling into Communist hands, President Harry S. Truman created the Marshall Plan, which gave these fragile economies not finished products but the ability to manufacture them.
The United States cannot and should not go it alone. It should enlist its allies in funding and administering a new Marshall Plan. Nor should we abandon military efforts to stabilize these regions.
With thoughtful preparation and execution, a new Marshall Plan could become an important new tool in our effort to combat the expansion of global terrorism.
MARTIN TOLCHIN Washington, Jan. 16, 2015
The writer, a former reporter for The New York Times, is a senior scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/21/opinion/to-combat-terrorism-a-call-for-a-new-marshall-plan.html

Load-Date: January 21, 2015


End of Document