To Live for Ireland
The New York Times
June 26, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 512 words
Body


Many readers of Irish descent are angry with our May 28 editorial, ''What's a Boycott Between Friends?'' We questioned whether Congress was wise to impose an embargo on the sale of 3,000 revolvers to the British police in Northern Ireland. By withholding these defensive weapons against terrorism, we argued, Americans undercut their own appeal for British help against terrorism in Iran. But to the weekly Irish Echo, our remarks seemed callous, petty and unjust. And many other readers reproached us for failing to mention that Amnesty International had censured the police in Northern Ireland.
AN-A
All right, a second look: Two distinct matters have somehow got muddled - the political arguments over Northern Ireland, about which our readers are largely right, and the moral arguments over terrorism, about which our critics might well think again.
Readers are right to contend that the status quo of British military occupation is intolerable. They are right to deplore the failure of successive British Governments to give the ill-used Catholic population a fairer share of political and economic power.  And they are right to see Northern Ireland as a British creature that owes its existence to excessive British deference to armed, intransigent Protestants. Having created the entity, the British acquired a responsibility.
But on the matter of terrorism, which has claimed 2,000 lives in a decade, our critics seem to resist all complexities. To be sure, Amnesty has censured British police practices in Northern Ireland, and a special commission appointed by the British Government has called for reforms. But Amnesty has also censured the Republic of Ireland for ill-treatment of political prisoners, a condition that led the Government in Dublin to establish another committee of inquiry, which also urged reforms in Irish police practices.
Divided Ireland is afflicted, north and south, by a similar destructiveness. Both parts live under harsh emergency laws that give police arbitrary powers - a fact unmentioned in the otherwise moving ABC documentary about the North, ''To Die for Ireland.'' In fact, the Irish Republic actively cooperates in combating terrorism with the same Northern security forces that Congress feels are undeserving of 3,000 handguns. And the toll is relentless: a few weeks ago gunmen shot the kneecaps of a citizen of the Irish Republic who had the effrontery to give evidence that helped convict two Irish Republican Army members for armed robbery.
The hope for a decent settlement lies with those who prefer to live for Ireland. Prime Minister Charles Haughey, for instance, now says the Irish Republic should modify its divorce and birth control laws - to eliminate one Protestant argument against eventual unification.  Perhaps his challenge to old prejudices will embolden the British as they draw up new proposals for equitable Northern self-rule.
These are matters truly worthy of American concern. Refusing to permit the sale of 3,000 revolvers may produce wonderful arguments, but the diplomacy it produces is petty and sterile.


End of Document