To succeed, anti-terror talks must lead to action
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
March 13, 1996, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition


Copyright 1996 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A; COLUMN
Length: 777 words
Byline: WILBUR G. LANDREY
Dateline: PARIS
Body


Joined together like Siamese twins, Shimon Peres and Yasser Arafat are likely  to live on or die together, and with them the process of peace in the Middle  East.
Today's hastily called conference of 29 or so heads of state and other  leaders in Sharm el-Sheik, Egypt, is first of all meant to save it and them.
To do that, it has to be seen doing something to combat the terrorism that  has nearly brought an end to the latest peace process, seen to be mobilizing  world cooperation, seen to be putting new measures into practice, seen to be  exercising pressure on states like Iran, Iraq and Syria charged with giving  comfort to terrorists.
In short, it has to be seen as something more than a one-day media event  with three hours of 10-minute speeches.
LANDREY
Only that may give Peres more freedom of action and a better chance of  winning the Israeli elections now only 10 weeks away.
And only that may take some of the pressure off Arafat before he is  discredited in the eyes of his own people as a helpless captive of the  Israelis.
What he needs more than anything is an end to the Israeli blockade of his  hungry home base of Gaza, sealed off even from neighboring Egypt in a  demonstration of just how little real autonomy the Palestinians have gained  from the peace process.
The advent of the right-wing Likud party in Israel, taking advantage of the  fear, anguish and anger caused by the suicide bombings, would hardly advance  the cause of peace, at least not in our time.
Arafat's crackdown on Hamas may have been overdue, but his disgrace or  overthrow as a result would scarcely advance the cause of peace either. His  survival depends not only on stopping the Hamas suicide bombers but on  avoiding a Palestinian civil war.
Both he and Peres are on a tightrope. If one falls, so most likely will the  other. The danger is that each needs more from the other than the other can  give.
One of the problems with today's conference is that not enough Arab or  Muslim leaders will be there alongside President Clinton, French President  Jacques Chirac, British Prime Minister John Major, German Chancellor Helmut  Kohl and Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak will be, along with King Hussein of Jordan  as well the Saudis and the usual crowd of conservative Arab states. U.N.  Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, an Egyptian, will add some weight.
But the attendance too accurately reflects the continued split in the Arab  and Muslim world to be seen as a fight against all terrorism.
Syria's President Hafez Assad is far too acute to risk his own power and  prestige by attending when some of the others there will be tempted to use the  frightening word as an excuse to stifle legitimate resistance. Boris Yeltsin  is one, some of the conservative Arab leaders may be others.
The best to be hoped for is that the meeting brings some pressure not only  on Syria but on Iraq and Iran not to harbor or finance the identifiable  terrorists who have nearly wrecked the peace process.
Will the United States fall out with the European allies and Russia over  Iran? If the Europeans sometimes seem too anxious to do business there, the  United States risks being too muscle-bound by its domestic politics to notice  the chance of change.
Finally, what can the leaders at Sharm el-Sheik really do about terrorism  when too often terrorism has finally paid - for the terrorists?
The bomb attacks on innocent civilians carried out by Hamas, the Irish  Republican Army and the Basque ETA have brought a new and horrible dimension  to terrorism for which there's no excuse.
But while it may be unpopular to say so, PLO terrorism established it as  the force that couldn't be ignored and thus in the end helped win Yasser  Arafat a place at the table.
It may be even more unpopular to recall that the bombing of the King David  Hotel and the assassination of U.N. mediator Count Folke Bernadotte by the  Jewish underground in Palestine, events connected with two recent Likud prime  ministers, probably furthered the establishment of Israel.
The line between one man's terrorist and another's patriotic freedom  fighter becomes almost impossible to draw. But for me, freedom fighters don't  go around persuading gullible, over-excited youths to blow themselves up in  order to kill dozens of other innocent men, women and children.
Force alone seldom works against terrorism. What works best is depriving  the terrorists of the sympathy of the world they live and hide in.
In the Middle East and elsewhere, that means paying attention to the  grievances they feed on. And that goes far beyond a high profile, one-day  media event in Sharm el-Sheik.

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); Shimon Peres; Yasser Arafat

Load-Date: March 13, 1996


End of Document