To understand terrorism, trace its bloodline
USA TODAY
November 21, 2001, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 718 words
Byline: Uri Avnery
Body

Since the atrocities of Sept. 11, it has become fashionable to talk about "terrorism." As a result, the word has lost all precise meaning.
Osama bin Laden is undoubtedly a terrorist. Killing thousands of civilians was a terrorist outrage. But the United States would have declared a "war on terrorism" against bin Laden even if he had been satisfied with killing U.S. soldiers in Saudi Arabia or blowing up Middle East oil installations. It is not the methods of bin Laden that have caused this war, but his aim: to get rid of the United States and its satellites, the Arab kings and presidents throughout the Middle East.
To pursue its war, the United States has set up a worldwide coalition. Every country joining it has been issued an American permit to call his enemies "terrorists": Russia in Chechnya; China in its Muslim regions; India in Kashmir; Israel in the occupied territories.
But just what is terrorism? "Terror" means extreme fear. The modern term was first used to describe the regime of terror instituted by the Jacobins, one of the factions of the French Revolution, to destroy their opponents by beheading them with the guillotine during the years 1793-1794.
Since then, the term has acquired a more general use. Terrorism is a method of attaining political goals by frightening the civilian population. It does not apply to the frightening of soldiers. The Japanese who attacked the American fleet in Pearl Harbor, for instance, were not terrorists. Neither were the Jews who attacked the soldiers of the British occupation regime in Palestine.
Terrorism and politics
Clausewitz said that war is the continuation of politics by other means. That is true for terrorism, too. Terrorism is always an instrument for the attainment of political aims. Since these may be rightist or leftist, revolutionary or reactionary, religious or secularist, the term "international terrorism" is nonsense. Each terrorist body has its own specific agenda.
There is hardly a liberation movement that has not used terrorism. Algerian women put bombs in the cafes of the French settlers. Nelson Mandela spent 27 years in prison because he refused to order his followers to abstain from terrorism. The Maccabees were terrorists who went around killing Hellenized Jews. So were the Irgun fighters who in 1938 put bombs in the Arab markets of Jaffa and Haifa in retaliation for Arab attacks. Shlomo Ben-Josef committed a terrorist act when he shot at an Arab bus.
Used by weak and strong
Generally, terrorism is the weapon of the weak. As Palestinian "terrorists" have been wont to say, "Give us tanks and airplanes, and we shall stop sending suicide bombers into Israel."
But big powers can use terror, too. Dropping the atom bomb on Hiroshima was a terrorist act, designed to frighten the Japanese population into demanding that their government surrender. So was the Nazi blitz on London and the British bombing of Dresden. Churchill and Hitler were as different as day and night, but they used the same method.
Israel has used this method from the day of its inception. In the early 1950s, the Israeli Defense Force (IDF) committed "retaliation raids" to frighten villagers beyond the border so they would put pressure on the Jordanian and Egyptian governments to prevent the infiltration of Palestinians into Israel. It is the same method that is used in the army when a commander punishes all of the soldiers in a company so they will turn against the one who made him angry.
The trouble is, terrorism generally is counterproductive in conflicts between nations. Rather than hand bin Laden over, the Taliban has become more extreme in its opposition to the United States. The recent IDF blockade against Palestinian villages did not isolate the "terrorists," but to the contrary, turned them into heroes. The devastation caused by the Russians in Chechnya strengthened the opposing guerilla forces.
Since terrorism is always a political instrument, the right way to combat it is always political. Solve the problem that breeds terrorism and you get rid of the terrorism. Solve the Israeli-Palestinian problem and the other flash points in the Middle East, and you get rid of al-Qaeda. It will wilt like a flower deprived of water. No one has yet devised another method.
Uri Avnery is a former member of the Israeli Knesset.

Load-Date: November 21, 2001


End of Document