TODAY'S MAIL: EDUCATION; MADISON DESERVES BETTER THAN MTI TERRORISM
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
December 18, 1997, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1997 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Opinion,; Letter
Length: 283 words
Body


So the Madison teachers have finally settled their contract dispute. Big deal. The uncaring and militant actions of Madison Teachers Inc. have forever tarnished my relationship with the city's teachers. . . .
I was appalled at MTI president, Bill Keyes.
His glare and menacing gestures and threats of teacher disobedience was scary and made me very uncomfortable. Like terrorists, MTI had our children hostage, and they used it to force the issue.
Madison teachers need to look at themselves in the mirror and ask, ''Why did I get into teaching?'' If they answer, ''for the love of teaching children,'' what happened? If you don't like what you're doing, look in the daily paper and findsome other type of employment. . . .
Madison teachers receive a good wage and benefits. If they lost their jobs, I understand there is a waiting list, two deep for every teaching spot.
I understand teaching is hard, but we as parents and our children deserve better.
Walter Meyer, Madison Millions for baseball while schools go in need
What planet is the governor living on? Hasn't anyone noticed that the Brewer Stadium costs have now exceeded $  300 million? Yet, the governor puts spending caps on our schools!
What he is saying is that it is OK if our schools are lacking space, supplies or enough teachers and teacher assistants. They don't need an education to watch baseball!
The $  300 million could be spread out to our suburban area schools so we could hire and keep excellent teachers and teachers assistants.
I can guarantee our school seats will be full opening day and every day. Can you, governor, say the same for the Brewers Stadium? Oh, yeah what was the quote, ''stick it to them.''
Kim Schmit, Mount Horeb

Load-Date: December 19, 1997


End of Document