Tolerance, not terrorism
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
September 2, 1992, Wednesday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 10A; EDITORIAL
Length: 455 words
Body


During last week's outbreak of rioting, burning and terrorism, right-wing  extremists forced 200 foreign refugees from the German port city of Rostock. A  similar group marched on an asylum hostel in Eberswalde, near Berlin, forcing  another 140 immigrants to flee under police guard. Their were shouts of "Sieg  Heil" and Hitler salutes from the violent demonstrators, who are mostly young  and disillusioned with the uneven economic and social results of unification.
WSHGERMANY
Across Germany this past weekend, neo-Nazi youths and other extremists  attacked at least 10 more hostels where residents born in Romania, Vietnam and  other countries are housed. Some demonstrators aimed to prolong the violence  until Tuesday, as a way of marking the 53rd anniversary of Hitler's attack on  Poland.
  The shadow of German history looms large and frightening in these  attacks, but it is not the only force at work. Racist ideology has always been  background noise in the former East Germany, which chafed under Soviet rule  while West Germans prospered. At the time of unification, some 50 percent of  East Germans polled said they feared a resurgence of neo-Nazi sentiment.
What has happened two years later in Rostock is the volatile product of  racism mixed with class conflict, unemployment, rapid change and a national  economy teetering off balance. 
  Many have pointed to Germany's liberal policies toward immigration as  the catalyst for the current backlash. About a quarter of a million people  sought asylum in Germany last year; a half million are expected during 1992.  Some have suggested that the government policy should be changed, as if  immigration was a temporary, localized issue. With the ongoing hardships in  Eastern Europe, Africa and Asia, however, refugees are on the move throughout  the world, and closing the door against them is no answer.
  Most Germans say they deplore the attacks on foreigners, and last  weekend 13,000 counterdemonstrators marched on Rostock to protest neo-Nazism.  There were chants of "Foreigners stay! Nazis go!" and banners with slogans  such as "Never Again Hitler." Yet many of these demonstrators were  extremists themselves, with their own appetite for violence. Some carried  weapons and Molotov cocktails; some wore black hoods to disguise their  identity.
The German government, representing the majority of native and naturalized  residents, should send a forceful message to all citizens that tolerance, not  terrorism, is the only acceptable strategy for dealing with ethnic, racial and  religious differences. The slow reaction by free nations to Serbia's "ethnic  cleansing" has already set a dangerous precedent, suggesting to neo-Nazis  that they have nothing to fear. 

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, CLAY BENNETT; Two men struggle to push a U.S. flag decorated car, being driven by a smiling President Bush. On the bumper is a "How's my driving?" sticker.

Load-Date: October 13, 1992


End of Document