Toll of terror rises one menacing notch
USA TODAY
August 10, 1998, Monday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; DEBATE
Length: 391 words
Body


The changing face of terrorism was made plain Friday in Tanzania
and Kenya, and it looks like this: Bigger, more malevolent, more
cruel than before. Given that the terrorist wars can never be
won outright, the news out of Africa is a powerful reminder that
the heights of terrorism are rising fast.
Not long ago, terrorism was predominantly a weapon of groups with
proclaimed political goals. And to promote their agenda, they
avoided excess collateral damage, to borrow one of modern warfare's
more horrible terms of art. When Palestinians attacked the Olympics
in 1972, their victims were Israelis. When bombers killed 241
Americans in a barracks in Lebanon in 1983, the scale was bigger,
but the victims were still politically relevant.
Not so in Africa. In Dar es Salaam and Nairobi, the United States
was the target. But relatively few Americans died, while hundreds
of Africans were killed. To a degree rarely seen before, the killers
demonstrated a total disregard for third-party victims.
Bigger bombs and less discriminate targeting: You can imagine
where this leads. The killers in Africa were doubtless operating
through a sophisticated transnational organization, perhaps with
the sponsorship of a terrorist state, which may or may not be
inclined to share technology or weapons of mass destruction. Add
to that the willingness to attack general populations, and the
stage is set for a truly national or even global catastrophe.
There have been hints of this future before. The bombing of the
World Trade towers in New York showed a willingness to kill thousands.
Attempts to release nerve gas in Tokyo's subway showed a willingness
to use chemical weaponry. As political terrorism is subsumed by
religious radicalism, the chances someone will use such a weapon
improve. If paradise depends on a body count, nothing prevents
a fanatic from pulling the trigger.
That argues for keeping the technology under control to begin
with, through treaties and other tools. And it suggests, where
possible, improving our record of preventing terrorism and bringing
terrorists to justice.
By Sunday, Washington was awash with promises to prosecute Friday's
bombers. But even if justice can be obtained, the terrorist bar
has been raised another malevolent notch. What can prevent that
rising standard from jumping another rung? There's no answer yet,
not in Africa nor any place else.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, , Khalil Senosi, AP

Load-Date: August 10, 1998


End of Document