Toll may rise in Moscow blast;
 Gas or terrorism? Officials differ on cause of explosion
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
September 9, 1999, Thursday,
Final Edition


Copyright 1999 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: News; Pg. 3A
Length: 293 words
Byline: Nick Wadhams, Associated Press
Dateline: Moscow
Body

Authorities searched for survivors and clues today after a massive explosion tore apart a nine-story apartment building today, killing at least 20 people and leaving dozens more feared dead.
Rescue workers said more than 60 people were hospitalized with serious injuries after being pulled from the wreckage.
JournalUp to 100 people could be buried under the mounds of smoking debris, they said.
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said the blast was apparently caused by a natural gas explosion. But other officials said it might have been a bomb.
''The nature of the damage and the number of casualties'' suggests an explosive device was placed in the building, the Federal Security Service, the country's main intelligence agency, said in a statement.
''It does not look like gas,'' added Sergei Shoigu, head of the Emergency Situations Ministry.
An anonymous caller told the Interfax news agency that the Moscow explosion and a Saturday night bomb blast in southern Russia were in response to Russia's military campaign against Islamic rebels in the southern territory of Dagestan. There was no way to determine the authenticity of the claim.
A huge bomb blamed on Islamic radicals destroyed a military housing complex Saturday in the southern republic of Dagestan. The militants, who are fighting for a separate Islamic state, had threatened to strike targets in Russia.
A bomb in a shopping center in central Moscow last week killed one person. Authorities were trying to determine who was responsible for the attack.
Moscow has also experienced natural gas explosions in the past, including a blast in July 1998 that killed six people, because of the city's crumbling infrastructure. The powerful explosion shook the southeast Moscow neighborhood shortly after midnight.

Graphic

 
Photo
The stripped-bare remains of a Moscow apartment building loom over rescue workers as they search for survivors of today's blast. Scores of victims may be buried in the rubble. / IVAN SEKRETAREV / Associated Press

Load-Date: September 10, 1999


End of Document