Tony Blair provides examples for George W. Bush to follow
University Wire
September 14, 2006 Thursday


Copyright 2006 Kentucky Kernel via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 530 words
Byline: By Megan Vazmina, Kentucky Kernel; SOURCE: U. Kentucky
Dateline: LEXINGTON, Ky. 
Body


I named my fish after Tony Blair.
And now I admit that was probably the stupidest thing I could have said in this column. Tony Blair deserves more than a fish named after him. He has served as England's prime minister for almost 10 years, stood beside America when we needed help most and shown just what a leader is capable of accomplishing.
In all honesty, President Bush should have learned more from Blair -- perhaps he would be in a better position today if he had.
In August 2005, Blair delivered a speech outlining a strict framework for dealing with the terrorism that Britain faced. This included fairly harsh deportation measures. In his speech, Blair said that "anyone who has participated in terrorism or has anything to do with it anywhere will automatically be refused asylum."
President Bush, why is it that people are receiving visas to enter the United States, overstaying those visas and training to become militant radicals aimed to destroy America? Why do we allow them to stay in this country?
In the same speech, Blair made a statement that I think is one of the most dignified and important remarks I have heard in quite a while.
"But coming to Britain is not a right. And even when people have come here, staying here carries with it a duty. That duty is to share and support the values that sustain the British way of life."
President Bush, why do illegal immigrants not share the same duty as the rest of the citizens of America? Why do they not pay taxes, pledge loyalty to our country, become citizens through our legal process?
Coming to America is not a right. You are not automatically assured residence here -- unless you enter illegally, of course. The laws and government of America are what makes this country what is it and set it apart from all others -- and everyone entering should support those values by following the law.
Beyond immigration and nationalism, Blair has urged the members of his party, the Labour Party, to stop the infighting. At a conference he declared "we're not going to win if we have personal attacks by anybody on anyone, because it turns off the public."
Tony Blair cares about what the public thinks; he wants his party to appear credible to the public.
President Bush is currently facing the possibility of losing Congress; members of his own party are turning against him and his policies. Yet he does little to try and regroup the Republican Party, little to make it strong and organized enough to be able to stand the election in November.
Blair has been one of our staunchest supporters in the war against terrorism.
"This is not a battle between the United States of America and terrorism, but between the free and democratic world and terrorism," he said.
And so it will be will great sorrow that I say goodbye to Tony Blair as prime minister. While he is not perfect, there are qualities that he possessed that make him a true leader.
I'm sure that many will think that I am very melodramatic because they don't understand how much I admire Tony Blair. I also hope that Bush has taken some pages from Blair's book on leadership.
I just hope that Tony, the fish, doesn't die of a broken heart.
(C) 2006 Kentucky Kernel via U-WIRE

Load-Date: September 14, 2006


End of Document