Tony Bennett Apologizes for 9/11 Comments
The New York Times
September 22, 2011 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 3; ARTS, BRIEFLY
Length: 371 words
Byline: By DAVE ITZKOFF
Body


Tony Bennetthas apologized on his Facebook page for remarks he made on Howard Stern's radio show suggesting that the United States had caused the Sept. 11 attacks.
In an interview broadcast on Monday, Mr. Bennett, the 85-year-old pop crooner, was talking with Mr. Stern and his co-host, Robin Quivers, about war and terrorism when he said: ''But who are the terrorists? Are we the terrorists, or are they the terrorists? Two wrongs don't make a right.''
When Mr. Stern said terrorists had ''started it'' by flying planes into the World Trade Center, Mr. Bennett answered, ''I don't know about that.''
Mr. Bennett added: ''They flew the plane in, but we caused it. Because we were bombing them, and they told us to stop. They said what are you doing? And they came on stronger. And come on -- we're going to have to retaliate. No, no, no. They said give them four times as much.''
Mr. Bennett also said in the radio interview that President George W. Bush had told him that the Iraq war had been a mistake.
His remarks about the attacks drew wide condemnation from listeners, and an editorial published Wednesday in The Daily News of New York called Mr. Bennett a ''knucklehead'' (even though that newspaper said he was ''one of our favorite singers and has been an all-around great representative of the Greatest Generation.'')
Mr. Bennett clarified his remarks in a statement posted on his Facebook page.
''I am so grateful to be an American, and as a World War II veteran,'' he wrote, ''I was proud to fight to protect our values, which have made America the greatest country on the planet.''
The statement continued:
There is simply no excuse for terrorism and the murder of the nearly 3,000 innocent victims of the 9/11 attacks on our country.
My life experiences -- ranging from the Battle of the Bulge to marching with Martin Luther King -- made me a lifelong humanist and pacifist, and reinforced my belief that violence begets violence and that war is the lowest form of human behavior.
I am sorry if my statements suggested anything other than an expression of my love for my country, my hope for humanity and my desire for peace throughout the world.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO                             

Load-Date: September 22, 2011


End of Document