TOP TERRORISM SUSPECT HAD EXPLOSIVES WHEN CAPTURED
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 10, 1995, Friday, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1995 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 7A
Length: 732 words
Dateline: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN
Body


Police found a little surprise when they arrested the man suspected of masterminding the World Trade Center bombing in New York: explosives in his bag, hidden in toy cars.
"He was found with explosives . . . and chemicals used in making bombs," Interior Minister Nasirullah Babar, who supervises Pakistan's police, said Thursday in describing the arrest of the suspect, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef.
Last Sunday, Yousef arrived in Pakistan on a flight from Bangkok, Thailand, according to Babar. Yousef was tailed by plainclothes police for two days and then arrested Tuesday at a Holiday Inn in Islamabad.
Babar said two suitcases were found in Yousef's hotel room: one was empty, but the other had the toy cars.
U.S. State Department security agents said Yousef was lying peacefully on a bed when the Pakistani and U.S. agents broke in. He had dyed his black hair red.
Interior Minister Babar gave several conflicting statements about the case that could not be immediately reconciled. He and other senior officials said initially that Yousef, 27, was carrying a passport and travel documents from his native Iraq. He used the alias of Ali Khan, a Pakistani official said.
But Babar said later that Yousef was traveling on a fake Pakistani passport.
The interior minister also said Yousef had been immediately handed over to the Americans, who whisked him out of the country. But Babar told the British Broadcasting Corp. that, before being handed over to U.S. officials, Yousef was interrogated by Pakistani authorities and admitted to being involved in the 1993 Trade Center bombing.
The FBI said it almost nabbed Yousef last month in the Philippines, where he was linked to a failed plot to assassinate Pope John Paul II, who was visiting the Philippines, but Yousef slipped out of Manila.
U.S. prosecutors believe Yousef received military training from Afghan rebel groups that maintained bases in western Pakistan, and that may have been why he returned to Pakistan. Pleads Not Guilty
After being turned over to U.S. officials, Yousef was secretly flown from Pakistan to the United States in a U.S. government plane. In New York Thursday, he pleaded not guilty to 11 counts relating to the Feb. 26, 1993, bombing of the World Trade Center.
That attack on the world's second-tallest building killed six people, injured more than 1,000 others and caused $ 500 million in damage.
Clean-shaven and dapper in a blue double-breasted suit, Yousef appeared calm Thursday and spoke fewer than 10 words during his brief appearance before U.S. District Judge John F. Keenan. "I plead not guilty," he said in English, waving off an interpreter. Yousef told the judge that he understood the indictment. He is being held without bond until his next court appearance on Wednesday.
Authorities say Yousef, who came to the United States in 1992, bought and mixed the chemicals for the bombs that exploded in a van parked under the 110-story twin towers of the World Trade Center.
Yousef, who had been living with two other bombing suspects in Jersey City, N.J., escaped the night of the bombing, using an alias to fly to Iraq via Pakistan. His fingerprints were found on two bomb-making manuals seized by authorities and on containers of bomb-making chemicals, authorities say.
The State Department had posted a $ 2 million reward for Yousef's capture. A U.S. source said U.S. officials in Pakistan had been tipped off about Yousef by an informant motivated by that reward.
The informant apparently had a checkered past; he was described as "no choir boy."
Four men were convicted last March of carrying out the trade center bombing, and they received life sentences. Another pleaded guilty to a minor role.
A seventh suspect is still a fugitive. No Mistrial
Eleven other men now are on trial in New York, accused of a much wider plan of terrorism to force the United States to change its policies in the Middle East, especially in Israel and Egypt.
The 11 men were allegedly led by Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman in a plan to assassinate Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and to bomb the United Nations, FBI headquarters, and two tunnels and a bridge in New York.
On Thursday, a federal judge denied a mistrial that defense lawyers had requested because a 12th defendant pleaded guilty Monday.
Lawyers alleged that the government and the judge improperly hid the fact that the defendant, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, was talking to the prosecution.

Load-Date: February 11, 1995


End of Document