Top Reform Rabbi Gives Watershed Address to Largest U.S. Muslim Group; Talks Held on Dialogue Program
The Forward
September 7, 2007


Copyright 2007 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: News; Pg. A1
Length: 878 words
Body


The head of America's largest Jewish denomination las  week became the first top Jewish communal leader in  recent memory to address a major American Muslim  organization.
At the 44th annual conference of Chicago's Islamic  Society of North America last Friday, Rabbi Eric Yoffie,  president of the Union for Reform Judaism, called for  an end to discrimination against Muslims, more dialogue  between religions, and for Jews and Muslims to  unite in support of a two-state solution to the Israeli-  Palestinian conflict.
A profound ignorance about Islam in the United  States had helped spread the image of Muslims as the  enemy, Yoffie said, pushing for a more active denunciation  of those promoting such beliefs.
The time has come to stand up to the opportunists in our  midst  the media figures, religious leaders and politicians  who demonize Muslims and bash Islam, exploiting the fears  of their fellow citizens for their own purposes, Yoffie said,  drawing frequent rounds of applause and a standing ovation.  The time has come to end racial profiling and lega  discrimination of any kind against Muslim Americans.
Liberal Jewish organizations such as the URJ have sought  Muslim partners at the national level for some time to  bridge the gap widened in the wake of the terrorist attacks  of September 11, 2001, and the ongoing violence in the  Middle East. But it was the emergence of a more moderate  leadership at the helm of ISNA, which has been accused  of supporting Hamas, that made the breakthrough speech  possible, URJ leaders say. ISNA's condemnation of terrorism,  including that conducted by Hamas and Hezbollah  and its open support for a two-state solution, as well as  the participation of the Pentagon, Justice Department and  Department of Homeland Security in this year's conference,  were key factors in Yoffie's decision to accept the  invitation to speak.
We carefully looked at the leadership's consistent and  outspoken condemnation of terrorism and their backing  for a two-state solution, said Mark Pelavin, director of  the URJ's commission on inter-religious relations and a  key player in the outreach effort along with ISNA's cofounder,  Sayyid Syeed. The FBI and the Pentagon were  represented, so this answers the allegations about terrorist  associations.
Yoffie's overture drew criticism from  David Harris, executive director of the  American Jewish Committee.
Here is another discredited group  eager for mainstream recognition,  Harris wrote in a blog on the Web site  of The Jerusalem Post. Inadvertently,  in the name of inter-religious dialogue,  he gave it.
Yoffie was not the only conference  participant to come in for criticism.  In a letter to Attorney General Alberto  Gonzales, two Republican lawmakers,  Peter Hoekstra of Michigan and Sue  Myrick of North Carolina, called the  Justice Department's involvement in  the ISNA confab a grave mistake.
ISNA, based in Plainfield, Ind., is the  largest umbrella group of Muslims in  North America, claiming more than  100,000 members and 300 constituent  organizations, including mosques,  campus groups and professional associations.  The URJ, which represents  some 1.5 million Jews and 900 congregations,  said that both umbrella groups  were in talks to set up a joint dialogue  and education program involving local  congregations and mosques.
In addition to his denunciations  of anti-Muslim stances adopted by,  among others, Christian leaders Pat  Robertson and Franklin Graham  and radio host Dennis Prager, Yoffie  won plaudits by criticizing what he  described as the Bush administration's  encroachment on civil liberties and  its lack of involvement in seeking a  just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian  issue.
He warned, however, that while Jews  should support Muslims in their fight  against Islamophobia, Muslims should  help fight against antisemitism and  Holocaust denial.
Critics of Yoffie's participation  in the conference, including the  AJCommittee's Harris, have pointed  out that ISNA is named as an unindicted  co-conspirator in a major terrorism  trial against the Holy Land Foundation  for Relief and Development, a Texasbased  charity shut down after the  September 11, 2001, attacks for its  alleged ties to Hamas. ISNA insists  that it is not a target of the prosecution  and that government officials  have indicated the move was a tactic  to allow the admission of evidence at  the trial.
Steven Emerson, a counterterrorism  expert who has accused severa  Muslim groups of being linked to terrorism,  claims that an ISNA subsidiary  had financial ties to Musa Abu  Marzook, a Hamas leader indicted in  the U.S. on terrorism-funding charges  and now living in Syria. Emerson also  contends that the organization stil  hosts speakers who have made anti-  Jewish remarks in the past.
ISNA leaders have acknowledged  that past leaders have on occasion  expressed statements critical of Israe  and Jews, but the current leaders stress  that the group has now adopted a clear  stance against such views.
In a statement released during the  conference, the organization said that  its condemnation of terrorism also  included acts perpetrated by Hamas  and Hezbollah, groups often considered  in Muslim countries to be legitimate  resistance movements.

Load-Date: September 5, 2007


End of Document