Top terrorism adviser is leaving White House
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
November 20, 2007 Tuesday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 358 words
Byline: By Ben Feller The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


Fran Townsend, the leading White House-based terrorism adviser who gave public updates on the extent of the threat to U.S. security, is stepping down after 4 1/2 years.
President George W. Bush said in a statement Monday that Townsend, 45, "has ably guided the Homeland Security Council. She has played an integral role in the formation of the key strategies and policies my administration has used to combat terror and protect Americans."
Her departure continues an exodus of key Bush aides and confidants, with his two-term presidency in the final 14 months. Top aide Karl Rove, press secretary Tony Snow, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and senior presidential adviser Dan Bartlett have already left.
In her handwritten resignation letter to Bush, Townsend wrote, "It is with a profound sense of gratitude that I have decided to take a respite from public service."
White House press secretary Dana Perino said Townsend struggled with the decision, talking about it with the president for months.
In an interview, Townsend said she hates to leave when figures such as Osama bin Laden and Al-Qaida's No. 2 leader, Ayman al-Zawahri, remain at large. "Do I wish that I was going to be standing here when they are captured or killed? Absolutely. But I have no doubt that we will ultimately be successful," she said.
Townsend decided it was time to take a break from government work - only a break, not an end, she insisted - and look for a job in the private sector. She hopes to work in global risk management for a large bank or financial services company.
In the past, she prosecuted violent crimes, narcotics offenses, Mafia cases and white-collar fraud as an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, N.Y., and as an assistant U.S. attorney in Manhattan.
Townsend became a familiar face for the administration, often appearing on morning news and Sunday interview shows to present Bush's case.
There was no word on a successor for Townsend. Perino said officials intended to act "relatively soon," because Bush wants some overlap between Townsend and her replacement before she leaves just after the first of the year.

Notes

 Nation 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Townsend 

Load-Date: November 20, 2007


End of Document