Top Officials In Europe Vow To Press Fight On Terrorism
The New York Times
July 14, 2005 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13; BOMBINGS IN LONDON: JOINT ACTION
Length: 482 words
Byline: By HELENE FOUQUET
Dateline: BRUSSELS, July 13 
Body


Interior and justice ministers of the 25 European Union countries held a special meeting here on Wednesday and renewed their pledges to take concerted action against terrorism, committing themselves to some specific actions and timetables.
 In a joint declaration, they presented a series of measures, most of them recycled from their 2001 or 2004 plans. Some new measures were added that were directly connected to the London bombings. It was unclear, though, whether they will be any more successful than they have been on earlier similar commitments.
  Home Secretary Charles Clarke of Britain, which currently holds the rotating European Union presidency, urged his counterparts to quickly enact security laws that would, for instance, require cellphone companies and Internet service providers to keep communications records for at least one year, making them available to governments trying to suppress terrorism.
 ''All of us across the European Union are absolutely determined to accelerate our work to make terrorism more difficult,'' he said.
 Mr. Clarke said the governments would seek authority to improve communication and cooperation among national law enforcement agencies. ''There was a determination for all our countries to say we cannot delay getting this right,'' he added.
 The British proposal was based on earlier measures drafted by European Union members. The European Union's first common plan to fight terrorism dates from the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, and the countries have been slow to act on some proposals.
 Shortly after the Madrid bombings in March 2004, European leaders met in Brussels to promise to work together and give a new impetus to the 2001 action. That led to an action plan adopted last December listing more than 150 measures.
 The technology industries still have reservations, though, about some steps outlined by the ministers.
 Mr. Clarke's stance also caused some resentment among members of the European Parliament. ''The British presidency is ridiculing the position of the European Parliament, because we are also very concerned about the safety of our citizens,'' said Kathalijne Buitenweg, a Dutch Greens member of the Parliament.
 A European arrest warrant came into force only in April 2004, though, after Italy dropped its objections. The earlier plans also called for measures to impede money laundering that have not been enacted, prompting the British chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, on Tuesday to tell the European Union finance ministers to step up efforts to seize terrorist assets.
 At a news conference on Wednesday, Pascal Clement, the French justice minister, defended the new agreement. ''Twenty-five ministers of interior and justice together, that changes things no matter what,'' he said. ''Even if this is not a situation of decision, at least it will bring things forward.''                                           

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: July 14, 2005


End of Document