Top Terror Suspect Killed, Indonesian Officials Say
The New York Times
September 18, 2009 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 1004 words
Byline: By PETER GELLING and SETH MYDANS; Peter Gelling reported from Jakarta, and Seth Mydans from Bangkok. Mark McDonald contributed reporting from Hong Kong, and Sari Sudarsono from Singapore.
Dateline: JAKARTA, Indonesia 
Body


Indonesian commandos raided a suspected terrorist hide-out in Central Java on Thursday, killing Noordin Muhammad Top,  the most wanted terrorism suspect in Southeast Asia, security officials said.
  Over the past six years, Mr. Noordin, an Islamist militant, became an almost mythical figure among both those who sheltered him on the run and those who pursued and finally killed him in a six-hour shootout.
  While suspected of orchestrating the country's worst bombings during those years, Mr. Noordin had repeatedly eluded capture, most recently in August when, after an all-night raid on a safe house, the police discovered that they had killed the wrong man, another terrorist who had worked with Mr. Noordin.
  At a news conference on Thursday, the chief of the National Police, Gen. Bambang Hendarso Danuri, said that this time Mr. Noordin, 41, was the man they had killed.
  General Danuri said that although the police were still awaiting DNA results, fingerprints from one of four men killed during the shootout matched those of Mr. Noordin. ''We are sure Noordin M. Top has been killed,'' he said. ''In this holy month of Ramadan, the country of Indonesia has been blessed.''
  Although counterterrorism experts called Mr. Noordin's death a major victory for security forces, they said it would not end extremism in the region.
  ''He could preach a very radical version of Islam, but could present it in a very, very simple way to attract students whom he managed to convince,'' said Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. ''He leaves behind a significant network that will continue the fight.''
  Mr. Gunaratna said Mr. Noordin had made contacts and recruited supporters in a wide network that included Indonesia, Malaysia and the southern Philippines.
  Mr. Noordin became the region's most-wanted terrorism suspect and a symbol of violent jihad as the main Islamist group in the region, Jemaah Islamiyah, turned away from large-scale violence in recent years and as its leading figures were killed or captured one after another. He had been a part of the group, but analysts said he broke away because he believed that violence was a necessary part of the Islamist fight. 
  He made a name for himself as the most skilled, inventive and dangerous bomb maker in the country and was suspected of being behind bombings in Bali in 2005, which killed more than 20 people; at the JW Marriott Hotel in Jakarta in 2003, killing 12; and at the Australian Embassy in Jakarta in 2004, killing 9.
  Mr. Noordin was also implicated in the coordinated suicide attacks in July on the JW Marriott and Ritz-Carlton hotels in Jakarta. Those bombings killed seven people, six of them foreigners, in addition to the two bombers. More than 50 people were wounded.
  On Thursday, the police said that they raided a house in Solo, in Central Java, only hours after receiving a tip. They said that at first, they had not known that Mr. Noordin was among the terrorist suspects there.
  About four hours into the assault, they said, there was a large explosion from inside the house, possibly from a suicide bomb. But they refused to comment on how Mr. Noordin and his associates had been killed.
  Sorting through the leveled house, the police said, they found 440 pounds of explosives, an M-16 rifle, a laptop computer and documents. Those documents revealed connections between Indonesian militant groups and Al Qaeda, General Danuri said.
  Sidney Jones, an expert on terrorism with the privately run International Crisis Group, said it was not clear whether Mr. Noordin had direct ties with Al Qaeda.
  Ms. Jones said Mr. Noordin's group ''models itself, in terms of ideology, targets and propaganda, after Al Qaeda.''
  ''The question is whether he only imitates it or whether he has some structural affiliation,'' she said.
  In a recent report for the crisis group, she wrote, ''the jihadist ideology remained confined to a tiny fraction of the country, but this fringe was able to draw on a wide variety of sources for recruitment, including several dozen Islamic boarding schools, various radical groups (not necessarily violent), an active Islamic publishing industry and impressionable youths.''
  People who knew Mr. Noordin or studied his activities said Thursday that he had a quiet magnetism that drew sympathizers to protect him, new recruits to join his splinter group and at least three women to marry and start separate families with him, giving him cover and shelter.
  ''He was a quiet person, didn't talk much, very pious,'' said an Islamic clergyman, Abu Wildan, who knew him from 1993 to 2002 when Mr. Noordin was a student and then the headmaster at Lukmanul Hakiem, an Islamic boarding school in Malaysia, where he was born.
  The school preached the violent brand of jihad of Abu Bakar Bashir, the godfather of Jemaah Islamiyah. Mr. Noordin, who graduated from the University of Technology in Malaysia in 1991, embraced its version of Islam.
  Like many other militants, he fled to Indonesia to evade a Malaysian crackdown on militants that followed the terrorist attacks in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001. By that time he seemed to have matured into a more focused and ambitious man, said Nasir Abas, a former Islamist leader who had been, for a time, Mr. Noordin's commander and who defected to the government in 2003.
  ''He is very well organized,'' Mr. Abas said in a telephone interview. ''He is very charismatic. He is articulate; he is very good in influencing people to join his cause, giving encouragement and motivation.''
  General Danuri identified one man killed in Thursday's raid as Bagus Budi Pranoto, another suspect in the July hotel bombings. The authorities say Mr. Pranoto worked with Mr. Noordin on preparations for the Australian Embassy bombing in 2004. 
  The two other men killed in the raid were Adib Susilo, who had rented the safe house, and Aryo Sudarsono, a protege of another bomb maker. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Gen. Bambang Hendarso Danuri, Indonesia's national police chief, with fingerprint samples of Noordin Muhammad Top.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SUBEKTI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 Mr. Noordin, an Islamist militant, often eluded capture.(PHOTOGRAPH BY INDONESIA NATIONAL POLICE, VIA A.P.)                                                     

Load-Date: September 18, 2009


End of Document