TOP COURT BLOCKS SUIT IN MATERIAL WITNESS CASE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
June 1, 2011 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-10
Length: 528 words
Byline: Robert Barnes, The Washington Post
Body


WASHINGTON -- Former Attorney General John Ashcroft cannot be sued for his role in detaining an American Muslim, even though the government did not charge the man with a crime or bring him as a witness in a terrorism investigation, the Supreme Court ruled Tuesday.
Justice Antonin Scalia said using the federal "material witness" statute to detain Abdullah al-Kidd in a terrorism investigation does not give Mr. Kidd a right to sue, because no court precedent had said such a use of the law was unlawful.
"Qualified immunity gives government officials breathing room to make reasonable but mistaken judgments about open legal questions," Justice Scalia wrote. "When properly applied, it protects all but the plainly incompetent or those who knowingly violate the law. Ashcroft deserves neither label."
All eight justices hearing the case agreed that Mr. Kidd's suit against Mr. Ashcroft could not go forward; Justice Elena Kagan sat out the case because she had worked on Mr. Ashcroft's behalf as President Barack Obama's solicitor general.
But there was disagreement about the government's action in the case and the treatment that Mr. Kidd suffered during 16 days of detainment.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, in a separate opinion joined by Justices Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor, said Mr. Kidd's ordeal "is a grim reminder of the need to install safeguards against disrespect for human dignity, constraints that will control officialdom even in perilous times."
Mr. Kidd is a onetime University of Idaho football star, born Lavoni T. Kidd. He converted to Islam in college. He was arrested at Dulles International Airport in 2003 as he was boarding a plane for Saudi Arabia, where he planned to study.
The government persuaded a federal judge to issue a warrant for Mr. Kidd's arrest by saying he was necessary to the investigation of Sami Omar al-Hussayen, who was eventually indicted on charges of supporting terrorism. Mr. Kidd was never called to testify against Mr. Hussayen, who was acquitted of the most serious charges against him.
Mr. Kidd maintains that in his more than two weeks of detention, he was strip-searched, shackled, interrogated without an attorney present and treated as a terrorist. He contends that his detention was part of a plan approved by Mr. Ashcroft to sweep up Muslim men the government suspected, but could not prove, had ties to terrorism.
The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco said Mr. Kidd's lawsuit against Mr. Ashcroft could proceed. It said the material-witness statute could not be used as a "pretext" for detaining someone suspected of wrongdoing, but whom the government was not willing to charge with a crime.
But Justice Scalia, writing for Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justices Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas and Samuel A. Alito Jr., said President George W. Bush's attorney general from 2001 to 2005 deserved immunity.
He noted that a neutral federal magistrate had authorized detaining Mr. Kidd. At the time of the arrest, Justice Scalia said, "not a single judicial opinion had held that pretext could render an objectively reasonable arrest pursuant to a material-witness warrant unconstitutional."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: John Ashcroft

Load-Date: June 1, 2011


End of Document