TOP COURT HEARS LOVE TRIANGLE CASE TRIED AS TERRORISM
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 23, 2011 Wednesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2011 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A-7
Length: 656 words
Byline: ROBERT BARNES, THE WASHINGTON POST
Body


WASHINGTON -- The cataclysmic events that led Carol Anne Bond to prison, and now to the Supreme Court, began with thrilling news: Her best friend was pregnant. That was followed by devastating news: Ms. Bond's husband, Clifford, was the baby's father. Rage came next.
Carol Bond, 40, a trained microbiologist, set out to poison Myrlinda Haynes over several months with a rare and potentially lethal blend of toxic chemicals. But Ms. Haynes, who received only a minor injury, was unable to persuade local law enforcement officials to act on her suspicions.
So she called in the feds. The U.S. attorney's office in Philadelphia went after Ms. Bond with a "sledgehammer," according to her lawyer, former Bush administration Solicitor General Paul Clement: Prosecutors sent Ms. Bond to prison under the anti-terrorist statutes, meant to enforce an international chemical weapons treaty.
So, more is at stake in the case the Supreme Court heard Tuesday than simply a woman scorned and inventive lawyers. Ms. Bond says the federal government had no right to indict her, and bases her claim on the 10th Amendment, the tea party favorite that specifies the limits of federal power.
As a result, Ms. Bond has drawn support from Phyllis Schlafley's Eagle Forum, the libertarian Cato Institute, gun owners and attorneys general in six states -- who, not coincidentally, are among those suing the federal government over President Barack Obama's health care act.
The justices will consider whether an individual has the right to sue on the claim that the federal government has trespassed in areas reserved for the states -- a subject of considerable interest to those who want to challenge the actions of Congress.
"It's all part and parcel" of the question of recourse for citizens and states who believe that Congress has exceeded its powers, said Washington lawyer David Rivkin, who wrote the states' brief. The 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia said individuals don't have such a right on their own, without the involvement of a state.
Mr. Clement said that even if the court does not rule broadly on the 10th Amendment, it should give Ms. Bond a chance to argue that her vengeful actions should never have been prosecuted under the auspices of a treaty with the daunting title: the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
"If Chemical Ali wanders into your district, this is your statute," Mr. Clement said, referring to Ali Hassan al-Majid, the executed Iraqi war criminal. "But it's not [intended] for a domestic case in [Pennsylvania's] Bucks County."
News that her best friend was carrying her husband's child was too much for Ms. Bond, who was unable to conceive. Her lawyers said it also brought back painful memories of her father's infidelities, which had caused Ms. Bond's mother to leave her father and move the family from Barbados to the United States.
Ms. Bond's emotional breakdown caused her to lose her hair and suffer panic attacks. But her enmity appears to have been directed mostly at Ms. Haynes, a fellow island immigrant who lived nearby in the Philadelphia suburbs. (Carol and Clifford Bond remain married, according to one of her lawyers, despite her incarceration in a West Virginia federal prison.)
The first phase of her campaign included slashing photos and placing phone calls to Ms. Haynes, with threats such as "I [am] going to make your life a living hell," and "dead people will visit you," court documents show. Ms. Bond was convicted in 2005 and fined on a minor state charge of harassment.
She was undeterred. From November 2006 through June 2007, she tried to poison Ms. Haynes on 24 occasions. Ms. Bond stole an arsenic-based chemical -- 10-chloro-10H-phenoxarsine -- from her employer, a chemical manufacturer. She went online and ordered the corrosive chemical potassium dichromate, which can destroy human tissue.

Load-Date: February 24, 2011


End of Document