Top aides can't agree on how to combat terrorism Powell much more inclined than Rumsfeld to take the low road
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
September 28, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 1152 words
Byline: John Diamond Chicago Tribune
Body


WASHINGTON - Secretary of State Colin Powell and his Pentagon counterpart, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, appear to agree on a strategy against terrorism. But the two officials and their aides see two starkly different opportunities for the United States, one involving making as many friends as possible, the other destroying as many enemies as possible.
For the moment, the Powell strategy appears ascendant as the Bush administration carefully builds a global coalition against terrorism that could eventually welcome some unlikely members, including nations listed by the U.S. as sponsors of terrorism.
The Rumsfeld view sees the attacks on New York and Washington as opening a door to a much more aggressive U.S. policy against terrorism that could eventually encompass military action against terrorist-sponsoring states. The extreme violence of the attacks, key Pentagon officials say, could clear away political obstacles for a hard-line military strategy that would have been inconceivable before Sept. 11.
With the administration completely focused on the immediate goal of stopping suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaida terrorist network, the rift over strategy on terrorism has yet to be settled.
For the short term, Powell and Rumsfeld agree that military force can be only one part of the campaign against terrorism, and that even the military portion will be markedly different from past campaigns. For one thing, there simply aren't many important military targets in Afghanistan, bin Laden's apparent hideout, that can be struck by U.S. airpower.
As President Bush put it vividly in a private briefing with lawmakers, "I'm not going to fire a $ 2 million missile at a $ 10 empty tent."
Powell has been reluctant even to concede that major U.S. military action is necessary in the wake of the bloodiest act of terrorism in history.
"Let's not assume there will be a large-scale war," Powell said Sunday. "I don't know that we should even consider a large-scale war of the conventional sort."
On Wednesday, Powell described the campaign against terrorism as having political, diplomatic and financial components, leaving a question mark beside the use of force. "There may also be a military component," he said.
Amid a climate of bipartisan support for Bush, leading conservative voices such as William Kristol, editor of the Weekly Standard, are questioning Powell's commitment to the president's tough line on terrorism.
For Rumsfeld, the question of military force is not one of whether but when.
"It will not be an antiseptic war, I regret to say," Rumsfeld told reporters Tuesday. "It will be difficult. It will be dangerous. The likelihood is that more people may be lost."
The divergent views at the top are reflected in the longstanding positions of some of Rumsfeld's and Powell's top aides. At the end of the Persian Gulf War, Paul Wolfowitz, now Rumsfeld's deputy but then a senior Pentagon official, clashed with Powell, then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, over the failure of the elder Bush's administration to threaten Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein. In the days following the Sept. 11 terror attacks, Wolfowitz talked about "ending" regimes that sponsor terrorism, a formulation rejected by the State Department.
Richard Haass, another veteran of the first Bush administration and now a senior adviser to Powell, is among those who have argued for attempting to engage Iran, a country regarded by the State Department as the leading sponsor of international terrorism.
Powell's coalition-building efforts suffered a blow Wednesday when Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, labeled the U.S. campaign on terrorism "disgusting" and said Iran would have no part in it.
Republican and Democratic congressional staffers, speaking on condition of anonymity, said lawmakers are concerned about mixed and uncertain signals from the Bush administration as its war on terrorism begins. Is the goal to kill bin Laden or capture him and bring him to trial? Will U.S. intervention result in the toppling of the ruling Afghan Taliban regime? How does the administration define a campaign aimed only at terrorist groups "of global reach?"
Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., said disagreement among presidential advisers is a good thing. "I would like people of dissimilar temperament like Powell and Rumsfeld sitting at the table," said Hyde, chairman of the House International Relations Committee.
Lawmakers also are trying to reconcile the unambiguous statement by Bush that countries either join the war on terrorism or oppose it, with statements by other senior officials that there will be not one coalition but many shifting coalitions depending on the particular anti-terrorist mission the U.S. is pursuing.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer repeated Bush's assertion that "this is the time for nations to choose about whether they are with the United States and the free world in the war against terrorism or they are not." But with delicate negotiations going on with other Muslim countries over the coalition-building effort, administration officials were unwilling to discuss what the consequences for Iran might be, if any.
Some of the policy differences within the administration may be chalked up to institutional bias. State Department officials tend to think in terms of diplomatic solutions to problems. At the Pentagon, especially as work crews dig through rubble containing scores of dead colleagues killed in the Sept. 11 attack, the tendency is to think in terms of military response.
"Where you stand depends on where you sit," said Andrew Krepinevich, a defense analyst with the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments.
The mixed signals may even be part of a deliberate strategy to keep U.S. adversaries guessing.
"So far, all we've heard is Afghanistan" in terms of possible military action, Krepinevich said. "But commando raids could occur in many countries."
Asked about the possibility Tuesday, Rumsfeld recalled a Winston Churchill quote about how, in war, truth is so precious it must always be accompanied by a bodyguard of lies.
He talked about the successful disinformation campaigns of World War II, such as an elaborate ploy to convince the Germans of the existence of a fictitious army before the Normandy invasion of D-Day.
Promising he would not lie to the press or public, Rumsfeld said, "We will not say a word that will in any way endanger anyone's life by discussing operations."
A senior White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that what may appear to be internal policy differences will likely smooth out over time. Bush's policy, the official said, is to focus first on bin Laden and his terrorist network. Accomplishing that objective may require leaving other priorities, such as going after states that sponsor terrorism, for later.
"The president has said he is a patient man," the official said.

Load-Date: September 29, 2001


End of Document