TOP FBI BRASS CRITICAL OF BUREAU'S ANTI-TERRORISM EFFORTS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
November 21, 2002 Thursday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 1371 words
Byline: ERIC LICHTBLAU, THE NEW YORK TIMES
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Senior FBI officials have grown frustrated with the bureau's performance in the war on terrorism, and they are demanding that agents nationwide become more aggressive and single-minded in hunting terrorists, internal memos and interviews show.
 Bruce J. Gebhardt, the second-ranking official at the bureau, told field office chiefs in a memo three weeks ago that he was "amazed and astounded" by the failure of some unidentified FBI field offices to commit essential resources and tools to the fight against terrorism, according to law enforcement officials familiar with the starkly worded memo.
 "You need to instill a sense of urgency" in field agents, Gebhardt wrote. "They need to get out on the street and develop sources. You need to demand that information is being sent" to the bureau's headquarters in Washington, he said, adding: "You are the leaders of the FBI. You cannot fail at this mission. Too many people are depending on us."
The internal frustrations suggest that the bureau is still suffering from many of the same problems that plagued it before last year's hijackings, including a failure to share information and prioritize investigations, officials said. Senior officials blame an institutional resistance, as some of the bureau's 56 field offices are finding it difficult to veer away from the bureau's decades-long focus on solving traditional federal crimes such as bank robberies, drug trafficking and kidnappings.
 Publicly, the bureau's director, Robert S. Mueller III, and other senior Bush administration officials say they are confident that the bureau is successfully reinventing itself as the lead domestic agency for counter-terrorism, with a clear focus on preventing future terrorist attacks instead of simply solving crimes that have already occurred. They point to the arrests in recent months of terrorist suspects in Detroit; Lackawana, N.Y.; Portland, Ore.; and elsewhere as evidence of the bureau's strong efforts to disrupt terrorism in the United States.
 But internal FBI communications and discussions among senior leadership in recent weeks tell a very different story.
 Mueller himself, in an internal memo sent to FBI employees last week, hinted at his frustration in trying to make counterterrorism the clear top priority for the entire bureau.
 Mueller said he no longer wanted to see FBI field offices establish their own distinct law enforcement priorities. Localized crime problems "will no longer be a basis for regional priority setting. While every office will have different crime problems that will require varying levels of resources, the FBI has just one set of priorities," and that begins with protecting the United States from terrorist attacks, Mueller wrote.
 Among their complaints, senior bureau officials have said they are unhappy that some field offices around the country are not moving aggressively enough to use secret terrorism warrants, are not developing enough intelligence sources to penetrate possible terrorist cells and are not loading all the terrorism-related information that they receive into the FBI's central computer system.
 Uploading and sharing terrorism leads is considered particularly critical. The intelligence community's failure to connect possible warning signs before the Sept. 11 attacks was partly blamed for the bureau's inability to analyze far-flung bits of information in its own files from field offices in Phoenix, Minneapolis, Oklahoma and elsewhere.
 FBI officials are also frustrated that headquarters has not always been kept informed of terrorism leads and developments in the field. In one embarrassing instance, Attorney General John Ashcroft asked Mueller in a recent meeting about search warrants in a case related to a terrorist investigation in Yemen in which the bureau was involved, but Mueller was apparently unaware of the investigation by his own agents, officials said.
 Officials said senior bureau leaders in recent weeks have directed field supervisors to demand weekly written briefings from their counterterrorism squads, ask more probing questions about pending investigations and push for greater use of warrants and surveillance against suspects. That task was made easier by a decision earlier this week by a federal appellate court validating the Justice Department's use of its expanded domestic surveillance powers.
 While officials would not comment on the details of the recent memos from headquarters, bureau spokesman Mike Kortan said Gebhardt's memo reflected his ongoing dialogue with field leaders on counterterrorism issues.
 "If any aspect of the counterterrorism program or any program requires emphasis or re-emphasis, he does not hesitate to do so," Kortan said. "Nothing is more important."
 While larger FBI offices such as those in New York and Los Angeles were known for aggressively pursuing terrorism cases long before last year's attacks, some smaller field offices have much less familiarity or even interest in such cases.
 The bureau's success or failure in recasting its role in national law enforcement has wide-ranging repercussions in the debate about homeland security.
 Some prominent politicians, particularly senior Democrats in the Senate, have stepped up their criticism of the bureau's counterterrorism performance in recent weeks. And policy-makers in both Congress and the administration have begun discussing whether the federal government needs to create a completely new super-agency for domestic and international intelligence, a move that could severely undercut the FBI's authority.
 Mueller and Ashcroft made separate trips this week to Southern cities to meet with FBI agents and other federal and local officials involved in counterterrorism. Ashcroft "wanted to remind law enforcement people how critical a role they play and how their mission has changed," according to Mark Corallo, a Justice Department spokesman who accompanied Ashcroft on trips to Atlanta; Tampa, Fla; and Charlotte, N.C.
 The Justice Department says that the FBI has already taken significant steps to recast itself in its new role of hunting terrorists, re-assigning 400 agents to counterterrorism from investigations of drugs, white-collar crime and other areas.
 According to a previously undisclosed report from the Justice Department to members of Congress last month, the bureau's commitment to nonterrorism cases that were once staples of the bureau dropped significantly in the months after the Sept. 11 attacks. The number of agents working narcotics cases dropped 45 percent, bank fraud cases dropped 31 percent and bank robbery investigations dropped 25 percent, according to the Justice Department figures.
 "Old habits die hard at the FBI," Sen. Charles E. Grassley, R-Iowa, a ranking Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, said on Wednesday. "The days of Bonnie and Clyde are over. It's time to match actions with words and really make prevention the top priority at the FBI."
 Sen. Patrick J. Leahy, D-Vt., who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said that he also believed the FBI was continuing to divert resources away from terrorism investigations in favor of cases "that can be easily handled by state and local authorities."
 "There's a longstanding historical problem at the FBI," said a congressional investigator who demanded anonymity. The special agents-in-charge, who run the field offices across the country, "are like princes with their own little fiefdoms, and the director is like the king who doesn't necessarily have the power to rein them in."
 But some agents said it is unfair of officials at headquarters to question the commitment or attitude of employees in the field and to paint agents nationwide with such a broad brush. Some agents suggested that the invective from senior officials simply reflects an effort to protect themselves from a rise in criticism over their own performances.
 "Everyone has been pushing hard at counterterrorism for 14 months. That's a no-brainer. This is our No. 1 priority" said Nancy Savage, an Oregon-based agent who is head of the FBI Agents Association. "And now that we're getting the legal and analytical tools to be effective, I think you're going to see a lot more people who want to be in the game."

Load-Date: November 22, 2002


End of Document