TOP ADVISERS MET ONLY TWICE ON TERRORISM
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
June 29, 2002 Saturday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 25
Length: 698 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


* The White House defends the amount of attention given in the course of nearly 100 high-level security meetings before Sept. 11.
President George W. Bush's national security leaders met formally nearly 100 times in the months before the Sept. 11 attacks, yet terrorism was the topic during only two of those sessions, officials say.
The White House acknowledged the dearth of top-level meetings devoted to the subject of terrorism by the "principals committee" of the National Security Council. Yet it has aggressively defended the level of attention, given only scattered hints of al-Qaida activity.
The description of the 90 to 100 meetings was confirmed by three White House officials.
Critics said the low number of terrorism meetings by the most senior members of the security council indicated the administration's priorities were elsewhere.
Bush's principals committee was focused on missile defense, Iraq, China, international economic policy, global warming and the U.S. stance toward Russia, a subject of particular interest to national security adviser Condoleezza Rice, a Russian expert who has now worked for both Bush administrations.
Besides Rice, the group usually included CIA Director George Tenet, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, Secretary of State Colin Powell and Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
One discussion on terrorism occurred July 3, amid escalating concerns about a likely attack by al-Qaida, one official said. But experts believed al-Qaida would attack American targets overseas, not inside the United States.
The other terrorism meeting occurred Sept. 4 as the security council p ut finishing touches on a proposed national security policy review for the president.
White House spokesman Ari Fleischer has described the council's review as a "comprehensive, multifront plan to dismantle the al-Qaida." It included instructions for the Pentagon to develop military strikes, plans to work closely with Afghanistan's northern alliance against al-Qaida and proposals to freeze bank accounts linked to Osama bin Laden's group.
That review was finished Sept. 10 and was awaiting Bush's approval when the first plane struck the World Trade Center.
Bush himself said in February 2001 that the nation hadn't done enough to prepare for possible terrorist attacks, and he pledged: "I will put a high priority on detecting and responding to terrorism on our soil."
A few weeks earlier, Tenet had told Congress, "The threat from terrorism is real, it is immediate, and it is evolving." He described bin Laden and his global network as a serious and immediate threat.
In the last months of the Clinton administration, the security council had determined that al-Qaida was responsible for the Oct. 12 bombing of the destroyer Cole, which killed 17 sailors. Bush first linked al-Qaida to the Cole bombing publicly in his speech to Congress after the Sept. 11 attacks.
"This was a failure in the Bush administration to recognize the nature of terrorism and its impact on the United States," said Vincent Cannistraro, a former CIA chief of counterterrorism operations and analysis. "Everybody felt that it was a chronic phenomenon, it would continue, and the best we could hope was to contain it."
One official argued that the lack of regular meetings devoted to terrorism among Bush's upper-echelon advisers did not mean inadequate attention was paid to the subject. More work was done by lower-level council staffers, who regularly briefed the principals individually, even if the principals didn't meet frequently on the issue, the official said.
Rice has described the work of the council's Counterterrorism Security G roup, directed by Special Assistant Richard Clarke, which met several times each week during July and August. By Aug. 6, Bush received a briefing report with the heading "Bin Laden Determined to Strike the United States." The report discussed the possibility of traditional airline hijackings.
"To say that the principals never talked about it before Sept. 4 is wrong," another official said. "There were lots of conversations on the margins at meetings or informal meetings. But the first formal meeting was to review the draft policy."

Notes

NATION / WORLD

Load-Date: June 29, 2002


End of Document