Top US general meets Taliban in Qatar, calls for reduced violence
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
December 17, 2020 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 549 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Negotiations between Taliban and the Afghan government officially started in Doha, Qatar on September 12, 2020, and have since made some progress.
"Military commanders on the ground are now starting to do things that are not conducive to peace talks and reconstruction and stability", Miller said, adding, "Clearly, the Taliban use violence as leverage" against the Afghan government.
Milley also traveled to Kabul to meet with Afghanistan's president to discuss the security situation that could impact any progress in the Afghan peace talks taking place in Qatar that have dragged on for months.
Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi on Wednesday said that a ceasefire in Afghanistan is not the responsibility of the Taliban alone but all sides to the conflict are responsible to achieve the objective.
Army General Scott Miller, the most senior commander of USA and coalition forces in Afghanistan, told AP the attacks were jeopardising the peace process.
Before this, President Ashraf Ghani in a cabinet meeting on Monday echoed NSA Hamdullah Mohib to say that the second round of the peace negotiation talks should be held in Afghanistan.
In a televised statement after the meeting, the foreign minister while emphasising the "seriousness of Taliban" about the process going forward said: "This process would Insha Allah go ahead from Jan 5. This means that if the war continues, the Taliban will eventually prevail regardless of plausible variations in the size or nature of the US troop commitment".
Streaming wars: HBO Max added to two platforms
Xfinity customers had some good news on Tuesday as a deal was reached to give full access to HBO Max's content portfolio. The announcement also left Roku users wondering when a deal with the streaming content provider would happen for them.
United States officials have accused the Taliban of stepping up attacks on Afghan security forces, as well as other civilian targets, even as the group's negotiators meet government officials in Doha.
Afghan officials have blamed the Taliban for carrying out the attack. At least three people were killed in Kabul in attacks this week, authorities said.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan pledged his country's support for the reduction of violence and the establishment of a ceasefire in Afghanistan.
While the Taliban has maintained its commitment not to attacked American forces in Afghanistan under the U.S. -Taliban peace agreement from earlier this year, it has significantly ramped up attacks on Afghan security forces in an effort to gain leverage in the peace talks.
The Afghan government as well as other global stakeholders, including the United States, the United Nations, NATO, and human rights groups have all called for a ceasefire. In return, Taliban promised to break ties with Al-Qaida and provide counter terrorism guarantees in areas under their control. "The higher the violence, the higher the risk", he said. "They are opposed to the process and creating roadblocks because their personal power and interests are in danger".
The peace talks are scheduled to resume in Qatar on January 5. The Kabul team returned from Doha on Tuesday.
About the next venue for the Afghan talks, Mr Qureshi said both sides had shared their points of view and preferences, but no final decision had been taken so far.

Load-Date: December 18, 2020


End of Document