TOP OFFICIALS TO GET VACCINE SOON AFTER ALL
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
December 15, 2020 Tuesday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2020 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ASECTION; Pg. A-5
Length: 433 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


Senior U.S. officials will begin receiving coronavirus vaccines this week as part of updated federal continuity of government plans that now include terrorism and pandemics as threats to the nation, and its leaders.
The effort comes after President Donald Trump tweeted on Sunday that White House aides should receive the COVID-19 vaccine "somewhat later in the program." Still, doses are expected to be administered at the White House, Capitol Hill and other facilities within the week, according to senior administration officials.
Public distribution of the shot is initially limited to front-line health workers and people in nursing homes and long-term care facilities.
The exact set of officials who will get the vaccine is classified but is not expected to include Mr. Trump or Vice President Mike Pence.
Study: 168K kids may starve due to virus
Economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic has set back decades of progress against the most severe forms of malnutrition and is likely to kill 168,000 children, according to a study released Monday by 30 international organizations.
The study from the Standing Together for Nutrition Consortium draws on economic and nutrition data gathered this year as well as targeted phone surveys. Saskia Osendarp, who led the research, estimates an additional 11.9 million children will suffer from severe malnutrition.
The fight against malnutrition had been an unheralded global success.
"The numbers were going down prior to COVID," said Lawrence Haddad, executive director of the Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition. "Ten years of progress eliminated in 9 to 10 months."
Eswatini leader dies after testing positive
The government of Eswatini has announced on Twitter that Prime Minister Ambrose Dlamini has died after testing positive for COVID-19.
Mr. Dlamini, 52, who had been prime minister since 2018, announced last month that he had tested positive for the virus and was being treated at a hospital in neighboring South Africa. The Eswatini government said he died Sunday afternoon.
Eswatini, formerly known as Swaziland, is a small mountain kingdom northeast of South Africa. It has recorded almost 7,000 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 127 deaths.
Google services back online after outage
A host of Alphabet services, including YouTube, Google Drive and Gmail, were briefly knocked offline Monday in a widespread outage spanning the tech giant's major platforms.
Google's workplace status dashboard showed U.S. outages began at 6:55 a.m. Eastern time.
Less than an hour later, the dashboard issued a status message indicating all services were back online.

Load-Date: December 15, 2020


End of Document