Touch of Life; Retired Dunbar minister pens book on spiritual terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
June 3, 2009, Wednesday


Copyright 2009 Charleston Newspapers
Section: METRO WEST KANAWHA; Pg. P4
Length: 995 words
Byline: Don Springer
Body


Terrorism has been associated with many facets of our lives, and the book "Spiritual Terrorism: Spiritual Abuse from the Womb to the Tomb" takes that word into a new area of religion.
The book is authored by Dunbar resident and honorably retired minister Dr. Boyd C. Purcell, who formerly served as a chaplain for Kanawha Hospice for more than 15 years.
Purcell, a native of Kentucky, also labored in the ministry of the gospel in Ohio and West Virginia before joining Hospice.
I had reason to talk with him by telephone more than a month ago. That has been followed up with several telephone conversations, and I recently had an opportunity to hear him speak.
He is a tall, neat, handsome, silver-headed man who certainly shows he is well-educated and an accomplished speaker. He has a message that is a little different for me - although I must admit he makes sense. Purcell was reared in fundamental Christian churches that preach salvation by works. After hearing about salvation by grace while in college, he left the fundamental churches and became an evangelical pastor after graduation from seminary.
As a result of continuing study of the Greek New Testament and earning his Ph.D., which improved his knowledge of Greek, Purcell came to the conclusion that God's love is unconditional and all-inclusive for all people. Consequently, God will ultimately, through Christ, save everyone without violating anyone's free will! As a result, his evangelical denomination forced him to resign or be condemned as a heretic. He resigned, became a chaplain for Hospice and took the training to become a Presbyterian minister.
First, he found himself disagreeing with literal "fire and brimstone" preaching that preyed on the "fear of God" rather than the "love of God." Second, his conclusion that "eventually God will save everyone" was due to understanding that Biblical fire symbolizes purification, not eternal torment.
In his book, he says, "Many thinking persons ask this question, 'How can one worship God who tortures people forever for failing to keep all of His commandments or even for rejecting Him?'"
I have not read his book, only excerpts.
I quote: "The word 'Gospel' literally means 'Good News.' Robert Short, the author of 'The Parables of Peanuts' said the Gospel is not Good News and bad news - just Good News. If relatively few people are saved and the rest are burned in literal hell fire forever, that would be mostly bad news. But some say that the Good News of everyone being saved by grace is too good to be true. I totally agree with the late, great Christian writer (George) Macdonald who replied that it is 'so good it must be true,' because it perfectly balances the love and justice of God."
In his book, Purcell says, "I could not disagree more strongly with theologians, preachers, and teachers who contend that people need to recognize that the horrific concept of inescapable torture in hell comes from the New Testament itself. Eternal torture has been graphically portrayed in paganism, but the symbolism of hell in the New Testament stands in sharp contrast to that terrible conception of God as the cosmic sadist."
Purcell certainly espouses some different words and thoughts for me. I have never thought much about everyone in the world being among the saved. Yet, I guess in reality I must admit if I expect God to save me, the rest of the world can't be far behind. I am thinking about some of his thoughts.
The author spent the past 15 years of his life among those suffering from cancer to find peace with God and to die in peace. "When I have asked dying hospice patients, terrified of hell, what a lake of burning Sulphur (NIV) would symbolize, they have thoughtfully responded that it would symbolize divine healing or purification from one's sins."
The author of these deep thoughts and a worker among dying patients also has a sense of humor. He has written some poetry. One is about God and Satan playing a baseball game. I am a great baseball fan and enjoyed it - thought you might, as well.
God at Bat
The outcome looks very dismal for God's side this cosmic day,
Satan's side has a three-run lead with only one inning to play.
Billions chained in hell fearfully breathe in labored desperation;
Billions on earth, in faith, hold onto hope for heavenly liberation
Satan, with no outs and bases loaded, intends to seal their fate,
He, the designated hitter, has an impish grin as he struts to the plate.
The word "rebellion" is on Satan's lips, his face contorted in hate,
He beats his bat composed of sin, wickedness, and evil on the plate.
The pitcher grips the ball, winds up, and delivers the ball with zing,
The hanging curve ball is smashed by the power of Satan's swing.
The hearts of demons are saddened and arrogance turns to doubt,
There is no joy on their side for arrogant Satan hits into a triple out.
The hearts of good spirits are gladdened, with half an inning to play;
With two outs and bases loaded, the stage is set for The Final Play.
All human voices chant for God, as The Pinch Hitter, to come to bat;
They'd all bet money and even their eternal spirits with God at bat.
The word "forgiveness" is on God's lips whose love knows no hate;
God rests His bat composed of love, grace, and mercy at the plate.
The pitcher grips the ball, winds up, and delivers the ball with zing;
Sin and even hell, itself, are destroyed by the power of God's swing.
Everywhere in this majestic universe God's glory is shining bright;
Everywhere there is goodness, joy, kindness, peace, love, and light.
Everywhere liberated spirits sing, dance, laugh, and shout in jubilation;
God, with one stroke of amazing grace, hits a walk-off grand slam and
ALL humbly bow, even Satan, and worship God in eternal adoration!!
- Boyd C. Purcell, Ph.D.
If you are interested in acquiring Purcell's book, it can be secured at authorhouse.com, 888-280-7715, amazon.com or local bookstores.
Such are the people, places and things that have touched my life in my West Virginia home!

Load-Date: June 3, 2009


End of Document