TOUGHER POLICY AGAINST TERROR IS SEEN GAINING
The New York Times
October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk
Length: 1239 words
Byline: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN , Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 27
Body


White House and State Department officials said today that, despite continuing disputes, the United States was moving closer to the tough policy on terrorists advocated by Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
They said this could include the swift use of military force, even if it resulted in civilian deaths.
But the officials acknowledged that there was no certainty so far that the United States in specific incidents would be ready to take the pre-emptive or retaliatory strikes called for by Mr. Shultz in a speech on terrorism in New York on Thursday.
There was embarrassment within the Government to the publicity given, with less than two weeks to go in the campaign, to the seeming contradictions among senior officials over how to deal with terrorism.
White House and State Department officials say United States is moving closer to tough policy on terrorists advocated by Secretary of State George P Shultz, but say there is no certainty that United States would be ready to take pre-emptive or retaliatory strikes advocated by Shultz in his recent speech; Walter Mondale is critical of apparent confusion within Reagan Administration over how to deal with terrorism (M)Mondale Critical of the Confusion
In San Francisco, the Democratic nominee, Walter F. Mondale, was critical of the apparent confusion.
''The worst thing you can do is say in the abstract what you will do except that you are going to be tough,'' he said. ''What they have done in the last day is to encourage terrorists to believe we don't know what we are doing.''
A State Department official, in commenting on the apparent conflict, said:
''On the one hand, the contradictions are real, because we have not ironed out every detail. On the other hand, they are not, because we are going to move against the terrorists. There will be a war on terrorists. You just watch and see.''
The White House and State Department officials said that part of the confusion stemmed from the fact that President Reagan and Vice President Bush were on the campaign trail and it was difficult to coordinate with the State Department. Part of the problem was that Mr. Bush had not seen Mr. Shultz's speech ahead of time.
''At the end of the day,'' a State Department official said, ''there was no distance between George Shultz and Ronald Reagan on terrorism.''
Mr. Shultz's aides said he felt that the United States, despite its frequent warnings, had not been willing to take decisive actions that would deter or punish terrorists.
He has argued, officials said, that the United States should be willing, as Israel is, to respond, as he said on Thursday, ''on a moment's notice,'' and to strike even though ''we may never have the kind of evidence that can stand up in an American court of law.''
''We cannot allow ourselves to become the Hamlet of nations, worrying endlessly over whether and how to respond,'' Mr. Shultz said.
Aides said he was particularly critical of the caution shown by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and by the covert side of the Central Intelligence Agency in stressing the dangers of retaliation to American foreign and domestic policy.  Mr. Shultz's differences with Mr. Weinberger go back to the dispute over the marines in Lebanon, with Mr. Shultz opposing a withdrawal and Mr. Weinberger arguing they should not be there.
 
Pentagon Aide Concedes Caution
An official close to Mr. Weinberger said today:
''It is true that the Pentagon is more aware of the downside of military operations and therefore is cautious about undertaking operations where the results are as unpredictable as in pre-emptive strikes against terrorists.''
Another official said Friday, ''One has to proceed with caution and with a lot of thought about unintended consequences from the use of force.''
According to White House and State Department officials, Mr. Shultz is supported by Robert C. McFarlane, the White House national security adviser, who, like Mr. Shultz, is a former Marine Corps officer. The officials also said Mr. Reagan, depite some comments to the contrary, basically agreed with the Shultz call for a firmer approach.
''Look, George Shultz is a cautious man,'' an aide said today. ''Can you imagine him making that speech on Thursday if he did not believe that he also spoke for the President?''
 
 McFarlane Supported Shultz
Mr. McFarlane read the speech before it was given and supported it, a White House official said. The speech was also circulated to the Pentagon, but elicited no official comment.
Mr. Shultz said in his speech that the public should understand beforehand that there was ''potential for loss of life of some of our fighting men and the loss of life of some innocent people'' when force was used against terrorists.
Mr. Reagan, in his most recent remarks on terrorism, on Sunday in the debate with Mr. Mondale, was more cautious.
''We want to retaliate,'' he said, ''but only if we can put our finger on the people responsible and not endanger the lives of innocent civilians.''
Vice President Bush while campaigning in Ohio on Friday, was asked about taking the risk to hurt civilians.
''I don't agree with that,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I think you have got to pinpoint the source of that attack. We are not going to go out and bomb innocent civilians or something of that nature. I don't think we ever get to the point where you kill 100 innocent women and children just to kill one terrorist. I don't think we have reached that point.''
 
Reagan Tried to Resolve Conflict
Mr. Reagan, when asked about the apparent conflict, tried to resolve it by saying of Mr. Shultz's speech, ''I don't think it was a statement of policy.''
''He was saying all these things must be considered,'' he said. ''I think what Secretary Shultz was saying was that you couldn't rule out the possibility of innocent people being killed. He was not saying that we would do that.''
Mr. Reagan created the impression that he was not supporting the speech. This led Larry Speakes, his spokesman, to say, ''Shultz's speech was Administration policy from top to bottom.''
Today officials close to Mr. Bush were saying that he was caught off guard since he had not been sent a copy of the speech. They said Mr. Bush was trying to reflect Mr. Reagan's comment in Sunday's debate that the lives of civilians should not be risked.
 
Comment Offered by Mondale
Some State Department officials also said that Mr. Bush's position, in general, was closer to Mr. Weinberger's.
Today Mr. Mondale told reporters in San Francisco;
''This past day we have the U.S. Government all over the map - the Secretary saying we will attack terrorists even if innocents are killed; then the Vice Presideny saying, 'Oh, no, only if they can be attacked without touching innocents;' then the President backing up and taking a different position, underscoring the fact that there is no one in charge.''
''All that theoretical talk yesterday, and the inconsistency,'' Mr. Mondale said, ''only emboldens terrorists to think this Government does not know
what it is doing.''
 
Bush Hails Shultz's Leadership
Today, Mr. Bush, speaking to the Zionist Organization of America in Washington, hailed Secretary Shultz for his ''able leadership'' in efforts to fight international terrorism. But the Vice President made no mention of the retaliation issue.
''Under the able leadership of Secretary Shultz, the State Department is focusing as never before on international terrorism and what can be done about it,'' Mr. Bush said.


End of Document