Tough issues: Israel and the War on Terror
University Wire
August 11, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 Idaho Argonaut via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 1051 words
Byline: By Frank McGovern, Idaho Argonaut; SOURCE: U. Idaho
Dateline: MOSCOW, Idaho 
Body


The idea of declaring a "war on terror" is fallacious for a number of reasons. For starters, declaring war on concepts is downright problematic. It doesn't work well. Look at the war on drugs. (Yes, this has been mentioned before, but nothing seems to have been done). It's working just about as well as prohibition - bang-up job there. However un-winnable a war on drugs may be, at least there is a tangible enemy present that one can see: drugs (unless one is on drugs, in which case they appear all fuzzy).
Terror, though, is an emotion. Admittedly, the war on terror is (hopefully) focused on eradicating the terror caused by terrorists.
I'm trusting I wouldn't get shot for running from a wild animal. It seems that it would have made more sense to declare a war on terrorists.
Unfortunately, this is equally awkward as attempting to define who is a terrorist and who isn't has and will always be an entirely arbitrary exercise, even if one feels God blesses their country with more gusto than He does others. For example, our country was founded through terrorism. The Boston Tea Party, the signing of the Declaration of Independence, our initial clashes at Lexington and Concord - these were terrorist acts. Were this to happen today, some angry wag at Fox News would insist these Deist upstarts be referred to as "Homicide Musketeers" rather than the wussily euphemistic "revolutionaries."
Another problem with our war on terror (beyond attacking Iraq for no apparent reason) is that it wasn't ours to declare. Terrorism has been used to stir the political pot since governments have been around to be stirred. More so, since we initially employed it to exist, America has, in relation to much of the rest of the world, been blessedly free of terror campaigns. In the Middle East, for example, a war on and of terrorism has been raging since circa 1948.
That was the year of the establishment of the state of Israel. The Jewish people have been having a pretty rough time of it since back in the day. For centuries they had nowhere to go. As people throughout history have been inclined to stupidly declare un-winnable wars on things they fear and/or don't understand, the Jews were, more often than not, unwelcome where they did end up.
Because of this historical shafting, I support an Israeli homeland. As possibly the most abused religious/ethnic collective in the history of the planet it would be nice if all the world's Judaic peeps could find somewhere to call their own and live there in peace.
Since May 14, 1948, Israel has had that home, though peace has eluded them. To name and date the clashes with neighboring states since Israel's inception would be an undertaking loftier than theiscolumn space allows. The predominate contemporary antagonist, though, has been another group of people with major homeland problems, the Palestinians.
Like our own war on terrorism, Israel's engagement is the source of much international distress. Unlike our own war on terrorism, the difference is that Israel was (and has since been) attacked by the enemy with whom they are engaged. In the American press, Israel is largely considered a protagonist set upon by zealous, mindless, self-immolation prone Palestinian antagonists. While there is certainly some truth to this characterization (it is hard to negotiate with a population who are committed to the absolute annihilation of your people), the situation is nowhere near that simple.
Two academics, John Mearsheimer and John Walt, a professor of political science at the University of Chicago and a professor of International Affairs at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, respectively, recently published a paper in the London Review of Books entitled "The Israeli Lobby." Despite some rather commonsense assertions, (namely, that there is a powerfully pro-Israeli lobby in the United States and our political friendship with Israel is detrimental to our war on terror as it inflames Muslim fundamentalists) the paper has become enormously controversial.
One of the facets of this controversy was Mearsheimer and Walt's suggestion, one not without precedent, that academics who publicly address America's lopsided financial support of Israel are accused of anti-Semitism. This has certainly been the case in the past. Noam Chomsky (himself Jewish) possibly the most populist, fair, egalitarian and certainly the most important social critic alive, has been tagged an anti-Semite for criticisms of Israel.
Alan Dershowitz, right-winger and Harvard prof, wrote a patronizing response to the paper denying that charges of anti-Semitism are ever leveled for critique of US/Israeli policy before stating that the authors had "destroyed their professional reputations" with an article that would undoubtedly appeal to neo-Nazis. The Anti-Defamation League, a pro-Israeli lobbying group, labeled "The Israeli Lobby" "a classical conspiratorial anti-Semitic analysis invoking the canards of Jewish power and Jewish control," and liken the essay to the infamous Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
These responses are absolutely counterproductive. "The Israeli Lobby" never suggests that there is one massive, conspiratorial Jewish lobby pulling the strings of foreign policy. The authors suggest that there is a powerful lobby, compromised of many different groups with a similar goal: U.S. support of Israel. And this is the case. Israel, for its size, receives an enormously inequitable chunk of American aid. The resultant disparity manifests itself as rockets smashing into residential buildings in Haifa. One Hezbollah terrorist killed along with a dozen or more civilians.
These are not easy issues. The problem with the world, particularly when it's at war, is that nothing is black and white. The Israelis are beset by enemies and need help (as do their enemies). A Palestinian baby has no less right to live or eat or go to school than an Israeli one does. God doesn't bless America any more enthusiastically than he blesses Iraq. And criticism of wrongdoing is not only the inalienable right of every American (and Israeli), it's our duty. To color the censure of political and social iniquity as prejudice, subversion or sedition is not only un-American, it's cowardly and a slap in the face to democracy everywhere.
(C) 2006 Idaho Argonaut via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 11, 2006


End of Document