Tourism hits record despite lingering fears of terrorism, agency says
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 28, 2003, Tuesday


Copyright 2003 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Business; Pg. e2
Length: 326 words
Byline: AP
Body


MADRID, Spain (AP) -- Tourism around the world hit a record last year despite fears of terrorism, although travelers stayed closer to home, made shorter visits and spent less, the World Tourism Organization said Monday.
For the first time, the number of international arrivals broke 700 million, reaching nearly 715 million, the WTO said. That marked a 3.1 percent rise from 2001, when the Sept. 11 attacks triggered a drop in 0.6 percent drop from the previous year.
France remained the world's most popular destination for international travelers with an estimated 76.7 million arrivals, and Asia and the Pacific displaced the Americas as the No. 2 region after Europe, said the WTO, which is a U.N.-related agency.
The figures released Monday are preliminary and do not reflect domestic travel, which has risen dramatically because of Sept. 11, especially in the United States.
And precise data are not yet available on how much revenue was generated last year by international travel, although the figure will probably be down because, among other things, a lot of people avoided airplanes and traveled by car.
Still, the WTO declared itself satisfied with the data and cautiously optimistic about the outlook for 2003.
"We have a lot of work to do to reaffirm positive trends, but first of all, to regain consumer confidence where needed," WTO secretary-general Francesco Frangialli said.
"World tourism has never before felt such a need for cooperation as now."
Local Angle
Portland International Airport reported a 3.6 percent decline in passenger traffic through the end of 2002. The final calculation was more than 12.2 million passengers, according to figures released Friday by the Port of Portland.
For December, the total was up 11 percent over the same period one year earlier. Factoring into the results were a lagging economy and high unemployment, cutbacks in passenger seating capacity and heightened screening measures that have complicated travel.

Load-Date: January 28, 2003


End of Document