Tourism overcomes terrorism in Egypt
USA TODAY
July 16, 1999, Friday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1999 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE;
Length: 341 words
Body


<>UPDATE<>
Looks as if Egypt's tourism industry has recovered from the terrorist
attack in Luxor nearly two years ago. Visits by Americans between
January and May hit 74,076, surpassing the 73,349 that visited
over the same period in '97. Tourism plummeted later that year
after Muslim extremists gunned down 58 sightseers at the popular
Queen Hatshepsut Temple in Luxor. The Egyptian government has
since spent millions boosting security at major sites, and officials
predict U.S. arrivals should top 1997's tally of 176,343.
<>PHENOMENA<>
Scots hope movie is just the ticket
Scotland once again is bracing for a Hollywood-induced tourism
boost. Four years after Braveheart and Rob Roy set
off a stampede of vacationers there, the region is awaiting the
impact of My Life So Far, opening today in New York and
Los Angeles. The film is set at the sumptuous "Harewood House"
in the Scottish countryside -- actually the 19th century Edwardian-style
Kiloran House in the highlands village of Loch Fyne. For film
buffs headed to the U.K., the British Tourist Authority has prepared
a free movie map of England, Scotland and Wales. Information:
800-462-2748. ("Harewood House," because the movie is so new,
has not yet been included.)
<>THEME PARKS<>
'Dad to Mikey, Dad to Mikey'
Worried about losing the kids at Disney World? Now you can just
ring 'em up by renting two-way radios. Orlando's In Touch Family
Communications lets families at Disney and other area parks keep
in contact (two radios for three days, $ 53; seven days, $ 120).
It also offers a device that, when put on kids, will beep when
parents within 200 feet push a button ($ 5.99 per day). Information:
407-812-4220 or www.intouchfamily.com. . . . Beepers aside, Disney
is making efforts to reduce long lines at its Orlando parks. By
the end of next week, visitors to Animal Kingdom who swipe their
tickets through machines at three of the most popular rides will
be given scheduled times to return for immediate entry. The new
"Fastpass" service will roll out at the Magic Kingdom and other
Disney parks later this summer.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Clive Coote, Miramax; 'Harewood House': Scottish site (actually Kiloran House) of the film 'My Life So Far.' It's not on tourist maps yet, but will be.

Load-Date: July 16, 1999


End of Document