TOUR OF DUTY
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 4, 1991, MONDAY, ST. CHARLES Edition


Copyright 1991 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 401 words
Byline: Story by Esther Talbot Fenning St. Charles Post Special Correspondent
Body


Bass guitarist Mike Brescia and the Patt Holt singers and dancers use their talents to take Americana to our overseas troops.  In the last three years, the St. Charles-based group has performed at U.S.  military bases in Asia, the Middle East, Europe, Central America and the Philippines.  This month, Brescia and seven members of the group will leave on their fourth trip abroad, a 49-day tour to bases in Germany, Iceland and the Azores.  Brescia, who also serves as the group's band director, said that because of the war in the Persian Gulf, he expects this trip to be different.  ''Probably we will be more apprehensive about things we thought nothing of before - like going through customs. Also, we may be doing more land than air travel between bases,'' he said.  Brescia admits that his family and friends are concerned about the threat of terrorism.  ''But not going is giving in to terrorism,'' he said.  Brescia, 21, lives with his parents, Yvonne and V incent Brescia, on Wilmington Drive in St. Charles. He's a student at St. Charles County Community College in O'Fallon, where he is a member of the student government and the Theta Kappa honorary society.  Brescia credits his parents for his academic performance in college.  ''Although I didn't do well in high school, they've always been supportive,'' he said.  Brescia takes semester breaks when he travels because he feels that experiencing cultural differences firsthand is an education in itself.
He cites his experiences in Saudi Arabia.  ''We were in Bahrain during Ramadan, the Islamic holy month. The cannon goes off at dawn to signal the start of the fast, which ends at sundown. We were told we could be arrested if we were caught eating, drinking or smoking in public during the day,'' he said.  ''We were also warned that they might approach us to buy our girls,'' he said.  The trips are sponsored by the Department of Defense, which commissioned Patt Holt to organize 19 tours for the purpose of entertaining U.S. troops abroad.  Holt said that she sets high standards for the entertainers who perform overseas.  ''It sounds corny, but these people represent the United States. They must be good citizens, be punctual, pay their bills and not cause trouble. AND, their motives for going can't be just money,'' she added.  ''The GIs not only appreciate having us there to entertain but to talk with us about home,'' said Brescia.

Graphic

 
Photo; Photo by L.T. Spence / St. Charles Post … Mike Brescia

Load-Date: October 8, 1993


End of Document