Toward a Balanced Terrorism Bill 
 The New York Times
October 4, 2001 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26
Length: 349 words
Body


Resisting heavy pressure to rubber-stamp Attorney General John Ashcroft's carelessly written antiterrorism package, Congress is working diligently to create a bipartisan compromise that respects both civil liberties and national security needs. The White House could aid this process greatly by telling Mr. Ashcroft to desist from making scurrilous remarks suggesting, without any legitimate basis, that lawmakers engaged in this thoughtful balancing process are somehow making the nation vulnerable to another attack.
     On the House side two unlikely allies, the Republican James Sensenbrenner, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, and John Conyers, the committee's ranking Democrat, have produced a compromise bill that goes far to correct overreaching in the Ashcroft proposal. Their bill retains sound provisions from the Ashcroft measure, such as reaffirming the authority of federal agents to conduct roving wiretaps that follow terrorism suspects as they move about. But it also tries to reinstate a needed measure of judicial review in the areas of wiretapping and detention of aliens. Further work is still needed, especially to make sure the government does not get expanded powers to detain immigrants indefinitely. 
 In the Senate, meanwhile, Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, announced an agreement in principle last night with the administration on a compromise bill that will need to be reconciled with the House version. Unfortunately the constructive air of bipartisanship that has surrounded these negotiations was upset on Tuesday when Mr. Ashcroft and Senator Trent Lott, the minority leader, expressed fury over the delay in producing a Senate bill and implied that failure to expand police and surveillance powers immediately, as the administration asked, would open the country to another terrorist attack.
Such talk is irresponsible. Congress has hardly been dilatory in responding to the administration's proposal, and no one has shown that the failure to enact legislation is either holding up the current investigation or making the nation vulnerable. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 4, 2001


End of Document