TRACES OF TERROR: COMPENSATION; Accord to Let Other Victims Of Terrorism Receive Aid
 The New York Times
May 25, 2002 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 733 words
Byline:  By SHAILA K. DEWAN 
Body


Senate Democrats and Republicans have agreed to allow the Sept. 11 Victim Compensation Fund to provide hundreds of millions of dollars to the families of victims of other terrorist attacks, including those involving anthrax, Senator Charles E. Schumer announced yesterday at his Manhattan office. The agreement would also cover those who were injured in those attacks.
     "They will get the same benefits that the 9/11 families did and I am happy to say I talked to the 9/11 families and they are fine with it," Senator Schumer said. 
 Under the agreement, families who lost members in bombings at the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in 1993, in Oklahoma City in 1995 or at the embassies in West Africa in 1998, or who contracted anthrax after Sept. 11 would be entitled to benefits under the same rules as families who lost members on Sept. 11, Senator Schumer said.
The agreement will send the message, he said, that, "We take terrorism seriously and we take care of its victims."
The average payout is expected to be $1.85 million, minus life insurance payments, pensions and some other benefits received by the families. Those who were injured in the attacks would be entitled to reimbursement for medical expenses and lost wages.
The agreement would not affect how much the families of those who died on Sept. 11 would get.
The fund was expected to pay out as much as $5 billion. But the cost of expanding the number of people eligible is difficult to estimate, because it is not clear how many families will file claims. Only 500 of the more than 3,000 victims of Sept. 11 have filed.
Still, Mr. Schumer's office has estimated that the agreement could cost at least $300 million.
In February, Michael Macko, whose father was killed in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, wrote letters to public officials, fearing that the families of the six victims in that attack would be overlooked, especially as discussions of a new memorial proceeded. The memorial to the 1993 victims was destroyed on Sept. 11.
Mr. Schumer responded, securing Mr. Macko an appointment to the family advisory council of the agency overseeing the redevelopment of Lower Manhattan. Mr. Schumer said he would also fight to have the 1993 families included in the victim's fund.
But there had already been complaints in Washington about the amount of aid being given to New York. Senator Don Nickles, an Oklahoma Republican, had expressed concerns about the $20 billion in promised aid and pointed out that Oklahoma City, where 168 died and more than 500 were injured, had received nothing for victim's compensation.
Then, earlier this week, the House passed a measure granting American victims of the two embassy bombings the same status as those who died on Sept. 11. Now, Senators Schumer and Nickles plan to amend that bill in the Senate, or introduce a new bill, to include victims from other attacks, as well as the four people who died of anthrax and others who contracted the disease.
Mr. Schumer said he was confident that both houses would approve the changes.
The Bush administration is on record as opposing the measure adopted by the House, partly on the ground that the Sept. 11 Fund was created specifically for the attacks on that day. The administration has said that it is preparing a set of principles for compensating victims of international terrorism.
But in light of the risk of seeming insensitive to terrorist victims, and the support of leaders in both houses, including the Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, and Representative J. C. Watts Jr. of Oklahoma, chairman of the House Republican Conference, a veto would be politically difficult.
"We still need to study the actual details of the proposal," said Trent Duffy, a spokesman for the White House Office of Management and Budget.
Federal officials have expressed concern that the expansion would create a dangerous precedent that might obligate the government to open the fund to even more victims of terrorism.
Mr. Schumer did not back away from that argument. "This does set a precedent," he said. "And I hope that we could extend that precedent" into the future, he added.
The agreement, Mr. Macko said, is the first indication that his mother could receive any money for her loss beyond her husband's life insurance policy and workers' compensation.
"It will allow me to sleep better at night knowing that my mom is taken care of," Mr. Macko said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 25, 2002


End of Document