Tracking network urged for drones
Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)
December 26, 2019 Thursday


Copyright 2019 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 317 words
Byline: <span class="neFMT neFMT_byline-source">Bloomberg News</span>
Body


WASHINGTON -- All but the smallest civilian drones would have to broadcast radio tracking data to ensure greater safety and prevent terrorism under a sweeping proposal unveiled by U.S. regulators Thursday. 
The long-awaited draft rules call for a massive new tracking network for everything from toys to larger commercial drones so that law enforcement can spot the devices flying anywhere, from congested urban areas to the most rural zones. 
The controversial measure by the Federal Aviation Administration, which is subject to public comment and could change before it becomes final, is a key foundation to advance drone-driven commerce, including deliveries of consumer goods by companies such as Alphabet Inc.'s Wing and Amazon.com Inc.'s Prime Air. 
"This is an important building block in the unmanned traffic management ecosystem," the FAA said in the proposal. 
With only limited exceptions for groups such as model-airplane operators, all drones weighing more than 0.55 pounds (0.25 kilograms) would have to broadcast their position and operator's identity at all times under the FAA proposal. 
The FAA is suggesting that private companies approved by the agency would set up tracking systems for drones, replicating the existing air-traffic control system for traditional aircraft. 
Law enforcement and homeland security agencies had demanded a tracking mandate in response to the growing number of drone threats, including a handful of close calls that halted airline flights near airports, collisions with other aircraft or use of the devices by terrorists around the world. 
The issue has fractured the rapidly growing base of drone operators, at times pitting recreational fliers and different segments of the industry against each other even as the majority of users acknowledge the need for some type of tracking. It also has raised significant concerns about government monitoring of the public. 

Load-Date: December 30, 2019


End of Document