Tracking terror's toll along U.S. party lines
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
January 25, 2006 Wednesday
Home Edition


Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 15A
Length: 473 words
Byline: CAROL WINKLER
Body


Last Friday, Karl Rove delivered a speech before the Republican National Committee in preparation for the 2006 midterm elections. "Republicans have a post-9/11 worldview, and many Democrats have a pre-9/11 worldview," he said. "That doesn't make them [Democrats] unpatriotic --- not at all. But it does make them wrong --- deeply and profoundly and consistently wrong."
Judging which political party offers the best hope of securing the nation from terrorism is an important goal for all American voters. Osama bin Laden's recent audio tape threatening another attack on U.S. soil makes effective leadership a high priority.
Fortunately, Americans have a record available for assessing the results of the two political parties on terrorism. Historically, the U.S. State Department has published the statistics on the number of international terrorist acts that have involved the United States and the number of American deaths from those acts in its annual report, Patterns of Global Terrorism. More recently, the National Counterterrorism Center assumed the task of collecting terrorism data from the State Department. 
If voters look back at the performance of all U.S. presidents since the beginning of Jimmy Carter's tenure in office, the documented historical record will surprise most of the electorate. On average, Democratic presidents have experienced 17 percent fewer international terrorism attacks involving the United States each year than their Republican counterparts (131 vs. 158).
On average, 11 U.S. citizens have died each year from terrorism while Democrats have controlled the White House. By contrast, 222 Americans on average have lost their lives every year that Republicans have controlled the White House.
Even if you excuse all the deaths associated with Sept. 11, 2001, it does not change the comparative assessment of the two parties. Omission of all terrorism deaths in 2001 means that, on average, more than four times as many Americans have died from terrorism each year under Republican presidents than under Democratic leadership. These numbers do not include combat deaths in Iraq.
Unfortunately, for the American voter, the State Department in 2004 announced its decision to stop publishing Patterns of Global Terrorism. The decision, according to former CIA analyst and State Department terrorism expert Larry Johnson, resulted from the National Counterterrorism Center's findings that more terrorist attacks happened in 2004 than any previous year dating back to 1985.
Voters should assess the track records of the two political parties during the 2006 campaign. American lives will depend on it.
* Carol Winkler is professor and chair of the Department of Communication at Georgia State Univerisity. She is the author of "In the Name of Terrorism: Presidents on Political Violence in the Post-World War II Era."

Graphic

 
Photo: Carol Winkler

Load-Date: January 25, 2006


End of Document