Tracking down terrorism;
Latest suspect reportedly blaming Iraq
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 10, 1995, Friday,
REGION EDITION


Copyright 1995 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL,
Length: 705 words
Byline: Jeanne King, By Reuters News Service
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Islamic militant Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, one of the world's most wanted men, pleaded not guilty yesterday to masterminding the World Trade Center bombing, but sources said he is cooperating with the government and blaming Iraq for ordering the devastating attack.
The Iraqi-born Yousef, 27, was arrested at a hotel in Islamabad, Pakistan, and turned over to U.S. authorities, who secretly flew him to New York late Tuesday night.
Yousef is charged with the Feb. 26, 1993, trade center explosion that killed six people and injured 1,000 in what has been called the worst terrorist attack on U.S. soil.
The arrest ended a two-year worldwide hunt for Yousef, and State Department officials said a $ 2 million reward will be paid for his arrest, although they declined to give any details.
Yousef appeared in federal court in Manhattan yesterday morning looking relaxed and clean-shaven. When U.S. District Judge John Keenan asked him how he pleaded, he answered in a firm voice, ''I plead not guilty.''
A source close to the case told Reuters that Yousef is cooperating with U.S. authorities and blaming the attack on Iraq.
''He's talking and cooperating big-time,'' the source said, adding, ''He's putting the blame for the trade center bombing on Iraq and saying the funding and authority came from Iraq.''
Yousef is being held on the third floor of the Metropolitan Correctional Center federal facility in lower Manhattan, an area normally reserved for defendants cooperating with the government, another source said.
However, State Department officials who briefed reporters in Washington said he was not talking. A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan declined to comment.
James Fox, the retired FBI agent who was in charge of the World Trade Center investigation, told Reuters, ''The totality of the evidence points toward Iraqi involvement. … I am not saying there is a smoking gun but after Yousef gets through talking, there may be.''
Officials say Yousef has been involved in other terrorist plots across Asia. The allegations include his helping to plan an attempt to assassinate Pope John Paul II during the pontiff's four-day visit there last month.
Counterterrorism experts called Yousef's capture a major victory, with ramifications for breaking up terrorist networks in the United States and around the world.
''This is a very big deal, a very, very important arrest,'' said one expert.
Yousef fled the United States the night of the World Trade Center bombing. A break in the manhunt occurred in January when police in the Philippines connected him to the failed plot against the pope.
Yousef was arrested in an Islamabad hotel Tuesday. Pakistani police found a suitcase in his room with two toy cars packed with explosives and cotton soaked in an explosive inside.
Yousef had originally been indicted with the four defendants who were convicted last March of bombing the trade center. Those four men were sentenced in May by U.S. District Judge Kevin Duffy to life in prison without parole.
He is not, however, charged in the ongoing trial that alleges that the World Trade Center bombing was part of a larger conspiracy.
In that case, Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman and 10 others are accused of planning a number of bombings and assassinations in the United States. Prosecutors said Abdel-Rahman is the spiritual leader of the group that wanted to ''levy a war of urban terrorism'' in this country.
Yousef emerged in testimony and in the prosecutors' summations during the earlier World Trade Center bombing trial as the ''mastermind'' of the explosion.
Prosecutors said Yousef arrived in the United States on Sept. 1, 1992, on a valid Iraqi passport but without an American visa. He applied for political asylum and his case was pending before immigration officials when he fled the country using a false passport and made his way to Iraq.
Prosecutors said Yousef arrived in the United States with terrorist manuals and that he had been trained in bomb-making in Peshawar, Pakistan. The initial indictment accused him of buying the chemicals used in the World Trade Center blast.
He allegedly shared an apartment with Mohammad Salameh, who was convicted of renting the van that was used to carry the bomb to the World Trade Center.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, DRAWING, PHOTO: Ramzi Ahmed Yousef. Age: 27 years. Accused of: Masterminding the World Trade Center bombing. Evidence: His fingerprints found on two bomb-making manuals and on containers of bomb-making chemicals.; DRAWING: Yousef pleads not guilty at his arraignment in New York yesterday.

Load-Date: February 12, 1995


End of Document