Tracing Drift Of Terrorism As It Evolves
The New York Times
January 25, 2005 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section E; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 8; TELEVISION REVIEW
Length: 679 words
Byline: By ERIC MINK
Eric Mink is commentary editor and an op-ed columnist at The St. Louis Post-Dispatch. He has written about television for more than 20 years.
Body


In the battle against Islamist terrorism, Xavier Raufer, a French expert on terrorism and international crime, fears that the Bush administration is 20 years behind the curve.
 ''They describe this as some kind of an Irish Republican Army, except that instead of being Catholics, they are Muslims,'' Mr. Raufer says on ''Al Qaeda's New Front,'' a documentary that has its premiere tonight on PBS's ''Frontline'' series. ''This is 1980's terrorism,'' he tells the program's correspondent, Lowell Bergman, who is also a correspondent for The New York Times. ''It has nothing to do with what terrorism is today.''
  ''Al Qaeda's New Front'' suggests that the splintering of Islamist terrorism into widely dispersed, more-or-less independent units is an evolutionary adaptation to Al Qaeda's eviction from Afghanistan three years ago by United States military forces. It focuses on the countries of Western Europe -- especially Spain, Britain and France -- to which vast numbers of Muslims have been migrating for at least two decades.
 ''Most Muslims in Europe are devout, conservative and opposed to the fanaticism of the militant Islamists,'' the program acknowledges, but their relative isolation within the broader cultures around them helps create conditions ripe for exploitation by astute extremist recruiters.
 The problem is magnified by the spread of virulent strains of Salafi, a fundamentalist variant of Sunni Islam. Particularly ominous, the program notes, is the increasing number of adherents to the Takfir wal Hijra version of Salafi, which approves of any tactic, no matter how violent, against nonbelievers, including other Muslims.
 The documentary succumbs to movie-making temptation in a couple of spots. An opening sequence about the bombings of commuter trains in Madrid last March marries newly shot scenes with surveillance video of the actual explosions. The editing is so seamless that it carries the program needlessly close to the line between legitimate illustration and inappropriate staging. A later simulation of a stakeout, complete with mood music and an ostensibly dramatic close-up of images in a car's rearview mirror, likewise undercuts the film's seriousness.
 It is also hard to justify the program's use of audio recorded during the beheading of the 26-year-old American hostage Nicholas Berg in Iraq last May. Although the sounds are heard in a segment about the recruitment of a suicide bomber, they add nothing of value to the program. 
 Those lapses notwithstanding, ''Al Qaeda's New Front'' makes a vivid contribution to the understanding of Western Europe as both an incubator and a target of contemporary Islamist terrorism.
 ''This is an ideal breeding ground,'' explains Mamoun Abdelali, a Muslim who lives in Paris. Among the factors he cites are ''unemployment, ignorance, academic failures, professional failures, a feeling of rejection by French society because there is no work or housing.'' He also points to ''a very low education level and thus very little knowledge of Islam.''
 The Bush administration's description of the war in Iraq as the central battle in the war against terrorism has raised doubts about its understanding of the mutating Islamist threat, particularly in Europe. In the aftermath of last year's bombings in Madrid, the ''Frontline'' program states, ''Many Europeans, already wary of the Iraq war, were worried that the United States, by pursuing a mainly military campaign against Al Qaeda, had underestimated the evolving nature of the threat.'' 
 ''Al Qaeda's New Front'' is a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation production by Neil Docherty for ''Frontline'' in association with The New York Times. A program titled ''War Without Borders,'' which used much of the same material, was broadcast in Canada in December. 

'Frontline'
'Al Qaeda's New Front'
PBS, tonight at 9; check local listings.

Neil Docherty, producer; Lowell Bergman, correspondent; David Fanning, executive producer for ''Frontline.'' A Canadian Broadcasting Corporation production for WGBH/Frontline in association with The New York Times.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: The bombing of a commuter train in Madrid last March is among the recent terrorist acts explored in ''Al Qaeda's New Front'' on PBS. (Photo by Kai Pfaffenbach/Corbis)                                    

Load-Date: January 25, 2005


End of Document