TRACKING DOWN SYRIA'S TERRORIST CONNECTIONS
The New York Times
October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5; Week in Review Desk
Length: 845 words
Byline: By JAMES M. MARKHAM
Dateline: BONN
Body


IN THE discreet world of Western counterintelligence, the name of Syria's Brig.
Gen. Mohammed Kholi cropped up insistently last week. The head of the Syrian Air Force's powerful intelligence network and an adviser to President Hafez el Assad, he is a familiar, if elusive, figure to the investigators in London, West Berlin and Paris who say they have come up with what would seem to be proof of his country's connection to recent terrorism operations.
In a London court, prosecutors said Nezar Hindawi, a 32-year-old Jordanian accused of trying to blow up an Israeli airliner, had testified in pretrial questioning that Syrian agents in Damascus furnished him with a Syrian passport, $12,000 and a bag with a false bottom that contained Czechoslovak-made explosives. Mr. Hindawi, they said, also mentioned that a Syrian air force intelligence officer, Col. Haitem Said, had taught him how to detonate the bomb. The prosecution contends that Mr. Hindawi also told police investigators that he had flown from the Syrian capital, stayed in a London hotel with Syrian security men and then given the bomb to his unwitting pregnant lover before she was to board an El Al flight to Israel in April. After the bomb was discovered by Israeli security agents, Mr. Hindawi fled to the Syrian Embassy and was greeted warmly by the Ambassador, according to the prosecution. In court last week, Mr. Hindawi repudiated most of his pretrial testimony.
Mr. Hindawi's brother, Ahmed Hazi, is expected to go on trial soon in West Berlin for the March bombing of an obscure German-Arab Friendship Society. Mr. Hazi told the police, they said, that he had picked up the explosives from the Syrian Embassy in East Berlin after his brother traveled to Damascus to clear the German attack with Syrian intelligence.
In France, the Government of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac has been trying to lean on the Syrians to restrain terrorists who killed 8 people and wounded more than 150 in a series of bombings in Paris last month. According to a source close to the investigation, the Government does not believe that the Syrians ordered the bombings, but it is convinced that General Kholi has previous connections to a clan of Lebanese Maronites suspected of being behind the attacks. France has implicitly threatened to publicize what it knows about Syria's involvement in terrorism if the bombings do not stop. At least one French official has met with General Kholi in Damascus to convey this message.
Mr. Assad's regime has not flinched from using terrorism to cut down its Arab enemies abroad and to try to dominate the Palestinian movement. It has also used violence to influence events in Lebanon and to strike at Israel. But it has not been Syria's habit to order attacks on civilian targets in Western Europe in the indiscriminate manner of the recent Paris bombings.
Four competing and mutually suspicious Syrian intelligence networks make it difficult to attribute every act of state-sponsored terrorism to Mr. Assad - and this ambiguity gives the President what is called deniability.
If someone in Syria did order the bombing of the El Al flight, Western intelligence experts believe that it was in retaliation for the Israeli interception of a Libyan jet in February. In that incident, the Israelis thought they had captured top Palestinian terrorists but found instead that they were holding seven Syrian politicians, including the assistant secretary general of the nominally ruling Baath Party. The Syrians were freed after 11 hours. Western analysts say it is possible that hotheads in General Kholi's operation sanctioned the El Al bombing to trigger a war between Syria and Israel.
''It's almost instinctive for them to use terrorism as a weapon and then to deny it,'' Paul Wilkinson, a terrorism expert at Aberdeen University, said of the Syrians.
In an interview this month in Time magazine, Mr. Assad accused Israeli agents of staging the aborted El Al bombing in London to discredit Syria and the Arab cause. ''If Syria had had a hand in it,'' Mr. Assad said coolly, ''the accused would not be facing trial in a British court.'' Mr. Assad conceded that Mr. Hindawi, though a Jordanian, had been issued a Syrian passport after having lost his Jordanian papers. But he described it as ''an ordinary matter that happens often in Arab countries.''
If Mr. Hindawi is found guilty of trying to blow up the Israeli airliner on the orders of the Syrian Government, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain may be obliged to take some kind of retaliatory action against Damascus. ''Any state which directs violence against another nation,'' Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe has declared, ''must meet the anger of the whole civilized world.'' The El Al bombing attempt would appear to fall into the category of aviation crime that the United States and its principal allies have agreed should lead to the severing of all air links. But it remains to be seen whether the West wants to take on President Assad, a powerful player in the Middle East and the Soviet Union's principal Arab ally.

Graphic

 
Photo of Nezar Hindawi (Reuters)


End of Document