Traditional GOP 'bump' after terrorism may elude Trump
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
June 14, 2016 Tuesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. Z2
Length: 537 words
Byline: Heidi M. Przybyla
Body


Donald Trump speaks Monday in Manchester, N.H.
The Orlando shooting is scrambling 2016 presidential election politics, but not necessarily in the way terrorism worries normally do.
Americans historically have favored Republicans to deal with terrorism threats, and Donald Trump is seeking to extend his party's traditional advantage.
The real estate mogul is doubling down on a proposed temporary ban on Muslims and escalating his attacks on President Obama, even speculating that perhaps Obama doesn't want to stop terrorism.
Alternatively, Hillary Clinton, who has called for national unity in the response to latest attack, potentially neutralized one of the Republican Party's biggest talking points in criticizing the Obama administration by using the words "radical Islamism."
"By using that phrase she's not going to be boxed in the way President Obama let himself be boxed in," said Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia's Center for Politics. In a Monday speech in Cleveland, Clinton also strongly reprimanded the Saudis and Kuwaitis for funding terrorism, a sign of her willingness to strike a more hawkish tone than she did in the Democratic primary.
Her response, particularly when compared with Trump's, may blunt any potential political advantage the presumptive GOP nominee may have otherwise gained, analysts said. The renewed emphasis on terrorism also highlights her record as the nation's former top diplomat and as a U.S. senator from New York following the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.
Trump, meanwhile, posted on Twitter that he appreciated "the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism."
"Nobody plays a good hand worse than Donald Trump," said Sabato. "The fact that he would tweet out how this tragedy benefited him," said Sabato, "it just tells you he has no real sense of what a president does and how a president does it," he said. "It's shocking, really."
The combination of Trump's response and Clinton's decision to distance herself from Obama may neutralize the Republican Party's traditional political advantage in the aftermath of terrorism, said John Hudak, a senior fellow in governance studies at the Brookings Institution.
"This issue could cut both ways for the Trump campaign," said Hudak. "Some will buy into his aggressive rhetoric on the issue favoring Muslim bans," said Hudak. "For others, fear, worry, and skepticism about Trump's seriousness and readiness to lead may push people away from him."
Clinton says the U.S.-led coalition in Syria and Iraq has made gains in the last month and that the U.S. should ramp up the air campaign. She also is calling for revisiting U.S. gun laws, including those that allow suspected terrorist sympathizers on the FBI's no-fly list to legally purchase assault weapons.
In a Monday speech in Cleveland, she criticized the Saudis and Kuwaitis for allowing funding to flow to "radical" schools and mosques "that have set too many young people on a path toward extremism." It was a stronger denunciation of Arab nations than she issued in the aftermath of the San Bernardino shootings.
Trump is pushing his Muslim ban. He also is escalating his attacks on Obama, saying on NBC's Today, that maybe he "doesn't want to get it."

Load-Date: June 14, 2016


End of Document