TRADE PROFITS WORTH MORE THAN HUMAN LIFE?
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
July 31, 1996, Wednesday


Copyright 1996 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 691 words
Byline: A.M. Rosenthal
Body


DOMESTIC terrorism is treason. International terrorism is war. It is
the duty of every democratic nation to protect itself and its people
from both. Until Western governments do so before, during and after
the commission of terrorism, and let its perpetrators know they always
will, terrorism will continue.
So far, these governments have taken some steps against domestic
terrorism, but in total insufficient. Against international terrorism
the West has failed to act with any efficacy at all. The chief reason
is that trade profits have become more important to Western society
than human lives or even national stability and safety.
That is about it, I think - the fundamental realities terrorists have
been teaching us for so long. And as they knew, the democracies have
had neither the attention span nor will power to stop terrorism either
domestic or international.
Terrorism lives on and on, not because of its ideological or physical
power but because the victim nations do not reach out to stop it.
Domestic terrorism is treason because its perpetrators use murder and
every other available form of violence to break their own government
and countrymen to their political goals and hatreds. International
terrorism is warfare because it is aimed at forcing foreigners to
accept the goals that the terrorist nations or movements could not
achieve through peaceful methods.
Americans are killed by international terrorists in barracks, in
embassies, in ambush, and now apparently once again in the skies - TWA
800 after Pan Am 103, the flight names burned into our history. And it
is faced with domestic terrorism in Atlanta, in every town where black
churches may have been burned by racists, and in states where armed
American bands openly threaten the lives of judges, politicians and
sheriffs.
If they have any sense, even of survival, Republican politicians and
civil liberties groups will work with, not against, President Clinton
to permit explosives to carry permanently identifiable markers, allow
the FBI to compete with killers using high-tech communication and try
to cut off funds for terrorists.
Domestic terrorism is a matter for law enforcement. It can be handled
- if Americans give up their mush-minded tenderness about how
persecuted the poor militia types feel, and if federal law enforcement
chiefs have not been too frightened by the waves of political pressure
and propaganda attacks against them.
International terrorism is not a matter primarily of law enforcement
but of national defense - the defense of the right of the democratic
peoples who are its targets to live without fear of attack at home and
abroad.
But the West, including America, has never marshaled its power or even
its anger against terrorism. One reason is that many Westerners are
intellectually slovenly enough to accept the terrorists' excuse that
they have to kill innocents to draw attention to their own grievances,
real or concocted. That puts the killers beyond the reach of ordinary
morality - above human judgment, safe forever in heaven's.
The major cause of Western lassitude about terrorism is that effective
anti-terrorism demands at least the refusal to enrich the nations that
help the terrorists. That would mean tough trade restrictions. Rather
than accept the loss of the terrorists' markets, European nations defy
American requests and laws to reduce investments in terrorist sponsors
like Libya and Iran.
Americans cannot be exceedingly holy about that, not as long as we
keep the terrorist wheel spinning by strengthening China, which sells
terrorist weapons to terrorist sponsors who transfer them to
terrorists to kill Americans.
Now Clinton has given to Al Gore the job of producing a new report on
terrorism. It will do no real good unless the vice president tells the
country whatever happened to the conclusion of a presidential
commission in 1990, after Pan Am 103 went down, and whether the
Clinton administration now agrees: Stopping terrorism means standing
ready to retaliate militarily against the sponsors of terrorism.
Everything else is commentary, of no great importance either to
terrorists or those they blow to small pieces.
Rosenthal is a columnist for The New York Times.

Load-Date: August 1, 1996


End of Document