TRADE CENTER PROSECUTOR DECRIES 'WAR OF TERRORISM'
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
October 5, 1993, Tuesday,
ALL EDITIONS


Copyright 1993 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front
Length: 608 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


A prosecutor pointed one-by-one to four Muslim fundamentalists charged in the World Trade Center bombing and said Monday their ''war of terrorism'' had shattered Americans' sense of security.
The Feb. 26 bombing, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000, was ''the single most destructive act of terrorism ever committed here in the United States,'' Assistant U.S. Attorney Gilmore Childers said in his opening statement.
He said no one will testify they saw the bomb being made or being driven in a rental van into a garage under the 110-story towers, but the evidence will tie the four defendants to each other and to the attack.
By Larry Neumeister  Associated Press
Some of the defendants - Mohammad Salameh, 26, Ahmad Ajaj, 27, Mahmud Abouhalima, 34, and Nidal Ayyad, 25 - shook their heads several times during the presentation but otherwise showed no emotion.
Defense lawyers maintained the men's innocence. Salameh's lawyer, Robert Precht, was slapped on the back and kissed by Salameh after he told jurors that ''truth is sometimes an elusive thing.'' Outside the courtroom, Precht said it was a ''stunning admission'' that there were no witnesses to the key events.
The bombing occurred as tens of thousands of people in the world's second tallest buildings were going about their business at 12:17 p.m., ''unaware that one minute later, at 12:18, their lives would change forever,'' Childers said.
The blast killed a locksmith, two maintenance supervisors, a dental supply salesman, a pregnant woman and a restaurant manager finishing lunch.
''From that point forward, Americans knew that 'this can happen to me, here in the United States,' '' the prosecutor told the jury in a courtroom packed with U.S. marshals, prosecutors, investigators and several friends of the defendants.
Other terrorist attacks in the United States have been deadlier, including a bombing on Wall Street in 1920 that killed 30.
The courthouse was ringed by federal and city police. U.S. District Judge Kevin Duffy told the anonymous jury, ''All of us together are about to start on a great adventure.''
The prosecution tried to link the Egyptian-born Abouhalima directly to the bomb-making, saying his shoe was found with a sulfuric acid burn on it. But in his opening statement, Abouhalima's defense attorney, Hassen Ibn Abdellah, asked the jury if it was not possible to get sulfur on a shoe by stepping on a cigarette.
The prosecutor said Ajaj, a Palestinian, entered this country with a false Swedish passport and ''a terrorist's library,'' including bomb-making manuals, notebooks and cassettes. He was in jail at the time of the explosion, serving six months for immigration fraud.
Defense lawyer Austin V. Campriello said Ajaj used the materials when he went to fight against the Soviet Union and communism in Afghanistan.
If convicted of conspiracy, the four men face a maximum penalty of life in prison without parole. Two other suspects are fugitives; a seventh has been severed from the trial for reasons that remain unclear.
The trial is expected to last for the rest of the year.
Abouhalima and Salameh are unindicted co-conspirators in another case in which 15 others have been charged in an elaborate scheme to topple the U.S. government through bombings, murders and kidnappings around New York City. Among those charged with conspiracy is Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, the blind Egyptian cleric who prosecutors say also inspired those accused in the Trade Center bombing.
The prosecutor described each man's alleged role and his ties to the three others: how the defendants bought and mixed chemicals to create the bomb and carried it into the Trade Center.

Load-Date: July 19, 1995


End of Document