Trade Center Mysteries Deepen;
Trial Raises Tantalizing Issues but Leaves Them Unresolved
The New York Times
November 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Metropolitan Desk
Section: Section B;; Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Column 2;
Length: 1310 words
Byline: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

By RICHARD BERNSTEIN
Body


The mysteries have begun to pile up: two shadowy figures who returned to Iraq after the World Trade Center was bombed; a Domino's pizza worker traveling long distance on first-class airline tickets; altered passports; fake I.D. papers; bomb-making manuals.
All are elements in the World Trade Center bombing trial, which finished its sixth week of testimony last week. But while the mysterious Iraqis and the forged passports have been mentioned in the Government's case against the four defendants, there has been very little clear explanation of their meaning, or how they tie together.
Bound by rules of evidence, limited to the specific criminal activities attributed to the four defendants, the trial has so far had the perverse effect of deepening, rather than resolving, some of the more persistent mysteries of the World Trade Center attack.
Who, if anyone, supplied the forged documents? Did the defendants act alone or were they supported by another group, or perhaps a foreign Government? And above all, what was their motive?
"In reading all the accounts of the trial, what strikes me is that something is missing," said Bruce Hoffman, a terrorism specialist at the Rand Corporation, a research institute. "An incomplete picture is emerging. It's harder than ever to put it in a wider context of why these particular guys on their own would have done this."
On trial are four men -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima, and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- accused of having conspired to make and transport the bomb that exploded in the World Trade Center on Feb. 26, killing six people and causing millions of dollars in damages. The case focuses on law enforcement, on the evidence against the defendants, which, since no one actually saw any of them plant the bomb, is largely circumstantial.
And that means that many questions will be raised and then left unanswered. For example, there are the various fake passports that have surfaced in the case. Mr. Ajaj, a Palestinian who worked at a pizza place in Houston, was found to be carrying four passports -- as well as six manuals on bomb-making and other elements of warfare -- when he came to the United States from Pakistan last Sept. 1. In addition to his real Jordanian passport, Mr. Ajaj was carrying Swedish, British and Saudi Arabian passports, under different names.
Where did a 26-year-old refugee get four passports? What did he intend to do with them? How did he have the money to be traveling on a $2,500 first-class ticket from Pakistan? Who gave him the military manuals? The questions suggest themselves, but because the prosecutors do not have to prove anything beyond that the defendants conspired to blow up the building, the trial does not promise to get into the answers.
But the trial has produced plenty of hints about the existence of a kind of penumbra of terrorism far larger than the four men accused of actually carrying out the blast. Indeed, some experts have concluded that the four men, if they were responsible for the attack at all, were likely only foot soldiers following the commands of higher-ranking plotters elsewhere.
Some specialists speculate, for example, that Iraq may have ultimately been behind the attack, though they say there is no clear proof.
Central to the theory is the role played by two Iraqis in the case, who have been indicted in the bombing but who fled the country after the explosion. One is Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, who arrived in the United States on Sept. 1 last year on the same plane as Mr. Ajaj. He was holding an Iraqi passport but no American visa. He was nonetheless allowed to enter the country when he applied for political asylum.
Six months later, right after the bombing, Mr. Yousef, whose fingerprints were on the military manuals in Mr. Ajaj's possession and who is believed by the authorities to have helped build the bomb, fled the country and is believed by investigators to have returned to Iraq, although his present whereabouts are unknown.
The other Iraqi is Abdul Rahman Yasin, who was questioned by the F.B.I. after the bombing, and then he, too, left the country, also going to Iraq, according to a family friend.
 
How Much Did Iraq Know?
 Terrorism experts are struck by the fact that two Iraqis came to the country a few months before the bombing and both then reportedly returned to Iraq after it. Given the tight control of Iraq by the regime of Saddam Hussein, it seems to some experts unlikely that Mr. Yousef and Mr. Yasin could have carried out their activities without the knowledge of the Iraqi authorities.
"It's almost inconceivable, given the nature of Iraqi society, that somebody could be involved in an act as dramatic as the W.T.C. bombing and then go back to Iraq, unless it were done under Iraqi direction," said Laurie Mylroie, a scholar at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "It's a totalitarian state."
And if the Iraqi authorities did know of their activities, could the attack on the trade center have been, at least in part, an officially approved act of vengeance against the United States for the bombing of Baghdad during the Gulf war?
 
No Clear Conclusions
 But other clues make it impossible to draw clear conclusions. There is, for one thing, the upcoming trial of 15 Muslim men, grouped around a blind Egyptian-born cleric, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, who are accused of plotting to bomb several targets in New York, including the United Nations and the Hudson River tunnels.  The indictment indicates that the plots were thwarted before they could be carried out.
Transcripts of tapes of conversations between F.B.I. agents and an informer, Emad Salem, who infiltrated the group around Mr. Abdel Rahman, show further intriguing international connections and ambitions.
Mr. Salem, for example, told one of his F.B.I. handlers that Mr. Abdel Rahman had contacts with representatives of Hamas, the extreme Palestinian organization, in Pakistan, and even seemed able to give orders to Hamas members playing some undisclosed role in the Afghanistan war.
Mr. Salem also says that Mr. Abdel Rahman gave orders to his followers to assassinate the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, during an official visit to the United States last year, though the plot was dropped when Mr. Mubarak failed to make an expected visit to New York.
Perhaps, some experts say, Iraqi agents used the group around Mr. Abdel Rahman to enable them to carry out their purposes, at the same time supplying the men for whom Mr. Abdel Rahman was a spiritual guide with the means to carry out objectives of their own.
But while Mr. Abdel Rahman and some of the other defendants in the two terror cases are deeply religious Muslims with a religiously inspired hatred of Mr. Mubarak, they are, at the same time, not believed to be friendly to the regime of Mr. Hussein, who is one of the most secular of the major Arab leaders.
 
Tantalizing Hints
 The trial itself, which is to continue today in spite of what apparently were suicide attempts last week by Mr. Ajaj and by a defendant in the upcoming case, has focused on the clues gathered from the trade center rubble and the movements of figures like Mr. Ajaj and Mr. Yousef. As it does so, it throws off tantalizing hints of other matters and then drops them before coming up with answers.
Among the biggest question is why people like the four defendants, newly established in the United States and working hard to build better lives for themselves and their families, would have become involved in terrorism against their new country.
Here, too, various specialists have offered various explanations: that they were motivated by religious fervor, that they were manipulated, or perhaps paid, by foreign intelligence agents. But, because few if any of the defendants are expected to take the stand, it is not likely that those questions will be put directly to them in the courtroom.

Load-Date: November 15, 1993


End of Document