TRADE CENTER CASE A TRIAL RUN FOR LAWYERS
 Philadelphia Daily News
March 7, 1994 Monday PM EDITION


Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 07
Length: 487 words
Byline: Larry Neumeister, Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


Now that the World Trade Center bombing trial is over, a second terrorism case takes center stage with what the first trial lacked - a turncoat, a star witness and lots of secretly taped conversations.
The trade center bombing was the most shocking terrorist attack on America in modern times, but prosecutors plan to show it was only part of a much bigger conspiracy when 15 men go on trial this fall.
These men, all Muslim fundamentalists, planned a "war of urban terrorism against the United States," according to an indictment.
The most prominent defendant is Sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, a blind Muslim cleric who has built a large following in the metropolitan area with fiery fundamentalist rhetoric.
The turncoat is defendant Abdo Mohammed Haggag, who has agreed to cooperate with the prosecution in the conspiracy case. And the star witness is Emad Salem, a government informant who allegedly will be heard on the tapes
discussing various plots to bring down the government through bombings, kidnappings and assassinations.
The trade center case ended Friday with the convictions of all four Muslim extremists on trial in the Feb. 26, 1993, bombing, which killed six people and injured 1,000. They face life in prison without parole when they are sentenced on May 4.
Prosecutors say the 15 defendants plotted to bomb military installations, the United Nations and tunnels and bridges linking New York and New Jersey; to kill FBI agents, judicial officials and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, and to kidnap former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. With Friday's convictions, the government won its argument that international terrorism exists in the United States. This probably will be important groundwork that prosecutors will capitalize on in the coming trial.
Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University, said the convictions "put the government on a roll."
"It's like a play coming onto Broadway with raves from its run in Boston," he said.
The trade center trial was remarkable for its number of witnesses, 207, and more than 1,000 pieces of evidence.
But the conspiracy trial promises to be a lot more interesting.
The inspiration for the plot allegedly came from Abdel-Rahman. But before the alleged conspirators got to carry out their plans, FBI agents raided a Queens garage in June and caught five men mixing explosives with Salem, the government informant.
It appeared the government would have to rely heavily on Salem and hundreds of hours of secretly recorded conversations among him and the defendants, and government officers. But prosecutors got a boost in the fall when defendant
Haggag agreed to cooperate.
Abdel-Rahman probably will play a leading role in the trial. He commands a special presence in the courtroom, where he is permitted to wear his clergyman's clothing. He has been held since last summer in a specially built section of the federal Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan.

Notes

NATION

Load-Date: October 18, 2002


End of Document