Trade Center Bombing Arrest Shows Breakthrough on Terrorism
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
February 10, 1995, Friday


Copyright 1995 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: THE U. S.; NATIONAL; Pg. 5
Length: 296 words
Byline: Ron Scherer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body


WITH the arrest of Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the alleged
''mastermind'' of the World Trade Center bombing, the United States
will be mounting yet another major terrorism trial.
Mr. Yousef, who was arrested on Tuesday in Pakistan, was
arraigned yesterday in the federal district court.
The FBI had
placed $ 2 million ransom on Yousef's capture and he was the subject
of a massive world-wide manhunt. At his arraignment, Yousef pleaded
not guilty.
Yousef's trial could be among the most revealing of the bombing
trials since the FBI considers him to be a professional terrorist.
The FBI believes he was involved in a plot to assassinate the Pope
during the Pontiff's recent trip to the Philippines.
Terrorism expert Michael Dobkowski of Hobart and William Smith
College calls Yousef's arrest ''a major breakthrough'' in the
battle against terrorism. ''It is unlikely he will talk but the
process of capturing him and the connections in New York and
Pakistan and wherever else and the safe houses he had will be
assimilated and will be useful for the future,'' he says.
Mr. Dobkowski says those connections will help the FBI better
understand the terrorism network. In fact, there are unconfirmed
reports that he was captured in part from information received from
one of the convicted bombers. ''It is part of the break in the
network,'' Dobkowski notes.
During last year's trial of four radical Middle Eastern men
convicted of participating in the 1993 bombing, Yousef was
described by defense lawyers as the ''evil genius'' behind the
bombing. He fled to Pakistan six hours after the bombing.
The government's case will likely use many of the same exhibits
that helped convict four other men. Yousef roomed with Mohammed
Salameh, who rented the van that carried the bomb into the basement
of the World Trade Center.

Load-Date: February 13, 1995


End of Document