Traffic woes leave Navy bases exposed; Service will address issue during annual terrorism exercise
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 18, 2012 Sunday
Final Edition


Copyright 2012 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A-21
Length: 321 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: NORFOLK 
Body


NORFOLK - When the Navy trains for responding to a terrorist attack on one of its U.S. bases, it's not just explosives, gunmen and suspicious fishing boats that the service's top leaders are concerned about. It's the traffic.
That vulnerability was highlighted in major Navy ports like those in San Diego, Mayport, Fla., and in the Pacific Northwest during last year's annual exercise, when heightened security at bases resulted in severe gridlock. Navy officials say that traffic leaves sailors waiting to get on base vulnerable to attack and can keep emergency vehicles from being able to quickly respond.
Navy officials are vowing to fix the traffic problems for this year's weeklong exercise, which begins Monday and affects every Navy installation in the continental United States.
"Last year, the admiral said, 'Well look, we need to know what would happen in the real world if this happened during rush hour.' And so we did it, and we found out that we had some issues that needed to be addressed," said Capt. Matthew Colburn, director of fleet anti-terrorism at U.S. Fleet Forces Command in Norfolk.
Some people waiting to get on base in already traffic-snarled regions complained of sitting in their cars for hours as security personnel thoroughly checked IDs, inspected vehicles and occasionally used bomb-sniffing dogs. A problem was people coming onto base who didn't need to be there.
This year, the Navy is encouraging those who can telecommute to do so, among other things.
The Navy said it has been invited by the Virginia Department of Transportation to have a liaison at its traffic command post -- where cameras monitor roadways -- during the exercise, as well as in the event of any emergencies. VDOT officials said they would work closely but did not specify how, citing security concerns.
Copyright © 2012, The Richmond Times-Dispatch and may not be republished without permission. E-mail library@timesdispatch.com

Load-Date: March 23, 2012


End of Document