Tragedy of terrorism hits Jerusalem family twice
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
March 4, 1996, Monday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 07A
Length: 299 words
Byline: Charles W. Holmes; STAFF CORRESPONDENT
Dateline: Jerusalem
Body


An Israeli couple, Morris and Hadassah Chuna, last week buried their niece, a 19-year-old soldier named Merav Nahum who died eight days ago when a powerful bomb devastated Bus No. 18 in Jerusalem's Sunday morning rush hour.
In their grief, they privately counted themselves lucky. Their own daughter had lingered at home that day and missed the bus she normally would have taken to her job.
Their luck ran out Sunday.
Galit Chuna, 18, was on Bus No. 18 when a bomb ripped it to pieces Sunday on a downtown Jerusalem street - on the same route at the same hour as the suicide bombing that took the lives of her cousin and 25 others Feb. 25.
Galit Chuna's parents, siblings and relatives kept vigil at a Jerusalem hospital after she was rushed there for emergency chest surgery. She was listed in very serious condition Sunday night.
Amid tears, hugs and cups of coffee, the family waited. Counselors and nurses attempted to comfort them. Strangers patted their shoulders and offered words of support.
But mostly, they were left to ponder why at a time of peacemaking their family had paid such a high price in blood.
"Everything is happening because of politics!" Hadassah Chuna cried in anguish while sitting in a busy hallway at Hadassah-Ein Kerem Hospital. The family was unable to find space inside a waiting room already filled with the family members of other victims.
After last week's bombing, the family discussed the risks of riding public buses - the favored target of Islamic militants opposed to peace accords signed by Israel and the Palestinians in 1993.
Galit Chuna cited a lack of alternatives to reach her job as a secretary at a social security office in central Jerusalem.
Recalled Leah Gonen, an aunt: "She said she wasn't afraid because it's her country and she has to take the bus."

Load-Date: July 17, 1996


End of Document