Training to focus on domestic terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
September 25, 1999, Saturday


Copyright 1999 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 451 words
Byline: By Amy Joi BrysonDeseret News staff writer
Body


Firefighters, law enforcement and other emergency response crews from throughout the state are learning more this week about how to combat domestic terrorism.
The Salt Lake Fire Department, in conjunction with the Department of Defense, is offering a weeklong course in a variety of topics to help Utah emergency crews prepare for a wide-scale domestic terrorism event.
The classes are part of a continuing effort by the federal government to invest resources and expertise in anti-terrorism measures. Last year, a similar class was held in Salt Lake City and this year, Salt Lake was among 130 host cities selected to receive the training.
Salt Lake Fire Capt. Devin Villa said firefighters from as far south as Juab County to as far north as Boise are in the classes. The classes range from dealing with hazardous materials to spotting immediate signs of domestic terrorism and preparedness.
Villa said the idea is to give firefighters and others the best tools possible to deal with such a catastrophe -- tools that will ultimately result in better medical care for patients and diminish the risks to people responding to the incident.
Classes are taught by Department of Defense experts, Villa said, and participants in this week's course will go on to teach others in their own department. The goal is to have all emergency personnel eventually trained in domestic terrorism response.
Salt Lake Police Lt. Phil Kirk said the classes are a good way to reinforce the lessons learned in this summer's freak tornado and also will reveal new tactics that public safety people can employ.
"I think there are very strong similarities between domestic terrorism and a natural disaster like the tornado in terms of the response. There has to be a lot of cooperative effort in place in order to handle such a huge threat to public safety. The type of training that goes into domestic terrorism requires everyone to be working together, with all resources, because no single agency will be able to handle one effectively on their own."
The goal of the federal mandate is for cities to thwart chemical and biological attacks that can cause massive casualties.
Villa said he is hopeful the 300 or so participants will learn to recognize acts of terrorism, which may not be as blatant as the April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah building in Oklahoma City, Okla. He said there have been instances in which deliberate chemical releases have sickened groups of people, and the trick is deciding if it terrorism or a natural event.
Last year, some of the sessions focused on the anti-terrorism efforts at the Summer Olympics in Atlanta and included presentations from investigators who worked on the Oklahoma City bombing.

Load-Date: September 25, 1999


End of Document