Training FBI conducts terrorism exercise at Frederick Towne Mall
The Frederick News-Post (Maryland)
May 7, 2014 Wednesday


Copyright 2014 The Frederick News-Post
Distributed by McClatchy-Tribune Business News
Section: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS
Length: 313 words
Byline: Sylvia Carignan, The Frederick News-Post, Md.
Body


May 07--Law enforcement officials acted out a terrorism event, complete with a SWAT team, suspects and store employees, on Tuesday morning at Frederick Towne Mall.
About 50 law enforcement officials were assigned roles, wearing large name tags such as "mall security" and "hostage."
FBI media coordinator Amy Thoreson said the role-players were not trained before the event.
"We literally put a sign around their neck and said, 'You're a shopper,'" she said.
At the start of the event, a loud "boom" went off inside the mall, simulating an attack. Frederick police Lt. Dwight Sommers said the sound was intended to be that of a pipe bomb.
About three hours later, responders were slowly finding out details about the attack. People playing active shooters had been directed to be inside the mall, and shoppers and store employees were evacuated.
Thoreson said the SWAT team on-site would not use any kind of projectiles in the exercise.
"Although this is a defunct mall, we want to be careful about what we're doing," she said.
According to the FBI, the exercises are part of a training exercise series in partnership with the Department of Homeland Security, not a response to any current threat.
Thoreson said they picked Frederick Towne Mall for the exercise because they would be "unhindered" by actual shoppers.
Maryland State Police, Department of Homeland Security staff, the FBI, staff from the Office of the State Fire Marshal, the Frederick County Sheriff's Office and the Frederick Police Department were among about 100 people who responded to the simulated attack as part of the exercise.
The suspect surrendered and all hostages were released, Sommers said.
Follow Sylvia Carignan on Twitter: @SylviaCarignan.
___ (c)2014 The Frederick News-Post (Frederick, Md.) Visit The Frederick News-Post (Frederick, Md.) at www.fredericknewspost.com Distributed by MCT Information Services

Load-Date: May 7, 2014


End of Document