Trampling Rights to Fight Terrorism
The New York Times
September 29, 2006 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 630 words
Body


To the Editor:
  Re ''Rushing Off a Cliff'' (editorial, Sept. 28):
You say that the broad definition of ''illegal enemy combatant'' in the antiterrorism bill railroaded through Congress could subject legal residents of the United States ''to summary arrest and indefinite detention with no hope of appeal'' and that ''the president could give the power to apply this label to anyone he wanted.'' 
  Detainees would lose the basic right to challenge their imprisonment, and anyone could be locked up forever, with no reason given and no notification to friends and family.
  Many of us are bitterly opposed to the current administration and have angered those who support the disaster in Iraq. What is to prevent letters, lies and innuendoes from being sent to the authorities accusing us of being illegal enemy combatants and a danger to the country? 
  What redress would we have? I tell myself that this could never happen here, but I fear we are on a very slippery slope.

Mabel J. Dudeney
Norwalk, Conn., Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  Terrorism poses a grave and different kind of threat to the Republic. Yet it is no more grave than, say, Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union. 
  No one has explained how it is different in ways that justify condoning torture, rewriting international law, discarding principles of due process and human decency, ceding judicial authority to the president, and putting our troops and reputation in further jeopardy. 
  The president's pre-election antiterrorism legislation will do these things. It is a measure of cravenness that members of both parties would vote for this bill for political expediency.

Christopher J. Mugel
Richmond, Va., Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  ''Rushing Off a Cliff'' is off the mark. I say that those who try to tear down our rights do not deserve to have their rights protected by us. 
  But you say otherwise -- that we must use judicious restraint and care to fight an enemy who is willing to fight without restraint and to win at all cost. 
  I don't think we can win fighting that way. In trying to vigorously protect our enemy's rights, we will surely lose ours.

Bill Decker
San Diego, Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  We have reached the point where we must demand that the president uphold the Constitution. 
  In the past, when a politician rose to the highest office in the land, it was taken for granted that he would put the nation first. Unfortunately, this is no longer the case. 
  Unless we act and demand that our elected representatives act in our behalf, we will have an executive with unlimited power.

Bob Geary
Portland, Ore., Sept. 28, 2006

To the Editor:
  The day the detainee bill is signed will be a day that will live in dishonor in our history. The practices that appalled us in the past when used by sleazy regimes will be incorporated into our legal heritage. 
  If we do not reject the responsible party in power, we will indict ourselves as accomplices before decent world opinion.

(Rev.) Connell J. Maguire
Riviera Beach, Fla., Sept. 28, 2006

The writer is a retired Navy captain.

To the Editor:
  You say that the ''Bush administration uses Republicans' fear of losing their majority to push through ghastly ideas about antiterrorism that will make American troops less safe and do lasting damage to our 217-year-old nation of laws.'' This is correct, but incomplete. 
  This administration seeks to strike fear in the hearts of all Americans so it can maintain total control. It uses the issue of security to create insecurity, while Democrats remain silent. 
  In 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt said that ''the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.'' The contrast is striking with today, when we seem to fear everything and reward the political opportunists who thrive on it. 

Morris Roth
Fort Lee, N.J., Sept. 28, 2006

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 29, 2006


End of Document