Trauma Doctors Gain Training For Attack
New York Sun (Archive)
August 9, 2004 Monday


Copyright 2004 The New York Sun, Two SL, LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1
Length: 734 words
Byline: By JILL GARDINER, Staff Reporter of the Sun
Body


More than 150 New York City trauma doctors, hospital administrators, nurses, and emergency workers have gotten a primer in how to handle a conventional terrorist explosion like the ones that have ripped through buses in Tel Aviv and trains in Madrid.
In a conference hosted by the Greater New York Hospital Association titled "Blast Trauma, Makeshift Bombs, and Mega-Casualty Terrorism" last week, three leading blast-injury experts laid out the nuts-and-bolts of how to deal with such an attack here.
The event, which comes on the heels of another terror alert and just weeks before the Republican National Convention, was designed to provide a historical context to civilian bloodbaths and give New York's medical community a better idea of what to expect and how to respond in the event of a catastrophic blast here.
"Conventional terrorism is far more common," a blast-injury research analyst at Emory University's Rollins School of Public Health, Catherine Lee, told The New York Sun." We really wanted to bring that message to the mainstream because there are many who are not really knowledgeable about it. There is a bio-terrorism lean" when it comes to preparation.
Ms. Lee and her colleagues, all part of a small international community of experts who study bombing injuries, say knowing how to treat bio-terrorism victims is important, but they say attention also must be paid to preparing for traditional explosions.
During a four-hour presentation in a conference room at GNYHA's office on West 57th Street, they detailed past explosions, talked about injuries common among blast victims, and shared Power-Point slides peppered with pie charts, graphs, and statistics.
Their views about blast-explosion probability, they say, hinge on the numbers. In 2001, bombs were used in 75% of the 348 terror attacks worldwide, with conventional weapons employed in 98% of the cases.
The panel outlined three types of blast explosions - open space, confined space, and structural - and discussed the unique injuries associated with each.
In confined-space explosions, like those on buses, pressure from the impact often causes hemorrhage in the lungs and gastrointestinal tract that aren't immediately visible. "Arming" medical teams with that information gives them a "quick and dirty" way to determine what needs to be done and how to efficiently take action, Ms. Lee said.
Open blasts, like those in outdoor plazas, often result in secondary shrapnel and debris wounds. And structural bombings, such as the 1995 Oklahoma City explosion, leave victims at greater risk for crush injuries.
"It is really wise to look at bio-terrorism because the risk ratio is high," Ms. Lee said. "All it takes is one person with smallpox to get on an airplane at Chicago O'Hare, and it spreads across the country. What we are saying is that we need to be prepared for conventional terrorism, too. In Madrid, I don't think anyone expected a 3/11 like our 9/11."
Until now, Ms. Lee said, American civilians have not thought much about these types of explosions. That has been left to the military. Much of the training since September 11 has, in fact, included teaching staff to whip on Haz-Mat suits and to use decontamination equipment.
The president and CEO of New York-Presbyterian, Dr. Herbert Pardes, said hospitals need to be prepared for everything.
"I'd rather be over prepared and worry about it later," said Dr. Pardes, who praised GNYHA for hosting the event. "My opinion is that we have to be just as prepared for blasts as we do for anthrax."
The event, co-sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, comes as area hospitals are readying for the Republican convention. Since September 11, GNYHA has met weekly with members about terrorism preparedness.
More recently, it has listened in on Secret Service presentations and participated in drills with the New York Police Department.
GNYHA officials said the blast event wasn't planned exclusively for the Republican convention, but rather as one more opportunity to enhance hospital preparation. Still, they say it was good timing.
"We planned this program several weeks ago," GNYHA's senior vice president and general counsel, Susan Waltman, said. "But we are very cognizant that while we've spent a lot of times on bio-terrorism and chemical events, that the most likely event still might be an explosive event, so we went back to the basics, so to speak."

Load-Date: August 9, 2004


End of Document