TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Fighting Terrorism: Airport Progress Report
The New York Times
July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Travel Desk 
Section: Section 5; ; Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Travel Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 333 words
Byline: By ADAM BRYANT 

By ADAM BRYANT 
Body


Airline passengers in the United States may have to wait two to five years for the implementation of proposed new systems for detecting explosives hidden in baggage at the nation's airports, according to a report by the General Accounting Office.
The report also found that while the Federal Aviation Administration has developed promising ideas for making airplanes more likely to survive an explosion, those ideas are still several years from being put into practice.
Published this spring, the report comes five years after the terrorist bombing of Pan Am flight 103, which prompted Congress to pass the Aviation Security Improvement Act in 1990. The act called for the F.A.A. to speed up the development of devices to guard against such terrorist acts. It also said that the new devices should be in place by November 1993.
The F.A.A., stated the General Accounting Office report, "has made little progress toward meeting the act's goal for deploying new explosive-detection systems."
The report also described as a "weakness" the fact that the Federal Aviation Administration has decided to test new explosive-detection systems in its own laboratories rather than at an airport, raising doubts about whether the systems can perform reliably in day-to-day use.
Other weaknesses it described included the F.A.A.'s failure to sufficiently consider how the various technologies that comprise a detection system would be linked. Because no single device can meet all the F.A.A.'s certification requirements, several technologies would have to be integrated to form a complete explosive-detection system. The report faulted the F.A.A. for planning to rely on airlines to combine the various devices.
A screening system to automatically check airline luggage for explosives, described as the first of its kind, was installed recently at Heathrow Airport in London by BAA, the company that operates seven airports in Britain. It is used only for baggage transferred between international flights.
   ADAM BRYANT

Load-Date: July 10, 1994


End of Document