Travel Overseas Picking Up
The New York Times
March 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section 1;; Section 1; Page 31; Column 3; Financial Desk; Column 3;
Length: 578 words
Byline: By AGIS SALPUKAS

By AGIS SALPUKAS
Body


Some airlines and travel agents with business overseas have reported a surge of bookings as the Persian Gulf war drew to a close. They said that while some Americans were still holding back for fear of terrorism, many others were now comfortable enough to travel abroad again, particularly because of the discounts being offered.
"Their tentative plans are becoming firm," said Steven E. Heydt, vice president of marketing for Liberty Travel, a large chain of travel agencies on the East Coast. "There is a general understanding that it's O.K. to travel again."
"Today we're getting calls for Italy, France," he said. The calls for bookings on cruise tours have at times been so heavy that agents have been unable to get through to the cruise lines still taking reservations by phone.
 
Calls Piled Up
 Carriers including Lufthansa, Air France and Pan American World Airways report bookings up significantly since President Bush in an address to the nation Wednesday night stopped the allied drive and proposed a permanent cease-fire.
Kerstin Sabene, a spokeswoman for Lufthansa, said the airline's reservation agents recorded a jump in the number of calls after the speech and had to put many callers on hold. "It was the busiest since the war broke out as far as telephone calls," she said.
She added that the higher level of calls had continued and that bookings had been running at normal levels, compared with a decline of 20 percent after the gulf war began Jan. 17.
Callers could also have been attracted by lower fares that took effect last Monday, she said. The fares included a $508 round-trip fare during midweek from New York to Frankfurt that must be booked and paid for by March 15. Before the discount the same fare would be $736 round trip.
 
Pan Am Encouraged
 Jeffrey F. Kriendler, vice president of corporate communications at Pan Am, said the carrier had its best day on Thursday since August, when Iraq invaded Kuwait. "The last four days have been encouraging," he said.
He said one reason for the higher bookings was that an offer of a round trip to many points in Europe for $238 was scheduled to expire yesterday. To qualify one had to fly on Pan Am before March 1.
Jim Ferri, director of corporate communications at Air France, said an increase in calls on Wednesday night had held up and that bookings were running slightly ahead of similar days last year.
Laura De Maio, director for public relations at Thomas Cook Travel, one of the largest groups of agencies in the nation, said an upturn in bookings over the last two weeks was continuing to hold up.
 
Travel Curbs Eased
 Many companies are beginning to relax or eliminate travel restrictions imposed during the war, she said.
Caribbean cruises are the most popular choice among travelers, she said. The promotional deals, some of which allow two travelers for the price of one or offer discounts of up to 50 percent, are attracting many vacationers.
But some travelers are still worried about terrorism and are booking vacations within the United States or close to it, she said.
The International Air Transport Association, an industry group that represents 200 airlines, estimated yesterday that the industry had lost $1 billion in January, mainly because of the crisis in the gulf.
Gunter Eser, the director general of the group, said traffic declined by 12 percent in January from a year earlier. "However, there are signs that business for the airlines is now starting slowly to pick up again," he said.

Load-Date: March 2, 1991


End of Document