TRAVEL ADVISORY ON THE GULF CRISIS;
Stepped Up Airport Security: Reports From Abroad and the U.S.
The New York Times
February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Travel Desk
Section: Section 5;; Section 5; Page 3; Column 3; Travel Desk; Column 3;
Length: 306 words
Byline: By BETSY WADE

By BETSY WADE
Body


Civil airports turned into instant barometers of national anxieties about terrorism when war began in the Persian Gulf Jan. 16. The bustle of passengers faded and some air terminals became uneasily still as travel overseas dropped off precipitately and domestic travel thinned. Uniformed guards multiplied. Close-in parking areas were blockaded to limit damage from any car bombs.
The Federal Aviation Administration for the first time shifted all 435 domestic United States airports from security Level Two to Level Four, the top point, with rules limiting access by nonpassengers and requiring tighter scrutiny for them and their luggage, as well as frequent checks of trash cans, bathrooms and other places where bombs might be hidden. By Jan. 28, when this was written, there was no sign that these precautions might be relaxed.
Overseas, airports that have been the scene of terrorism -- and others -- put into place stringent controls. Travelers were startled to see soldiers in camouflage uniforms and armored vehicles at Heathrow Airport in London. The Athens airport was closed to nonpassengers. Rules in Europe, similar to the F.A.A. regulations, were coordinated through an information network created earlier to combat terrorism. In Germany, passengers were warned they might not be able to take aboard laptop computers or even hair dryers; at Frankfurt, if cameras were large, unfamiliar or caused concern at security barriers, they had to be left behind. United States passengers were warned of this.
American passengers by and large did not complain, but said they welcomed added protection. Although all were summoned to their departure points early to permit more careful security checks, there were few delays and after the first day, no missed flights because the paucity of passengers meant that the procedures went fast.

Graphic

 
Photo: Sign of the times: curbside Baggage check-in closed at Delta terminal, Newark International Airport. (Johnathan Atkin for The New York Times)

Load-Date: February 3, 1991


End of Document