Travel Advisory;
Insurance Plan Covers War And Terrorism
The New York Times
March 31, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Travel Desk
Section: Section 5;; Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk; Column 1;
Length: 285 words
Body


Although fears about international travel have subsided somewhat since the end of the Persian Gulf war, travel industry executives say people going to politically restive countries remain as nervous as ever about terrorism. One company, in what it calls a first-of-its-kind service, says it will insure people against injury or death caused by war or terrorist acts.
The company, WorldCare Travel Assistance Association, based in Los Angeles, said it started its program in late February, just after the war. The idea, it said, is to fill a gap in insurance programs that specifically exclude coverage to victims of war and terrorism. Travelers buying the new service, called WarCare, are covered for 31 days, and must also subscribe to the company's WorldCare program, which includes baggage insurance, toll-free telephone assistance, basic medical insurance and other services. The basic WorldCare package is $86 for five to eight days' travel.
WorldCare, a subsidiary of the Transamerica Occidental Life Insurance Company, said the new service would assure travelers who are the victims of terrorism and war adequate medical treatment, even if they must be taken to another country. It also provides benefits of up to $150,000 for death or dismemberment.
Although the rates are subject to change, it said WarCare would now cost most for individuals traveling to Israel or Bahrain ($407). Coverage is less expensive ($283) for those going to Libya, Lebanon, Bangladesh or Afghanistan or Pakistan. Less expensive is the WarCare package for people going to Egypt, Syria, Morroco, Nigeria, El Salvador, Vietnam or Cambodia ($142). For most European countries, the service costs $71.
More information: (800) 253-1877.

Load-Date: March 31, 1991


End of Document