TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT; Threat of Terrorism Hurts Kenya Tourism
 The New York Times
January 4, 2004 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 5; Column 1; Travel Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 904 words
Byline:  By MARC LACEY
Dateline: NAIROBI, Kenya  
Body


DANGERS abound in Kenya. There are malarial mosquitoes, especially along the shores of Lake Victoria and the Indian Ocean coast. There are pockmarked roadways, which rundown vehicles navigate with abandon. There are lions and hippos and buffalo, all of which can be deadly.
     But Kenya's rugged nature has always been one of its attractions. Here was a taste of Africa, wild but not too wild. 
 Recently, however, many tourists have begun to regard this premier safari spot as too dangerous for their taste. It is not the mosquitoes or the roads or the beasts that are scaring them away. And it is not the street crime, which has increased over the years with the country's poverty. Most fearsome of all are the terrorists who have twice struck Kenya and who, some officials believe, may strike again.
The most recent public announcement issued by the American Embassy here on Dec. 2 urged Americans in Kenya to avoid downtown Nairobi, which has traditionally been the launching pad for safaris into the country's interior. The State Department had already urged Americans in a Sept. 25 travel warning to defer nonessential travel to the country. It was the 1998 bombing of the American embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, that first put Kenya on the map as a target of terrorism. In 2002, terrorists struck again, this time bombing a beach-front hotel north of Mombasa that was popular among Israeli tourists. The attackers failed in their nearly simultaneous attempt to use surface-to-air missiles to down an airliner full of Israeli tourists.
In its recent announcement, the embassy said it had received an anonymous warning detailing terrorists' threats aimed at the Stanley Hotel and the Hilton Hotel, two popular downtown establishments. American officials said in interviews that they had received an e-mail message suggesting that a truck with a bomb would be used in an attack on the hotels. The State Department warning said, "American citizens in Kenya should remain vigilant, particularly in public places frequented by foreigners such as hotels, shopping malls, restaurants, and cafes, and should also avoid demonstrations and large crowds."
Travelers are apparently hearing the message, and similar ones issued by other Western governments. Kenya attracted 495,751 tourists in 2002, according to the Kenya Tourist Board, and estimates put this year's figure as of Nov. 30 at 488,255, far below the country's goals. Back in 1996, Kenya tourism reached its peak with more than one million visitors. Americans visiting Kenya have declined in number from 42,794 in 2001, to 40,346 in 2002. As of the end of November this year, 35,253 Americans had visited Kenya, a decline that tourism officials attribute to the State Department warnings.
The drop has been devastating for tour operators, hoteliers, wood carvers and the thousands of others who make their living from foreign visitors. The Kenyan government, stung by the travel warnings, has moved to minimize the threats. Earlier in the year, when foreign governments feared that terrorists might strike at the Nairobi and Mombasa airports, the Kenyans beefed up security there. Now, heavily armed officers have taken guard outside tourist hotels. 
"There is no cause for alarm," Raphael Tuju, the minister for tourism and information, said in a recent statement. "Kenya is still a safe destination to be in and to visit. All our systems are on high alert and ready to respond to any threat, real or imagined."
The beefed-up security presence is visible from the Thorn Tree Cafe, which has for decades been a popular stop for safari-goers in downtown Nairobi. Attached to the Stanley, the oldest hotel in the capital, the cafe is a place to sip cold Tusker beer, exchange adventurous tales with other travelers and watch the city go by. But the Thorn Tree is not the carefree place it used to be. Although it is still an open-air cafe, the management years ago put up opaque glass to separate panhandlers from guests. Security guards now keep a close watch for thieves. And these days there are soldiers in camouflage guarding tourists dressed in khaki.
Still, life seems to go on. The evening after the threat against the Stanley, the cafe was bustling. The Pressmen, a local band, was playing African hits; the waiters were serving Tusker left and right; and tourists and locals filled the tables, though there was not an American visitor to be found. In the mix was Kenya's foreign minister, Kalonzo Musyoka, who made an appearance to show that he considers the hotel, and the country as a whole, to be safe.
"The best way to deal with international terrorism is not to give in to their threats but to stand up against them," Mr. Musyoka said. "We all know the implications of such harsh travel warnings. All those wishing to spend their holidays with us, running away from the cold, get worried."
Mr. Musyoka milled around. The band played. As darkness fell, the soldiers were no longer visible."We can't stop enjoying the world because of terrorism," said a man from Britain who was off to the Masai Mara, Kenya's premier game preserve, the following day.
Another traveler, a businessman from South Africa, said he was studying the faces of everyone he came across, looking for people who looked evil. "Everything we do has some risk," he said. "We all have to decide whether it is too much risk. I'm here, and so are many others, but I'm being careful."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Wildebeests in Masai Mara park. (Photo by Reuters) 

Load-Date: January 4, 2004


End of Document