TRAVEL ADVISORY ON THE GULF CRISIS -- TORONTO;
Stepped Up Airport Security: Reports From Abroad and the U.S.
The New York Times
February 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Travel Desk
Section: Section 5;; Section 5; Page 8; Column 3; Travel Desk; Column 3;
Length: 389 words
Byline: By JOHN F. BURNS

By JOHN F. BURNS
Body


Of all Western countries involved in the war against Iraq, Canada may have the least reason to fear terrorism. Unlike Britain, France and Italy, Canada has suffered no major terrorism attack in recent years from Palestinian groups or associates in Libya and Iraq.
According to David Whipple, a former White House counter-terrorism expert quoted in The Toronto Star, Canada has never been an inviting target. "The whole point of international terrorism is symbolism," Mr. Whipple said. "If I was Saddam Hussein, I wouldn't think I'd get an awful lot of terrorist benefit from hitting Canada."
Still, Canada, with naval and air units in the gulf, remains a potential target, and security has been tightened to the highest levels ever at airports and other vulnerable installations.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police has been forced to draft into its security network officers whose normal duties are with the force's renowned Musical Ride -- men and women more accustomed to donning the force's red tunics and riding breeches and giving equestrian displays.
With the numbers of Americans traveling overseas sharply down, Canadian tourism officials look forward to a rise in Americans coming here. The trend is already visible in increased bookings at resorts like Whistler, British Columbia, widely rated as one of the continent's best ski destinations.
For Americans, journeys to Canada are not likely to be jarred by highly visible security arrangements, at airports or elsewhere. The Canadian approach so far has stressed discretion, and there is little other than more rigorous procedures for checking baggage.
At Lester B. Pearson International Airport in Toronto, Canada's largest with more than 20 million passengers a year, officials are tight-lipped about the new measures that have been adopted, except to say that some of the most important will remain invisible to passengers.
One announced measure has been the closer-than-usual questioning of all passengers of Palestinian or Iraqi origin. Another is a requirement that passengers traveling to Europe and Asia on Air Canada check in two and a half hours before flight time, half an hour earlier than previously.
A gala that was to have marked the opening of the Toronto airport's third terminal, on Jan. 25, was canceled, apparently because the celebration was judged inappropriate.

Load-Date: February 3, 1991


End of Document