Treat the disease
Air Force Times
March 21, 2005 Monday


Copyright 2005 Army Times Publishing Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 52
Length: 351 words
Body


It is true in Baghdad, in the Gaza Strip, in Kabul - indeed everywhere that the seeds of terrorism sprout: Intelligence and strike capabilities are valuable tools, but eradicating terrorism is as much about economics as it is about warfare.
In the nascent democracies of Iraq, Afghanistan and the Palestinian territories, fledgling governments need immediate infusions of capital to establish their own security and set the stage for long-term economic growth.
Nowhere is economic renewal a more pressing need than in the Middle East. A visit to the Gaza Strip exposes the abject poverty that is the engine of seething rage. And yet there are signs of hope. The gradual reopening of passage into Israel is providing opportunity for Palestinians to earn hard currency, and support appears to be declining for radical groups like Hamas.
A new survey of Palestinians shows more than 76 percent of respondents support the Sharm el-Sheik accord agreed to by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and the new Palestinian leader, Mahmood Abbas. Among the agreement's key points: Israel will allow the Palestinians to start construction on a Gaza seaport.
But getting the money to preserve the peace can be nearly as tough as winning the peace. Arab governments have pledged millions to the Palestinian people, but have yet to deliver. And in the United States, the House Appropriations Committee voted to cut in half the White House supplemental budget request for reconstruction aid to Afghanistan. The decision sends a signal that Americans don't deliver on promises.
Ironically, the same committee voted to boost spending on new military hardware by $1.8 billion. Weapons and the military arts have important roles in the war on terrorism, but they treat the symptoms, not the disease.
It is easy to be cynical about pouring money into struggling states, where corruption is the rule, but this is where trust and faith come in.
The international community has vested interests on all sides of each of these conflicts. They can continue to spend on destruction, weapons and terrorist bounties or they can invest in peace.

Load-Date: March 31, 2005


End of Document