Treasury Department Designates Waad Project
RTT News (United States)
January 6, 2009 Tuesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 320 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The Treasury Department announced Tuesday that it designated the Waad Project, a Hizballah-run construction firm, under Executive Order 13224, which targets terrorists and those providing support to terrorists or acts of terrorism.
According to Treasury, Hizballah established the Waad Project, in part, because Jihad al-Bina--Hizballah&apos;s main construction company--had difficulty receiving funds from donors following its designation under E.O. 13224 by the Treasury Department on February 20, 2007. Hizballah Secretary General Hasan Nasrallah publicly endorsed the Waad Project in May 2007.
The department said Hizballah has used the Waad Project to rebuild its command headquarters in Beirut&apos;s southern suburbs, which was destroyed in the summer 2006 conflict with Israel. The Waad Project has built Hizballah&apos;s underground weapons storage facilities and parts of the group&apos;s military infrastructure in Lebanon. Additionally, the Waad Project&apos;s website has provided telephone numbers for those wishing to donate aid to Hizballah, Jihad al-Bina, and the Hizballah-controlled Martyrs Association.
The Waad Project, Treasury stated, tried to hide its affiliation with Hizballah, just as Jihad al-Bina used deceptive means to seek funding projects from international development organizations. Additionally, the general manager of the Waad Project has stated that donors to the Waad Project have wished to remain anonymous because Hizballah is a terrorist organization and they preferred not to be identified due to the risks of dealings with a terrorist group.
"The Waad Project is another example of Hizballah&apos;s use of deceptive tactics to support its military and terrorist apparatus," said Stuart Levey, Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RealTimeTraders.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 16, 2010


End of Document