Treasury Sees Ties Between ID Theft And Terrorism
American Banker
November 19, 2004 Friday


Copyright 2004 SourceMedia, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: MORTGAGES; Pg. 7; Vol. 169; No. 223
Length: 598 words
Byline: Isabelle Lindenmayer and Erick Bergquist
Body


The Treasury Department is worried about what seem to be links between
identity theft and terrorism, the assistant secretary for financial
institutions said Thursday.
Roughly half of phishing cases currently originate from foreign
countries, Wayne Abernathy said. "One suspects that terrorist organizations
are involved."
In phishing, an increasingly common e-mail scam, bank customers are lured
to an impostor bank Web site where they are tricked into giving their account
information and passwords.
"We do think there's a link that can be made from pieces of information
we have gathered," Mr. Abernathy said. "Right now it's a conceptual link, but
we think we can make it an actual link."
He spoke at an identity-theft press conference in New York organized by
American Express Co.
According to the Federal Trade Commission, roughly 27 million American
have been victims of identity theft since 1998. Fraud cost businesses about
$48 billion and consumers $5 billion in 2002, the FTC said last year.
A number of credit card companies, including American Express, offer to
alert consumers whenever an unexpected change is made to their credit report.
Such changes may signal identity theft.
Also at the conference, Cathy Black, Amex's director of fraud prevention 
and data security, said a number of Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act
provisions that will go into effect Dec. 1 might help to reduce credit card
fraud.
Among other things, merchants will be required to truncate credit card
numbers on receipts and consumers will be entitled to free copies of credit
reports once a year from each credit bureau.
Susan Grant, the director of the National Consumers League, said proposed
rules for enforcing the act would put even more of the responsibility for
identifying and preventing fraud on banks and their regulators.
For example, one such proposal would classify frauds involving stolen
credit cards as identity theft, allowing the victims to expunge the
fraudulent transactions from their credit histories.
A study released Monday by Javelin Strategy and Research concluded that a
significant number of banks are not offering customers adequate protection
from identity theft.
The study found that at more than half of 40 leading U.S. banks,
consumers do not have the option of eliminating paper statements, which are
often used by identity thieves.
In an interview Thursday, Michael Cunningham, who heads fraud protection
for the card services group at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., said that former law
enforcement officers and other investigators play "a very significant role"
in fighting fraud.
For example, a former Secret Service officer leads his investigations and
recoveries group, he said. Mr. Cunningham, who is also a senior vice
president at JPMorgan Chase, said he has also hired former postal inspectors
and local law enforcement officers.
"We hire them in investigative roles for their experience, their contacts
in the industry and in law enforcement," he said.
As an example of how JPMorgan Chase fights fraud, Mr. Cunningham said
that if his employees sensed fraud was occurring in a certain ZIP code in New
York -- if, say, they noticed many purchases of jewelry for more than $5,000
-- they would "ask that the merchants call in" whenever someone tried to make
such a purchase.
Mr. Cunningham added that fraud activity moves around quite often and
gets hot and cold very quickly. When it seems to die down in an area, his
Tempe, Ariz., unit lets the merchants know that they do not have to call in
anymore.
Copyright 2004 Thomson Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.
http://www.thomsonmedia.com            http://www.americanbanker.com

Graphic

 
photo, Abernathy 

Load-Date: October 31, 2006


End of Document