Treasury Official: Swift Disclosure 'Very Damaging'
American Banker
July 12, 2006 Wednesday


Copyright 2006 SourceMedia LLC d/b/a Arizent. All Rights Reserved
Section: WASHINGTON; Pg. 4; Vol. 171; No. 132
Length: 605 words
Body


Stuart Levey, Treasury under secretary for the office of terrorism and
financial intelligence, testified Tuesday before a House Financial Services
subcommittee about the government's program to access international wire
transfer data in the Swift system. Following are excerpts from his testimony.
As the 9/11 Commission staff pointed out ... "following the money to
identify terrorist operatives and sympathizers provides a particularly
powerful tool in the fight against terrorist groups. Use of this tool almost
always remains invisible to the general public, but it is a critical part of
the overall campaign against al-Qaida."
The Terrorist Finance Tracking Program was just such an invisible tool.
Its exposure represents a grave loss to our overall efforts to combat
al-Qaida and other terrorist groups.
The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (Swift)
is the premier messaging service used by banks around the world to issue
international transfers, which makes its data exceptionally valuable. The
Swift data consists of records of completed financial transactions; it does
not provide access to individual bank account information.
In response to a subpoena, Swift makes available to us a subset of its
records that it maintains in the United States in the normal course of its
business. The legal basis for this subpoena is the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act, which allows the government to compel the production of
information pursuant to presidential declarations of national emergency.
We issue such administrative subpoenas regularly, and our authority to do
so is clear. In this case, our subpoena is issued pursuant to President Bush's
declaration of an emergency with respect to terrorism after Sept. 11th in
Executive Order 13224. That declaration has been renewed yearly in light of
the continuing threat posed by al-Qaida and other deadly terrorist groups.
The Swift subpoena is powerful but narrow. The data cannot be searched
unless the analyst first articulates the specific link between the target of
the search and a terrorism investigation. Pursuant to an agreement that we
reached with the company, Swift representatives are able to monitor these 
searches in real time and stop any one of them if they have any concerns
about the link to terrorism. In addition, a record is kept of every search
that is done. These records are reviewed both by Swift's representatives and
an outside independent auditor.
Some observers have argued that the disclosure of the program did little
damage because terrorist facilitators are smart and already knew to avoid the
banking system. They correctly point out that there has been an overall trend
among terrorists towards cash couriers and other informal mechanisms of money
transfer -- a trend that I have testified about. They also hold up as public
warnings the repeated assertions by government officials that we are actively
following the terrorists' money.
What we had not spoken about publicly, however, is this particular
source. And, unfortunately, this revelation is very damaging.
This disclosure compromised one of our most valuable programs and will
only make our efforts to track terrorist financing -- and to prevent
terrorist attacks -- harder. Tracking terrorist money trails is difficult
enough without having our sources and methods reported on the front page of 
newspapers.
I can assure you, however, that our efforts will not wane. With our
interagency colleagues and our partners abroad, we will continue to draw on
every resource at our disposal to uncover and disrupt these terrorist
networks.
http://www.americanbanker.com            http://www.sourcemedia.com

Graphic

 
photo, Levey

Load-Date: November 14, 2006


End of Document