TREAT TERRORISM FOR WHAT IT IS - AN ACT OF WAR;
OCEANS THAT ONCE PROTECTED US NOW MAKE US MORE VULNERABLE.
Portland Press Herald (Maine)
August 24, 1996, Saturday,
CITY EDITION


Copyright 1996 Guy Gannett Communications, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL,
Length: 283 words
Body


If, as now seems likely, a bomb or missile brought down TWA Flight 800 last month, the United States should treat it as act of war.
American experts should trace the explosive to its source and seek out the perpetrators.
Then, if the motive was political rather than grossly criminal, the political leaders of this country should respond as a great nation is obligated to do when it is attacked.
If another country is culpable, the United States should call it to account. Political and economic penalties should be imposed, as has been done with Iran and Libya. Neither should more direct and ominous measures be ruled out.
Terrorism cannot be treated as a price of world commerce, viewed merely as a traveling inconvenience. It is not. Terrorism is a weapon of war used by determined adversaries against defenseless civilians.
This nation should shape its responses accordingly.In an age of giant jetliners, the great oceans that long protected Americans from foreign terrorism now make us more vulnerable.
Yet major American airports remain fuzzily committed to hiring and training expert security personnel. Bags continue to make their way onto planes without being adequately inspected. Luggage still slips through without owners. Oversight of people moving through vulnerable airport areas remains spotty at best.
Better protection starts with better recognition of the nature of the threat.
History indicates that FBI experts eventually will identify the explosive device that killed 230 men, women and children aboard TWA Flight 800.
Investigation into the crash of Pam Am Flight 103 also indicates they will determine who manufactured the weapon, who bought it, who delivered it or carried it on board.

Load-Date: August 25, 1996


End of Document