Trial Starts in Plot Against Danish Paper Over Cartoons of Prophet - Correction Appended
The New York Times
April 14, 2012 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 582 words
Byline: By CHRISTINA ANDERSON
Body


STOCKHOLM -- Four men went on trial in Denmark on Friday on charges of plotting a shooting spree in late 2010 at a Danish newspaper that published cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad, with prosecutors suggesting they intended to focus on the defendants' links to Pakistan.
The publication of the cartoons by the paper, Jyllands-Posten, in 2005 set off a wave of violent protests by Muslims and ignited a debate over freedom of the press and respect for religion around the world.
The senior prosecutor, Henrik Plaehn, said the attack was intended to coincide with an event in the central Copenhagen building where the newspaper has its editorial offices. Crown Prince Frederik had planned to attend but was not the target of the attack, according to Danish news reports.
All four of the suspects live in Sweden, and news reports have said that at least three had traveled in Pakistan, in whose more lawless territories terrorist groups operate with relative freedom. Prosecutors told a district court in a suburb of Copenhagen on Friday that the men intended to carry out the attack on Dec. 29, 2010, but that the plot was foiled that morning by Swedish and Danish intelligence services, which had been monitoring the men for months.
The men -- identified as Munir Awad, Omar Abdalla Aboelazm and Mounir Ben Mohamed Dhahri -- are charged with terrorism offenses. Another man, Sahbi Ben Mohamed Zalouti, is charged with preparing to commit a terrorist act. All four pleaded not guilty.
Mr. Zalouti, 38, told the Swedish police shortly after his arrest that the group had planned the attack, according to a recorded interrogation played at the trial, the Danish news site Politiken.dk reported. He said that Mr. Dhahri, 46, had pressured him into joining the group. ''Mounir Dhahri is my best friend,'' he said. ''When it comes to saying 'yes' or 'no,' I am an extremely weak person.''
He told the police that he had tried to back out of the plot. ''We talked about what was possible to do if one wanted to,'' he said, but that he never intended to join it, calling that ''my worst nightmare.''
Prosecutors showed surveillance images of three of the men traveling by car from southern Sweden to the suburb of Herlev, outside Copenhagen, the Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet reported. All four men had begun the journey to Stockholm, Danish news reports said, but Mr. Zalouti parted ways in the city of Jonkoping. The three others crossed the Oresund Bridge from Sweden to Denmark at 2 a.m. on the morning of Dec. 29.
Later, when searching the car, which was parked in Herlev outside an apartment where three of the suspects were sleeping, the police found a machine gun with 34 rounds. In connection with the subsequent arrest in the apartment, a police search turned up a silencer for the machine gun, a pistol, plastic ties commonly used as makeshift handcuffs and $20,000 in cash.
Earlier terrorism convictions in Denmark have carried 12-year sentences, but prosecutors are likely to push for longer sentences in this case, according to Danish Public Broadcasting.
The trial is expected to last until mid-June.

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: The byline for an article on Saturday about the opening of a trial of four men charged with plotting a shooting spree in late 2010 at a Danish newspaper that published cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad misspelled the reporter's given name. She is Christina Anderson, not Christine.
Correction-Date: April 17, 2012

Load-Date: April 17, 2012


End of Document