TRIA COMPROMISE FORGED; Measure would raise trigger, narrow scope of backstop - Correction Appended
Business Insurance
December 19, 2005


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 636 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-House and Senate negotiators resolved differences late Friday afternoon between competing bills designed to extend the federal terrorism insurance backstop through 2007.
The agreement came as the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, which created the federal backstop for insurers' future terrorism-related losses, neared its expiration date of Dec. 31.
The compromise draws almost exclusively from White House-based legislation approved by the Senate, which would scale back the backstop before ending the program entirely on Dec. 31, 2007.
Both the House and Senate were expected to vote on the measure over the weekend before adjourning until January.
Although the compromise bill did not meet the expectations of all extension backers, most of whom tended to favor a more expansive bill approved by the House, the fact that some extension was likely drew more than a little relief.
``We're obviously very pleased that the passage of the legislation is now imminent, as there have clearly been several conservative and influential members of Congress who would have been content to see the bill expire amid gridlock between the two chambers,'' said Joel Wood, senior vp-government affairs for the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington, who spoke before the final legislative language was available.
The compromise legislation will extend TRIA for two years. Unlike the original backstop, it will not provide coverage for general liability, commercial auto, burglary/theft, surety or professional liability. And, unlike the House bill, the compromise measure will not cover group life.
The minimum trigger for the backstop will be raised to $50 million in 2006 and $100 million in 2007 from the current $5 million. The measure will also increase the industry's so-called ``deductible'' in terms of earned premium for covered lines to trigger coverage, to 17.5% in 2006 and 20% in 2007, up from the current 15%.
The bill also calls for a presidential working group to review how the program works and possibly make further recommendations.
Mr. Wood said that the CIAB was ``disappointed'' that the bill does not contain some key features of the House measure, notably the formation of a broad-based commission charged with recommending a permanent terrorism insurance mechanism. The House bill had also contained surplus lines reforms backed by the CIAB.
The Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America also welcomed the compromise agreement.
``This agreement will allow businesses and our economy to continue to grow as we fight the war on terrorism,'' Ernst Csiszar, president of the Des Plaines, Ill.-based PCI, said in a statement issued shortly after the compromise had been announced.
``TRIA is an essential part of our nation's economic success in the post-Sept. 11 world. The public/private partnership that TRIA established is vital to American businesses that need protection from the enormous economic losses that can result from this new and unprecedented risk,'' Mr. Csiszar said.
Mr. Wood said that the CIAB ``will continue to work hard with members of Congress in both chambers to try to identify ways in which the terrorism insurance dilemma can be permanently resolved.''
``It is very good news for (policyholders) in that there will be a definitive backstop for two years; however, we are concerned that this is the final extension that the market will see, and we'll have to address a long-term solution in very short order,'' said Aaron Davis, a vp with Aon's national property practice in New York.
``It was unfortunate that the House bill-which included essentially a carrot for the industry, to establish a commission with a mandate to find a long-term solution and provide a third year of coverage under TRIA in order to allow the market transition-was not included,'' said Mr. Davis.
Correction


Due to incorrect information provided to Business Insurance, a Dec. 19 story erroneously stated that legislation to extend the federal terrorism insurance back stop would exclude general liability from the program. The story was published before final legislative language was available.
Correction-Date: December 26, 2005

Load-Date: December 29, 2005


End of Document