Trial to start in Miami in alleged plot to blow up the Sears Tower Seven defendants formed terrorist cell, planned jihad, prosecutors say.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 17, 2007 Monday
SECOND EDITION


Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A6
Length: 443 words
Byline: By Curt Anderson THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: MIAMI 
Body


To hear prosecutors tell it, Narseal Batiste and six followers formed a budding homegrown terrorist cell determined to rival the Sept. 11 attacks by toppling the Sears Tower in Chicago.
In the same court building where Jose Padilla was convicted last month, trial begins this week for seven men who federal prosecutors say envisioned a "full ground war" that would eventually replace the U.S. government with an Islamic regime.
"I want to fight some jihad," Batiste said in a 2006 conversation taped by the FBI. "That's all I live for."
Defense attorneys and supporters of the so-called "Liberty City Seven" say the men never sought to hurt anyone and amassed only one gun and a few knives and machetes. They say the alleged terrorism conspiracy was driven by a pair of paid FBI informers - one claiming to be an al-Qaida emissary.
"These guys never left the United States," said Albert Levin, attorney for defendant Patrick Abraham. "They never traveled to the Middle East. They never had any way of carrying out what was discussed. This was pure words."
Batiste, the leader of an obscure religious sect, and the others from Miami's blighted Liberty City neighborhood each face decades in prison if convicted. The four-count indictment includes charges of conspiracy to levy war against the United States and conspiracy to provide material support to al-Qaida.
Jury selection is scheduled to begin Tuesday and take one to two weeks. The main prosecution case is expected to last at least six weeks.
The trial promises to test anew the post-Sept. 11 strategy of the administration of President George W. Bush of disrupting potential terrorists in the earliest possible stages. When it comes to terrorism cases, federal officials say, arrests can't wait until the proverbial fuse is lit.
"People who never would have been prosecuted prior to 9/11 are now prosecuted," said Matthew Orwig, former U.S. attorney in Texas who served on a Justice Department terrorism and national security panel. "Nobody wants to allow any terror case to go unaddressed. Even if the chances of their carrying anything out is minuscule, the consequences could be enormous." 
Like the Padilla trial, the Liberty City case will feature dozens of FBI telephone intercepts as well as video of Batiste and the others discussing the alleged plot to destroy the 110-story Sears Tower, America's tallest building.
The strongest evidence is FBI videotapes showing all seven men pledging allegiance to al-Qaida and its leader, Osama bin Laden. But defense attorneys claim that at least some group members had no idea what they were doing and were persuaded to take the oath by Batiste and the FBI informer.

Load-Date: September 17, 2007


End of Document