TRIA bills' introduction renews hope; Backers hail actions of House, Senate
Business Insurance
March 14, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 635 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Supporters of extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act by two years say they have renewed hopes, now that extension bills have been introduced in both chambers of Congress.
House Democrats' introduction last week of the Terrorism Insurance Backstop Extension Act came only a couple of weeks after Sens. Robert Bennett, R-Utah, and Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., introduced a similar bill in the Senate.
TRIA, which established a federal financial backstop for insurers covering losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire at the end of the year. Extension proponents-including risk managers and insurers-have argued that the backstop must be maintained to prevent market disruptions.
The House Democrats, all members of the Financial Services Committee, introduced H.R. 1153 on March 8.
''We need to act now to extend the program while we work on long-term solutions to protect American workers and our cities and towns against possible terrorist attacks,'' the bill's chief sponsor-Rep. Michael Capuano, D-Mass.-said in a statement.
Reps. Barney Frank, D-Mass., Paul Kanjorski, D-Pa., and Joe Crowley, D-N.Y., also sponsored the bill. Rep. Frank is the Financial Services Committee's ranking Democrat.
In addition to extending TRIA through the end of 2007, the bill would extend the backstop cover to group life policies as well as property/casualty insurance and would require that policies issued during the last year of the program retain the terrorism coverage backstop until they expire. It would also require the Treasury Department to draft recommendations about long-term ways to deal with terrorism reinsurance.
Extension supporters hailed the introduction of the bill.
Janice Ochenkowski, vp-external affairs for the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc., said in a statement that ''both legislative chambers have now confirmed what RIMS has championed all along-the TRIA program is a necessary measure to provide effective and reasonable commercial insurance options against catastrophic terrorist attacks.''
''It's indicative of the importance that's attached to this issue, especially considering how early this is in the 109th Congress,'' said David Winston, senior vp in the National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos.' Washington office. He said he hopes for ''early action'' on extension.
Julie Gackenbach, an assistant vp at the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America, called the move a ''first step toward mitigating the negative effects TRIA's expiration would have on our nation's economy.''
''It's a sign that Congress recognizes that, without a backstop, the economy and our markets will suffer,'' said Maria Berthoud, principal and vp at B&D Sagamore, a Washington lobbying firm that deals with insurance and financial services issues.
''Recognizing the public comments of Republican leadership… the introduction of a Democratic bill reflects a bipartisan desire to continue a public-private partnership dealing with terrorism risk,'' said Frank Nutter, president of the Reinsurance Assn. of America.
''If we can't agree on a long-term partnership and convince Congress and the business community that it serves their goals, then it seems that an extension with a mandate to agree on a long-term program is inevitable. Congress certainly has resisted the notion that TRIA could be extended indefinitely,'' said Mr. Nutter.
A spokesman for the American Insurance Assn.-which also praised the new bill-cited another sign of increased interest in TRIA reauthorization. He said that a group of AIA member company chief executive officers met with Treasury officials as well as lawmakers of both parties in both houses last week.
They urged their listeners to deal with the issue quickly and ''were encouraged by what they heard at both Treasury and Congress,'' he said.

Load-Date: March 16, 2005


End of Document