TRIA's transience a problem; Terrorism Risk Assessment and Insurance Coverage Seminar
Business Insurance
June 23, 2003, Monday


Copyright 2003 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 30
Length: 409 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The 2002 Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, while a ''step in the right direction,'' still presents risk managers with significant challenges, according to a brokerage executive.
''It's pretty clear that the (program's) temporary nature is a problem,'' said Gail P. Norstrom during the Terrorism Risk Assessment and Insurance Coverage Seminar, held in Washington earlier this month.
The federal terrorism coverage backstop authorized by TRIA, which was designed to allow insurers to build private capacity for terrorism coverage, is scheduled to end in 2005.
The fact that the backstop is temporary can make it difficult for risk managers to formulate long-term risk management plans; the future of a key tool in their risk management toolbox is uncertain, said Mr. Norstrom, managing director-property practice group of Aon Risk Services Cos. Inc. in Avon, Conn.
The New York-based Strategic Research Institute presented the seminar.
Policyholders looking for terrorism coverage have several options, he noted. They can buy TRIA-backed commercial insurance, which would provide coverage if the federal government certified that a terrorism attack meeting the criteria set by TRIA had occurred. They can buy stand-alone coverage that would respond to noncertified terrorist attacks, such as those caused by a domestic terrorist. Or policyholders may choose to buy a combination of both types of coverage to ensure protection in the event of certified or noncertified attacks, he said.
''From a policyholder's point of view, the aftermath looks much the same,'' he said.
Despite the availability of TRIA-backed coverage, few companies-perhaps as few as 15%-have chosen to the buy it.
''An awful lot is an issue of being in denial,'' said Mr. Norstrom. Some buyers don't feel exposed, some can't quantify risks and a ''chaotic'' rollout process alienated some, he said.
In addition, ''pricing is all over the map,'' with some insurers not wanting to offer the product. The price of terrorism coverage runs anywhere from 2.5% to 300% of the underlying premium, said Mr. Norstrom, with the median running about 12%, and perhaps 18% in areas regarded as higher risk. Compared with stand-alone terrorism policies, the TRIA-backed coverage generally costs less and provides higher limits, he said.
''Terrorism is unique,'' he said. ''A single event can destroy your business, whether you are a target or not. This is a moving, morphing, constantly changing target.''

Load-Date: June 25, 2003


End of Document