TRIA measures set for compromise talks; House passes extension bill, but sunset nears
Business Insurance
December 12, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1275 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-It's down to the wire, but there remains optimism that the federal terrorism insurance backstop will be extended before expiring on Dec. 31, even though some significant obstacles remain.
The extension is far from a given, though, since the contents of bills passed by the House and Senate differ significantly even though both measures bear the same number, S. 467. In fact, the House of Representatives' version of S. 467, which the House calls the Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision Act of 2005 and which passed by a 371-49 margin last week, is actually an entirely different measure in all but its number. The House took the Senate bill, stripped it of everything but the number and attached its own legislation.
That didn't sit well with the Bush administration, which wasted little time in expressing its displeasure. The administration, which strongly supported enactment of the original Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, has adamantly opposed extending the backstop unless it is significantly scaled back. The House version of S. 467 somewhat expands the program. But even though the White House sharply criticized the House bill, the Office of Management and Budget's official ``statement of administration policy'' does not specifically promise a veto.
Another potential problem arose when the Senate Banking Committee did not follow the action of the House Financial Services Committee by naming conferees quickly, thus raising concerns that a conference committee would not be able to complete its work this year. A spokesman for the Senate Banking Committee noted that not much time remained to accomplish the task, but he did not rule out the possibility that a bill could emerge this year. Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby, R-Ala., ``continues to remain hopeful that we will be able to pass a temporary and targeted TRIA extension, provided it follows the Senate approach,'' said the spokesman Thursday afternoon.
Both the House and Senate versions of S. 467 would extend the backstop for two years, although the House bill could allow the backstop to remain in place through 2008 under some circumstances. Both bills also increase the current minimum loss needed to trigger the backstop from the current $5 million to $50 million in covered damage in 2006 and $100 million 2007.
The bill passed by the House would, among other things, establish a broad-based commission to make recommendations on what role, if any, the government should play in guaranteeing terrorism insurance and would extend the current protections granted to property/casualty insurers to group life insurers. It would also create so-called ``silos'' for various lines of coverage and subject them to differing deductibles before individual insurers could tap the backstop created by TRIA. In addition, the House bill would expand the program to cover acts of domestic terrorism as well as foreign-originated terrorism.
The House bill would require insurers participating in the program to offer coverage for acts of terrorism involving nuclear, biological, chemical and radioactive agents, though that coverage ``may differ materially from the terms, amounts and other coverage limitations applicable to losses arising from events other than NBCR terrorism.''
The bill approved by the Senate-the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act-is silent on that matter; conferees from both chambers will have to meet to iron out such differences between the House and Senate measures. The Senate bill, for example, does not cover group life and eliminates coverage for some other lines currently covered, such as commercial automobile. The Senate bill also does not contain silos, does not extend coverage to acts of domestic terrorism and calls for the President's Working Group on Financial Markets rather than a broad-based commission to report on terrorism insurance market conditions.
Nonetheless, proponents of TRIA extension are confident that the differences can be overcome and a compromise reached well before Dec. 31.
``We're thrilled with the overwhelming bipartisan vote,'' said Joel Wood, senior vp-government affairs with the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers in Washington minutes after the vote. ``And we expect that House and Senate negotiators will be able to complete action next week. But it's not over till it's over, and we're very mindful that there are some enemies of this bill who would like to see the differences between the two chambers derail the process.''
``The passage of TRIA extension legislation by the U.S. House of Representatives represents an important step forward in preserving the federal backstop to protect companies that would otherwise be left vulnerable in the aftermath of a terrorist attack,'' said Terry Fleming, a member of the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc.'s board of directors with responsibility for external affairs. ``RIMS applauds both chambers of Congress for their work on this critical economic issue and encourages the House and Senate to reconcile their respective bills at the earliest possible moment,'' said Mr. Fleming, who is also director-division of risk management for Montgomery County, Md., in Rockville.
``We think that a compromise will be reached and it will go to the president,'' said Carl Parks, senior vp-government affairs in the Washington office of the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America. PCI is concerned about the House bill's NBCR provision, he said. ``If there is such a thing as an uninsurable risk, that's it. It really is a problem for midsized and smaller insurance companies, because there's no reinsurance at all. If they're in position where they're required to offer it, they have to make a decision as to whether they will be in the marketplace at all for overall coverage.''
Mr. Parks added that PCI is ``very much supportive'' of finding a long-range market-based solution to the terrorism insurance issue and thinks that specific House provisions calling for the broad-based commission and an examination of reinsurance solutions ``is the best way to have a long-range market-based program.''
``We remain very optimistic about getting this done by the end of the year,'' said Leigh Ann Pusey, senior vp-government affairs for the American Insurance Assn. in Washington. ``The House vote was a key step toward resolution before Congress adjourns.''
According to the OMB statement, the Bush administration ``strongly opposes'' the House measure. ``Adding new lines to the federal reinsurance backstop sends the wrong signal to the marketplace, which should be encouraged to find new ways to diversify the risks of doing business,'' said the OMB statement. The statement noted the White House's goals of reducing the lines of coverage covered by TRIA while increasing the insurance industry's exposure are not met in the House version of S.467.
Observers said the OMB statement does not present an insurmountable obstacle.
``We don't think it's a stumbling block,'' said PCI's Mr. Parks. ``The president has not yet cast his first veto in five years, and we don't think that this will be the first time. We certainly understand that the administration has some concerns, and we think those concerns have been addressed in both the House and Senate in terms of shrinking the program'' and providing a greater degree of private-sector insurance involvement, he said.
``I don't see it posing an additional problem. I think it's something members have been aware of and have factored in,'' said AIA's Ms. Pusey. ``The overwhelming strong votes for passage in both the Senate and the House are clear indications of Congress' intention to protect the economy.''

Graphic

 
Art Caption: A tale of two backstops: Senate, House TRIA extension proposals differ in several ways.

Load-Date: December 16, 2005


End of Document