TRIA bill offers rallying point; Senate set to start hearings on extending federal terrorism backstop
Business Insurance
February 28, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: Pg. 1
Length: 967 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-The recent introduction of legislation that would extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act by two years has raised hopes among policyholders that Congress will act on the TRIA extension issue sooner rather than later.
TRIA, which provides a federal backstop for insurers facing losses from future catastrophic terrorist attacks, is slated to expire on Dec. 31. Risk managers, insurers and others have advocated that the law be extended for at least two years to avoid insurance market disruptions.
The introduction of extension legislation in the Senate drew praise from risk managers.
''This is a good positive step toward this issue. As we all know, the expiration of the backstop is fast approaching,'' said Bradley R. Wood, senior vp-risk management for Marriott Corp. in Bethesda, Md., welcoming the move.
''This is an issue that has been a concern to policyholders in 2004 in that we'd be running up against the clock,'' said Mr. Wood. ''As we've progressed here in 2005, we're getting some positive signs that there is some keen interest in getting the act extended.''
''The timely introduction of the bill will assuage the concerns of many risk managers,'' said Peggy Rychtarik, vp-risk management at Grubb & Ellis Co. in Northbrook, Ill.
The bill, introduced by Sens. Bob Bennett, R-Utah, and Chris Dodd, D-Conn., on Feb. 18, just before Congress went on its weeklong Presidents Day recess, would extend TRIA through the end of 2007. In addition, it would require that policies written by Dec. 31, 2007, continue to enjoy TRIA backup but only until they expire in 2008, with no backup extending beyond Dec. 31 of that year.
Meanwhile, the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee-of which both Sens. Bennett and Dodd are members-will hold a hearing on TRIA oversight Thursday. During a hearing last fall on the state of the insurance industry, almost every member of the committee spoke in favor of extending TRIA (BI, Sept. 27, 2004). Committee Chairman Richard Shelby, R-Ala, however, did not mention the issue.
The House Financial Services Committee, which passed TRIA extension legislation last year, has not yet scheduled a hearing on the issue for this session. A member of that committee, Rep. Deborah Pryce, R-Ohio, told a joint meeting of the Council of Insurance Agents & Brokers and the Reinsurance Assn. of America earlier this month that the full House might not move until the Treasury Department issues its report on the state of the terrorism insurance market (BI, Feb. 14). Treasury has until June 30 to issue its report.
Policyholders and insurance industry representatives all hailed the introduction of the Senate bill.
Janice Ochenkowski, vp-external affairs for the Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc., issued a statement commending the senators. ''RIMS believes TRIA extension is necessary to avoid the market disruptions that occurred after Sept. 11, 2001, and before the adoption of TRIA. This legislation will ensure that terrorism insurance continues to be available to buyers of commercial insurance in a comprehensive and affordable manner,'' said Ms. Ochenkowski, who is also senior vp at Jones Lang LaSalle in Chicago.
''With TRIA's expiration looming, the introduction of this legislation is critical to avoiding potential economic dislocation in the short term, and it's a first step in Congress' review of the long-term terrorism risk issue,'' said Martin DuPoy, vp-government relations for the Washington-based National Assn. of Real Estate Investment Trusts and a representative of the policyholder-backed Coalition to Insure Against Terrorism.
Joel Wood, senior vp-government affairs for the CIAB, called the bill ''a much-needed spark plug'' for extending TRIA.
''The Dodd-Bennett bill gives us all a rallying point. Clearly, legislation won't be completed until after the Treasury Department has weighed in with their report in June. As much as we'd like to resolve the uncertainty sooner rather than later, perhaps it will be a good thing that Congress legislates on this issue later in the year. By then, it will have fully sunk in that the sunset provisions for terrorism coverage at the end of this year are for real,'' Mr. Wood said.
''This will be a difficult bill to pass, no doubt. But we're reasonably optimistic about our prospects, because we think legislators are going to realize that the government is in the terrorism insurance business with or without TRIA,'' he said.
''The introduction of the Bennett-Dodd bill is very good news,'' said Carl Parks, senior vp-government affairs for the Property Casualty Insurers Assn. of America in Washington. ''I'd go back to last fall, when Sen. Shelby held the Banking Committee hearing on the status of the insurance industry, and most of the comments of the members from both sides of the aisle were regarding the need to extend TRIA. And you follow that up with the hearing Sen. Shelby called for March 3,'' he said.
Certainly, there are ''signs that key members of the Senate understand the urgency of extending TRIA and finding a long-term solution to the problem of insuring against terror,'' Mr. Parks said.
''From the reinsurance perspective, without any type of program in place next year, we don't think there's going to be a viable reinsurance market that's able to provide adequate capacity for terrorist attacks to the primary insurers,'' said Mary Z. Seidel, vp and director of federal affairs for RAA. ''The fact that some key members of the Senate have recognized that there needs to be continued federal backstop is a significant step forward.''
The bill's authors ''clearly appreciate the urgency of addressing the TRIA expiration issue,'' said David Winston, senior vp-federal affairs in the Washington office of the Indianapolis-based National Assn. of Mutual Insurance Cos.

Load-Date: March 2, 2005


End of Document