TRIA HELD HOSTAGE IN SENATE
Business Insurance 
Print Version
December 22, 2014


Copyright 2014 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. 14; Vol. 48
Length: 358 words
Body


Shock, disappointment and disgust. That sums up our reaction - and the reaction of virtually every risk manager, producer and underwriter - to the Senate's failure to reauthorize the federal government's terrorism insurance program in time to prevent its lapse on Dec. 31.
The House of Representatives, which has tended to be more skeptical about the program than the Senate, passed a reasonable extension bill by an overwhelming margin earlier this month.
The Senate, however, operates by its own rules, one of which allows a single senator to hold up legislation for whatever reason.
And that's what happened: Retiring Sen. Tom Coburn, R-Okla., placed a hold on the reauthorization bill because he objected to a provision that would have created a National Association of Registered Agents and Brokers.
The senator objected based on his interpretation of states' rights - an interpretation apparently not widely shared among his colleagues, who had already voted to form NARAB. But Senate leaders decided it wasn't worth the effort to overcome Mr. Coburn's staunch objection.
In the process, the terrorism insurance program was abandoned.
There's going to be a lapse; that can't be undone. What can be done is to reauthorize the program as quickly as possible when the new Congress - sans Sen. Coburn - convenes next month. And that's going to mean a renewed push on the part of the program's supporters, who understandably think the deal already was done.
It's back to square one: Bills will have to be drafted and introduced in both houses; the normal committee process will probably have to take its course. It's not going to be easy, particularly with majorities in both chambers that might be more skeptical about the need for a federal terrorism insurance program than their predecessors.
But pressure has to be put on Congress to move, and quickly. House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, wasted no time in blasting the Senate for inaction and expressing hope that the new House will move "very quickly" to reauthorize the program.
Supporters need to hold him to his word and do everything to get a similar response from the new leadership of the Senate.

Load-Date: December 25, 2014


End of Document