TRIA safety net essential to economy
Business Insurance
April 4, 2005


Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: PERSPECTIVES; Pg. 10
Length: 840 words
Byline: Robert E. Vagley
Body


The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 is a core component of our nation's critical infrastructure. Inarguably, the program has secured our economy against real, present dangers posed by terrorists determined to destroy the American way of life. TRIA expires Dec. 31. Congress must put another terrorism insurance mechanism in place immediately, because, unfortunately, the threat of terrorism won't expire at year's end.
Terrorists seek to maximize fear among Americans, inflict great economic harm and loss of life and maximize worldwide attention. As a result, their targets have been high-profile American icons. That is why major amusement parks, hotels, resorts and athletic and entertainment venues are considered appealing terrorism targets. Also, recent reports indicate al Qaeda looks for ``softer'' targets where our icons are well protected. This could put suburban and rural schools, malls and offices at risk.
Immediately following the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, many hotels and major sports and entertainment venues found it virtually impossible to obtain adequate insurance due to concerns about further attacks. TRIA allows such enterprises and all U.S. businesses to secure coverage for property, liability and workers compensation.
Some academics suggest the ``free market'' should be responsible for terrorism insurance. Unfortunately, property/casualty insurers do not operate in a free market. Under the current state-based regulatory regime, complex government price and product controls artificially suppress terrorism insurance rates, force insurers to bear unbearable risks and deny product choices to consumers.
The private sector also lacks the financial capacity to handle catastrophic terrorism losses. Under plausible event scenarios, estimated insured losses from catastrophic terror attacks on U.S. soil could exceed $250 billion. This would greatly surpass the entire commercial P/C industry's current capacity of about $168 billion. This capital is not solely dedicated to terrorism; it also backs other commercial risks, such as natural disasters and workplace incidents unrelated to terrorism.
While other commercial risks are spread through traditional reinsurance, global reinsurers have no appetite for terrorism in the United States. The Reinsurance Assn. of America estimates current terrorism reinsurance capacity totals only $4 billion to $6 billion, of which very little is available for nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological-or NBCR-risks.
As TRIA's end date looms, insurers face difficult decisions about whether to underwrite terrorism risks without a federal backstop. This ``all or nothing'' proposition is bad for insurance customers and the economy and could lead to job losses, stalled commercial transactions and delayed construction projects.
Recently, top Bush administration officials reported that terrorists are planning new catastrophic attacks on U.S. soil. At a February Senate hearing, FBI Director Robert Mueller and CIA Director Porter Goss both emphasized concerns about NBCR threats, which Mr. Goss called ``only a matter of time.'' Mr. Mueller added that ``the growing body of sensitive reporting... continues to show al Qaeda's clear intention to obtain and ultimately use some form of chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear or high-energy explosives material in attacks against America.''
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan also recently told a House panel ``there are regrettable instances in which markets do not work, cannot work.'' He added that ``you cannot have a voluntary market system and the creation of markets, especially insurance markets, in a society subject to unanticipated violence....While I think you can get some semblance of terrorism insurance (without government involvement), I have not been persuaded that this market works terribly well.''
TRIA is a temporary stabilizing mechanism. Now, a long-term shared-responsibility program must be developed and implemented. Such a program must recognize the need for government responsibility for NBCR risks. There also should be a public/private risk-sharing mechanism for terrorist attacks involving conventional weapons.
Sens. Robert Bennett, R-Utah, and Christopher Dodd, D-Conn.-and co-sponsors-have introduced legislation tying a short-term TRIA extension to a mandatory study of long-term public/private solutions. Legislation also has been introduced in the House.
If there were another attack today on the scale of Sept. 11, because of TRIA, insurers would react as they did three and a half years ago: claims would be paid quickly and fully. Also, as the result of insurer claims dollars flowing to victims, the U.S. economy would recover and move forward.
For workers, businesses, cities, universities, hospitals, and all other American enterprises that could become the next victims of catastrophic terrorism, the vital economic safety net that TRIA provides must not be allowed to unravel at the end of 2005.
Robert E. Vagley is president of the American Insurance Assn. in Washington.

Load-Date: April 11, 2005


End of Document