Trial and Error
The Forward
October 26, 2007


Copyright 2007 The Forward Association, Incorporated All Rights Reserved
Section: Letters; Pg. A10
Length: 763 words
Body


A mistrial is not the same as an acquittal. Five men escaped conviction  in Texas this week on federal charges of financing terrorism  through a Muslim charity, but they were not found innocent. The  jury failed to agree on a verdict, and the judge declared a mistrial.
The government charged that the men's charity, the Holy Land  Foundation, was funneling money to Palestinian welfare agencies controlled  by Hamas. That meant, the government said, that they were  effectively funding Hamas and its terrorism, a criminal act. The defendants  said there was no connection between Hamas and their charities,  which they said are untainted by terrorism. The jury didn't buy the  government case and voted to acquit, but three jurors unexpectedly  disavowed the verdict as it was read in court, triggering the mistrial. The  government is free to try the case again before a different jury, perhaps  hoping its luck will change.
But Uncle Sam's luck is not likely to change. This trial was the  third major terrorism case in as many years that the federal government  brought before a jury and lost. A few smaller cases have brought  convictions, but these were decided mainly by judges. Major criminal  cases are brought before juries, and the feds don't have much luck  convincing the jurors.
The Holy Land case was supposed to end differently. The government's  case was 13 years in the making at a cost of millions of taxpayer  dollars. Evidence reportedly included thousands of pages of transcripts,  financial statements and phone records, plus hundreds of hours of wiretapped  conversations and live testimony from an Israeli intelligence agent.  From published news accounts, it sounded pretty convincing.
As it happens, the most damning bit of evidence surfaced just  last week, as the jury was finishing deliberations. Mahmoud Abbas's  Palestinian Authority moved on October 18 to dissolve the main network  of Islamic charities in the West Bank, according to a posting that  day on a Hamas Web site, unearthed by the Investigative Project. The  Palestinian Authority claimed that the move was intended to improve  management, but a Hamas spokesman in Gaza insisted it was a naked  bid to remove the charities from Hamas control.
Why, then, did the feds lose this case? For one, cases of this  complexity, involving months of testimony and thousands of pages of  financial details, are notoriously difficult to win in front of a jury. Jurors  can take in only so much. Second, the Bush administration's credibility  in these matters is in tatters, eviscerated by four years of war in Iraq,  the wreckage wrought by the war and the exposure of lies that led us  to war. Even in Texas or Florida, a jury of 12 citizens cannot bring itself  to vote guilty based on the administration's evidence.
How, then, to avoid these embarrassments in the future? Our government  might start by re-examining some assumptions and learning  lessons from the past. The first lesson to be learned is how to identify  enemies correctly. It was the assumption that all Muslim terrorists are  the same  that Saddam Hussein equals Osama bin Laden  that led  us blundering into the Iraqi quagmire in the first place. The terrible  error could have been seen in advance, but the Bush administration  lacked the curiosity to look.
So it is with Hamas. The organization was deservedly labeled  terrorist in 1995, including both its military and political wings. That  ruling has guided policy toward Hamas ever since. Unnoticed is the fact  that Hamas declared a unilateral cease-fire with Israel in 2005 and has  almost entirely avoided attacks on Israelis since then. No, it has not  tried to impose the cease-fire on other groups  neither rival extremists  like Islamic Jihad nor rogue elements within its own ranks. Nor has it  renounced its goal of eliminating Israel. Nonetheless, the group is going  as far as its ideology will permit in seeking coexistence.
America, meanwhile, continues as though nothing has changed in  the past quarter-century. New grudges emerge, but the old ones never seem  to be resolved, forgiven or reconsidered, and the list grows longer.
Hamas has signaled in every way possible in the past three years  that it wants to break out of its isolation and become a responsible  neighbor. It hasn't gone nearly far enough nor been forthright and  consistent enough, but it has moved. This moment in history, when  a new peace initiative is about to be launched and the old, tried-andtrue  tactics of war are crumbling, is a perfect time to reconsider the  quarantine of Hamas.

Load-Date: October 24, 2007


End of Document