Trial opens old wounds, prompts review of terrorism
University Wire
March 10, 2006 Friday


Copyright 2006 University Daily Kansan via U-Wire
Section: COLUMN
Length: 531 words
Byline: By Mark Vierthaler, University Daily Kansan; SOURCE: U. Kansas
Dateline: LAWRENCE, Kan. 
Body


As Zacarias Moussaoui entered the courtroom, a slowly healing wound on the American psyche was ripped open. Moussaoui, the only person to have charges brought against him stemming from the Sept. 11 terrorists attacks, stood defiant in front of the court. He said he was a member of Al-Qaeda and admitted to six accounts of conspiracy.
Arrested shortly before the Sept. 11 attacks took place, Moussaoui has been charged with responsibility for the attacks. The government prosecutors are calling for his execution, claiming he is directly responsible for the 3,000 deaths because he kept quiet. Although he did not have a hand in the actual plans, or the execution of them, prosecutors allege he was aware of them. And he kept quiet.
For almost five years, the United States has dealt with the monsters that were created on the day the towers fell. We watched in horror as live TV brought the images of the collapsing buildings into our homes.
Free speech crashed face first into the gravel of good taste. Should the newspapers have run the photos? Should artists claiming artistic license be allowed to sell the images of a person falling to their death? Soon, the tragedy itself became snowed under with the verbal volleys of politicians and citizens alike.
Bomb the bastards. But, who were the bastards? Soon, after an extended stay in Afghanistan, the United States deployed troops to Iraq. A brand new controversy sprang up and election campaigns were bludgeoned over our heads day after day. Eventually, the public eye began to glaze over. The deaths incurred in Afghanistan and Iraq were used as a political lever, not only by those in charge, but also by those attempting to discredit those in charge.
People still died, though. The World Trade Center is still an incredibly poignant hole in the ground. The families that lost loved ones are still searching for answers. In this muted, uncomfortable silence, we're still looking for revenge.
It's time for the United States to truly find what defines it as a country. For too long tragedy has begotten violence, anger and death. The events that took place on Sept. 11 are unforgivable. But, we've been marinating in a society of fear and anger for so long, there's a "Lord of the Flies"-esque desire to find at least one more scapegoat.
Should Moussaoui die? I can honestly say I don't know. I wish I did. Will one more life taken fill the void of a person you've spent every single day of your life with? My gut tells me he should die. But one last twinge of humanity tugs me back.
If he is guilty, he deserves punishment. But if he's killed, he becomes a martyr for his cause. He is spiritually prepared for death. Yes, he is an evil man, convicted of being part of an abandoned plan to fly an airplane into the White House. Yes, he's morally reprehensible. But what does death accomplish?
For God's sake, as a society we have to use our head and not our hearts. I'm not condoning his behavior. I'm not giving aid or sympathy for the terrorists. But, as Siddhartha Gotama, better known as Buddha, said, "Hatred does not cease in this world by hating, but by not hating; this is an eternal truth."
(C) 2006 University Daily Kansan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 10, 2006


End of Document