Tribe's Proposal Gets New Scrutiny; Terrorism raises fears about nuke facilities; N-Safety: Fears Grow After Sept. 11
Salt Lake Tribune (Utah)
November 23, 2001, Friday


Copyright 2001 The Salt Lake Tribune
Section: Final; Pg. C1
Length: 554 words
Byline: JUDY FAHYS, THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE
Body


A Massachusetts congressman has asked the Nuclear Regulatory Commission a big "what if" about the nuclear waste holding facility proposed for the Skull Valley Goshute Indian Reservation:
What if a jetliner loaded with 20,000 gallons of fuel took off from the Salt Lake City airport and crashed into the above-ground storage casks?
The question, posed by Democratic Rep. Ed Markey on Monday, represents the third time since spring the agency has been second-guessed for giving short shrift to the potential for terrorism at U.S. nuclear facilities.
"The NRC is still operating in a pre-September 11 world," said Markey, a member and past chairman of the panel that oversees commercial nuclear power and a longtime critic of atomic energy regulation.
"While the NRC and the nuclear power industry have been saying nothing short of 'It can't happen here,' " he said, "we know all too well that the terrorists of al-Qaida have contemplated and would carry out an attack on a nuclear facility."
In a similar letter last month, Utah state government attorneys asked the NRC to reconsider security risks posed by the Goshute facility. The same issues also were raised in June by two retired military officers, who felt theirs were "voices in the wilderness" about the possible terrorism threat.
The NRC only requires commercial nuclear facilities to prepare their sites for an attack by a few people armed with hand-held weapons or explosives -- nothing like a suicide hijacking.
Similar standards have been applied to the proposal by a consortium of out-of-state utility companies that plans to build and operate the storage facility on 125 acres of Goshute land about 45 miles southwest of Salt Lake City. The consortium, called Private Fuel Storage LLC (PFS), needs a permit from the NRC to park power-plant waste for up to 20 years, while a permanent underground repository is made ready, perhaps in Yucca Valley, Nev.
NRC spokeswoman Sue Gagner said the NRC staff has begun a thorough study of pertinent regulations, including training and communications standards.
"We are doing a complete review of our security requirements to see if any changes are needed," she said. "It's a top-to-bottom review."
Gagner also said her office would respond "in writing and in detail" to Markey's 10 pages of questions.
Meanwhile, PFS spokeswoman Sue Martin pointed out that the NRC last week issued two decisions about the storage site's safety.
In one, the NRC staff agreed with PFS that the risk of an accidental aircraft crash at the facility would be less than 1 in 1 million. In the second, the commission itself said a 1 in 1 million crash risk is reasonable. The state wanted the standard to be 1 in 10,000, given that the facility would be 15 miles from the Salt Lake City International Airport and on the flight path between Hill Air Force Base and the Utah Test and Training Range.
Martin added that a broader security-policy issue is dealing with the waste PFS wants to put on the Goshute Reservation, waste currently being stored at more than 70 sites around the nation, in many cases near big cities.
Markey aide Jeff Duncan called the NRC "dismissive" about the possibility of terrorism at nuclear facilities.
"They have a duty to protect the public health and safety, and we view this as a critical health and safety issue."
fahys@sltrib.com  

Load-Date: November 23, 2001


End of Document