Tribute planned for beheaded teacher in France; 11th person arrested
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 19, 2020 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2020 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 686 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


He fled after the attack but local police confronted him in the nearby area of Éragny.
The police launched a probe into the murder which was joined by the anti-terrorist prosecution.
The lesson sparked complaints from several parents. The attacker was killed by the police after a pursuit from the murder site.
Mr Macron said: "One of our compatriots was murdered today because he taught... the freedom of expression, the freedom to believe or not believe". "It is no coincidence that this evening it is a teacher that this terrorist killed because he wanted to bring down the Republic in its values".
At the school, parents and teachers paid tribute to the victim. "It's shocking that I won't see him again", said Tiago, a student in sixth grade. Paty was attacked in the immediate vicinity of the school while on his way home and also had numerous injuries on his head, in the abdomen and upper limbs, authorities stated.
The suspect was found a short distance from the victim, carrying a knife.
French authorities commonly do not disclose the surname of suspects. Three officers fired back, causing the suspect to fall, police stated. On Friday night, police arrested his parents, younger brother and one grandparent, a judicial source said, wanting to establish what they knew of his plans and if he had any accomplices.
Anti-terrorism prosecutor Jean-François Ricard will give a press conference on Saturday afternoon.
The attacker, who was shot dead by police as he refused to surrender, was an 18-year-old refugee of Chechen origin and not previously known to the intelligence services.
The post was removed swiftly by Twitter, which said it had suspended the account because it violated the company's policy.
"From Abdullah, the servant of Allah, to Macron, the leader of the infidels, I executed one of your hell dogs who dared to belittle Muhammad", the Tweet said.
Nine people, including members of Anzorov's family, were placed in custody in the early hours of yesterday.
Kanye West Calls Out Actress Issa Rae for Saturday Night Live Diss
While he performed his latest single, Holy , on the stage, Chance the Rapper , who collaborated with him on the track, joined him. Later that night, Bieber returned for an intimate performance of his latest record, " Lonely ".
The pupil, speaking beside her mother, said no one had made a fuss about the class a year ago.
Almost a dozen people are being held for questioning in Paty's killing, which took place as he headed home from class.
Four people, including a minor, have been arrested, a judicial source told AFP early Saturday.
The profile of the attacker, as recounted by law-enforcement officials, illustrates the difficulties security agencies face identifying would-be attackers who are often exposed to extreme ideology on the internet and whose contacts with other Islamist militants, if they have any, may have been purely virtual.
Macron guaranteed a quick reaction from the federal government on Friday.
"It's them or us", titled Le Point magazine in an editorial on the killing, while the regional Le Telegramme wrote that Friday's attack "reminds us to what extent our French model of education and separation of church and state is threatened".
"Without them, there are no citizens".
"A teacher was assassinated for the work that he does, but freedom of thought, freedom of expression, and the ability to teach these fundamental principles in our school s have also been attacked", added Ricard. Our unity and firmness are the only answers to the monstrosity of Islamist terrorism.
And late last month, after the trial had begun, two people were wounded in an attack near the magazine's former offices that authorities investigated as a possible terrorist act.
Ricard acknowledged that prior incident on Saturday, saying, "This terrorist crime is the second committed during the trial of the January [2015] attacks".
In some ways, the outpouring of shock and grief is a repeat of almost six years ago, when millions of pencil-brandishing protesters defended free expression, following the terrorist attacks targeting the offices of the Charlie Hebdo satirical magazine.

Load-Date: October 19, 2020


End of Document