Tripoli forces push opponents back slightly south of Libyan capital
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
April 22, 2019 Monday


University Wire
Copyright 2019 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 496 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


According to the United Nations, divisions within the global body over support for the warlord encouraged Haftar to launch his assault on Tripoli, which has already killed 205 people, including civilians, wounded 913, and forced tens of thousands to flee, the World Health Organization said on Thursday.
"In the past week, WHO Libya specialized emergency medical teams in frontline hospitals handled 89 major and 63 surgeries".
As you can imagine, more people are reading The Jerusalem Post than ever before.
"Mismari claimed that forces of the Government of National Accord were trying to attack LNA troops in the southern and the eastern suburbs of the Libyan capital".
Libya has been the scene of increasing violence since 2011, when former dictator Muammar Gaddafi was toppled from power after an uprising and a North Atlantic Treaty Organisation military intervention.
Reuters was unable to confirm whether an aircraft or unmanned drone was behind the strike which triggered heavy anti-aircraft fire.
Forces loyal to Libya's UN-recognised government have put up strong resistance.
A one-time officer in former Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's army who spent years living in exile in Virginia and later fought against Gadhafi's regime, Haftar, who is aligned with a parliament based in the country's east, has also reportedly received some support in the past from France, Russia, the UAE and Egypt.
BlackBerry Messenger shutting down on 31 May 2019
Back in 2016, BlackBerry announced a new partnership with Indonesia-based Emtek to help expand the consumer BBM business. The company thanked the support of its users, partners and employees for being part of the BBM consumer service journey.
Mustafa al-Mejii, a spokesman for the GNA's military operation, said his forces "have launched a new phase of attack".
Explosions heard in the city center this time were louder than in previous days, Reuters reported.
US President Donald Trump spoke by phone with Khalifa Haftar, the White House revealed Friday, as the Libyan warlord's forces continued to push toward the heart of Tripoli with heavy shelling in the southern parts of the Libyan capital. The LNA has so far mainly used aging Soviet-made jets from the air force of Muammar Gaddafi, toppled in 2011, lacking precision firepower and helicopters, according to residents and military sources.
Libya is split between rival governments in the east and west. President Donald Trump phoned Hifter earlier this week, expressing United States support for the leader's perceived stance against terrorism.
A White House statement Friday said: "The President recognized Field Marshal Haftar's significant role in fighting terrorism and securing Libya's oil resources, and the two discussed a shared vision for Libya's transition to a stable, democratic political system".
Residents in Tripoli said Hifter's forces seem to be making small progress and gains on the ground.
Battles between both sides have since raged on the outskirts of Tripoli.

Load-Date: April 22, 2019


End of Document