TRIPOLI, IN A PROTEST NOTE, ACCUSES U.S. OF 'INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM'
The New York Times
August 20, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 888 words
Byline: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Aug. 19
Body


Libya accused the United States tonight of ''international terrorism.'' The charge came in a note of protest delivered to the Belgian Embassy, which looks after American interests here in the absence of direct Libyan-American diplomatic relations.
The note resulted from the air clash in which the United States said two of its carrier-based fighters shot down two Libyan planes about 60 nautical miles off Libyan territory. Libya said the action, which it denounced as aggression, occurred ''within Libyan territorial waters.''
Libya sends note to Belgian Embassy accusing US of "flagrant and overt violation of all international laws"Dispute Over Distances
The United States maintains that Libya can claim only a three-mile territorial limit; Libya claims 12 miles except in the area of the Gulf of Sidra, the site of the battle. There, Libya says, its territorial limits run 12 miles north of a baseline drawn across the mouth of the Gulf.
The American action, the note declared, was a ''flagrant and overt violation of all international laws.'' The note did not say whether any Libyan planes had been shot down.
Libya's official press agency asserted tonight that one American F-14 was downed in the offshore action, contradicting a United States announcement that the American planes had returned safely to their base aboard the carrier Nimitz.
The battle, which the Pentagon said broke out when one of two Libyan planes fired missiles at two approaching American jets, was also strongly denounced by the Syrian state radio.
There was no immediate word, however, from the Libyan leader, Col.  Muammar el-Qaddafi, who was in Aden, Southern Yemen. The precise nature of Libya's response is not likely to be known until Colonel Qaddafi returns from Aden, where he has been meeting with the heads of state of Southern Yemen and Ethiopia. The three leaders signed a treaty today that Colonel Qaddafi had said would be aimed against the United States, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
Although Libya is the third-largest exporter of oil to the United States, after Saudi Arabia and Nigeria, relations between the nations have not been warm.
The United States withdrew its diplomatic delegation from Tripoli after a mob broke into the American Embassy grounds and set it on fire during anti-American demonstrations in December 1979.
Last May the Reagan Administration shut the so-called Libyan People's Bureau in Washington after accusations that the bureau was involved in finding and killing anti-Qaddafi exiles in the United States.
The report of the downing of the American F-14 was carried by the Libyan state radio, which quoted a military spokesman in a dispatch by Jana, the official state press agency. Later, the Libyan radio said that Libyan Navy vessels had picked up the wreckage of an American plane.
In Washington, the Defense Department denied that any American planes had been lost.  Earlier accounts of the episode by the Libyan radio also differed from the American version of events. The radio said that eight American planes had intercepted two Libyan planes that were ''conducting a routine reconnaissance operation within the Libyan airspace and territorial waters in the Gulf of Sidra.''
 
Earlier Objections by Libya
Even before today's clash, the Libyans had heatedly objected to the American naval maneuvers, which Libya said had ''exposed world peace and security to danger.'' The statement by the Libyan People's Bureau for Foreign Liaison said that Libya ''reserves the right to take all necessary measures to protect its legitimate rights in its territorial waters and airspace.''
A Libyan military spokesman added that the United States Navy was ''continuously, intensively and provocatively violating our territorial waters and airspace.''
Also before the clash, the Libyan press agency said that the United States Navy exercises ''unmask the nature of America's aggressive intentions against the Libyan nation and its achievements.''
Linking the United States naval presence to accusations that Egyptian troops are carrying out maneuvers along the Libyan border, which have been denied by President Anwar el-Sadat, the press agency added, ''The joint challenge by the American Administration and its agent Sadat, personified in the maneuvers of the American fleet and the ground forces of the Egyptian regime, are the last link in the chain of imperialism and the search for war and aggression against the people and the people's liberty.''
 
Tough Words From Iran
After today's dogfight Iran urged Libya not to ''shy away from a confrontation'' with the United States. Foreign Minister Hossein Mousavi said it was ''an expansion of American crimes and aggression throughout the world.''
Abed Rabbo, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization's information department and a member of its executive committee, said that ''this aggression calls for revolutionary Arab measures, especially by members of the Steadfastness and Confrontation Front, to face this American miilitary escalation with comprehensive and radical steps.''
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, which has been receiving arms from Libya, called the episode ''American air piracy'' and said that ''the masses throughout the Arab world will set the whole Arab region aflame to show that the Libyan revolution is not alone in the confrontation.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: map of Mediterranean Sea and Libyan shore showing area of dispute


End of Document