TRIREA extension vital for industry
Business Insurance
October 29, 2007


Copyright 2007 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 43
Length: 466 words
Byline: Gregory Case and Aaron F. Davis
Body


The recent approval by the full House and a key Senate committee of legislation to extend the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act is crucial to the financial well-being of companies across the nation as well as to the insurance market as a whole. This key legislation provides for assurances that U.S. businesses and their employees will be protected if a terrorist incident occurs.
After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, many insurance companies excluded terrorism events from their insurance policies-for fear they would not be able to afford to cover such losses in the future. As a result, Congress passed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act in 2002. TRIA created a federal backstop to protect companies against terrorism-related losses.
In 2005, Congress extended the program for two additional years, and on September 19th, the House of Representatives took an important step to ensure that the principles under which TRIA was created are maintained for the long term.
As a partner in the pursuit of prudent risk management, Aon supports the Terrorism Risk Insurance Revision and Extension Act of 2007. While there have been positive developments on the modeling and risk transfer capacity front since TRIA's inception, the simple fact is that the private market is not prepared to handle this risk now or in the near term without some form of public/private partnership.
The argument that TRIA has stifled private market development is untrue. It has, in fact, helped create the market for U.S. terrorism risk transfer-enabling the insurance industry to understand, analyze and quantify the impact of terrorism rather than exclude it altogether.
TRIA has also performed an important function in fostering private market participation by essentially creating a private market retention level that covers losses before the federal government steps in to provide excess catastrophic capacity. Just think how much better off things would be in New Orleans had a program of this nature been in place in advance of Hurricane Katrina.
To date, TRIA has provided the U.S. economy with a needed economic safety net that has encouraged the private market to cover all but the most catastrophic of losses. TRIREA, if signed into law by the president, will foster broader affordability and availability for terrorism insurance for property owners, corporations, public entities and insurers, and this means that all Americans can feel confident that a terrorist incident will not cause irreparable, long-term damage to our nation's corporate infrastructure.
We hail Congress' support for extending the TRIA program, and we call on the Bush administration to do the same.
Gregory Case (top) is president and CEO of Chicago-based brokerage Aon Corp. Aaron F. Davis is director of National Terrorism & Property Resources for Aon.

Graphic

 
Art Credit: Gregory Case * Aaron F. Davis

Load-Date: November 2, 2007


End of Document