TRIUMPHANT ARAFAT HASN'T EARNED LAURELS
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 19, 1993, SUNDAY, FIVE STAR Edition


Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. 3B; CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER COLUMN
Length: 519 words
Byline: Charles Krauthammer Copyright Washington Post Writers Group
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


I never thought I would live to see Yasser Arafat on the White House lawn.  And now that I have, I'm ready to reconsider the merits of longevity. I was there Monday when Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin shook hands. I did not feel wonder. I felt only anxiety.  Arafat is a schemer, a broker, a political thug. He came to the White House with one purpose: to transform himself into a statesman and visionary.  I have my doubts. And on the White House lawn, Arafat did nothing to dispel them. He said nothing to dispel the suspicion that his paper promising peace will go the way of every promise he has made - from the Cairo agreement of 1969 (which promised Lebanon peace if it would let him run a Palestinian state within southern Lebanon) to the "renunciation of terrorism" that George Shultz coaxed out of him in 1988.  Did anyone listen to Arafat's speech? Here was his great chance to tell Israel as plainly as Yitzhak Rabin had just told the Palestinians: We accept you, we want to live together in peace. Arafat said nothing about recognizing Israel. Nothing about stopping terrorism. Nothing about ending the intifada.  He spoke only of his future hopes and demands for getting more than he has been given.  It was a sorry performance.  Yitzhak Rabin signed the letter recognizing the PLO in Jerusalem on live television. He wanted his people to see it. When Arafat signed his letter recognizing Israel, he did so behind closed doors.
This is important because this whole peace adventure hinges on the PLO having really changed, not on its signing pieces of paper. It requires that Arafat begin to undo 50 years of vicious anti-Israel propaganda and tell his people plainly that Israel has a right to exist. It requires that Arafat tell them plainly that the fighting must stop. And to say it not just once but repeatedly, directly, in Arabic, to his Palestinian constituency.  On Tuesday, Arafat was asked: "Why don't you clearly call on Hamas and other Palestinians to stop their attacks on the Israelis?" "I have done it. And this, I have signed it," replied Arafat, refusing to make a simple forthright statement such as: "I ask my people to stop killing Israelis." Instead, this: "The accurate implementation of this agreement will defuse the causes of . . . violence." Meaning: Give me what I demand ("accurate implementation") and there will be no further need to knife Israeli bus drivers. Till then? Well, I have signed it, have I not?  This is how the "old Arafat" handled such questions: bobbing, weaving, maneuvering. This verbal slipperiness was lost on the U.S. media, which have the historical memory of a newt.  This is a very tentative pact based on very large promises made by very unreliable people. Yes, it might work. But Arafat's Washington performance - forget his history - does not inspire confidence. Here is the "new Arafat" at the National Press Club Tuesday: Q: "The Jewish people have not felt that they could trust you to keep your word. Why has this changed? And why should they trust you now?" A: "Many didn't trust Jesus Christ in the beginning." (Applause.) Think about that.

Load-Date: October 11, 1993


End of Document