TROOPS SENT TO QUELL VIOLENCE
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 27, 2009 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD; WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. A-4
Length: 560 words
Body


MEXICO CITY -- Amid growing alarm over drug violence in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico will deploy up to 5,000 more troops to in the border city, officials said yesterday. There are currently 2,000 soldiers and 425 federal police in the city, which is across the border from El Paso, Texas.
The troop deployment is part of President Felipe Calderon's offensive against drug traffickers.
Jose Reyes Ferriz, the mayor of Ciudad Juarez, said the added troops would give the military a higher profile by taking control of police functions, including street patrols. Currently, soldiers tend highway checkpoints, guard crime scenes and take part in special operations, such as house searches.
The city is without a police chief since Roberto Orduna quit last week after several officers were slain and someone posted threats saying more would be killed unless he stepped down.
U.K. handed over suspects
LONDON -- Contradicting previous denials about Britain's participation in the Bush administration's global war on terrorism, Defense Minister John Hutton said yesterday that Britain had handed over two terrorism suspects captured in Iraq to the U.S., which sent them to Afghanistan, where they're still being held after more than four years.
The men, thought to be Pakistani nationals, are members of Lashkar-e-Taiba, a Pakistani Islamist group with links to al-Qaida, and have been classified as "unlawful enemy combatants," Hutton said.
His disclosure contradicts past claims by the British government that it was never complicit in the practice of extraordinary rendition, in which detainees are sent to third countries, including some in which torture is commonplace.
The revelation sparked criticism from opposition politicians and civil liberties groups, who charged that the government is revealing details of its complicity in America's crackdown on terrorism in bits and pieces, and only after repeated denials.
Mr. Hutton said he now knew that some Cabinet ministers were aware that the two were handed over to the U.S. and transferred to Afghanistan in 2004.
The government, however, continued to deny that such practices had occurred, and the cases were exposed after a review of detentions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Mr. Hutton apologized for the past misinformation provided to members of Parliament. 
Bishop apologizes
ROME -- A British bishop whose denial of the Holocaust embroiled Pope Benedict XVI in controversy has apologized for his remarks, a Catholic news agency said yesterday.
Bishop Richard Williamson, with the conservative Society of St. Pius X, had faced worldwide criticism over a television interview in which he said no Jews were gassed during the Holocaust.
While Bishop Williamson apologized in a statement yesterday to all those who took offense and for the distress he caused, the bishop did not specifically say that his comments were erroneous, or that he no longer believed them. As a result, Jewish leaders said the apology did not go far enough.
Also in the world...
Engine trouble may have caused the Turkish Airlines crash Wednesdaythat killed nine people in the Netherlands, the head of the agency investigating the accident said yesterday. ... Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced a new law yesterday to crack down on an unprecedented wave of gang-related murders in Vancouver, which is preparing to host the 2010 Winter Olympic Games.

Load-Date: February 27, 2009


End of Document