Truckers can play a role in fight against terrorism
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
June 22, 2002, Saturday


Copyright 2002 The Pantagraph
Section: Editorial; Pg. A16
Length: 410 words
Body


Having truckers be alert for suspicious - possibly terrorist - activity along our nation's highways, including bridges and tunnels is a good idea.
Professional drivers spending a lot of time on the road could be more likely to recognize something out of place than a casual driver.
Even the catchy title "America's Trucking Army," coined by the American Trucking Associations, has a nice ring to it.
But when the truckers' organizations start talking about $38.5 million to operate this program, it's time to put on the brakes - or at least ease off the gas pedal.
Among other things, the money would be used to staff a toll-free hotline which later would be upgraded to a full-scale "Highway Watch Operations Center." The trucker would report suspicious activity to the hotline or operations center, where the information would be evaluated and passed along to the appropriate agency.
Let's just keep it simple. Call 911, or whatever the appropriate emergency number is where the trucker is traveling.
There are some good ideas in the "Anti-Terrorism Action Plan" put together by the trucking industry task force that studied the subject. This includes improving access to information for background checks of commercial truckers. Among concerns voiced since Sept. 11 is the possibility of terrorists obtaining licenses for hauling hazardous wastes and using the substances in an attack.
Other ideas sound more self-serving, such as developing a system to expedite "pre-cleared vehicles" at international borders.
But while we may quibble with the details, the concept of "enlisting" truckers in the anti-terrorism fight is a sound one.
It's a matter of numbers in addition to an ability to note something out of the ordinary. There are a lot more trucks on the nation's roadways than police cars. They cover a lot more miles, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Nearly every trucker is likely to have a cellular phone, CB radio and/or other communications device with which to report a potential problem.
Long seen by many as knights of the highway, ready to aid a motorist in distress, truckers are natural soldiers in the war against terrorism.
But let's not get carried away creating overblown, formal programs in an era when anything with "anti-terrorism" attached to it seems to expect a blank check from taxpayers.
Instead, let's see the trucking industry and government work together to enhance national security without the infusion of tens of millions of tax dollars.

Load-Date: June 25, 2002


End of Document