Truckers fighting terrorism
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
August 11, 2002, Sunday


Copyright 2002 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WIRE;
Length: 601 words
Byline: By George Strawley Associated Press writer
Body


HARRISBURG, Pa. -- Robert St. John has spotted drunken drivers and other potential road hazards while driving his New Jersey truck route.
Now, he'll be keeping an eye out for terrorists.
St. John is joining a national program that turns truck drivers into eyes and ears on the lookout for signs of terrorist activity. When they spot something suspicious, drivers call a nationwide center, which then relays the information to the appropriate law-enforcement agency.
"You've got nearly 3 million truck drivers throughout the country -- 6 million eyes running up and down not only interstate highways but other roads throughout the communities," said St. John. "If we're trained properly on what to look for and how to make that call on what we're observing, we can possibly deter something from happening."
The "Highway Watch" program arrived in Pennsylvania on Thursday with the first two-hour training session for about 50 selected drivers. The drivers are now going back to their companies to train other drivers.
The program is part of a trend following Sept. 11 as authorities encourage more citizen involvement to reduce the threat of terrorism -- a movement that has come under fire from civil liberties groups.
The program teaches drivers to spot signs of terrorist activity. They include indications that a person may be "rehearsing" a terrorist act to be carried out later, said John Willard, a spokesman for the American Trucking Associations, responsible for the program under a grant from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
Citing the need not to tip off potential terrorists, officials with the program declined to go into detail about the types of activities for which drivers will be trained to look.
As many as 400 drivers are being trained each month in the program, which started in Colorado. Pennsylvania is the 13th state to sign on. Utah Department of Public Safety spokesman Doug McCleve said there is no specific program for truckers to watch for possible terrorist activities in the Beehive State. The state, however, does have a phone number truckers and other citizens can call to report suspicious activities. That phone number is 801-557-8600.
"This is a phone number for any citizen, truck drivers or anybody else, who can call in at any time and report suspicious activities. We encourage people to call their local law enforcement first," McCleve said. "In general, we would encourage everybody to look for anything that looks unusual or suspicious in any way."
The training program for truckers started out as a general safety program but expanded to include counterterrorism after the terrorist attacks.
In July, the Justice Department announced plans for a program encouraging Americans to watch for suspicious activity and report it to the government. Operation TIPS -- the Terrorism Information and Prevention System -- was promptly criticized by civil liberties groups.
The American Civil Liberties Union said it was concerned that participants would, in effect, be searching people's homes without warrants, resources would be wasted on useless tips, and vigilantism and racial profiling would result.
Many security experts, however, say getting help from truckers and other ordinary citizens makes sense.
"I know they can make a difference," said Jeff Beatty, a security consultant for the Highway Watch program. "I know of incidents already in the trucking industry where there have been arrests of suspects because they exhibited suspicious behavior."
On The Net: American Trucking Associations: www.truckline.com; Pennsylvania Motor Truck Association: www.pmta.org/ 

Load-Date: August 11, 2002


End of Document