Truckers get rolling on spotting terrorism
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 10, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A01
Length: 1041 words
Byline: SHANE GRABER Of the Post-Dispatch
Body


The Department of Homeland Security has just the soldier to serve as a trusty line of defense against terrorism -- the American trucker.
These professional drivers are already on the road, there are plenty of them, and they're supposed to keep their eyes peeled anyway, federal officials reason.
So the Department of Homeland Security recently spent nearly $20 million to get 400,000 professional drivers -- including 10,000 from Missouri and 14,000 from Illinois -- trained in the finer points of terrorism spotting.
Some say that's not nearly enough. Truckers carry 70 percent of the nation's freight, yet the federal government spends 100 times more on airplane safety than it does on trucking security, safety experts said.
"Trucks clearly can be a means of delivering explosives," said Christian Beckner, a fellow in the homeland security program for the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington-based think tank. "So there's a track record here that is as deep as aviation in terms of terrorists using trucks as a means for carrying out attacks."
The U.S. Transportation Security Administration, which is part of the Homeland Security Department, recently pledged a $19.3 million grant to Highway Watch. The program was formed in 1998 and gives truckers a national hot line to report trouble, including highway hazards and emergencies not related to terrorism.
Since Missouri adopted the program, about 400 truckers have received training. In March, Illinois became the latest state to adopt the program. Illinois drivers have just begun taking classes.
The program is for anybody "willing to kill a Saturday afternoon to keep an industry safe from a terrorist attack," said John Willard, a spokesman for the American Trucking Associations.
During the one-day session, truckers learn about truck bomb terrorism around the world, how terrorist attacks play out and the ways someone might case a target.
The hot line handles about 200 calls a month nationwide. About half a dozen of those are security-related and have led to "ongoing investigations," Willard said.
Mark Wandersee, 50, drives a tractor-trailer for Schnuck Markets Inc. He and about 20 of his co-workers went through the Highway Watch program.
"We pick up on things," said Wandersee, of St. Peters. "We're so familiar with our highways that I feel that with how many miles we cover, we'd see something that might be out of the ordinary."
Wandersee, a 30-year veteran truck driver, has been with the grocery chain for 22 years.
"I think our occupation has been a perfect match for this task," he said. "As the program grows, it will teach us more, too."
Although the program was started for truckers, other highway professionals like bus drivers and motorist assist workers go through the program, too.
Bob Smith, a 62-year-old charter bus driver for Central States Trailways, recently volunteered to take an evening class.
"After 9/11, everybody got a little concerned," the Mehlville man said. "I don't think this part of the country is at risk as much as the areas on the east coast or in a big city, but being on the road, you never know what you might see. Chances are I never will see anything, but there's always that chance."
Wandersee and Smith might not have seen any trouble, but others have. A trucker who had gone through the Highway Watch program made the Oct. 24, 2003, report that led to the capture of the Washington-area sniper.
"They're patriotic Americans," Willard said. "Just like everybody else, we want to do our part to keep America safe. And you don't have to look any further than Oklahoma City to see what a truck bomb can do."
On April 19, 1995, Timothy McVeigh used a rented Ryder truck loaded with explosives to bomb the Murrah Federal Building, killing 168 people.
Terrorists have repeatedly used heavy vehicles in attacks, said a July 30 information bulletin from the Department of Homeland Security and FBI.
"Some terrorists consider trucks to be one of the best tools to breach security measures and carry explosives since the U.S. airline industry significantly increased security procedures," the bulletin said.
Terrorists also have shown an interest in planning attacks that use a truck's hazardous materials, officials believe.
On Aug. 1, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge raised to code orange the threat level for the financial services sectors in New York City, northern New Jersey and Washington. Intelligence officials had learned that terrorists might have been planning an attack by using "car and truck bombs," Ridge said.
Despite the warnings, the federal government has spent less than 1 percent of what it has on aviation security to secure the nation's trucking infrastructure, said Beckner of the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
"The planners' interest in truck bombs should serve as a wake-up call for the government to take trucking security more seriously," he said.
There are plenty of trucks from which terrorists can choose. Every day between 3 million and 3.2 million tractor-trailers crisscross the country. The Illinois trucking industry employs 62,374 workers. Missouri has 35,961.
"In other countries, truck bombs aren't uncommon," said Ross Nichols, director of member services for the Missouri Motor Carriers Association. "Our main goal is to keep trucks from getting targeted."
That's harder than it sounds, though, experts insist.
"It's a difference between a closed system versus trucking, where you have hundreds of thousands of miles of roads, millions of trucks and no defined spaces where trucks are going to land or take off," Beckner said. "But that's not to say there aren't things that can't be done."
The government should spend more on projects to secure trucks, especially those rigs that carry hazardous materials, he said.
But getting more money for the industry isn't easy. Although the Senate has recommended $22 million for Highway Watch next year, the House's Department of Homeland Security appropriations committee has said that this year's grant of nearly $20 million should last through the end of next year.
Trucking industry workers hope they can change lawmakers' minds.
"This is just the first step," Willard said. "Is this enough money? No. But it won't be the whole shebang."

Load-Date: September 10, 2004


End of Document