Truckers trained to watch for terrorism
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
August 6, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 303 words
Body


The government has fears that trucks may be used for terrorism and is training some truckers in the state to help protect the country.
The American Trucking Association has dubbed the program "Highway Watch." It's a plan to keep trucks from being used as weapons.
#TRUCKERS.BAL.a6#
Thursday the first volunteers from Pennsylvania's Trucking Army will finish their training.
"It's mostly common-sense things," Don Siekerman, a truck association spokesman, said. "It's simple stuff -- like trucks that are out of place, on bridges or near buildings where they shouldn't be. For the most part, these guys know what to look for. It's just getting them to think about it and report it."
Truck drivers were selected for the program because of their sheer number and constant presence on the roads.
Currently, there are trucking armies in 18 states. Several other states, like Pennsylvania, are ready to jump on board.
Funding for the program comes from the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration and the Office of Homeland Security.
"Truck drivers can see a lot of things sitting so high up," said Farmer Griest, safety director of Ephrata's Lester R. Summers Inc., one of two Lancaster County trucking companies participating.
"They see a lot more than anyone in a car can."
Griest said the program is a great idea. When he returns from the training session, he intends to share what he learned with the 92 drivers at Summers Inc.
"We're very safety conscious," he said. "We have a meeting once a month. That'll be a great time to get as many of our drivers trained as possible."
High Industries Inc. of Lancaster also is taking part in the training session.
Siekerman said the key to the program is that all reports are made to a national call center, creating a central dispatch system to alert the proper authorities in each state.

Load-Date: August 14, 2002


End of Document