Truck Attack Casts Cloak of Terrorism on Final Mayoral Debate
The New York Times 
November 1, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 1006 words
Byline: J. DAVID GOODMAN and WILLIAM NEUMAN
Highlight: Mayor Bill de Blasio and two of his challengers discussed terrorism in the final mayoral debate, and traded jabs on pay-to-play, homelessness and taxes.
Body


Against a backdrop of renewed fears of terrorism, Mayor Bill de Blasio and two of his main challengers clashed on Wednesday in their final pre-election debate that, after a solemn start, descended into frequent cross-talk and pointed attacks.
The timing of the debate, a day after a man who immigrated from Uzbekistan rammed a pickup truck through a crowded Lower Manhattan bike path, killing eight and wounding a dozen, presented political difficulties for Mr. de Blasio’s opponents, Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis, the Republican candidate, and Bo Dietl, a former police detective running as an independent.
The first three questions were related to terrorism: how to conduct police surveillance without violating civil liberties of Muslim New Yorkers; building bollards to            better secure pedestrian and cycling areas; and reacting to            President Trump’s comments on further restrictions to immigration.
Neither challenger criticized the mayor on his handling of the attack; each started by praising the Police Department and the resolve of the people of the city. All three liked the idea of more bollards.
But Mr. Dietl defended the surveillance of Muslims within minutes of the start.
“As far as this profiling thing, worrying about it, just look at this terrorist,” Mr. Dietl said. “What did he look like? Did he look like the terrorist, if you looked at a dictionary, with that beard the way he had.”
He added, “Political correctness cannot be there all the time.”
The stage afforded a ready-made opportunity for viewers to imagine how the relatively unknown Ms. Malliotakis, who stood to the mayor’s left, and the bellicose Mr. Dietl, who stood to his right, might have reacted to a similar act of terrorism, six days before the vote on Nov. 7.
Mr. de Blasio, fresh off a day of national media appearances and a news conference on the attack with law enforcement leaders, sought to maintain his composure as attacks came from both sides.
After about 15 minutes devoted to terrorism, the topics switched to familiar terrain for the mayor and his antagonists: crime numbers, the rise in homelessness, the need for more affordable housing, and the mayor’s conduct with donors that led to state and federal investigations but did not result in charges.
“This has been covered and covered and covered again,” Mr. de Blasio said, when asked by the debate moderator, Maurice DuBois of WCBS-TV, about testimony from a high-dollar donor in federal court in recent days. The donor, Jona S. Rechnitz, described in the case of a former union boss how his donations of more than $100,000 to Mr. de Blasio’s political causes gave him easy access to the candidate and mayor.
“He had my email address the same way that thousands of people have my email address,” the mayor said.
Even without the terror attacks, the two challengers faced an uphill battle on Wednesday: The polls show no momentum for their candidacies; they are competing for some of the same votes among those disgruntled or angered by Mr. de Blasio’s leadership; Mr. de Blasio raised nearly double the amount collected by Mr. Dietl and Ms. Malliotakis together during the last fund-raising period.
The prior debate among the three candidates devolved into shouting at many points, not least because each had their partisans in the raucous audience at Symphony Space on the Upper West Side where it was held last month.
On Wednesday, the audience did not play a role; not all of the seats were filled, according to a spokesman for the Campaign Finance Board. (Reporters were barred from entering the audience area.)
Mr. Dietl, who yelled through much of the first debate, softened his tone on Wednesday night, but not his message.
“I know a criminal when I see one. Mr. Mayor, you’re a criminal with your corruption and your pay-for-play,” Mr. Dietl said.
Ms. Malliotakis, 36, who represents areas of Staten Island and southwestern Brooklyn, sparred with Mr. de Blasio, amid frequent cross-talk with Mr. Dietl.
The most sustained back-and-forth came on the subject of rising property tax bills that some areas of the city have experienced. She pointed out that, in contrast, homeowners in Park Slope, Brooklyn, where Mr. de Blasio owns two townhouses worth more than $1 million, pay relatively little in property taxes.
“Like so many New Yorkers, I bought my home a long time ago and I never thought we’d see the kind of values we’re seeing today,” Mr. de Blasio said.
“You’re a millionaire!” Mr. Dietl interjected in mock awe.
Mr. de Blasio then shifted to criticize Ms. Malliotakis for not supporting his call for a so-called millionaires tax to pay for transit system improvements, and he pointed out that she voted for Mr. Trump.
“O.K., here we go,” Ms. Malliotakis said. “Here we go again.”
“So let me hear you say out loud you support a millionaires tax,” Mr. de Blasio said.
“I support you, Millionaire Bill, paying more property taxes,” Ms. Malliotakis shot back.
But the Republican candidate struggled to rise above the din with anything like a clear articulation of what the city would look like under her leadership.
“On January 1st, the for-sale sign comes off the gates of City Hall,” she said, in closing.
Neither debate included Sal Albanese, a former city councilman who ran against Mr. de Blasio in the Democratic primary and received the endorsement of a left-leaning newspaper, the Chief-Leader, popular with city workers; he did not meet the fund-raising thresholds set by the Campaign Finance Board.
At the end of the debate, Mr. Dietl praised Mr. DuBois, saying, “You’re the best narrator.”
Mr. de Blasio could not resist correcting him. “Moderator,” he said.
PHOTO: From left, Bo Dietl, Mayor Bill de Blasio and Nicole Malliotakis praised the police response to Tuesday’s attack but differed on surveillance. The mayor’s fund-raising also came under fire. (POOL PHOTO BY JEFFERSON SIEGEL)
Related Articles
Days Before Vote, Terror Attack Puts Mayor on World Stage
Five Takeaways From the Final New York City Mayoral Debate
Sparks Fly at Mayoral Debate, as de Blasio Fends Off 2-Pronged Attack

Load-Date: November 3, 2017


End of Document