Trudy Rubin: On sober reflection;
One year later, don't exaggerate the threat of terrorism.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
September 10, 2002 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: Pg. A11; news
Length: 815 words
Byline: Trudy Rubin
Body


Was the world really transformed in those 18 minutes on the morning of 9/11 when two hijacked planes shattered our complacency?
Not as much as you might think.
One year later, if you piece together what we now know that was off our radar screen before - about global terrorism, al-Qaeda, anthrax - you can say with some certainty that we are much safer now than we were then.
This point may seem counterintuitive as the Bush team gears up to attack Iraq based on the claim that Saddam may some day nuke us or help terrorists do it. How can we be safer, when the White House says the terrorist threat is so severe that the United States must have the right to depose any unfriendly ruler anywhere?
Let me offer three reasons why, I feel the scope of the threat is less overwhelming than you may believe - especially after days of watching anniversary reruns of the collapsing twin towers.
First of all, the al-Qaeda attack woke us up to the realities of a new era. For a decade, experts had been warning that terrorist attacks were more of a threat than wars with unfriendly states. Politicians paid little notice; the Bush team was more focused on big states with nuclear missiles.
But after 9/11 the new reality hit home.
Now there is a recognition that we are living through a period of extreme global economic change and social dislocation. Satellite television has made young people aware, especially in the Middle East, that their countries are falling behind. They want to vent their frustrations. In such a climate, murderous utopians arise who appeal to the disaffected with promises of a new heaven.
Solving the "root causes" of such disaffection lies more in the hands of the people of the Mideast than it does in ours. The region will continue to fester for some time. But at least if Americans are aware that such discontents breed terrorism, they can deal with the problem. That's far better - and far safer - than not being aware at all.
Second, whatever the danger from the new terrorism, it can't match the past threats posed by all-out conventional or nuclear war. Terrorism terrorizes - it horrifies civilian populations but it (mercifully) can't cause the mass fatalities of, say, Verdun or the Bulge. Nor can it lay waste entire cities or countries.
To get hold of weapons of mass destruction - viruses, a suitcase bomb, or the like - terrorists would need the help of rogue states that have return addresses. This must make any rogue ruler hesitate, be he Saddam Hussein or the rulers of Iran or North Korea, since he who hands off such weapons to terrorists is asking to be wiped out by the United States.
Third, when it comes to the terrorists themselves, the most dangerous group so far - al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden - has not won and clearly cannot win.
I am not dismissing the danger that al-Qaeda cells may strike again. Key leaders remain at large and we don't know whether bin Laden is dead or alive. But the U.S. operation in Afghanistan - which was necessary - deprived al-Qaeda of its safe haven. And Sept. 11 was a wake-up call to intelligence agencies through the West, including the CIA and FBI. A new level of global intelligence cooperation now exists that will continue, because so many nations feel threatened by terrorists.
Moreover, despite the emotional appeal of bin Laden to the Muslim disaffected, few would like to live in the seventh-century caliphate he sought to rebuild. His ideas won't attract the Arab masses, even though al-Qaeda will no doubt find new recruits.
So where does this leave us one year on? I believe we are engaged in a long-term struggle against the fallout from a period of acute global change. This could continue for a couple of decades.
I do not think the struggle against terrorism is - or should be labeled - an all-out war.
Nor does this struggle require an overarching new security doctrine. The idea that the United States should be permanently mobilized to roll back rogue leaders is imperial overreach.
Saddam Hussein, with his track record of geopolitical recklessness, may prove a special case who has to be dealt with militarily. This can be done within the framework of U.N. resolutions. It doesn't require a new Bush Doctrine of fighting preventive wars.
What hasn't changed over the last year is the ultimate character of the United States. Americans can be mobilized to meet a terrorist threat, but I don't believe the country is ready or willing to remain on a permanent war footing. Nor are Americans prepared to take on the financial and military burdens of reshaping the entire world.
This is becoming clear as the debate over Iraq really gets going.
The biggest threat to America on this first anniversary of Sept. 11 may be the damage we could do to ourselves if we exaggerate the threat we face. The reality is serious enough. It is a challenge we can meet.
Contact Trudy Rubin at 215-854-5832 or trubin@phillynews.com.  

Load-Date: September 10, 2002


End of Document