TRUMP WANTS TOUGHER IMMIGRANT SCREENING Focuses remarks on nations hit by terror
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
July 24, 2016 Sunday
Main Edition


Copyright 2016 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 006
Length: 421 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


ELECTION 2016
 WASHINGTON  - Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is asserting that countries like France that he says are compromised by terrorism may be subjected to the "extreme vetting" he proposes as a deterrent to attacks in the U.S.
 When asked if his proposal might lead to a point when not a lot of people from overseas are allowed into the U.S., Trump said, "Maybe we get to that point" and added: "We have to be smart and we have to be vigilant and we have to be strong."
 In an interview to air Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press," Trump also defended Fox News founder Roger Ailes, who left the network amid accusations of sexual harassment; criticized rival Hillary Clinton's newly named running mate, Sen. Tim Kaine, for accepting gifts while Virginia's governor; dismissed descriptions of his nomination acceptance speech as "dark," instead calling it "optimistic"; and expressed disapproval of David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader who is seeking a Senate seat from Louisiana.
 For months Trump has called for a temporary ban on foreign Muslims seeking to enter the United States and criticized the Obama administration for continuing to admit refugees from Syria. In his speech Thursday night at the Republican National Convention, he said the U.S. "must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place" - notably leaving out any reference to Muslims or to Syria, Iraq and other Mideast nations.
 In the NBC interview, Trump noted "specific problems" in Germany and France - both countries have been rocked by fatal attacks in public places in recent weeks - and "Meet the Press" host Chuck Todd asked if his proposal would limit immigration from France. "They've been compromised by terrorism," Todd said.
 Trump replied: "They have totally been. And you know why? It's their own fault. Because they allowed people to come into their territory." He then called for "extreme vetting" and said: "We have to have tough, we're going to have tough standards. ? If a person can't prove what they have to be able to prove, they're not coming into this country."
 In his comments about Ailes, Trump described the ousted Fox News head as a longtime friend and said "some of the women" complaining about Ailes have been helped by him in the past and earlier had said good things about him.
 "It's very sad," Trump said. "Because he's a very good person. I've always found him to be just a very, very good person."

Load-Date: July 28, 2016


End of Document