Trump ties visas to health care:
Chicago Daily Herald
October 5, 2019 Saturday
WEB EditionNC1 EditionNC2 EditionMF12 EditionNC3 EditionNM1 EditionNC EditionNC14 EditionMC1 EditionMC3 EditionMD1 EditionML2 EditionNL1 EditionNC14C EditionNC4 EditionCLFM EditioneBlast Edition


Copyright 2019 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NATION_; Pg. 2
Length: 501 words
Body


Trump ties visas to health care: WASHINGTON — The White House late Friday issued a proclamation saying it would deny visas to immigrants who "will financially burden" the U.S. health-care system starting Nov. 3, demanding that foreign nationals prove that they have insurance or are affluent enough to cover their own health-care costs before entering the United States. Like many of Trump's immigration policies, it is likely to face swift legal challenges in federal courts. 
Trump said he is taking the action to "protect the availability of health care benefits for Americans." Paris attack possibly terrorism: PARIS — French prosecutors opened an investigation Friday that treats the fatal knife attack that a civilian employee carried out at Paris police headquarters as a potential act of terrorism. The longtime police employee stabbed four colleagues to death Thursday before he was shot and killed. Bus flips over; 13 injured: TOLEDO, Ohio — Authorities say a bus carrying developmentally disabled people flipped over during a crash with other vehicles in Ohio and sent 13 people to hospitals. Five of those taken to hospitals suffered severe injuries, police said. Legionella closes schools: CHESTERTON, Ind. — Two northwestern Indiana schools have been temporarily closed after a school district employee tested positive for Legionnaires' disease. Duneland School Corporation officials say Westchester Intermediate School was closed Friday after "traces" of Legionella bacteria were found in its cooling tower, and Chesterton Middle School was shuttered following a similar discovery in its water system. Both schools were tested after an employee reported testing positive for Legionnaires' disease. Comedian Andy Dick charged: LOS ANGELES — Comedian Andy Dick, 53, has been charged with groping a driver from a ride-hailing service in West Hollywood on April 12, 2018. Johnson may seek Brexit delay: LONDON — British Prime Minister Boris Johnson would seek an extension to the Oct. 31 Brexit deadline if no withdrawal deal with the European Union is reached by mid-October, according to a document read aloud in a Scottish court Friday. First all-female spacewalk set: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. — The first all-female spacewalk is back on, six months after a suit-sizing flap led to an embarrassing cancellation. NASA announced Friday that the International Space Station's two women will make the spacewalk later this month. 15 fraternities suspended: Ohio University administrators this week suspended 15 fraternities amid allegations of hazing, shutting down all events and activities at the chapters until further notice. The action encompasses all members of the Interfraternity Council at Ohio University. Retrial in warehouse fire case: OAKLAND, Calif. — Derick Almena, 49, the founder of an artists' work-live collective in the San Francisco Bay Area where a fast-moving fire trapped and killed 36 partygoers three years ago, will be tried again on manslaughter charges, prosecutors said Friday.

Load-Date: October 7, 2019


End of Document