Trump administration backs PLO in victims' high court appeal
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
April 2, 2018 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A13
Length: 401 words
Byline:  By MARK SHERMAN Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON - Despite its bumpy relationship with the Palestinians, the administration of President Donald Trump is siding with the Palestine Liberation Organization in urging the Supreme Court to reject an appeal from American victims of terrorist attacks in the Middle East more than a decade ago.
The victims are asking the high court to reinstate a $654 million verdict against the PLO and Palestinian Authority in connection with attacks in Israel in 2002 and 2004 that killed 33 people and wounded hundreds more.
The case was set to be considered at the justices' private conference on Thursday, but a decision to reject the appeal could come as early as Monday.
The federal appeals court in New York tossed out the verdict in 2016. It said U.S. courts can't consider lawsuits against foreign-based groups over random attacks that were not aimed at the United States.
The victims sued under the Anti-Terrorism Act, signed into law in 1992. The law was passed to open U.S. courts to victims of international terrorism, spurred by the killing of American Leon Klinghoffer during a 1985 terrorist attack aboard the Achille Lauro cruise ship.
The victims argued that offices the Palestinians maintain in the nation's capital to promote their cause in speeches and media appearances and to retain lobbyists were sufficient to allow the lawsuit in an American court. The appeals court disagreed.
In late June, the justices asked the administration to weigh in on the case, as they often do in cases with foreign policy implications. The Justice Department filed its brief eight months later, saying there was nothing in the appeals court ruling to "warrant this court's intervention at this time."
Theodore Olson, the lawyer for the victims, wrote, "The government is not being square with the court."
If the appeals court decision is left in place, it would close the courthouse door to U.S. victims of "many acts of terrorism overseas in which terrorists maim and kill indiscriminately, without regard to nationality," Olson said. He pointed to recent attacks in Belgium, Britain, France and Spain as examples. Even Klinghoffer's relatives would have no case, unless they could prove he was killed because he was American, rather than Jewish, he said.
The administration said it was "far from clear" that so many claims would be kept out of court.
The Palestinians also have called on the court to reject the appeal.

Load-Date: April 27, 2018


End of Document