Trump visits Kenosha, cites 'domestic terrorism' President Donald Trump visits KenoshaWisconsin
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
September 2, 2020 Wednesday


Copyright 2020 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 406 words
Byline: Zeke Miller and Jonathan Lemire Associated Press
Body


aw_200902_trump kenosha cd
^$^By Zeke Miller
and Jonathan Lemire
KENOSHA, Wis. - President Donald Trump stood at the epicenter of the latest eruption over racial injustice Tuesday and came down squarely on the side of law enforcement, blaming "domestic terror" for the violence in Kenosha, Wisconsin, and making no nod to the underlying cause of anger and protests - the shooting of another Black man by police.
Trump declared the violence "anti-American." He did not mention Jacob Blake, who was left paralyzed after being shot in the back seven times by an officer last week in Kenosha.
Soon after arriving in the city, a visit made over the objections of state and local leaders, Trump toured the charred remains of a block besieged by violence and fire.
With the scent of smoke still in the air, he spoke to the owners of a century-old store that had been destroyed and continued to link the violence to the Democrats, blaming those in charge of Kenosha and Wisconsin while raising apocalyptic warnings if their party should capture the White House.
"These are not acts of peaceful protest but, really, domestic terror," said Trump.
And he condemned Democratic officials for not immediately accepting his offer of federal enforcement assistance, claiming, "They just don't want us to come."
The city has been the scene of protests since the Aug. 23 shooting of Blake, who was shot as he tried to get into a car while police were trying to arrest him. Protests have been concentrated in a small area of Kenosha. While there were more than 30 fires set in the first three nights, the situation has calmed since then.
Trump's motorcade passed throngs of demonstrators, some holding American flags in support of the president, others jeering while carrying signs that read Black Lives Matter.
A massive police presence, complete with several armored vehicles, secured the area, and barricades were set up along several of the city's major thoroughfares to keep onlookers at a distance from the passing presidential vehicles.
Offering federal resources to help rebuild the city, Trump toured a high school that had been transformed into a heavily fortified law enforcement command post. He said he tried to call Blake's mother but opted against it after the family asked that a lawyer listen in.
Trump later added he felt "terribly" for anyone who suffered a loss, but otherwise only noted that the situation was "complicated" and "under investigation."

Load-Date: September 2, 2020


End of Document