Trump defends CIA nominee, says she is 'tough on terror'
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
May 8, 2018 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2018 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A7
Length: 523 words
Byline:  By ZEKE MILLER and DEB RIECHMANN Associated Press  
Body


WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump defended Gina Haspel, his nominee to head the Central Intelligence Agency, on Monday, dismissing criticism of her involvement in a harsh interrogation program and arguing that Democrats want her out because she "is too tough on terror."
Haspel had offered to withdraw her nomination, administration officials said, amid concern that a debate over interrogation practices that some call torture was attracting unfavorable attention and could hurt the CIA. She would not want to stay in "if she felt her nomination would be a problem" for the CIA, but the White House has complete confidence in her, press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Monday. Haspel "is 100 percent committed" to going through the confirmation process.
Haspel's involvement in the agency's interrogation programs after the Sept. 11 attacks have drawn scrutiny from Democratic lawmakers.
Sanders says the White House is "fully confident" in Haspel's ability to answer questions about her involvement in those programs on Wednesday when she testifies before the Senate.
Haspel was meeting at the Capitol on Monday with senators whose support could be key to her confirmation. Asked if there was any chance she would withdraw, Haspel told reporters, "Looking forward to Wednesday," when she will be questioned by the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Trump said earlier on Twitter that Haspel has "come under fire because she was too tough on Terrorists."
"Win Gina!" he tweeted.
White House aides on Friday sought out additional details about Haspel's involvement in the CIA's now-defunct program of detaining and brutally interrogating terrorism suspects after the Sept. 11 attacks as they prepared her for the confirmation hearing. This is when she offered to withdraw, officials said.
They said Haspel, who is the acting director of the CIA, was reassured that her nomination was still on track. The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations. The news was first reported Sunday by The Washington Post.
Haspel, who would be the first woman to lead the CIA, is the first career operations officer to be nominated to lead the agency in decades. She served almost entirely undercover, and much of her record is classified. Democrats say she should be disqualified because she was the chief of base at a covert detention site in Thailand where two terrorism suspects were subjected to waterboarding, a technique that simulates drowning.
She has told lawmakers in recent weeks that she would stand firm against any effort to restart the brutal detention and interrogation program, administration officials said on Friday. She is expected to reiterate that publicly this week.
Haspel, one official said, was wary of suffering the same fate as failed Veterans Affairs nominee Ronny Jackson and of dredging up the CIA's troubled past. She took over last month as the acting CIA director after the previous director, Mike Pompeo, was sworn in as secretary of state.
Haspel's conversations will continue ahead of Wednesday's confirmation hearing at the Senate Intelligence Committee and a later full vote in the Senate.

Load-Date: May 12, 2018


End of Document