Trump taking logical steps
The Bismarck Tribune
September 9, 2018 Sunday


Copyright 2018 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 7
Length: 323 words
Body


Mainstream media pundits have decried President Donald Trump's recent demands for increased European support for NATO, and attempts to engage Vladimir Putin as an abandonment of traditional U.S. allies and collusion with an enemy. Hogwash. He is updating a long dysfunctional post-WWI European policy into the 21st century. NATO was formed to counter the imminent threat of a massive Soviet communist army invading western Europe from occupied eastern Europe. The U.S. paid the bill because post-war Europe was broke.
The Soviet Union no longer exists, eastern Europe is no longer occupied, and Russia is no longer communist. Russia has neither the conventional military strength, nor the immediate geographical position to pose an imminent threat to western Europe. Putin is brutal, but his geopolitical interests are nationalist, not communist. It is both unrealistic and dangerous to pose Russia as a perennial enemy. Russia is a geopolitical competitor, a rival, and a potentially dangerous situational adversary, not an ideologically driven threat. It needs to be engaged realistically based on respective geopolitical interests. The real common threat to the U.S., Europe, and Russia is middle eastern terrorism and a nuclear Iran.
Furthermore, Europe is no longer broke. It has a powerful economy, and the U.S. has a crushing debt. We are currently paying 3.6 percent of our GDP, more than 70 percent of the entire NATO budget, compared with 1-2.4 percent for European nations, and Europeans frequently don't pay their commitment. Because guns and butter are fungible, we are essentially paying for Europe's bloated social welfare system at the expense of our own debt and needs.
It's time to back off on NATO, assess Europe's fair share of the cost, realistically and cautiously engage Russia, and refocus on the real threat -- Middle Eastern terrorism and nuclear Iran. Trump's policy is correct and long overdue.
William Schuh, Mandan

Load-Date: September 9, 2018


End of Document