Trump: Rudy & I win war
Daily News (New York)
May 12, 2016 Thursday
SPORTS FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2016 Daily News, L.P.


Section: NEWS; Pg. 10
Length: 284 words
Byline: BY CAMERON JOSEPH NEW YORK DAILY NEWS With Jennifer Fermino
Body


WASHINGTON - Donald Trump is thinking about creating a terrorism commission - and floated the name of Rudy Giuliani as a possible chairman.
"I'm thinking about setting up a commission, perhaps headed by Rudy Giuliani, to take a very serious look at this problem," he said Wednesday on "Fox and Friends."
Trump mentioned Giuliani and the potential commission if he wins the White House while slamming President Obama for his handling of terrorism.
"Now, if you don't want to discuss the problem, then we're never gonna solve the problem," Trump said. "It's a real - it's a real problem, not only here but throughout the world," the former reality TV star said, then criticized Obama's refusal to say "radical Islamic terrorism."
Former mayor and GOP presidential candidate Giuliani has been a staunch Trump backer, endorsing him before last month's New York Republican primary.
Giuliani declined comment.
Trump also said his proposed ban on Muslims would only be temporary and would not prohibit London's new mayor, Sadiq Khan, a Muslim, from entering the country.
But Trump's national spokeswoman said the new proposals would still make it harder for Muslims to get into the U.S. "Well, again, it all depends on if we know their intentions," Katrina Pierson said on CNN.
She said if the U.S. "knows who they are, knows where they're coming from, if they have documents, then yes, those are individuals that could come to this country."
Khan called Trump's views "ignorant."
"It is possible to be a Muslim and to live in the West. It is possible to be a Muslim and to love America," he said on CNN. "By giving the impression that Islam and the West are incompatible, you are playing into the hands of the extremists."

Graphic

 
Rudy Giuliani is a Trump BFF; London Mayor Sadiq Khan isn't.

Load-Date: May 12, 2016


End of Document