Trump threatens 'severe consequences' if Iran resumes nuclear program
The Acorn: Drew University
May 10, 2018 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 581 words
Byline: Joey Payne
Body


The former Central Intelligence Agency director referenced Obama's statement on the withdrawal that "laid out clearly the facts of the deal" and "what type of assurances we have that Iran is not going to pursue this". They will, however, feel a void if they are denied access to the USA economy.
Mattis said the administration will collaborate with US allies and partners to stunt Iran's destabilizing activities in the Middle East, including the ongoing developments to its ballistic missile program, its support of terrorism, and its threat to global commerce in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf.
The protest came as Iranian officials, including parliament speaker Ali Larijani and President Hassan Rouhani, said Wednesday they hoped European leaders will work with them to preserve the deal between Tehran and world powers - without the USA - but stressed that the nation could now decide to resume its nuclear program. Meanwhile, the Iranian people have suffered at home from a tanking currency, rising inflation, stagnant wages and a spiraling environmental crisis. It's time for President Trump to ignore former Secretary of State John Kerry's repudiation of the Monroe Doctrine. He decided that this deal actually undermines the security of the American people he swore to protect and, accordingly, ended US participation in it. So we will work with our allies and try to bring Iran back into more responsible behavior. "After the sanctions were lifted, the dictatorship used its new funds to build nuclear-capable missiles, support terrorism, and cause havoc throughout the Middle East and beyond". In July 2015, when Barack Obama was at the helm, the USA, the UK, Iran, China, France, Russia, Germany and the European Union adopted the so-called Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), under which Iran would eliminate stockpiles of enriched uranium in return for lifting nuclear-related economic sanctions.
"The European Union is ready to challenge at the WTO any unilateral measure that would hurt the interests of European companies and respond in a proportionate manner, in accordance of course with the rules of that worldwide organisation", Griveaux said.
Israel patently does not believe the danger of an Iranian strike has passed - public bomb shelters in the north are being opened, the IDF chief of staff toured the north on Wednesday, Iron Dome rocket defense systems are being deployed and tanks are heading north.
In 2005, when India voted against Iran at the worldwide atomic energy agency , Iran had retaliated by cancelling a deal for selling liquefied natural gas or LNG. No one in the Trump administration has any illusions about the negotiations ahead.
Could this all be part of a Donald Trump "Art of the Deal" high-pressure play to force Tehran into concessions?Sputnik spoke toHooshang Amirahmadi, President of the American Iranian Council for more insights into the issue. Since the earliest days of his administration he has established strong working relationships with his Japanese and South Korean counterparts to help do just that. "The president spiked the Iran deal out of spite and hubris, with no viable alternative", Rice added. The deal was not "decayed, rotten", as Mr Trump has described it.
British Prime Minister Theresa May, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron said they noted Trump's decision "with regret and concern" in a joint statement. He urged all parties to the agreement to deliver on their commitments.

Load-Date: May 10, 2018


End of Document