TRUMP PLANS TO EXIT TREATY WITH RUSSIA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
May 22, 2020 Friday
SOONER EDITION


Copyright 2020 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATION/WORLD; Pg. A-12
Length: 559 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body


The United States intends to withdraw from a treaty with Russia that allows unarmed surveillance flights over each other's territories, President Donald Trump said Thursday, a move that marks the latest U.S. pullback from a major international arms pact and could further strain ties with Moscow and European allies.
But the president suggested a full withdrawal from the Open Skies Treaty - which would take place in six months - could be averted if Russia stopped violating the agreement, as the administration accuses it of doing.
"Russia didn't adhere to the treaty, and so until they adhere to the treaty, we will pull out," Mr. Trump said as he left the White House for a trip to Michigan. "There's a very good chance we'll make a new agreement, or do something to put that agreement back together."
Even so, the withdrawal was already set in motion, potentially signaling an end to overflight arrangements set up decades ago to promote trust and avert conflict.
The pact has 34 signatories, including major NATO allies. The administration has briefed some about the president's plan, officials said.
Last year, Mr. Trump removed the U.S. from another major international arms-control agreement with Russia, the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which dates back to 1987.
Michigan flooding declared emergency
Many Central Michigan residents remained cut off from their homes Thursday even as floodwaters receded, with senior citizens among the scores of people staying in shelters after flooding overwhelmed two dams, submerged homes and washed out roads.
President Donald Trump, who was visiting a Michigan Ford production plant, signed an emergency declaration authorizing the Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Emergency Management Agency to coordinate relief efforts.
At Midland High School, 90% of people who slept in the school's gym were senior citizens, said shelter coordinator Jerry Wasserman. He said extra precautions were in place due to the combination of the guests' ages and the coronavirus pandemic.
"We had to deal with COVID and then deal with their angst of what's happened to their house and their pets and all this," Mr. Wasserman said Thursday.
Much of the area remained underwater, including in Midland, the headquarters of Dow Chemical Co. And floodwaters continued to threaten downstream communities.
It could be days before the full scope of damage can be assessed, officials said. No flood-related deaths or injuries have been reported.
FBI: Texas shooting is 'terrorism-related'
A shooting at a Texas naval air station that wounded a sailor and killed the gunman early Thursday was being investigated as "terrorism-related," the FBI said, but divulged few details as to why.
The suspect was identified as Adam Alsahli, of Corpus Christi, according to three officials familiar with the investigation who spoke to the Associated Press on condition of anonymity.
FBI Supervisory Senior Resident Agent Leah Greeves said at a news conference that investigators were working to determine whether a second person of interest was at large but did not elaborate. She also would not discuss a potential motive or specify what led investigators to believe the shooting was related to terrorism.
The injured sailor was discharged from a hospital where she was treated for minor injuries, according to a statement from the command.

Load-Date: May 22, 2020


End of Document