Trump addressed an alternative world in puzzling Poland speech
Charleston Gazette-Mail
July 10, 2017, Monday


Copyright 2017 Charleston Newspapers
Section: NEWS; Pg. P4A
Length: 739 words
Body


WASHINGTON A little learning is a dangerous thing, wrote the poet Alexander Pope. Three centuries later, Popes aphorism perfectly and dangerously describes President Donald Trumps understanding of history as a zero-sum clash of civilizations in which the West can triumph by imposing its will.
The speech Trump delivered Thursday in Warsaws Krasinski Square might have been appropriate when Britannia ruled the waves and Europes great powers held dominion over lesser peoples around the globe. It had nothing useful to say about todays interconnected world in which goods, people and ideas have contempt for borders.
The fundamental question of our time is whether the West has the will to survive, the president said. Do we have the confidence in our values to defend them at any cost? Do we have enough respect for our citizens to protect our borders? Do we have the desire and the courage to preserve our civilization in the face of those who would subvert and destroy it?
Trump added what he probably thought of as a Churchillian flourish: I declare today for the world to hear that the West will never, ever be broken. Our values will prevail. Our people will thrive. And our civilization will triumph.
Triumph over whom? Trump mentioned radical Islamic terrorism as one of the enemies posing dire threats to our security and to our way of life, but he didnt stop there. He went on to add Russia and weirdly the steady creep of government bureaucracy to the list. It is appalling that the president would describe patriotic public servants as a kind of fifth column that drains the vitality and wealth of the people, and I guess some precious bodily fluids as well.
But what does Trump mean when he speaks of the West and its civilization?
Americans, Poles and the nations of Europe value individual freedom and sovereignty, he said. We must work together to confront forces, whether they come from inside or out, from the south or the east, that threaten over time to undermine these values and to erase the bonds of culture, faith and tradition that make us who we are. ... We write symphonies. We pursue innovation. We celebrate our ancient heroes, embrace our timeless traditions and customs, and always seek to explore and discover brand new frontiers.
Thats what I mean about a little learning. If the president read a few history books, hed know that for most of the last 2,000 years, China and India were the worlds leading economic powers, and Europe was a relatively primitive backwater. Hed know Europe rose to dominance not by erecting walls, but by opening itself to the rest of the world its resources, products and people.
There is nothing pure about Western civilization. Its ability to absorb and incorporate outside influences has proved a great strength, not a weakness. Imagine Italy without tomato sauce, a gift from the New World or the United States without the high-tech companies founded by immigrants, gifts from the Old World.
Of course Trump is right to call for a united front against terrorism. But the solution, in a globalized world, cannot be to hunker behind walls, however big and beautiful those walls might be. Industrial supply chains cross borders and span oceans. Words and images flash around the globe at the speed of light. Global issues, such as nuclear proliferation and climate change, demand global solutions. Like it or not, we are all in this together.
The correct response to the terrorism threat, which is real, is to isolate it as an abomination that is as much a grievous insult to Islam as to any other faith and that has taken the lives of far more Muslims than non-Muslims.
The wrong response is to posit that the West is besieged by, and therefore at war with, a hostile civilization. Thats a fight everyone loses.
Trump did finally make clear that the United States remains fully committed to Article 5 of the NATO treaty, which states an attack on one member of the alliance is tantamount to an attack on all. He was tougher on Russia than in the past, and he cited propaganda, financial crimes and cyberwarfare as new forms of aggression that must be countered.
But viewing the fight against terrorism as some kind of civilizational Armageddon is wrong. Trump seems to view himself as the Wests defender against 1.6 billion Muslims, almost all of whom want only to live in peace. We need a capable president, not a crusader in chief.
Eugene Robinson is a columnist for
The Washington Post.

Load-Date: July 12, 2017


End of Document