Trump: World can't tolerate terrorism
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
November 25, 2017 Saturday


Copyright 2017 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 7
Length: 360 words
Byline: JILL COLVIN The Associated Press
Body


JUPITER, Fla. - President Donald Trump on Friday denounced the deadly mosque attack in Egypt and reached out to its president, asserting the world must crush terrorists by military means - and the U.S. needs the travel ban that's tied up in courts.
"Need the WALL, need the BAN!" Trump tweeted before his planned call to Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi. "God bless the people of Egypt."
At his Florida resort for a long Thanksgiving weekend, Trump spoke by phone with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan "about bringing peace to the mess that I inherited in the Middle East," he said in a tweet. A Turkish official said Trump agreed the U.S. would no longer arm Syrian Kurdish fighters - a claim not verified by the White House.
Attention then turned to the attack in Egypt, where at least 235 people were killed when Islamic militants attacked a crowded mosque during prayers in the Sinai Peninsula, setting off explosives and spraying worshippers with gunfire.
"The world cannot tolerate terrorism," Trump tweeted in response. He added, "We must defeat them militarily and discredit the extremist ideology that forms the basis of their existence!"
During the call between U.S. and Turkish leaders, Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlut Cavusoglu claimed, Trump said the United States would no longer supply arms to Syrian Kurdish fighters. Cavusoglu was in Erdogan's office during the call.
Turkey considers the Kurdish Syrian fighters, known by the initials YPG, to be terrorists because of their affiliation with outlawed Kurdish rebels in Turkey. A U.S. decision to arm the fighters soured relations between the two NATO allies.
"Mr. Trump clearly stated that he had given clear instructions and that the YPG won't be given arms and that this nonsense should have ended a long time ago," Cavusoglu said.
The White House did not immediately respond to questions about Cavusoglu's claims and did not immediately release its own take on the call.
Erdogan's office said in its summary that the two leaders had discussed the Syrian crisis and other regional issues during their phone call Friday, and that they also discussed ties between Turkey and the United States.

Load-Date: November 28, 2017


End of Document