Trump is right to make moves against terrorism
Reflector: Mississippi State University
February 9, 2017 Thursday


University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; Pg. 1
Length: 476 words
Byline: Heath Fisackerly
Body


One of the very first things President Trump did after becoming commander-in-chief was order the Joint Chiefs to design a plan that would serve as a true strategy for defeating ISIS. Trump signed a presidential memo to the Pentagon as an order to design the plan within 30 days of the Trump Administration's existence. 
Trump made good on yet another campaign promise in being tough and vigilant in fighting ISIS. Reports from the Pentagon say that plans were being scripted before Trump even became president. 
Trump had a phone call with Russian President Vladimir Putin during his first week in office in which they talked about the importance of having a good relationship and combatting terrorism. Trump believes that Russia could be a vital asset in the fall of ISIS, but many on Capitol Hill are very weary of the president's desire to include Russia.
If the United States could form a relationship with Russia that would benefit both countries, it would bolster our attack against ISIS in the Middle East. Trump has repeatedly pledged to "knock the hell out of ISIS," which is something we can do, but having a partner would ease the burdens on the United States. The United States should not be fighting this alone and the president knows that. 
It appears that both Trump and Putin believe an alliance against the barbarians could indeed work. "Both President Trump and Putin are hopeful that after today's call the two sides can move quickly to tackle terrorism and other important issues of mutual concern," the White House said.
Trump and Secretary of Defense Gen. James Mattis are very eager to get their plan rolling so that an imminent end to the threat will be in place. 
Iraqi troops that have been backed by U.S. airpower have retaken half of the city of Mosul, Iraq, from the ISIS militants, but they have suffered heavy damage and may need reinforcements to continue the fight.
The president has openly said that nothing is off the table, but one would think he would have a hard time deploying a large number of American forces because of the bashing and harsh criticism he received for supporting the Iraq War. 
It is vital that we take the threat of the Islamic State seriously, because we have seen their ideology spread throughout Europe and other parts of the world. 
If   it  is advised that American troops be deployed, the president must consider it  if it gives the U.S. a legitimate shot at destroying ISIS. 
Though we do not need to "invade" Iraq again, we cannot stand idly by while these barbaric maniacs destroy city after city and murder thousands of Christians and other middle eastern minority groups. 
This is an urgent fight, and the American military is ready to start swinging its fist. The American military bolsters the most powerful airpower in the world and with any forces on the ground, they would be an incredible tool. 

Load-Date: February 10, 2017


End of Document