Trump Vows to Stop Immigration From Nations 'Compromised' by Terrorism. How Could It Work?
The New York Times
July 24, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 623 words
Byline: By HAEYOUN PARK
Body


Donald J. Trump, the Republican candidate for president, on Thursday called for an immediate suspension of immigration from ''any nation that has been compromised
by terrorism.'' This is the latest in a series of evolving stances on immigration, which began with a proposal to ban Muslim immigrants. Here are some of Mr. Trump's statements and their possible effects. 
  ''A total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States'' Trump campaign news release, Dec. 7, 2015
  After the shootings in San Bernardino, Mr. Trump called for the United States to temporarily keep all Muslims out of the country. How would such a ban work? The United States does not screen for religion upon entry, but one way could be to create a list that would be subject to such a ban. If Mr. Trump's ban, for example, included immigration by people from majority-Muslim countries, more than one million people from at least 46 countries would be prevented entry annually as legal permanent residents or temporary immigrants, such as students, guest workers, diplomats or tourists. U.S. immigration law does not take religion into account when approving visas, and current applications do not include questions about religious identity or affiliation, a State Department official said. Mr. Trump's ban would rely on a law that gives the president authority to prevent the entry of any class of people who would be ''detrimental to the interests of the United States.''
  ''Suspend immigration from areas of the world where there is a proven history of terrorism.'' Mr. Trump's speech, June 13
  After the Orlando massacre, Mr. Trump removed the reference to religion and instead proposed barring people from areas of the world with a ''proven history of terrorism'' against the United States and its allies. One possible approach would be screening out the home countries of people who have launched jihadist-inspired strikes in the United States, including the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. But past acts of terrorism suggest that it would not be a blanket solution. Although the Sept. 11 attackers entered the United States using tourist, business or student visas, half of the attacks since 2001 have been committed by people born in the United States. And one of the attackers -- Richard Reid, known as the shoe bomber -- was a British citizen, and would not have needed a visa to enter the United States.
  Suspend immigration from regions linked with terrorism until a proven vetting method is in place.'' Mr. Trump's Twitter account, June 25
  In June, Mr. Trump told Bloomberg News that he would ''limit specific terrorist countries.'' He did not offer the names of countries, but said, ''We know who those terrorist countries are.'' If Mr. Trump meant a list including all the countries from which foreign fighters have gone to Syria and Iraq to join the Islamic State and other extremist groups, there are more than 80 of them, and they include many of United States' European allies. But while in Scotland in June, Mr. Trump said he would not have a problem with a Muslim from a place like Scotland entering the United States.
  ''Immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism.'' Mr. Trump's speech at the Republican convention, July 21
  Mr. Trump on Thursday emphasized the need for a ''proven'' vetting mechanism and said that he would bar immigrants from ''compromised'' nations. One way of implementing this would be to bar immigration from countries that the State Department calls terrorist havens or state sponsors of terrorism. Although it's possible for a president to temporarily suspend immigration from certain parts of the world, it would be a slowprocess and take an ambitious bureaucratic effort.

Graphic

 
GRAPHICS: Barring immigrants from countries where more than 90 percent of the population is Muslim would keep out about 675,000 people each year.
Barring immigrants from countries where more than 50 percent of the population is Muslim would keep out about 1 million people each year.
Barring immigrants from countries the State Department calls terrorist havens or state sponsors of terrorism would keep out about 2 million people each year.
Barring immigrants from countries where jihadist-inspired attackers against the United States were born would keep out about 5.5 million people each year.
Barring immigrants from countries from which foreign fighters have departed to Iraq and Syria would keep out about 29 million people each year. (Source: Department of Homeland Security
State Department
David Sterman, New America
Pew Research Center
The Soufan Group
the International Center for the Study of Radicalization and Political Violence
 Migration Policy Institute) (GRAPHICS BY GREGOR AISCH/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: July 24, 2016


End of Document