Trump has the bold ideas on terror
Chicago Daily Herald
September 21, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 16
Length: 526 words
Body


The terrorist bombings in New York and New Jersey, which injured 29, and the terrorist stabbings in Minnesota, which injured nine, were nowhere near as serious as the terrorist shootings in Orlando, which killed 49, and in San Bernardino, which killed 14. Nevertheless, the acts of accused bomber Ahmad Khan Rahami, and of Dahir Adan, the stabber whose rampage was ended by an off-duty police officer in Minnesota, brought the issue of terrorism back to the presidential campaign trail.
Clinton played it safe. Speaking to reporters in White Plains, New York, before setting off to a speech at Temple University Monday, she thanked first responders and in essence promised to continue the Obama administration's anti-terror efforts, only a bit better. She would start an "intelligence surge," she said, and an "accelerated" anti-Islamic State coalition air campaign -- all a little more of what Obama is doing.
After two acts of jihad committed by immigrants apparently committed to Islamic radicalism, Clinton, as always, rejected Trump's immigration-oriented anti-terror proposals. The overarching theme of Clinton's message at the news conference was continuity with the Obama administration.
Clinton did not address the possibility that what is being done now is not working.
In any event, that was it for Clinton's public statements on the issue. When Clinton arrived at Temple, for a planned speech to millennials, she began with a few seconds of thanks to first responders, but then continued with the speech as planned. It covered climate change and LGBT rights, but said nothing about national security.
Trump, for his part, was as bold as Clinton was cautious. "Attack after attack, from 9/11 to San Bernardino, we have seen how failures to screen who is entering the United States puts all of our citizens, everyone in this room, at danger. So let me state very, very clearly: Immigration security is national security," he said.
Trump noted that in the past decade and a half, "hundreds of immigrants and their children from high-risk regions have been implicated in terrorism and terrorist-related activity in the United States." And Clinton, Trump continued, would substantially increase the number of refugees from high-risk areas being allowed into the U.S. Clinton also opposes ideologically vetting those entering the country, as Trump proposes to do.
Trump covered other aspects of the fight against terrorism in conventional terms -- "working in partnership with our allies on a military campaign to utterly destroy ISIS." But the heart of his speech was immigration and a bold intention, if not a detailed plan, to attack the problem of imported terrorism.
"Trump looked strong, while Clinton looked measured and weak," wrote Curt Anderson, a veteran GOP operative not working on the campaign. "Also -- we overestimate the impact of what the candidates say in the wake of these things. The big issue is that any terror attack is terrible for Clinton. It highlights her biggest weakness. Anybody remember when Hillary Clinton's strongest asset was her command of foreign policy and experience with it? Seems like a long time ago."
© 2016, Universal

Load-Date: September 21, 2016


End of Document