Trump fires Defense secretary; Mark Esper clashed with president several times
USA TODAY
November 10, 2020 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION


Copyright 2020 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 541 words
Byline: Tom Vanden Brook, USA TODAY
Body


WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump terminated Defense Secretary Mark Esper on Monday, days after his election loss to Joe Biden and following a series of clashes between Esper and Trump over the withdrawal of U.S. forces from key bases abroad, using active-duty troops to quell domestic protests and banning Confederate emblems from military installations.
Trump made the announcement on Twitter.
"Mark Esper has been terminated," Trump tweeted. "I would like to thank him for his service."
He named Christopher Miller, the director of the National Counterterrorism Center as acting defense secretary.
The tweet was a sign Trump plans to be active for the next two months, even as he contests the election.Trump is considering dismissing FBI Director Christopher Wray, aides said; they also expect CIA Director Gina Haspel to go.
Sen. Jack Reed, D-R.I., the ranking member of the Armed Services Committee, blasted Esper's ouster as reckless. "Firing the secretary of Defense in the waning weeks of the Administration undermines national security at a critical moment," Reed said. "The president's choice to fire secretary Esper is a play for attention and is yet another example of President Trump putting his ego over the needs and security of our nation."
Esper, 56, had been serving as Army secretary when Trump chose him in July 2019 to replace Patrick Shanahan who had resigned as acting Defense chief after USA TODAY reported about his tumultous personal life. Esper's tenure at the Pentagon was packed with controversy and danger: Trump's decision to intervene in the military justice system to avert penalties for troops accused of war crimes; the Navy's firing of Capt. Brett Crozier after he sought aid for his COVID-19-stricken carrier; and the killing of Iranian Gen. Qasem Soleimani that prompted a counterattack that wounded more 100 troops.
The relationship between Trump and Esper began unraveling quickly this summer. Trump went so far as mock his name in a briefing with reporters, saying, "Some people call him 'Yesper,'" a dig at Esper for what had been seen as his willingness to accommodate Trump.
Esper, in an interview Nov. 4 with the Military Times, disputed that he was overly deferential to Trump.
Esper differed with Trump over the display of Confederate emblems and names at installations. Trump slapped him down after Esper had expressed openness to renaming 10 military bases named after Confederate generals.
After protesters marched in cities across the country, including Washington,  following the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis, Trump urged a crackdown. Esper referred to American streets as battle space that governors needed to dominate, a phrase he later said he regretted. But he resisted invoking the Insurrection Act that would have allowed active-duty troops, some poised in June on the outskirts of Washington, to quell disturbances.
Miller is a former Pentagon official who has led the counterterrorism center since August. Prior to that he had been a senior official at the Defense Department for special operations and combating terrorism.
He is a combat veteran in Army Special Forces. He took part in the initial attacks in Afghanistan that overthrew the Taliban in 2001 after the 9/11 terror attacks. 

Load-Date: November 10, 2020


End of Document