TRY ANOTHER PERSPECTIVE ON ISRAEL
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
April 1, 1996, Monday


Copyright 1996 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: EDITORIAL;
Length: 320 words
Body


Let me share a few comments about the terror summit held in that elegant resort center in Egypt and attended by all those dedicated statesmen committed to fighting terrorism and bringing about peace and justice. The focus of the conference was, of course, on the recent wave of suicide bombings that occurred in the heartland of our favorite ally in the Middle East, Israel.
The United States and Israel are applying pressure on Yasser Arafat and his Palestinian National Authority to quell the militancy of Hamas, the so-called Islamic fundamentalist group that has claimed responsibility for the attacks. Countries such as Iran, Syria and Libya are being accused of supporting Hamas and its allies.
In all this talk of taking punitive measures against countries sponsoring terrorism, the one nation that is not being implicated is our beloved ally, the ''sacred cow'' for our politicians seeking re-election - Israel. What? Israel, the country that was founded through terrorism, created the Hamas movement as an alternative leadership to the secular Palestine Liberation Organization. It was the same Likud Party in Israel that decries bombings and murders that created the leadership structure of Hamas during the Intifadah (uprising) in Palestine.
Our distinguished leader Bill Clinton is once again playing election year politics by promising unconditional aid to help Israel combat ''terrorism.'' The leading Republican contender for the presidential nom-ination, Bob Dole, is no better in trying to appease pro-Israel special interest groups by requesting more assistance from our deficit-plagued budget to help Israel fight the scourge of militancy. Meanwhile, the regimes that are promising to combat extremism are the very same ones that are oppressing their masses and creating the climate for grass-roots populist movements to bring forth dramatic changes to their respective societies.
Srinidhi Anantharamiah
Logan

Load-Date: March 30, 1998


End of Document