Try suspects in federal court
USA TODAY
May 26, 2009 Tuesday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 366 words
Byline: Elisa Massimino
Body


Imagine you were the manager of the New York Yankees and you had to make a pitching change in the 9th inning of a World Series game. Would you turn to Mariano Rivera, arguably the greatest relief pitcher ever to play the game? Or would you turn the ball over to a kid who is still learning how to throw and hope for some beginner's luck?
This is essentially the choice facing President Obama when it comes to deciding how to try prisoners held at Guantanamo Bay.
He can move the prisoners to federal courts, where more than 100 international terrorism cases have been tried successfully over the past 15 years. It is the most sophisticated and well-respected legal system in the world, with more than two centuries of precedent. This is the Mariano Rivera option.
Or he can turn to military commissions, a just-created legal system that has a poor record of dispensing justice and lacks legitimacy even among many of the military lawyers who once tried to make it work.
I've been to Guantanamo. Despite the best efforts of the military lawyers and judges charged with running the trials there, military commissions had a make-it-up-as-you-go-along character to them. No amount of tinkering now can change that perception.
But even if President Obama could wave a magic wand, erase the legacy of the Bush-era military commissions and start anew, is that the best option? Treating Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the alleged mastermind of 9/11, as a combatant in a military trial reinforces his claim that he is a warrior, not a common criminal. Which picture of him do we want to broadcast to potential al-Qaeda recruits?
Our federal courts have been dispensing justice in complex international terrorism cases for many years while the military commissions at Guantanamo floundered. Dedicated investigators and innovative prosecutors have put away scores of dangerous terrorists, including many captured abroad, who now are serving hard time behind bars in maximum security prisons. Most Americans couldn't name these defendants now -- they are in the dustbin of history, where they belong.
President Obama should opt to build on that winning record.
Elisa Massimino is chief executive officer of Human Rights First. 

Load-Date: May 26, 2009


End of Document