Tsunami aid won't calm terrorism
Charleston Gazette (West Virginia)
January 10, 2005, Monday


Copyright 2005 Charleston Newspapers
Section: Editorial; Pg. P4A
Length: 624 words
Byline: Cynthia Tucker
Body


LIKE most other Americans, I'm a sucker for tsunami-relief photos of U.S. troops tending to wounded children, feeding dazed refugees or rescuing water-logged survivors. Those can-do soldiers, sailors and Marines do us all proud.
But I'm not naive enough to believe that U.S. generosity toward Muslims in the relief effort will mitigate the anti-American rage that burns white-hot in so many Muslim countries. That rage has been stoked for decades, and only decades worth of savvy U.S. diplomacy, supported by the shrewd use of military force, will cool the fires that forge terrorists.
We'll get burned again and again if we misunderstand the hatred, the hopelessness and the nihilism that breed suicide bombers.
So far, President Bush and his advisers have been anything but candid in unraveling the tangled resentments, fears and malevolence that brought Islamist fanatics to our shores. They've been downright mendacious in proposing solutions.
The Bush team claimed, for example, that toppling Saddam Hussein would bring peace between the Israelis and Palestinians. So far, it hasn't even brought peace between Iraqis.
As retired U.S. Marine Gen. Anthony Zinni, a former Mideast envoy, noted last May in criticizing the invasion of Iraq:
"I couldn't believe what I was hearing about the benefits of this strategic move - that the road to Jerusalem led through Baghdad, when just the opposite is true. The road to Baghdad led through Jerusalem. You solve the Middle East peace process, you'd be surprised what kinds of other things will work out."
At the very least, an Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian territories would deprive Arab TV outlets of the steady stream of bloody occupation footage that inflames Muslim communities, not just in the Arab world but also in the West. (Let's hope for post-election stability in Iraq, because an American withdrawal there would have a similar benefit.)
The death of Yasser Arafat gave President Bush a golden opportunity to restart the peace process. So far, however, he hasn't seemed interested in taking a high-profile role.
Even if Bush were to lead a process that ended with a lasting Middle East peace - which, heaven knows, would rank alongside the defeat of fascism and the demise of the Soviet Union as the greatest political accomplishments of the past 100 years - that alone wouldn't be enough. While it would contribute significantly to curbing terrorism, it wouldn't calm the roiling resentments of all the young Muslim men who have come to believe that they will find salvation in violence.
To see how deranged some of those young men have become, consider the Nov. 2 murder of Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh. Authorities have arrested Mohammed Bouyeri, 26, who allegedly killed van Gogh because he was enraged by a film that Bouyeri believed disrespected Islam.
But Bouyeri was no longtime fanatic. A second- generation Moroccan immigrant, he was a high school graduate studying social work. After a series of personal setbacks, however, he took up with an extremist group and turned to holy war.
That madness will be hard to root out. The solution will include the sort of diplomacy that sponsors Arab-speaking TV news programs that are friendly to the West but not heavy-handed. And the kind of hard-nosed realism that insists Saudi Arabia and Pakistan do more to crack down on the schools that crank out anti-Western clerics who flourish not only in the Muslim world but who spread their hatred to mosques in Western Europe and the United States.
I'm delighted that the United States has given money and muscle to the relief effort in stricken Asia. It's the right thing to do. And I hope that's the only reason we're doing it.
Tucker is editorial page editor of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.

Load-Date: January 11, 2005


End of Document