TURKISH OFFICIAL'S SOVIET VISIT SAID TO MARK A NORMALIZATION
The New York Times
December 2, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk
Length: 498 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, Dec.1
Body


Foreign Minister Ilter Turkmen's current visit to the Soviet Union was described by officials here as marking a normalization of relations, which were said to have cooled somewhat since the military came to power here in 1980.
The officials noted that both Mr. Turkmen and Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko expressed a desire in their formal declarations to increase political as well as economic cooperation.
After two days of official talks, during which Mr. Turkmen was received also by Prime Minister Nikolai A. Tikhonov, the Turkish delegation went to Azerbaijan today and is due to return to Ankara on Friday.
ANKARA, Turkey, Dec.1 - Foreign Minister Ilter Turkmen's current visit to the Soviet Union was described by officials here as marking a normalization of relations, which were said to have cooled somewhat since the military came to power here in 1980.
Officials here described the Moscow talks as friendly but said also that complaints were raised on both sides.  Mr. Gromyko was said to have requested the extradition of three Soviet citizens of German origin who hijacked a Soviet airliner last month and forced it to land at an American monitoring station on a Turkish air base at Sinop on the Black Sea. The request was reportedly based on a Soviet-Turkish agreement, not yet ratified, requiring that all hijackers be returned to the country of origin immediately.
The three hijackers have been detained and have requested temporary asylum in Turkey and eventual transfer to West Germany.
 
Turkey Raises Armenian Issue
The Turkish delegation was said to have brought up issues of international terrorism, including the support the Soviet Union is accused of giving to Armenian underground groups that have attacked Turkish diplomats.  The Soviet Union reportedly replied that it had nothing to do with international terrorism and that it wanted good neighborly relations.
Turkey's military rulers have made a point of establishing good working relations with their Communist neighbors but until now relations with the Soviet Union were described as reserved. Mr.  Turkmen's visit had been scheduled for July but was postponed because of tension over the shooting of two Turkish guards on the Turkish-Soviet border.
Officials here noted that there was no mention in Moscow of the recent Turkish-American agreement for the modernization of 10 Turkish airfields within the NATO framework. They termed this ommission a sign of Soviet good will.
The talks were said to have focused especially on new opportunities for cooperation in trade and investments. The Soviet Union has invested more than a billion dollars in building an iron and steel mill, an oil refinery and an aluminum complex and is said to be studying plans for another refinery.
Turks, who are facing new restrictions on trade with Western Europe, are particularly interested in the Soviet market. Trade has been in the form of barter between the two countries, but in January they will change to hard-currency payments.


End of Document