Turkish prime minister talks at Princeton U. of a new world order
University Wire
September 24, 2009 Thursday


Copyright 2009 The Daily Princetonian via U-Wire
Length: 543 words
Byline: By Jack Ackerman, The Daily Princetonian; SOURCE: Princeton
Dateline: PRINCETON, N.J. 
Body


Former professional soccer player turned Turkish Prime Minister Recep
Tayyip Erdogan proposed the creation of a "new global order" to an
audience of roughly 700 students and visitors in Princeton's Richardson Auditorium
on Wednesday.
During the speech, which was delivered in Turkish and
simultaneously translated to audience members via individual earpieces,
Erdogan said that today's most pressing international matters require
international cooperation that embraces a diversity of opinion while
focusing on political, cultural, economic and legal issues.
"This
global order should be an order which embraces everyone, which is ...
based on sharing, which sees differences as social enrichment. And it
should be an order which is based on trust," Erdogan explained. "This
political order should be just, equitable and participatory. We must
understand world politics as a whole, and we must understand properly
the dynamic relationship between different actors."
Erdogan
criticized the hypocrisy of world leaders and organizations who profess
respect for all people and all viewpoints in documents like the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights but whose actions contradict
their stated views.
"If you have the text, and you don't have the
practice, that of course is not really of any use to us," he said. "In
our country, we say that you cannot feel the sweet taste of honey in
your mouth just by speaking the name of honey. You have to eat the
honey to taste the taste."
Turkey's past experience dealing with
economic recession, ethnic conflict and terrorism leaves it in a
position to play an important role in international cooperation aimed
at combating these issues, Erdogan said.
He explained, "When [my
party] first came to power, we had many problems with countries
surrounding us ... had problems with almost all of our neighbors, and so
much so that the situation was at times threatening, and we said that
our goal is not to make enemies, but to make friends."
Erdogan
pointed to the specific examples of Turkish relations with Syria, Iraq,
Iran, Russia and the Caucasus as evidence of his country's successful
foreign policy. "If one can remove prejudice and preconceptions," he
said, "it is not so difficult at the end of the day to make friends."
Princeton President
Tilghman, who introduced Erdogan, lauded Turkey as a key American ally
and an important leader in Middle Eastern politics.
"Turkey
occupies a critical place in the world, bridging as it does two
continents, and not just geographically," she said. "It looks both east
and west ... Its history has been inextricably intertwined with both the
Christian and Muslim worlds."
The alliance between Turkey and the
United States is especially important in preventing terrorism, Erdogan
explained. To do this, he cautioned, people must stop equating
terrorism with Muslim religious beliefs.
"Islam never accepts
terrorism," he said. "The meaning of the word 'Islam' is 'peace.' It is
a religion which believes in peace."
While Erdogan acknowledged
that much remains to be accomplished, he said he believes Turkey's
values and the will of its people will help guide the country. "We are
trying to take the right steps based on justice and rights, and those
steps are supported by our society, our people."
(C) 2008 The Daily Princetonian via UWIRE

Load-Date: September 24, 2009


End of Document