TURKISH JUNTA PLANS CHANGES FAR WIDER THAN INITIAL AIMS
The New York Times
April 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 1957 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey
Body


Turkey's military rulers are planning broad changes that go far beyond the aims they stated when they seized power last Sept. 12, raising the question of how long the generals intend to stay in power.
Gen. Kenan Evren, the popular leader of the five-member junta, has repeatedly proclaimed the military's firm commitment to democracy and promised a return to democratic, parliamentary rule ''as soon as possible.''
In a speech during a recent tour of the Aegean region, General Evren, who is also head of state, reiterated a pledge to convene a constituent assembly this fall and then allow the formation of new political parties and, eventually, elections.
But neither General Evren nor anyone else has offered a timetable for the return to the barracks. The military chiefs have merely asked for ''understanding'' from their friends and allies, particularly the West Europeans, who have demonstrated uneasiness over accepting the military regime as a partner in organizations like the Council of Europe.
Turkish junta plans changes far wider than initial aims
The pashas, as generals are traditionally called in Turkey, respond to their critics by reminding them of the state of turmoil in Turkey only a year ago and pointing to their record.
 
Authority of State Restored
In fact, their achievements in only six months have been remarkable. They have established security and practically put an end to political terror from both the right and left, restored the authority of the state and got it to function again, put the economy on an even keel by substantially reducing inflation, and consolidated relations not only with their Western allies but also with the Islamic and Communist countries.
These successes have had their price. In the name of a ''correction'' of Turkey's ailing democracy, Parliament and political parties have been suspended, the press has been subject to strict self-control, human rights have been curtailed and there has been a reduction in the living standard of much of the population.
Nevertheless, the military regime still enjoys the support of most of the people, essentially because of its success in curbing political violence.
Wherever one goes - to the campuses, to gatherings of the intelligentsia, to the downtown teahouses or the slums of the main cities - people refer to the military rulers with respect and praise. ''They have put an end to the anarchy and brought us peace'' is a typical comment in every sector of the population.
 
Cohesive, Hard-Working Team
The generals seem to be a cohesive, hard-working team. General Evren in particular travels about the country a good deal, and his concerns include all the problems of state from reforestation to raising the literacy rate. He personally planted the first sapling in a program to plant more than 19 million trees to honor Kemal Ataturk, the founder of modern Turkey, whose centennial is being celebrated this year.
The general has also demonstrated his concern over illiteracy, even urging his fellow Moslems to send their daughters to school along with their sons. The Government recently announced a campaign to achieve 100 percent literacy - a lofty aim, as there are said to be 13 million illiterates in Turkey.
The immediate aim of the Sept. 12 takeover was to keep the country from falling apart. There had been a steady degradation in the security and political situations for more than two years, and by the time of the military intervention there was widespread fear of civil war.
According to a recent report from the Martial Law Coordination Council, there has been a steady decline in terrorism. Before Sept.  12, about 25 people a day were being killed in terrorist incidents; now the average is less than one a day. In the last month, 18 people lost their lives in violent clashes, half of them suspected terrorists.
 
Term for Kurdish Nationalists
This dramatic drop in political violence has been accomplished mainly by widespread arrests, according to military sources. The Coordination Council report said that 13,392 ''militants'' of clandestine organizations were captured in the six-month period, including 9,071 extreme leftists, 2,041 extreme rightists and 2,280 ''secessionists,'' a euphemism for Kurdish nationalists. It said that 805 trials had been initiated against 28 clandestine organizations, 17 of which were described as leftist, 5 as rightist and 6 as secessionist.
However, the martial law authorities insist that terrorism ''has not yet been eradicated.'' The report pointed out that a record number of illegal arms were seized last month, including 17,910 rifles, machine guns and pistols.
There have been recent accusations by some international organizations, such as the London-based human rights group Amnesty International, that the Turkish security forces, in their struggle to get at the roots of terror, are using ''systematic torture'' against detainees.
Prime Minister Bulent Ulusu, speaking at a recent news conference, condemned the use of torture under any circumstances and said that his Government would investigate any torture claim and punish anyone found guilty.
 
Investigation of 68 Charges
The Prime Minister acknowledged that there had been 68 torture charges, presumably against the security forces, since the military took power. He said that 14 allegations had been found to have some basis and that legal proceedings had been initiated, that 14 had been deemed baseless and that 40 were under investigation.
The authorities have indicated, however, that other abuses of human rights, such as lengthy detentions and restrictions on the right of appeal, are necessary for the present. Thus anyone can be taken into custody for 90 days without being charged, and a journalist like Lutfu Oflaz can be sentenced to a year and a half in prison, with no appeal, for his year-old article calling for a ban on the neofascist Nationalist Action Party.
Similarly, a former Minister of Public Works, Serafettin Elci, can go to jail for two years and three months without appeal, for ''making Kurdish and secessionist propaganda,'' because there is no appeal of sentences under three years.
Although there is no direct press censorship, self-censorship is encouraged. Early on, the military authorities banned several leftand right-wing newspapers, and occasional warnings have been issued through the temporary closing of a publication or the detention of a journalist. The unwritten law is that the military regime should not be criticized and that no politics should be allowed.
 
Results of Economic Program
The rulers have also made considerable progress toward economic recovery. There has been no economic miracle, but the Government has scrupulously carried out the January 1980 stabilization program and the results are beginning to show. The author of the plan, Turgut Ozal, was kept on and named Deputy Prime Minister, with broad rein to carry out his free-market policies.
The rate of inflation, which reached 107 percent for 1980, has been curbed, though it is still high. Mr. Ozal expressed the conviction recently that it can be brought down at least to 40 percent this year. There are other positive signs; exports and wages are substantially higher.
But the austerity measures have brought recession, stagnant production, reduced purchasing power and increased unemployment, which is estimated at over 20 percent. The Government has moved to make taxes more equitable, but this is not expected to compensate for the loss in purchasing power.
There is labor peace, but it is an enforced one. The radical labor union confederation Disk has been suspended and its leaders jailed.  Collective bargaining and the right to strike have been banned and arbitrary dismissals made possible.
 
Reluctance to Bolster Military
Despite economic progress, Turkey still needs considerable financial help and is counting heavily on new pledges of aid from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development this spring.  Last year Turkey received $1.2 billion from the O.E.C.D., more than half of it from the United States and West Germany. This year, Mr.  Ozal is asking for $1.5 billion.
The generals' long-term political aim is the ''purification'' of Turkey's democratic system. They have not specified what they mean by that, but they seem certain to change the system that led to political paralysis before the coup.
Under pressure from the Europeans to produce a schedule for the return to democracy, General Evren recently announced that sometime between Aug. 30 and Oct. 29, both of which are holidays here, a constituent assembly would be convened to draft a new constitution and a law on political parties.
For the present, what the generals call ''a political armistice'' has been attained. All political activity has been suspended and Parliament dissolved. Most of the 100 or so political leaders who were detained after the coup, including the leaders of the two main parties, former Prime Ministers Suleyman Demirel and Bulent Ecevit, have been released.
 
Direction Involvement in Terror
The leaders of the small radical parties however, are still in jail or being sought. Alpaslan Turkes and other leaders of the extreme right-wing Nationalist Action Party are reportedly being held on serious accusations of direct implication with right-wing terrorism.
Necmettin Erbakan and the leadership of the Moslem fundamentalist National Salvation Party will probably be charged with mixing religion and politics and trying to undermine the secular state. An arrest warrant has been issued for Behice Boran, leader of the Marxist Turkish Workers Party, who fled the country after the coup.  Dogu Perincek and other militants of the small Maoist Turkish Worker Peasant Party turned themselves in and will probably be tried for aiming to change the social order.
The junta, or National Security Council, has supreme power and serves as the legislative body. Led by General Evren, who is the military Chief of Staff, the council includes the commanders of the army, air force, navy and gendarmerie.
In an early pronouncement the military leadership reassured the world that Turkey's foreign policy would not change and that the cornerstone would remain its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The generals even improved relations with their historic rival, Greece, and lifted the veto on Greek return to NATO's military wing.
 
Improved Ties to Soviet Bloc
Foreign Minister Ilter Turkmen likes to call Turkey's foreign policy ''multilateral,'' meaning that while Turkey maintains its firm commitment to the West, it also intends to improve relations with the Communist bloc.
Turkey sees itself as small and vulnerable, both economically and geographically. Therefore it feels it must try to consolidate relations with its Arab neighbors, and so far the junta has done remarkably well in preserving ''correct'' relations with the Soviet Union.
The generals have also considerably improved relations with key Moslem nations on which they depend for oil - Saudi Arabia, Libya, Iraq and Iran. This has been done partly at the expense of downgrading diplomatic ties with Israel but without breaking relations altogether.
Likewise, Mr. Turkmen is expected to stand up to pressure from Washington to draw Turkey into any peacekeeping force that may be formed to serve in the Middle East.
In a speech on March 28 in Manisa, an ancient farming center in western Anatolia, General Evren accused ''Communist organizations'' of trying to create divisions in the country and discredit the army.  He said that most of the terrorists in Turkey were young people between 16 and 25 who had been ''pushed'' into revolution. He said the real leaders behind the terrorism were either in foreign countries or ''behind curtains.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Gen. Kenan Evren and aide


End of Document