Turkish police detain over 440 people in anti-IS operation
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
February 6, 2017 Monday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 282 words
Byline:  Associated Press  
Body


ISTANBUL - Turkey's anti-terrorism police have detained more than 440 people for alleged links to the Islamic State group, the state-run news agency reported Sunday.
The Anadolu Agency said 60 suspects, the vast majority of them foreigners, were taken into custody early Sunday in the capital, Ankara.
It said a total of 445 people were detained in simultaneous pre-dawn police operations that spanned several cities, including Istanbul and Gaziantep, near the border with Syria.
The largest operation was in the southeast province of Sanliurfa, where police took into custody more than 100 suspects from multiple addresses and found materials relating to Islamic State militants.
Security forces also apprehended nine suspects who were allegedly preparing an attack in the northwestern city of Izmir.
Anadolu did not give the nationalities of all those detained, but 10 minors were among the foreigners detained in Istanbul and the northwestern province of Kocaeli.
Turkey, which last year endured a failed coup attempt and dozens of bloody attacks linked to IS or Kurdish militants, has been stepping up its anti-terrorism efforts.
The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for a mass shooting at a nightclub in Istanbul on New Year's Eve that killed 39 people. The group claims to have multiple cells in Turkey.
Turkey is a member of the NATO alliance and the U.S-led coalition against IS. It shares borders with Syria and Iraq, two war-torn nations at the heart of the fight against IS militants.
Turkish forces have been deployed in Syria since August with the aim of clearing a border patch of IS militants and Syrian Kurdish fighters that Ankara considers related to its own Kurdish insurgency.

Graphic

 
 Turkish anti-terrorism police break a door during an operation to arrest people over alleged links to the Islamic State group, in Adiyaman, southeastern Turkey, early Sunday, Feb. 5, 2017. Turkey's state-run agency says anti-terrorism police have detained more than 400 people in simultaneous police operations that spanned several cities, including Istanbul and Gaziantep near the border with Syria, according to the report. (Mahir Alan/Dha-Depo Photos via AP)  Turkish anti-terrorism police stand by their armoured vehicle during an operation to arrest people over alleged links to the Islamic State group, in Adiyaman, southeastern Turkey, early Sunday, Feb. 5, 2017. Turkey's state-run agency says anti-terrorism police has detained more than 400 people in simultaneous police operations that spanned several cities, including Istanbul and Gaziantep near the border with Syria, according to the report. (Mahir Alan/Dha-Depo Photos via AP) 

Load-Date: February 7, 2017


End of Document