TURKISH DIPLOMAT IS SLAIN IN OTTAWA
The New York Times
August 28, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 464 words
Byline: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: OTTAWA, Aug. 27
Body


A Turkish diplomat was shot and killed here today as he stopped his car at a light during the morning rush hour. Soon after the slaying a caller to the police in Montreal asserted that the killing was carried out under the orders of an Armenian nationalist group.
The Ottawa police said that, according to more than a dozen witnesses, a man appearing to be in his 30's left one of the cars backed up at a major intersection, walked to the car being driven by Col. Atilla Altikat, the Turkish military attache, and fired several shots through the front passenger window. The gunman fled after dropping his weapon, a Browning 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol, into the victim's car.
OTTAWA, Aug. 27 - A Turkish diplomat was shot and killed here today as he stopped his car at a light during the morning rush hour.
(The Associated Press reported that the police were also looking for the driver of the car used by the gunman.) In their account, the Ottawa police said a man called authorities in Montreal and said that the killing had been carried out by a group he identified as the Justice Commandos for Armenian Genocide.
''We will strike again,'' the caller was reported as saying.  The attack was the latest of more than 20 assaults worldwide against Turkish officials, presumably carried out by Armenian groups seeking to avenge the 1915 massacre of Armenians in Turkey.
In one such attack in April, Kani Gungor, a counselor at the Turkish Embassy in Ottawa, was seriously wounded. At the time, responsibility for the attack was taken by a group called the Secret Army for the Liberation o*AArmenia. This group has called for the establishment of an Armenian homeland in eastern Turkey.
Police officials said there were several factors that appeared to link the two shootings. ''It would appear that the crime is part of the worldwide terrorism campaign being waged by groups of Armenians,'' one police officer said. No arrests were made today, and no one has been arrested for the April attack.
Canada's Minister for External Affairs, Mark MacGuigan, called today's attack a ''senseless crime.'' ''We have learned to our sorrow that no country is safe from such outrages,'' he said, ''but Canada stands firm in its determination to combat terrorism in all its forms and to seek out and punish the perpetrators of such acts.''
----
 
Turkey's Leader Assails Killing
ANKARA, Turkey, Aug. 27 (Reuters) - Turkey's military ruler, Kenan Evren, tonight condemned the killing of a Turkish diplomat in Ottawa and said it was part of a virtual war against Turkey by Armenian terrorists. In a statement broadcast by the state television, General Evren, who seized power in a coup in September 1980, said, ''The Turkish Government is determined to take all necessary measures to prevent these massacres.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of Ottawa police removing the body of Col. Altikat


End of Document