TURKISH PREMIER AND HIS MAIN FOE UNITE AGAINST TERRORISM
The New York Times
July 26, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 689 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, July 25
Body


Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and the opposition leader, former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, have agreed to support legislation reinforcing the authority of the army and the courts against terrorism, it was announced here today.
Mr. Demirel, leader of the ruling conservative Justice Party, and Mr. Ecevit, leader of the left-of-center Republican People's Party, reached the limited agreement under public pressure for action against terrorism after the assassination of a former Prime Minister, a Member of Parliament and a prominent union leader in the last few days. Altogether, more than 2,000 people have been killed in political violence in Turkey this year.
The political parties' agreement came at a four-hour dinner given last night by Acting President Ihsan Sabri C@aglayangil at the presidential palace. 
AN-ABasic Positions Unchanged
However, the two leaders, who have been bitter political opponents for years, showed today that their basic positions were unchanged.  Mr. Demirel insisted that the way to fight subversion and terror was by reinforcing the authority of the state through new laws. Mr.  Ecevit remained adamant that what was needed was not new laws but a new government that would include the main political parties and treat terrorism ''without bias.''
In Istanbul, extraordinary security measures were taken as thousands of workers walked through the city in a funeral cortege for the latest victim of terrorism, Kemal Turkler, head of the Marxist Metalworkers Union.
Abdullah Basturk, leader of the leftist Confederation of Revolutionary Labor Unions, of which the Metalworkers Union was a part, said at the grave, ''There is only one promise we can make to our friend Kemal Turkler here: to struggle against fascism altogether.''
A clandestine right-wing terrorist group calling itself the Turkish Revenge Brigade has claimed responsibility for Mr. Turkler's murder, apparently in retaliation for the murder last weekend of former Prime Minister Nihat Erim, a conservative, by a group known as the Revolutionary Left.
 
5 Bills Are Planned
Acting President Caglayangil told reporters today that the meeting between Mr. Demirel and Mr. Ecevit had been fruitful and stressed that they had agreed to continue to meet ''to find urgent solutions to other matters.''
Mr. Caglayangil said five bills would be introduced in the National Assembly as soon as possible. They were a bill to reinforce the authority of martial-law commanders, three bills to improve the functioning of the judiciary and one to compensate families of security men killed by terrorists.
Mr. Demirel called last night's meeting useful and said that if the legislation went through as agreed, Parliament's credibility would increase, the security forces would know that Parliament was behind them and Turkish democracy would be strengthened.
''We discussed the country's problems yesterday - the prevention of anarchy, terror, secessionism and subversion,'' he told reporters, adding, ''It has now become necessary to look for new remedies, new measures, new approaches.''
 
Ecevit Is Sanguine
Mr. Ecevit was sanguine about the results of the meeting. He said that the antiterrorist legislation agreed upon had been proposed by his Government, which resigned after Mr. Demirel's party won elections in October. He emphasized that his party maintained its opposition to Mr. Demirel's proposals for state-security courts and emergency powers.
Mr. Ecevit insisted that the Republican People's Party would not give emergency powers to the Demirel Government, which it accuses of misusing power.
He said he had tried to persuade Mr. Demirel to discuss his proposal for ''a broadly based government'' to fight terrorism, but he said Mr. Demirel had evaded the issue. Only once before have Turkey's two main parites joined in forming a Government. That was in 1961, after the military had temporarily taken over running the country, but the experiment was not successful and the Government lasted only six months.
No progress was made on one of the most urgent problems, the nomination of a president, over which Parliament has been deadlocked for four months.


End of Document