Turkey Moved on Iraq to Combat Terrorism;
In Iran, Who Dictates?
The New York Times
March 30, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A;  Page 22;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk ; Column 5; ; Letter
Length: 452 words
Body


To the Editor:
In "How to Trade With Iran" (column, March 24), A. M. Rosenthal has encouraged the Administration to isolate Iran further as punishment for its many sins, including that of dictatorship. Yet Mr. Rosenthal has consistently failed to identify the present Iranian dictator.
Who indeed does rule Iran today with an iron fist? President Hashemi Rafsanjani? The 270-seat Parliament? The supreme spiritual leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei? The National Consultative Assembly? Mr. Rosenthal, by his very omission, has unwittingly underscored the reality of a nascent government by consensus and the rule of law in Iran.
After a decade and a half, the post-revolutionary Constitution, which was framed to avoid the concentration of power in one branch through a system of checks and balances (sounds familiar?), is beginning to take hold. Public debate or even protest no longer means an automatic jail sentence or social and professional banishment.
Time and patience are required; Iran cannot simply shrug off several thousand years of despotism and monarchy to become like Switzerland overnight. It is vital for Washington to realize the importance of these trends to the long-range security interests of the region and to encourage them, instead of continuing its anachronistically punitive policy toward Teheran.
Iran's offer of a major contract to develop offshore oilfields to a subsidiary of an American company was a sign of victory for those in Iran who want to put an acrimonious past behind and get on with rebuilding the country and re-establishing normal foreign relations. Perhaps, even after three years in development, the offer was too early and unexpected. Future opportunities should not be dismissed with the same quick anger.
If today normalization of relations with Vietnam, where thousands of Americans lost their lives in combat, is possible, then surely similar possibilities in regard to Iran exist. Iran's anger toward America, for its support of the Shah's rule, became a matter which was ruthlessly exploited by politicians in both countries. Today it is essentially a dead issue.
Iran's status in the eyes of Mr. Rosenthal, and those who agree with him, as a "rogue nation" is owed in no small measure to the continuing isolation and vilification of that country. By drawing Iran back into the international fold, that country (with its ailing economy) will find it to its trade and diplomatic advantages to comply further with international norms of conduct.
Seeing through the rhetoric of animosity between Iran and America now will prevent grave problems in the geopolitically sensitive Persian Gulf region in the future. Let the healing begin.
 
BEHROUS SABA
Los Angeles, March 26, 1995

Load-Date: March 30, 1995


End of Document