Turkish president hits back at Europe
The Bismarck Tribune
May 7, 2016 Saturday


Copyright 2016 The Bismarck Tribune, a division of Lee Enterprises All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 2
Length: 446 words
Byline: DOMINIQUE SOGUEL Associated Press
Body


ISTANBUL - Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan had harsh words Friday for Europe, saying his nation won't reform its anti-terrorism legislation just for the sake of getting visa-free travel for its citizens there.
The tough talk comes at a time when moderate Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has stepped down, a move that Erdogan's critics fear will help the president further consolidate his power.
As part of an agreement in which Turkey will help halt the flood of migrants and refugees from the Middle East, the European Union asked the nations in the bloc to allow Turkish citizens to travel to Europe without visas on short stays. In exchange, the EU wants Turkey to meet certain conditions, among them a revision of its harsh anti-terrorism laws.
But Erdogan has been pressing for quite the opposite: He wants Turkish law to impose a broader definition of terrorism at a time when the country faces the twin threats of renewed conflict with Kurdish militants in the southeast and growing blowback from Syria and Iraq in the form of bombings and other attacks by the Islamic State group.
"The EU at the moment is saying, 'you will change your anti-terrorism law for visas,'" Erdogan said in an unusually tough speech in Istanbul.
Addressing European leaders, he countered: "You allow terrorists to set up tents next to the European Parliament. Why don't you change your mindset?"
That was a reference to symbols of the Kurdistan Worker's Party that Turkish officials say were seen recently at demonstrations and in tents set up outside the European Parliament. The group, known as the PKK, has waged a decades-long insurgency in Turkey and is designated by Ankara and its allies to be a terrorist organization.
"You will allow terrorists to set up tents, say you are doing it in the name of democracy, and then tell us to change our terrorism law for visas," Erdogan said.
"We'll go our way, you go yours," he added, sharply. "Go make your agreement with whoever you can."
The EU, which needs Turkey's help on the migrant crisis, is not in the best position to pressure Erdogan to pursue reforms on any front.
While anti-terrorism laws have been widely used to silence his critics - much to the alarm of domestic and international human rights groups - Turkey also has suffered an unpreceded wave of deadly suicide bombings linked either to the PKK or IS.
There was no immediate reaction from EU officials on whether they would relax their demand for reform of the anti-terrorism legislation. Turkey still must meet five of 72 criteria to qualify for the visa-free travel plan, and the European Parliament and the EU Council are expected to reach a decision on the matter in June.

Load-Date: May 7, 2016


End of Document