TURKS SEE LONG FIGHT AGAINST TERROR
The New York Times
October 29, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 723 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, Oct. 28
Body


Turkey's military leadership will maintain its ban on political activities until it has eradicated terrorism, according to the spokesman for the ruling junta.
The spokesman, Gen. Haydar Saltik, Secretary General of the National Security Council, announced that progress had been made since the Sept. 12 military takeover in the fight against terrorism.  But he said it was still necessary ''to get to the brains of the organizations.''
General Saltik, who appears to be one of the most influential of Turkey's new military leaders, reviewed major domestic and foreign policy issues today in what was officially called ''an informal chat'' with foreign journalists.
Turkish military leaders plan to continue ban on political activities until all terrorism is stopped
Behind his smiling and relaxed manner, however, the general's words illustrated the military Government's firm determination to remain in power as long as it considers necessary.
He praised Greece's return to the military wing of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, but warned against the assumption that Turkey's new military rulers would be more flexible in international relations than past civilian Governments.
 
'Helpful for Turkey'
''We share the belief,'' he said, ''that Greece's return to NATO's military structure has helped achieve stability and efficiency in the southeast wing, thus filling the gap between Italy and Turkey, which is helpful for Turkey and the other allies.'' He expressed the hope that negotiations with Greece would lead to greater understanding and confidence, but stressed that Turkey would ''never sacrifice its national interests.''
On the Iraq-Iran conflict, General Saltik expressed ''deep concern.'' Iraq's Minister of Industry and Mines came to Ankara last weekend, and though the general said that the Iraqi had not requested Turkey's mediation he stressed that if both sides asked for help Turkey would be willing.
On the possible release of the American hostages in Iran, the military spokesman pointed out that in the past foreigners were evacuated from Iran through Turkey ''on humanitarian grounds.'' But he said the National Security Council had not had any contact with the United States on the issue.
Many of the questions directed at General Saltik, which had been submitted previously in writing, centered on the junta's declared intention to return to democratic rule. He evaded questions about a timetable, pointing out that the new administration ''hasn't had time to get at the roots of terrorism.''
 
Decrease in Incidents Emphasized
He emphasized that the number of terrorist incidents and casualties had decreased substantially and that rightist and leftist terrorists were being rounded up, ''but we cannot say that terrorism has been completely eliminated.''
He announced that since the coup a total of 6,900 people had been arrested, 3,900 had been detained but were not yet charged, and 746 had been given sentences in connection with the fight against terrorism.
The general declared that the main factor in the success achieved in the antiterrorist drive was the people's faith in the armed forces. He cited as evidence the fact that people had voluntarily turned in over 160,000 firearms that they had been keeping for self-defense.
Other reasons behind the improvement in the security situation, he said, were the increased authority of the martial-law commanders, the ban on politics, which he called ''a political armistice,'' labor peace and the action by the armed forces to eradicate terrorism.
The general said that special penal laws and exceptional legislation would not be needed.
 
Conditions Called Much Worse
Questioned on plans for a new constitution, he stressed that after the 1960 military coup it had taken seven months to set up a constituent assembly; only seven weeks have passed since the military took over this time, he said, and asserted that conditions were much worse now.
He pointed out that the National Security Council approved a provisional Constitution yesterday and said he would reply to specific questions on the document at a news conference on Saturday.
Asked about the future of former Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and the opposition leader, Bulent Ecevit, General Saltik replied: ''They are normal citizens and will be allowed to return to political life after the political armistice.''


End of Document