Turkey detains over 200 for 'illicit money transfers' to US
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
October 2, 2018 Tuesday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: MARKETS; Pg. 1
Length: 306 words
Byline: Jean Garcia
Body


Turkey's state-run news agency said prosecutors have issued detention warrants against 417 people suspected of money laundering for transferring 2.5 billion Turkish lira ($423 million) to thousands of bank accounts overseas.
Police, the prosecutor and other judicial authorities were not immediately available to comment on the report, which was carried by other Turkish media.
The suspects are Turkish and Iranian nationals, involved in money transfers to accounts of mainly Iranians residing in the United States.
Financial crimes units of the Turkish police launched simultaneous operations all across Turkey early Tuesday to capture suspects charged with running a criminal organization, laundering money and violation of laws against the prevention of financing terrorism.
Kavanaugh 'Can No Longer Commit' To Teaching Harvard Law Class in 2019
While Kavanaugh was not "perfect with respect to alcohol", Trump said he knew opposition Democrat senators who are not "angels". Harvard law students had called on the faculty to drop Kavanaugh's teaching appointment over the the allegations.
According to the investigation, from January 2017, the suspects made more than 28,000 transfers to accounts in banks outside Turkey.
The arrests come as the United States is in the process of reimposing sanctions on Iran after Washington pulled out of a 2015 global deal limiting the nation's nuclear programme, including on Iran's ability to use the worldwide financial system and export oil.
In the case, Iranian-Turkish trader Reza Zarrab, who was once close to the Ankara authorities, turned whistleblower and gave evidence accusing the Turkish leadership of being complicit in the scheme.
Capital outflow overseas has been a sensitive issue for Turkish authorities after the sell-off of the lira sent the Turkish currency down 40 percent this year.

Load-Date: October 2, 2018


End of Document