Turkey heads to polls as violence grows; Slow economy, terrorism fight face voters
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
October 30, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. Z2
Length: 510 words
Body


Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu speaks at a rally of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Istanbul
Millions of Turkish voters will head to the polls Sunday for the second time in five months for a snap election unfolding amid mounting violence, deepening polarization and a sputtering economy.
The previous parliamentary election in June dealt a heavy blow to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's ambitions to further consolidate his grip on power. Voters denied Erdogan's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) a majority for the first time in 13 years, while giving the country's long-repressed Kurdish minority its biggest voice yet in Turkish politics.
But that election yielded a parliament without a majority, and coalition talks collapsed.
Since then, the NATO-member country and U.S. ally has been rattled by growing security threats and political turmoil.
A spate of attacks across Turkey has been blamed on Islamic State militants, including the Oct. 10 suicide bombings on a pro-Kurdish rally in Ankara that killed 102 people. Meanwhile, conflict between the Kurds and the Turkish state has returned with a vengeance following the collapse of a two-year cease-fire with insurgents from the separatist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
Now, Turkey is effectively waging a two-front war against the PKK and the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS, in neighboring Syria and Iraq. Both groups are designated terrorist organizations by Turkey and most Western countries but also are sworn enemies.
The terrorism fight has emerged as the focus of the AKP campaign, led by Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu.
"We will continue to fight until weapons are buried, terrorism stops, and all our mountains, plains and valleys are cleared off," Davutoglu told supporters at a rally Sunday in Istanbul. "They thought they could create an atmosphere of chaos in the country after June 7 (elections), but we will never allow them."
Erdogan portrays his party as a guarantor of stability. Speaking at a massive anti-terrorism rally in Istanbul last month, he called on supporters to vote for the party he helped found "so that peace returns to Turkey."
Opponents accuse Erdogan of using security concerns to rally nationalist votes. The president and others have tried paint the PKK as a close ally of the pro-Kurdish People's Democratic Party, (HDP), whose electoral victory in June helped deny Erdogan's party its ruling majority.
Meanwhile, rising instability and slow growth have hobbled the economy, which flourished in the early years of Erdogan's rule that began in 2003. Consumer confidence and the value of the lira have slumped to new lows. Turkey's "open-door policy" toward Syrians fleeing civil war also is starting to take an economic toll; Ankara claimed to have spent nearly $8 billion caring for more than 2 million refugees.
Opinion polls suggest that voter preferences remain largely unchanged by recent developments, and analysts predict Erdogan's party will again fail to secure a majority of seats in parliament to govern alone.

Load-Date: October 30, 2015


End of Document