TURK SAYS JUNTA WILL STAY TILL ANARCHY IS ENDED
The New York Times
October 15, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 621 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, Oct. 14
Body


Turkey's new head of state, Gen. Kenan Evren, announced today that the military rulers would not relinquish power until they had put an end to ''anarchy'' in the country.
General Evren, who was attending military maneuvers in eastern Turkey, told the people of the largely Kurdish city of Diyarbakir that the armed forces had had to seize power ''to prevent the country from falling into a civil war.'' His words were broadcast by the state radio and television.
In Ankara, a high military source close to the National Security Council, as the junta is called, refused to give a timetable for the pledge for a return to democracy. He stressed the necessity to carry out the council's program, that is, to put an end to terrorism, restore political stability and correct economic ''deficiencies.''
AN-A
The officer, who asked that his name not be disclosed, briefed selected Turkish journalists about the junta's intentions. Foreign journalists were not invited.
He disclosed that former Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and the opposition leader Bulent Ecevit, who were freed on Saturday, had been barred from making political statements in order ''to avoid political controversy and tension.''
 
People Asked to Help
''We have to have political peace in the country to fulfill our commitments,'' the military spokesman reportedly declared. ''That's why we banned all political activities.''
In Diyarbakir, General Evren spoke at length about the junta's determination to put an end to terror and anarchy and called on the people to help. The terrorism, which was taking 20 to 30 lives a day before the Sept. 12 coup, was a main reason for the takeover. The situation has improved to the point where there are now two or three deaths per day, but it is not known whether the terrorist groups have been broken or are only lying low.
''We will not leave our present duty until we overcome this anarchy, until we clean up all the country,'' General Evren warned.  ''If we do go, the nation will condemn us. We will achieve quick results if the citizens help us.''
Responding to veiled criticisms in the Turkish press about recent executions -the first in eight years - the chief of state stressed that the junta had merely confirmed death sentences handed down by independent courts.
''We are soldiers, but we kill in war,'' General Evren said. ''In times of peace nobody finds pleasure in killing people, apart from some ill-willed people. Those people were taking their arms and fearlessly shooting innocent people. If we do not hang them, whom shall we hang?''
 
Aware of Previous 'Mistakes'
Recalling the 1960 and 1971 coups, General Evren conceded that ''mistakes'' had been made and that ''ill-intentioned persons'' had taken advantage of the Constitution. The nation, he said, would lose patience with military intervention if the present junta made the same mistakes.
Speaking more directly on the same subject, the officer in Ankara said the junta wanted to change the Constitution and the election laws ''to avoid past deficiencies'' during coalition governments.  This was an apparent reference to the influence wielded by the small parties when the larger parties cannot obtain a parliamentary majority.
''Necessary adjustments will be made to provide Turkey with governments that enjoy a strong parliamentary majority,'' he was quoted as saying.
Asked whether the constituent assembly that is to draft a new constitution would include representatives of political parties, the officer said that had not been decided. When the armed forces took power, they immediately suspended the Constitution, dissolved Parliament and the Cabinet and banned all political activities, but they promised a return to democratic rule ''as soon as possible.''


End of Document