TURKS WINNING WAR AGAINST TERROR, PREMIER SAYS
The New York Times
December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 566 words
Byline: By MARVINE HOWE, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: ANKARA, Turkey, Dec. 6
Body


Prime Minister Bulent Ulusu reviewed the successes of the military Government's fight against terrorism in Turkey today and stressed that it must be carried out within the limits of the law.
The Prime Minister confirmed reports that investigations were under way into allegations that since the military coup Sept. 12 up to eight people had died after torture while being detained.
''Strict orders have been given to martial-law authorities to investigate the torture allegations,'' the Prime Minister said. ''If it is established through investigations that any of the allegations are valid, necessary legal action would of course be immediately initiated and penal sanctions be taken against those who resort to such illegal, inhuman methods.''
AN-A
Prime Minister Ulusu, a former navy commander, brought up the torture issue in a wide-ranging news conference on the achievements of his Government.
 
Reports of Security Abuses
His assurances that laws categorically prohibit the torture of detainees follow persistent reports of abuses by security officials as they carried out their mission to crush terrorism.
This week a group of 63 lawyers presented a petition to Ankara's three martial-law courts protesting curbs on the right of defense.  The lawyers charged that ''tortures, resulting in deaths, are being applied in police stations and prisons,'' and they cited five cases.
Other specific limitations on the right of defense listed by the lawyers were the new 90-day detention period, ''giving broad opportunity for torture''; restrictions on the right of appeal; limited time for preparation of the defense; increased penalties in martial law court cases, and a lack of privacy in meetings between lawyers and prisoners.
''I have not been informed about any torture case that resulted in death,'' the Prime Minister said. But he later added that martiallaw commanders were ''considering with the utmost care the allegations of death by torture, which do not exceed eight.''
 
Sharp Decline in Violent Deaths
Prime Minister Ulusu noted out that the daily average death toll from terrorism has been reduced from 22 in the year before the coup to fewer than three since then.
Comparing the 80-day period after Sept. 12 with the 80 days before, he cited other statistics: the number of armed assaults and clashes down to 305 from 1,609; casualties down to 132 dead and 339 wounded from 680 dead and 1,297 wounded; incidents involving explosives down to 238 from 704; the seizure of 6,873 clandestine rifles and pistols compared with 1,823 before the coup.
He listed these economic achievements since the coup:
- A major fiscal reform package is expected to go into effec t before the end of the year. It is aimed at al leviating the tax burdenon fixed incomes by revising minimum-income c eilings and tax brackets, providing a 50 percent increase in wages.
- A budget of 1,581 billion Turkish liras (nearly $18 billion), which represents an 11.6 percent increase in real terms, has been presented. Priority is given to rapidly productive investments, agricultural needs, energy projects, improvement of ports, railroads and telecommunications, and development of economic and social training.
- The inflation rate, which reached 100 percent in recent years, has been reduced to perhaps 55 to 65 percent this year.
- The strikes, lockouts and slowdowns that plagued the nation before the coup have been ended.


End of Document