Turkey Approaches Democracy
The New York Times
November 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial
Length: 330 words
Body


With this week's election, Turkey moved from outright military rule to quasi-democracy. It stretches truth to describe the vote as free, since all of Turkey's older parties and more than 2,000 politicians were barred from taking part. But the poll was no mere charade. The winner, with a majority, was a party led by Turgut Ozal, the brash freeenterpriser least favored by the generals who seized power three years ago.
Mr. Ozal is a consensus politician, flexible enough to have served as chief economic planner in both elected and military regimes. Under his tutelage, Turkey shaved inflation, doubled exports and resumed its growth. He has shown political flair in guiding his year-old Motherland Party to victory over a more right-wing group openly favored by the armed forces, which finished third. He has clearly won the right to govern. The question now is whether the generals will let him.
A new Constitution adopted after a no-debate referendum retains Kenan Evren, a retired gen- eral, as President, with broad powers in the Gaullist mode. That is because the military leaders are haunted by the memory of a weak and divided parliamentary regime that failed to curb terrorism by either left- or right-wing extremists. Indisputably, the violence has been contained since the 1980 military coup, at the cost of the detention of at least 21,000 people, episodes of prison torture and a 10- year suspension of the political rights of former party leaders.  This is a troubled history that Americans have to take into account in appraising political life in a strategically important NATO nation. But it does no service to an important ally to pretend that this election completes the process of returning Turkey to the democratic fold. Turkey is now a halfway house. Whether it moves to stable civilian government depends both on the restraint of its generals and the good sense of its politicians. Democracy will not mature if its military guardians keep it in perpetual infancy.


End of Document