TV Q&A
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 5, 2010 Sunday
FIVE STAR EDITION


Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT; TV Q&A; Pg. TV-9
Length: 446 words
Byline: ROB OWEN
Body


Post-Gazette TV editor Rob Owen answers reader questions online every Friday in Tuned In Journal blog at post-gazette.com/tv. Here's a selection of recent queries.
Q: I could not stand "My Name is Earl," but I truly like "Memphis Beat." Is Jason Lee really singing the songs? Or is he just lip singing?
-- Diane, 56, Arlington
Rob: According to a TNT publicist, Jason Lee is not singing. The singing is done by Mark Arnell.
Q: When does the new season of "Son's of Anarchy" begin?
-- Steven, 69, McMurray
Rob: "Sons" is back on FX on Tuesday. I watched the season premiere and was not initially wowed until the final scene, which was full of "Holy cow!" moments that give me hope for a strong season to follow.
Q: I would like to know if Jillian and Ed are still together from "The Bachlorette" series and if and when there are any plans for a wedding?
-- Kathy, 64, West Mifflin, PA
Rob: Don't buy them a gift just yet: In recent months reports surfaced that they are at the very least "taking some time apart."
Q: It's been YEARS since I've been excited about the fall TV season, but I am now that CBS is bringing back the big wave on "Hawaii Five-0." Please tell me that not only will I see updated versions of Steve McGarrett, Dan-O, Chin-Ho, Che, Kono and The Governor, but also plenty of smuggling, espionage and terrorism all conducted by a nefarious bunch of sinister characters of ill-repute like Red Chinese spymaster Wo-Fat and others.
-- Rand-O, 44, Pittsburgh
Rob: Many of the characters from the original are back -- in this new "Hawaii Five-0" Jean Smart plays the governor of Hawaii -- and the pilot has some fantastic fight sequences, along with terrorism and human trafficking plots. But the show's drama is overwrought and the tone is utterly humorless.
Q: I liked "Saving Grace," and think the writers ought to get some sort of award for doing religion and not making it saccharine. The last episode was a hard thing to watch and TNT made it a little harder by cutting into the last few minutes with a promo for "Hawthorne." I'd love to know if I missed anything, and how many angry viewers contacted TNT to complain.
-- Jean
Rob: You're the only complaint I've gotten on a promo cut-in, but I know June's "Saving Grace" finale itself was polarizing and some viewers did not like it at all.
Q: Watching all the shows that are on 24/7 on hundreds of channels seems like an impossible task. How do you do it?
-- Kathleen, Pittsburgh
Rob: One person can't watch everything. I try to keep up with the shows that are most likely to lead to viewer questions -- serialized shows more than procedurals -- and I do a lot of reading about TV, even the shows I don't make time to watch.

Notes

Ask TV questions at post-gazette.com/tv under TV Q&A./

Load-Date: September 9, 2010


End of Document