TV STATIONS WARY OF DOCUMENTARY ON TERRORISM
The New York Times
August 6, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk
Length: 594 words
Byline: By SALLY BEDELL SMITH
Body


A two-part documentary examining terrorism around the world has been purchased by fewer than 15 television stations because of its controversial nature, the distributor for the program said yesterday.
''Terror!'' was assembled over two years by Herbert Krosney, an independent producer. It includes frequent reminders of the consequences of terrorism - footage of numerous bombings, assassinations and hijackings - as well as interviews with some terrorists not before seen on television.
Terror!, two-part documentary examining terrorism around the world, has been bought by fewer than 15 television stations because of its controversial nature, according to distributor, Silverbach-Lazarus Group (S)
Toby Rogers, senior vice president of the Silverbach-Lazarus Group, a distributor of television programs, said that since last April the documentary has been offered for sale to stations in 272 metropolitan areas. The stations approached have included those affiliated with the three commercial networks as well as those that are independently operated.
The overwhelming reason given by stations that turned down the program, Mr. Rogers said, was: '' 'Let's face it, it's a controversial topic. Stations have to sell their spots, and corporate advertisers have a problem being identified with something controversial.'' Mr. Rogers said that during the recent crisis over the hijacking of a TWA jet, ''we did get a certain groundswell of stations thinking they could capitalize on the news. But the moment it was over, their interest waned.''
 
Declined by Chicago Station
Among those stations that declined to run the program was WFLD-TV, an independent station in Chicago. Eric Block, vice president for creative services for the station, said that one reason was that the program could not ''tie into specific local issues.'' Another reason, he said, is that ''documentaries are a hard sell. They traditionally don't perform well in the ratings. Added to that is the specter of controversy that may turn advertisers away.''
Financing for the $500,000 production came from three foreign television networks - ZDF in West Germany, Channel Four in Britain and Global Television in Canada - as well as Jafta Japan Inc., a Japanese advertising agency. Mr. Krosney said that he decided to sell the program commercially in the United States because ''I thought it could get a far wider audience than on public television.''
He said that he was ''a bit discouraged'' by the results. ''I wouldn't look necessarily to do a serious documentary again if it were dependent on the commercial American market.''
 
Got Good Ratings on WNEW-TV
In New York City, the program appeared on WNEW-TV, on July 22 and 23d at 9 P.M., and received ratings that were better than usual for the station at that time. Each night, a total of about 400,000 households tuned in, out of a total of 6.6 million in the New York metropolitan area, according to Rob Friedman, program director for the station.
''We thought it belonged in prime time and so we purchased it,'' said Mr. Friedman. ''We had our news and legal departments go over it carefully. A few minor adjustments were made, but we thought it was a stunning documentary.''
Among the other stations that have run the program are WCVB-TV, an ABC affiliate in Boston, WAGA-TV, a CBS affiliate in Atlanta, and WPLG-TV in Miami, an ABC affiliate.
Mr. Rogers said that his company is continuing discussions with stations in Detroit, Chicago and San Francisco. ''We're not giving up our efforts,'' he said. ''We view this documentary as a long-term property.''


End of Document