TV VIEW;
MUST TV BE AT THE MERCY OF TERRORISTS?
The New York Times
July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk
Length: 1469 words
Byline: By John Corry
Body


How does terrorism play on television? It depends. Consider the two-part documentary ''Terror!'' Its point of view is clear; the exclamation point tells us that. Terrorism lies outside the pale; it is something to be abhorred. Ideologists define terrorism to their own ends, while the United Nations, the documentary notes, has been unwilling to define it at all. Most reasonable people, however, need no definition; they recognize terrorism when they see it. Terrorism is a bombing, an assassination, a hijacked plane. It is a violent act in a political context, and it is, as Arthur Hill, the narrator of the documentary, says, ''a part of the world we live in.''
''Terror!,'' which begins on WNEW-TV/Channel 5 tomorrow night at 9, is something like a compendium of terrorist groups. It says that more than 1,000 groups have claimed responsibility for some 8,000 incidents since 1968, and that more than 500 terrorist groups are operating now. ''Terror!'' looks at some that are, or have been, prominent: the Japanese Red Army, Black September, Provisional Irish Republican Army, Fatah, Prima Lenai, Hezbollah, Armenian Secret Army, Red Brigades. They come from the left and the right. They all kill indiscriminately.
John Corry article discusses television coverage of terrorist incidents and reviews WNEW-TV documentary Terror! (M)
Say right off, meanwhile, that some of the reporting on ''Terror!'' is thin, and that occasionally a fact, or accusation, is aired and then too quickly allowed to submerge. Mr. Hill says, for example, that after the siege of the Libyan Embassy in London last year, ''Syria and Libya struck a deal. For $350 million, paid on April 25, 1984, Syria gave Qaddafi access to its own well-developed intelligence network.'' This may be true, but we'd like to know how ''Terror!'' knows it and certainly what Libya is getting for its money.
Whatever its failings, however, ''Terror!'' does persuade us that terrorism is used to change how the world thinks, or at least what it thinks about. We live in a time of instant communication; the world is a global village. Television is the universal hearth. Terrorists can speak to the world, and alter it, by capturing its cameras first.
''Terror!'' notes, for instance, that two years after Palestinian terrorists murdered Israeli athletes at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, the U. N. recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization; Yasir Arafat addressed the General Assembly. By 1975, the documentary says, only five Palestinians arrested for terrorist attacks in Europe remained in prison. There had been 207. Obviously, television technology alone did not bring all this about. On the other hand, when the world watched Munich, the P.L.O. had a platform. Clearly, this placed other events in motion.
The documentary says television is a conduit for terrorist demands and lets it go at that. In fact, television does a good deal more. For one thing, it can superimpose a different reality on terrorism. A viewer may know that the hijacking of a jet is a terrorist act; television obscures the perception. On television, the recent hijacking of a TWA jet, along with the murder of one passenger and the incarceration of others, was not a story about terrorism; it was a story about negotiations. What had to be done to set the hostages free?
Thus, terrorism disappeared. Indeed, the hijacking seemed to turn into a giant television production. A handsome leading man acted as spokesman for the hostages; then their relatives wept in America. Anchormen conducted diplomacy, negotiating for the hostages' release. President Reagan did call the hijackers ''thugs and barbarians,'' but he had to hold a media event with the families of other hostages to do it. An ABC advertisement with David Hartman caught the pervasive spirit of television nicely: ''Wake up to the latest in the hostage ordeal on 'Good Morning America.' ''
None of this might have mattered, except that in changing the event, television also determined how we reacted to it. Television rules applied. Analysis, anchorman diplomacy and constant repitition of the hijackers' demands shifted responsibility for the hostages away from the hijackers and the Amal militia to Israel. If Israel would only release its Moslem detainees, the hostages would go free. Israel almost seemed to be the jailer.
An ABC poll during the crisis found that 42 percent of Americans, apparently a larger number than ever before, now wanted the United States to distance its foreign policy from Israel.
Did the television coverage exacerbate a latent anti-Semitism? Spokesmen for American Jewish organizations may have thought so.
They appeared frequently on news programs, speaking, one thought, in euphemisms. Anti-Semitism was not mentioned, although the possibility that it had been aroused seemed to hover over the discussions. Did the television coverage circumscribe the ways the Administration could respond to the hijackers? Lesley Stahl said on CBS that the White House was considering a request to the networks to limit their coverage. ''Administration officials,'' she reported, ''say emotional pleas are making it more difficult to manage the crisis.''
Or did the television coverage even prolong the crisis? The powerless and the aggrieved - or those who believe themselves to be that way - can claim the world's attention through television; they can confirm their own identity and show the rightness of their cause. Speculating on ABC about why the Amal seemed reluctant to give up the hostages on the final weekend, Peter Jennings said, ''They were at the center of the universe - these hostage holders - why should they give them up?'' This may have been the most provocative thing anyone who regularly appeared on television said about television and what it was doing.
In retrospect, it seems that television had learned nothing from the Iranian hostage crisis, when the Ayatollah Khomeini and his associates had determined the coverage. The networks camped outside the Embassy in Teheran for more than a year, each with three, four and five crews at a time. There was never any real news, although the Iranians had access to the networks when they wanted it. Meanwhile, Sadegh Ghotbzadeh, the Ayatollah's aide, made deals. Feed film to ABC, CBS and NBC; then get it on EuroVision. If EuroVision uses the film, Japan will pick it up. Then it goes out to the rest of Asia. The world would get the Ayatollah's message.  By contrast, the Shiites in Lebanon were not nearly so sophisticated, although they didn't do badly at all. The Amal press secretary posted a notice: ''The Central Press Bureau of the Amal declares that all film taken of the hostages can be used freely by all press agencies and television networks.'' This meant there would be pool coverage; the Amal did not believe in exclusives. They wanted the television film to get the widest possible dissemination. They wanted to speak to the world, and, like the Iranians, they did.
Credit the television news departments, however, for at least worrying about some of this. In the final days of the coverage, the networks did specials. Commentators, anchormen and correspondents plunged into self-examination, talking about how well or how poorly they had reported the story. No one, as nearly as this viewer could tell, admitted to a single mistake. The self-examinations ended either in self-praise or in a defense of network practice.
And the defense most often heard was this: Everyone manipulates television; it's something that goes with the territory. Even the most respected old hands on television said this was so. ''Was television manipulated?'' John Chancellor rhetorically asked. ''Yes,'' he answered. ''By just about all the players in the game. Any free society can be manipulated.'' Other old hands agreed.
It was a curious defense, really. It meant that television, which regularly claims print journalism's theology and perogatives, did not accept print journalism's responsibilities. Newspaper editors take responsibility for what appears in their papers. They are accountable. Their equivalents in television apparently are not. Television coverage is something that just happens. Nabih Berri beckoned; Dan Rather had to respond. Hostages apologized for their captors; producers were forced to listen. Surrogates for the hijackers held news conferences; correspondents simply had to attend. Where was judgment? There was none. The coverage, it seems, was beyond anyone's control.
This is unsatisfactory, of course. Terrorism demands responsible journalism. It is too grave, far-reaching and important a subject to be treated with the television empty-headedness it has received. In its way, the documentary ''Terror!'' is a corrective. It has a point of view; it makes a judgment. It also recognizes terrorism.


End of Document