TV Violence - What We Know but Ignore
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
September 7, 1993, Tuesday


Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
Section: OPINION/ESSAYS; Pg. 19
Length: 1409 words
Byline: Daniel Schorr; Daniel Schorr is senior news analyst for National Public Radio.
Highlight: Violence on the tube won't be resolved until economic
incentives are reversed
Body


I HAD 23 rewarding years with CBS News as a correspondent at
home and abroad and six years with Ted Turner and CNN. And if both
associations ended with blow-ups over what I considered issues of
principle, I harbor no hard feelings.
My problem with television goes beyond my own relations with the
medium, although my experience in television gave me a special
sensitivity to its baneful effects on the American psyche. Let me
put it in a sound-bit: Television, celebrating violence, promotes
violence. By rewarding terrorism, it encourages terrorism. By
trivializing great issues, it buries great issues. By blurring the
line between fantasy and reality, it crowds our reality. And people
are beginning to catch on.
I do not know why conservatives seem generally more concerned
about sex on television and liberals more concerned about violence
on television. The Christian right is appalled at the number of sex
scenes. Of 45 such scenes watched by USA Today in a sample week,
only four involved married couples. Thirty-nine involved adulterers
or unmarried persons.
Others are more appalled by violence. By the age of 18,
according to the National Coalition on Television Violence, the
average American will have witnessed 200,000 acts of violence,
including 40,000 murders. Opinion polls indicate that up to 80
percent of Americans today think there is too much violence on
television.
''In the absence of family, peer, and school relationships,''
said the 1969 National Commission on Violence, ''television becomes
the most compatible substitute for real life experience.'' John
Hinckley, who withdrew from school and family life, spent many
hours alone in a room with a TV set, retreating into a world of
fantasy violence. When questioned by the Secret Service after
shooting President Reagan in 1981, he first asked, ''Is it on TV?''
Anyone who has worked in television knows of its power to create a
reality of its own that may crowd our real reality.
Less benign is what people will sometimes do to get themselves
and their causes authenticated by television. Prison rioters
sometimes list as a primary demand that they be able to air their
grievances on television. You may say that TV is the victim, not
the instigator of terrorism. But the dirty little secret is that
television enjoys the tingle of a terrorist incident. It enjoys the
ratings, and profits, that go with televised terror. ABC scored an
exclusive interview with the captain of a hijacked TWA plane in
Lebanon, who spoke with a captor's gun to his head. A triumph for
ABC - and a triumph for the terrorists who gained international
recognition by this promotional stunt.
NBC had an exclusive interview with Abu Abass, wanted for murder
in the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro, and NBC agreed
not to reveal where it had interviewed the fugitive, who used his
opportunity to justify terrorism on American TV. Anthony Quainton,
who used to head the State Department's Office for Combatting
Terrorism, has associated the increase in casualties during
hijackings and hostage-takings during the 1980s with a desire to
ensure media attention.
Channel 7 in Miami, long at the bottom of the ratings pile has
emerged as one of the most successful independent stations in the
nation. Why? On a typical evening, Channel 7 reported on three
rapes, two plane crashes, three hit-and-run accidents, and a
wild-monkey attack.
The quest for ratings is not limited to the entertainment
studio. It has spread to the newsroom - in case you can still tell
the difference. The ''docu-drama,'' and, more recently, the
syndicated ''reality-based shows,'' as they are called, have almost
erased the line between fact and fiction. News programmers are
sometimes driven to recreation themselves.
Four years ago, the ABC Evening News showed a simulation, not
immediately identified as such, of an American diplomat suspected
of espionage handing over a briefcase full of secrets to a Russian
agent.
I suspect that kids who go around shooting kids, on purpose or
at random, no longer know the difference between the bang-bang they
grow up with on the television screen and the bang-bang that snuffs
out real lives. Maybe the kids they shoot will come back to life
after the commercial. The desensitizing effect of endless violent
acts is the most destructive aspect of television's general assault
on a sense of reality. E.B. White predicted in the 1940s that
television would become either ''the test of the modern world, a
saving radiance,'' or ''a new and unbearable disturbance of the
modern peace.'' Which is it?
Violence and sex on television have not developed by
happenstance. In the 1950s, ABC, the youngest and least watched of
the three networks, found a formula to catch up with NBC and CBS.
It was ''The Untouchables,'' a program full of violence, highly
successful, that established murder and mayhem as the way to lift
ratings. Script writers today will tell you that they are ordered
to insert more scenes of sex and violence and that scripts have
been rejected for being too tame.
''The most important thing,'' said former Surgeon General Jesse
Steinfeld in 1972, ''is that a casual relationship has been shown
between violence-viewing and aggression.'' The Commission on
Violence and Youth of the American Psychological Association just
reported five to six violent acts per hour on prime time, 20 to 25
on Saturday morning children's programs. Cable and MTV had more.
Finding: ''There is absolutely no doubt that higher levels of
viewing on television are correlated with increased acceptance of
aggressive attitudes and increased aggressive behavior…
Children's exposure to violence in the mass media, particularly at
young ages, can have harmful lifelong consequences.''
We have long known all this. The media have often covered up
such knowledge. In 1968 CBS assigned me to cover the hearings of
the National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence,
after the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert
Kennedy.
One interim report dealt with TV and violence. I taped a summary
for the Evening News. Shortly before air time I was told that CBS
executives had intervened to censor my report. One item deleted was
a paragraph stating that while ''most persons will not kill after
seeing a single violent television program … it is possible that
many learn some of their attitudes about violence.'' My protest
almost got me fired.
But TV can no longer hide its love affair with violence. The
networks, feeling the heat and fearing federal intervention, now
offer warning labels. But for the quarter of American families that
are now single-parent families, the parent is usually at work. Who
is there to exercise discretion? Isn't the warning actually bait
for kids?
Congress has been looking at the problem of television and
violence since 1952, and now there is some sentiment in Congress to
control violence by legislation. One bill would mandate a chip
enabling viewers to block out programs that the networks classify
as violent. Networks are reluctant to put the label on for the
obvious reason that advertisers will stay away from such programs.
Rep. John Bryant (D) of Texas has a bill that says: Cut violence or
you will be fined, and stations may lose licenses when they come up
for renewal. In a Senate hearing, Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D) of
Ohio told network executives, ''Do something or else.''
This raises First Amendment issues. The courts hold that a
regulated industry, using channels that really belong to the
public, cannot escape regulation. But any move to regulate for
contents stirs profound unease in a supporter of free speech and
free press. Nothing is more likely to bring on a threat to the
First Amendment than abuse of the First Amendment. By law, after
all, television is supposed to operate ''in the public interest,
convenience, and necessity.''
Why is it so hard to get television to control its love affair
with violence? Because of perverse economic incentives. Because
violence sells. Why does it sell? Because the public buys it. We
all make the violence profitable.
I like Attorney General Janet Reno's recommendation that parents
refuse to buy products that advertise on violent television
programs. Does that sound like ''boycott''? Yes. But the problem of
violence on television will not be resolved until economic
incentives are reversed. Organized public action will be more
effective than government regulation.
As for E. B. White's choice between ''saving radiance'' or
''unbearable disturbance'': We've had the disturbance. We wait for
the saving radiance.

Graphic

 
ILLUSTRATION BY POLLY BECKER

Load-Date: September 6, 1993


End of Document