TV VIEW;
Terrorism Stalks A Drama
The New York Times
January 10, 1988, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 2; Page 31, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk
Length: 997 words
Byline: By JOHN CORRY
Body


AIR FORCE COMMANDOS SNATCH A TERRORIST in Lebanon and bring him to the United States for trial. The Justice Department is involved; the American Civil Liberties Union is involved. Sy Resnik (played by Ron Liebman), the well-known defense attorney who also teaches law at the University of Pennsylvania, becomes involved, although not because he really wants to. As he says, the terrorist is ''scum, lowlife,'' a fanatic who murders civilians. Besides, he has other things on his plate. On the other hand, duty does call. ''It's not about him, sir,'' a first-year law student says earnestly to Resnik, ''it's about due process.'' Well, maybe it is; maybe it isn't. Either way, though, ''Terrorist on Trial: The United States vs. Salim Ajami'' is a pretty good television movie.
The three-hour production, on CBS at 8 tonight, is very much Mr. Liebman's movie. It has to be. The real subject of ''Terrorist on Trial'' isn't terrorism; it isn't the American judicial system, either, even if the smartly done script - by William Link and the late Richard Levinson - pretends that it is. The real subject is defense strategy in a big case. What does a heroic lawyer do to get his client off, particularly if the client is scum or lowlife? Indeed, what is the lawyer morally obligated to do?
Just about anything, the movie suggests. ''There are no limits in the service of the law,'' Resnik tells his students. He may have been reluctant to take the case, but once enlisted, he'll give his all. Resnik may wear a sweatshirt when he teaches class (his students are better dressed), but he is supposed to be in the tradition of Charles Laughton in ''Witness for the Prosecution'' and Spencer Tracy in ''Inherit the Wind.'' The difference is the CBS movie assumes that we may be just the tiniest bit turned off by a defense attorney who gives his all to free a Palestinian terrorist who murders children. Therefore, Resnik must agonize a bit.
Thus he makes clear that he doesn't approve of terrorism. But what is he supposed to do when the Attorney General calls and says the President wants him to represent the terrorist? The trial is supposed to be a showcase for American democracy, proof that even a terrorist can have a day in court. Meanwhile, Resnik is Jewish, and everyone, including people in the A.C.L.U., apparently believes that a Jew won't defend a Palestinian terrorist. Obviously, Resnik must sign on then; it's a matter of personal honor.
In fact, the movie is dragging in a red herring here, meant only to make us have warm feelings about the lawyer. In the real world, an A.C.L.U. type is unlikely to believe that a big-shot defense lawyer won't defend a terrorist because the lawyer is Jewish. A little later, the red herring turns rank when three American Jews, supposedly Israeli fund-raisers, burst in on Resnik and warn him about defending the Palestinian terrorist. ''You're a Jew, you wipe your hands of him,'' the principal fund-raiser says ominously. Menace hangs in the air; a subtle, even if unintended, anti-Semitism hangs there, too. The scene suggests that good Jews and bad Jews are divided by adherence to secular causes. The defense lawyer is good; the three fund-raisers are obviously bigots.
Subsequently, ''Terrorist on Trial'' spends a lot of time justifying defense tactics and explaining why celebrated defense attorneys, or at least some of them, do the things they do. Why do they appear on talk shows, hold frequent news conferences and sometimes bleed in public? Could it be vanity, ego or a desire to raise their fees for after-dinner speeches? No, no, no; as this particular defense attorney explains, he is trying to ''create a climate'' that will allow a jury to acquit. Sacred legal duty, apparently, forces him to go on talk shows.
The CBS movie is serious about this. At the same time, it wants to be sophisticated. It works in wry references to defense attorneys who make music videos and capitalize on their cases. Resnik isn't one of those, however; he's a principled guy out to do his best. He looks at the stone-faced terrorist (Robert Davi) and says he'll defend him even if the terrorist does refuse to cooperate. The terrorist insists he's a political prisoner; the Justice Department says he's an ordinary murderer. The attorney, insisting he must do what he can for his client, raises a political defense.
''Terrorist on Trial'' deals with how he does this. For one thing, he compares Palestinian terrorists to South African blacks; for another, he says that United States intervention in Vietnam changed the rules of warfare. Mr. Liebman gets the most interesting speeches. Sam Waterston, who plays the Justice Department prosecutor, is restricted to more conventional points of view. At about midpoint in the film, he seems to drop out of the cast - he returns later - because the film is so insistent on upholding the defense that it simply forgets about the prosecution.
There is an interesting moral dilemma here. If Mr. Liebman is to get the most interesting speeches, then the movie must indicate that the terrorist is not merely a murderer. If it doesn't, we're likely to think that an A.C.L.U. aide is suggesting a sensible course of action when she rhetorically asks about the terrorist, ''What should we do - shoot him?'' If we agree with that right off the bat, there is no point to a three-hour movie.
Consequently, the movie, directed by Jeff Bleckner, must portray the terrorist as something of an underdog. It hints that he was driven to terrorism because he suffered; it also hints that he had nothing to with the crime with which he is charged. The courtroom scenes are particularly effective. Mr. Liebman is not as impassioned as real-life trial lawyers, but he seems terribly sincere. ''Terrorist on Trial: The United States vs. Salim Ajami'' is really a celebration of defense lawyers. The point of view may be sentimental, even simplistic, but the movie is sufficiently taut and gripping that you aren't likely to care.


End of Document