TV's concern waning over terrorism
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
May 17, 1995, Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: BAYLIFE,
Length: 358 words
Byline: Walt Belcher
Body


The period of mourning for the Oklahoma City bombing victims apparently is over as far as television is concerned.
USA cable network will show "Die Hard" at 9 tonight. Bruce Willis battles terrorists who plan to blow up a skyscraper.
"Die Hard 2" airs at 8 p.m. Thursday on CBS. Willis battles terrorists who take over an airport.
HBO debuts "Making of "Die Hard With a Vengeance' " at 9:30 tonight. It's a behind-the-scenes look at the third "Die Hard" film, which opens in theaters Friday.
For more than a week after the bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma City on April 19, networks pulled off series and movies with terrorist or bombing themes. CBS, ABC and Fox pulled programs or ran disclaimers.
There has been some speculation that Fox might try to alter or cut portions of Monday's cliffhanger ending of "Melrose Place," which involves a bomb story. But after "Die Hard" airs this week, the "Melrose" ending likely will seem tame.    CNN anchor  Porter Anderson, the former Tampa Tribune theater critic whose name still strikes terror in the hearts of local thespians, has joined CNN as a "freelance, part-time news anchor."
Anderson, who worked at the Tribune from 1985 to 1991, is pulling the graveyard shift on weekends and is not yet a full-time employee, according to a CNN spokesman.
Anderson made his debut this past weekend reading headlines and introducing clips between midnight and 6 a.m. Sunday and 1:30 a.m. and 6 a.m. Monday.
Since leaving the Tribune, Anderson has worked at the Dallas Times Herald and written for The Village Voice in New York, and edited a newspaper in his native South Carolina.
He currently is living in Atlanta but has been unavailable for comment. During his stint at the Tribune he certainly stirred up emotions. He was barred from one dinner theater and once felt the wrath of none other than George Steinbrenner, who wrote a lengthy Letter to the Editor challenging one of Anderson's reviews.
If you're up late - or very early this weekend - check out the former actor-turned-critic-turned-anchor.  Reach Walt Belcher online on Prodigy at TRIB03B@Prodigy.com. Or fax (813) 259-7676. Or call (813) 259-7654.  

Notes

COLUMN; TELEVISION

Graphic

 
SIGNATURE; PHOTO,
 Porter Anderson

Load-Date: May 19, 1995


End of Document