TWA FLIGHT 800;
Accident or crime?;
Terrorism feared but not proved
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 19, 1996, Friday,
JOURNAL EDITION


Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 01A
Length: 425 words
Byline: FROM OUR NEWS SERVICES
Body


The swiftness of the jumbo jet's midair destruction, the broad swath of the Atlantic Ocean littered by debris and the absence of an emergency call for help has led investigators to focus on the possibility that TWA Flight 800 was knocked from the sky by terrorists.
Even as they cautioned against premature conclusions, federal, state and local investigators were exploring every scenario, ranging from whether a bomb exploded in the plane to whether a missile fired from the ground picked the airliner out of the sky.
"We are assuming, at least in law enforcement, that it is a bomb. We could be wrong, but we have to puruse it as a crime," a senior law enforcement official told The Washington Post.
But the prospect of a catastrophic mechanical failure also remained. Evidence culled from the gruesome retrieval of more than 100 bodies and wreckage from the waters off the coast of Long Island puzzled investigators because initial inspections turned up no shrapnel or powder.
All that was clear was that all 230 people aboard the Boeing 747 from John F. Kennedy Airport bound for Paris died Wednesday in the explosion or by drowning in the water below.
Government officials told Newsday they were seriously examining the possibility that a missile struck the plane, and they noted that there was an apparent blip on the radar screen before the explosion. The blip, if not a meaningless shadow, could conform to what some investigators said were reports of a flash rising from the surface before the explosion.
But electronic clutter on the tapes is making a determination difficult, the officials said.
And the plane was believed to have been outside the range of most shoulder-launched missiles.
White House press secretary Mike McCurry said investigators were "trying to clarify any abnormalities" on radar screens. Asked about speculation that there was a missile, McCurry replied, "There's no American official with half a brain who ought to be speculating on anything of that nature."
Meanwhile, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said he had turned over to the Justice Department and the White House an English translation of an Arabic tract threatening the American troop presence in Saudi Arabia.
The tract was translated as saying, "The mujahedeen will deliver the ultimate response to the threats of the foolish American president. Everyone will be amazed as to the size of that response."
The tract, dated July 16, said the Americans should be prepared to leave within days, Burns said. There was no reference to the TWA disaster, he said.

Graphic

 
Color Photo: An unidentified vessel tows a piece of wreckage from the
 crash of TWA Flight 800 early Thursday. The jetliner crash has caused
 much concern over the reasons why. / The Associated Press

Load-Date: July 21, 1996


End of Document