Twin Cities get increase in anti-terrorism money; But Homeland Security warns that mid-size cities could suffer if more funds are given to the largest cities.
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
July 19, 2007 Thursday
Metro Edition


Copyright 2007 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 6A
Length: 561 words
Byline: Mark Brunswick, Staff Writer
Body


Minneapolis and St. Paul, which found their anti-terrorism funding requests significantly reduced in 2006, got what officials said were substantial boosts in federal anti-terrorism money on Wednesday from the Department of Homeland Security.
"We're nowhere near what we asked for, but we are thrilled at what we got," said Judson Freed, director of emergency management for Ramsey County.
The metro area will receive more than $8.4 million from a program known as the Urban Areas Security Initiative, which provides assistance for high-threat, high-density urban areas to deal with terrorist threats. In 2006, the Twin Cities region was awarded only $4.3 million, sparking criticism from local emergency management officials and the Minnesota congressional delegation.
The funding will go toward personnel, planning, and some equipment, mostly for communications, Freed said.
State gets $3 million
The state of Minnesota will also receive about $3 million more from two statewide programs to support information sharing and terror prevention.
In previous years, the distribution of federal anti-terrorism money had been criticized for being too political and for assigning money to areas that would seem in little need of protection. In 2005, Sen. Norm Coleman, R-Minn., withheld his support for Michael Chertoff's nomination to be Homeland Security secretary over concerns that St. Paul and Minneapolis were categorized separately in  assessing the threat.
Freed said local applicants were disciplined about what they asked for, part of a 16-week application process.
In making Wednesday's announcement awarding $1.7 billion in counterterrorism grants and $1 billion in grants to improve emergency communications, Homeland Security officials increased funding for hot spots such as New York City - which was given $134 million, up $10 million - and the Washington area - $62 million, a $15 million increase.
Funding steeped in security
But officials also warned that doling out more cash to the largest cities could mean eliminating funding for mid-size cities such as Minneapolis and St. Paul.
"If we answer the wish lists of the top tier cities, basically there would be nothing left," Chertoff said. "Maybe Congress wants to go down that road and say we're going to put it all in six cities. I think that would be a mistake."
Selecting what areas receive funding is steeped in security and risk levels remain classified, so even the regions receiving funding are not clear on what threats may have contributed in the process. Minnesota shares an international border, has two nuclear reactors, two major cities and a major port. While security for the 2008 Republican National Convention in St. Paul was not part of the application process, the event could have been factored in.
Said Coleman: "This increased funding will provide critical, additional resources to meet out ever high expectations of public safety."
The Washington Post contributed to this report. Mark Brunswick - 651-222-1636
THE TOP 7 CITIES UNDER THREAT
Homeland Security's rank:
1. New York
2. Los Angeles
3. Washington
4. Chicago
5. Houston
6. San Francisco
7. Jersey City/Newark
THE SIGNIFICANCE:
Those cities receive $410 million, or 55 percent, of the $747 million in the Urban Area Security Initiative. The rest of the money goes to 39 other cities - including the Twin Cities, which gets $8.4 million.
news services

Load-Date: July 20, 2007


End of Document