Twitter's Window On the Election
The New York Times
November 5, 2012 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 5; BITS
Length: 660 words
Byline: By NICOLE PERLROTH
Body


In Florida, voters responded most when Mitt Romney posted about education and when President Obama did the same about foreign affairs. In Ohio, Mr. Obama's posted about gay rights, more so than any other topic, held the most traction. For Mr. Romney, it was his posts about the economy.
Twitter introduced an interactive map on Thursday showing which of the candidates' tweets drove the most engagement - measured by the number of times the tweet was reposted or favorited - on Twitter at the national and state levels.
Nationwide, Mr. Obama's most popular post was, "No family should have to set aside a college acceptance letter because they don't have the money." His second most popular post was actually a quote from Vice President Biden about women's rights: "VP Biden: I do not believe that we have a right to tell other people, women, that they can't control their bodies." Interestingly, at the state level, that post resonated most with voters in Wyoming, followed by Iowa, South Dakota and West Virginia - states where women's rights are not considered the pivotal issue.
Mr. Romney's most popular post was this remark on Sept. 11th: "On this most somber day, America is united under God in its quest for peace and freedom at home and across the world." Second most popular was a comment about wealth distribution: "I am running for president to get us creating wealth again - not to redistribute it."
In swing states, Twitter's map tells an interesting, and sometimes counter intuitive story. According to the latest polls, Virginia, Wisconsin, Ohio, Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire, Colorado and Florida are still toss-ups.
In the last presidential election, the President won Virginia by seven percentage points. This year, the race is expected to be much closer. There, voters' response was highest when the candidates posted about issues related to retirement.
The same was true for Wisconsin. Democrats carried the state in the last six presidential elections, but the addition of one of their own, Representative Paul D. Ryan, to Mr. Romney's ticket has kept the race tight. There, retirement was also the issue that seemed to have the most traction on Twitter.
In Iowa, where six electoral votes are up for grabs, voters were most engaged when Mr. Obama posted about topics related to energy and the environment and when Romney posted about health care.
Nevada voters responded most to Obama's comments on taxes. Mr. Obama's most popular post in that state was "1,240,000 middle-class families in Nevada could face a tax increase under Mitt Romney." Mr. Romney's posts about education drove the highest level of engagement. "With over 60k jobs lost & the highest unemployment rate in the nation, Nevadans aren't better off under @BarackObama," was Mr. Romney's most popular post.
In Colorado, women's issues have taken center stage after women proved crucial to two Democratic victories in the 2010 races for Senate and governor. But according to Twitter's data, Colorado voters responded in the largest numbers when Mr. Obama posted about taxes. For Mr. Romney, it was his remarks about terrorism.
If, as in the 2004 election, the race comes down to Florida, then the candidates may do well to defy conventional wisdom that retirement is all Florida voters care about. Within Florida, Mr. Romney's posts about retirement did not resonate as well as those about education and foreign affairs. Likewise, Mr. Obama's posts about topics relevant to retirement had less traction than his those about terrorism and foreign affairs.
Despite the perception that Twitter is just a place for East and West coasters to talk to each other, Twitter's map shows a surprising level of engagement in states like Wyoming, Utah, Texas, Mississippi and Oklahoma. The opposite proved true for New Hampshire and Vermont, where Twitter noted it was not able to collect enough data to draw conclusions.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/11/01/new-data-shows-which-candidates-tweets-resonated-most-with-electorate/

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Twitter has produced a map showing which of the presidential  candidates' posts have produced the most user engagement. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TWITTER)        

Load-Date: November 5, 2012


End of Document