Twitter targets users promoting terrorism [JUMP]Spam-fighting technology among tools it's employing; Spam-fighting technology among tools it's employing
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
February 6, 2016 Saturday


Copyright 2016 Times Publishing Company  All Rights Reserved
Section: METRO; Business; Pg. 21
Length: 632 words
Byline: TAMI ABDOLLAH The Associated Press
Highlight: Terror
Body


WASHINGTON - Twitter is now using spam-fighting technology to seek out accounts that might be promoting terrorist activity and is examining other accounts related to those flagged for possible removal, the company announced Friday. 
 The steps signal efforts by Twitter to automatically identify tweets supporting terrorism, reflecting increased pressure by the U.S. government on social media companies to respond to abuse more proactively. Child pornography has been the only abuse automatically flagged for human review on social media, using a different kind of technology that sources a database of known images.Twitter also said Friday it has suspended more than 125,000 accounts for threatening or promoting terrorist acts, mainly related to Islamic State militants, in the past eight months. 
 Social media increasingly have become a tool for recruitment and radicalization used by the Islamic State group and its supporters, who by some reports have sent tens of thousands of tweets a day. 
 Tech companies are dedicating increasingly more resources to tracking reports of violent threats. Twitter said Friday it has increased the size of its team reviewing reports, with a goal of reducing the response time significantly. 
 The San Francisco-based company also changed its user policy in April, adding language to make clear that
threatening or promoting terrorism counts as abusive behavior and violates its terms of use.In January, the White House made good on President Barack Obama's promise to reach out to Silicon Valley to tackle the use of social media by violent extremist groups. Those particularly include the Islamic State group, which inspired attackers who killed 14 people in San Bernardino, California, in December. 
 A post on one of the killers' Facebook pages that appeared about the time of the attack included a pledge of allegiance to the leader of the Islamic State group.Facebook found the post, which was under an alias, the day after the attack. The company removed the profile from public view and informed law enforcement. Such proactive efforts are fairly uncommon. 
 The Obama administration sent several top officials to San Jose, California, including FBI Director James Comey, Attorney General Loretta Lynch and National Security Agency Director Mike Rogers. 
 Among issues discussed was how to use technology to help speed the identification of terrorist content, according to a copy of the White House briefing memo obtained by The Associated Press.We recognize that identifying terrorist content that violates terms of service is far more difficult than identifying images of child pornography, but is there a way to use technology to quickly identify terrorist content? For example, are there technologies used for the prevention of spam that could be useful? the memo states. 
 In late 2015, Twitter began using proprietary spam-fighting tools to find accounts that might be violating terms of service by promoting terrorism, sending them to be reviewed by a team at Twitter. 
 Twitter said it has seen results, including an increase in account suspensions and this type of activity shifting off of Twitter.It also noted that there is no magic algorithm for identifying terrorist content, which is why even humans reviewing the material ultimately are making judgment calls based on very limited information and guidance. 
 Free speech and local law also can complicate matters. 
 Like most people around the world, we are horrified by the atrocities perpetrated by extremist groups. We condemn the use of Twitter to promote terrorism, Twitter said in a statement released Friday. 
 It said it would continue to engage with authorities and other relevant organizations to find solutions to this critical issue and promote powerful counter-speech narratives.

Load-Date: February 6, 2016


End of Document