Two assaults cap year of spreading terror; 'Terrorism is new normal,' former EU diplomat says.; CONTINUING COVERAGE
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
December 21, 2016 Wednesday


Copyright 2016 Dayton Newspapers, Inc.
Section: ; Pg. A1
Length: 851 words
Byline: Tim Arango
Body


Concrete barriers are being moved to enlarge the security perimeter near the Christmas market in Amsterdam, Netherlands, on Tuesday following the attack in Berlin, Germany.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other government members visit the site of the attack in Berlin, Germany, Tuesday.
Messages and candles left by mourners lie at a memorial near the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin. SEAN GALLUP / GETTY IMAGES
ISTANBUL - A trim and well-dressed man, dapper in a black suit, flashes a badge to enter the most genteel of events - an exhibition of nature photographs - pulls out a pistol and guns down an ambassador, right in the middle of the diplomatic quarter of the Turkish capital, Ankara.
Around the same time, in the shadow of a great church in Berlin that still bears the scars of bombs from World War II, a man plows a truck through a Christmas market, killing a dozen people.
The two terrorist attacks - one in Europe, the other on the periphery of Europe - came within hours of each other Monday night, bookends to a terrible year that saw the wars of the Middle East metastasize across Europe and beyond, spawning terrorism, upending the lives of ordinary citizens and energizing right-wing political movements.
The attacks could not have been more different in style, but each showed, in simultaneous fashion, the modern era of terrorism brought on bytheexpandingblowbackof the wars in the Middle East, which have defied international efforts to end them.
For Turkey, the murder of the Russian ambassador was a capstone to one of the most turbulent years in its modern history: The threat of terrorist attacks became a fact of everyday life. A botched coup was followed by a purge of civil society. A war against Kurdish separatists spiraled into ever-greater levels of brutality.
For Germany, which until Monday had been spared the sort of mass terrorist killings that had struck other European countries like France and Belgium, the attack was the realization of concern that it would be next. The future could be ominous: As the threat of terrorism becomes a reality, fears are growingthatGermany,which had welcomed refugees from the Middle East, could see its politics upended by the rise of its own right-wing, populist movement.
The killing of Russia's ambassador to Turkey was a choreographeddisplayofprecision and purpose, captured on video. The elegance of the setting - the white walls, the colorful,museum-qualityphotographs - lent the whole episode the feel of performance art, with the killer prancing around, waving a gun and declaring his act revenge for Russia's bombing of the Syrian city of Aleppo.
While the German attack remains to be sorted out, early reports attributing it to a Pakistani migrant underscored the new levels of anxiety. In any event, whoever carried out the attack sought to kill indiscriminately with a method - steering a vehicle through a crowd - taken from the playbook of the Islamic State.
At his apartment in Berlin, Can Dundar, a prominent Turkish newspaper editor, watched the news coverage Monday night of both events on separate televisions, as terror gripped his home country and his adopted one. Dundar moved to Germany to escape prison, having been convicted in a Turkish court on treason charges for publishing an article about Turkey's support for Syrian rebels.
"It's impossible to get rid of it," he said. "These troubles are following me." In Germany, he said, "everyone I talked to was waiting for such an attack."
"You could feel the tension," Dundar said. "Berlin was untouched so far. People were waiting for such a thing. But not the German police, perhaps. I didn't see so much security around."
Turkeymaybeaccustomed to frequent terrorist attacks - a recent bombing at a soccer stadium in central Istanbul killed dozens - but Germany is not. The effect of the threat of terrorism on an open society like Germany's could be profound.
"As a Frenchman, my first thought was, this was Nice all over again," said Marc Pierini, a former European Union ambassador to Turkey who is now a visiting scholar at Carnegie Europe. He was referring to an attack in France last summer in which a man drove a truck through a busy pedestrian thoroughfare, killing more than 80 people.
Europeans, he said, are "slowly going through the motions that terrorism is our new normal."
"Oursocietiesarenotused to that," Pierini added.
Turkey and Germany have been at odds over a number of issues, including a deal to stem the flow of migrants from Turkey to the European continent and Germany's opposition to Turkey's crackdown after the failed coup. But they are bound together in other ways: For decades there have been thousands of Turkish citizens working in Germany, and more recently intellectuals and others have sought asylum there to escape the growing authoritarianism in their home country.
Tulin Yazici, a Turkish-German academic, moved back to Frankfurt, where she was born, after the Turkish government began targeting academics for arrest after the failed coup.
Even after Monday's attack in Germany, she said, "it's obvious to me that I made the right decision."

Load-Date: December 21, 2016


End of Document