Two Arrests In Finland Are Linked To Terrorism
The New York Times
September 18, 2011 Sunday
National Edition


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 306 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Body


HELSINKI, Finland (AP) -- The authorities in Finland have arrested a man and a woman on suspicion of financing and recruiting terrorists. The detentions are the first terrorism-linked arrests in Finland, intelligence officials said.
The two who were arrested have foreign backgrounds, the authorities said Saturday, and their plans were not aimed at Finland.
Detective Inspector Kaj-Erik Bjorkvist of the National Bureau of Investigation declined to further identify the suspects or provide details about the case, except to say that the activities they are suspected of being involved with were related to terrorist groups ''far away'' from Finland.
The Finnish Security Intelligence Service said it began operations in 2009 that led to the arrests on Sept. 7. Officers confiscated ''data and other material'' in searches of homes at several locations in the Helsinki metropolitan area after the arrests, Detective Inspector Bjorkvist said.
The interior minister, Paivi Rasanen, Finland's top police official, said Finns should not be frightened by the episode.
''Finns really don't have to be concerned,'' Ms. Rasanen told Finnish TV4. ''They don't have to worry or to fear.''
The intelligence service said the episode would not heighten the perceived terrorism threat in Finland, which the authorities consider to be low.
On Sept. 10, the Helsinki District Court ruled that the police could detain the suspects for two weeks, Detective Inspector Bjorkvist said. A new custody hearing is expected this month.
Similar arrests have previously been made in Norway and Sweden.
In 2008, the police in Norway and Sweden arrested six men suspected of financing terrorism activities in Somalia, but only one of them, a Somali-born Norwegian, was fined for having broken a United Nations arms embargo of the African country. The other five were released.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 20, 2011


End of Document