Two not of a kind Talent and McCaskill debate presidents, Iraq and Hastert in dead-heat race that's in the national spotlight.
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 9, 2006 Monday
THIRD EDITION


Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A1
Length: 912 words
Byline: By Deirdre Shesgreen POST-DISPATCH WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON * 
Body


Missouri GOP Sen. Jim Talent and Democratic rival Claire McCaskill battled Sunday over the House page scandal and the leadership of President George W. Bush in a nationally televised debate.
Engaged in one of the tightest and most closely watched races in the country, Talent and McCaskill disagreed on the first question out of the box on NBC's "Meet the Press": Whether House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., should resign amid questions about his handling of the congressional page sex scandal.
McCaskill, Missouri's state auditor, said yes.
She contended the scandal involving ex-Rep. Mark Foley's e-mails to House pages demonstrated "an arrogance of power."
"It is about holding on to power instead of about doing the right thing," McCaskill said.
Talent's answer: Hastert doesn't need to resign -- at least not yet. 
"I'm comfortable with the investigation moving forward," Talent said, "and the people who were responsible taking the consequences. And that's up to, and including, the speaker."
Polls show the Senate race in Missouri to be a dead heat, one of a handful of contests that will determine which party controls the Senate after November.
Sunday's exchange focused heavily on terrorism and Iraq, with moderator Tim Russert doing the grilling.
Both contenders had some time in the hot seat.
For Talent, one of the most uncomfortable moments of the debate seemed to come after Russert played a series of clips of Bush praising Talent and noted that Talent had voted with the president 94 percent of the time. Russert asked the senator whether Bush was a great president.
Talent wouldn't give a clear answer. "History judges presidents," Talent said, sitting beside a gleeful-looking McCaskill. "History is going to say there were some things he did that were right and some things he did that were wrong."
McCaskill ridiculed Talent's response, and when asked the same question about former President Bill Clinton, she quipped: "He's been a great leader, but I don't want my daughter near him."
Then McCaskill did some squirming herself, when Russert asked her whether she would apologize for saying that Bush let people in New Orleans die "because they were poor and because they were black."
At first, she did not back down, saying that she was voicing how "millions of Americans felt," although she added, "I do not believe the president is a racist."
Pressed again, she said, "Maybe I shouldn't have said it that way -- but the feelings are real. . . . Our citizens died because we couldn't get them food or water. This is not an administration that's ready to protect us."
Iraq and terrorism
Russert asked Talent how he could assert, as the senator recently did, that the U.S. is making progress in Iraq and the mission is going well, when U.S. military and Iraqi civilian casualties are spiraling.
Talent responded that the level of violence was "unacceptable" but that he still believed the U.S. had made progress. "Saddam is gone and the threat he represented is gone," he said.
Talent accused McCaskill of being "weak" on the war against terrorism, saying she wants to set an "artificial" timeline for withdrawal from Iraq. He pointed to questions she has raised over the president's warrantless wiretapping program and a recent bill that prevents terrorism suspects from challenging their detention in court.
McCaskill strongly rejected the suggestion that she was weak on terrorism, saying she supports giving the president the tools he needs to do proper surveillance. And she defended her call for a phased, two-year redeployment of U.S. troops from Iraq to other countries in the region.
"Iraq is a mess," she said. "If you're in a hole, you need to quit digging. We are breeding a culture of dependence. We are not breeding a democracy."
Talent said he still would have voted for the war even if he knew in advance that there were no weapons of mass destruction. Asked how long he would support keeping 145,000 U.S. troops there, he said, "We have to be there until the mission is done."
In response to a question from Russert, Talent also dismissed any notion that the $300 billion spent in Iraq might have been better spent in Afghanistan or on domestic security at home. Talent said the tab for Iraq and Afghanistan was only 1 percent of the gross domestic product and that Iraq was "an important front on the war on terror."
McCaskill quickly shot back: "Sen. Talent, I think, just said the $300 billion was not a lot of money. Clearly, he's been in Washington too long if he doesn't think $300 billion is a lot of money."
McCaskill accused Talent of not holding the administration accountable for mistakes in the war.
Stem cell issue
The two candidates also exchanged sharp jabs over stem cell research -- one of the hottest issues in the Missouri campaign.
Earlier this year, Talent withdrew his support for a federal human cloning ban that some critics said would also outlaw crucial stem cell research. But he opposes a Missouri referendum that would protect certain kinds of stem cell research.
Asked by Russert about his switch, Talent said the state referendum would "create an unqualified constitutional right to clone at the earliest stages of human life."
Russert asked McCaskill how she could support a form of research that some have said is equivalent to abortion.
"My faith directs me to heal the sick," she said. "I come down on the side of hope, hope for cures and for supporting science."
---
The next Talent-McCaskill debate is set for Oct. 11 in St. Louis.

Notes

 ELECTION 2006 * U.S. SENATE 

Graphic

 
PHOTO
 PHOTO - Sen. Jim   Talent,  R-Mo., shakes hands with Democratic opponent Claire McCaskill before the start of their interview on NBC's "Meet the Press" on Sunday in Washington.   Kevin Wolf | The Associated Press 

Load-Date: October 9, 2006


End of Document