TWO MEN GET PRISON TERMS IN 'JIHAD' CASE/ NORTHERN VIRGINIA PAIR WAS ACCUSED OF TIES TO A TERRORISM-RELATED PLOT
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
April 10, 2004 Saturday City Edition


Copyright 2004 Richmond Newspapers, Inc.
Section: AREA/STATE; Pg. B-1
Length: 493 words
Byline: Paul Bradley/ Times-Dispatch Staff Writer, Contact Paul Bradley at (703) 548-8758 or pbradley@timesdispatch.com,  
Dateline: ALEXANDRIA
Body


Two men who pleaded guilty to being part of what authorities branded a "Virginia jihad network" were sentenced to federal prison yesterday for their roles in the terrorism-related conspiracy.
U.S. District Judge Leonie Brinkema sentenced Randall Todd Royer, 31, of Alexandria, to 20 years in prison on two conspiracy charges. Ibrahim Ahmed Al-Hamdi, 26, of Falls Church, was sentenced to 15 years on a pair of firearms- and explosives-related convictions.
The men were among 11 Muslim-Americans who were indicted last year on charges they used paintball games in the Spotsylvania County countryside to train for a religious war against Americans and traveled abroad to hone their fighting skills.
Six of the men, including Royer and Al-Hamdi, pleaded guilty to various charges, while three others who opted to go to trial were convicted of firearms and other charges and face long prison terms. Two of those named in the original indictments went to trial and were acquitted of all charges against them.
In a prepared statement, U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft said the stiff prison terms "demonstrate the severe penalties for aiding terrorist causes. We will not allow terrorist groups to exploit America's freedoms to pursue their deadly goals."
In his plea agreement, Royer admitted to helping six of his co-defendants gain entry to a camp in Pakistan operated by Lashkar-e-Taiba, a group seeking to drive India out of the disputed Kashmir region. The American government has designated the group a terrorist organization.
Some of those who went to the camp admitted in their plea agreements that they wanted to obtain combat and weapons training and fight in Afghanistan on the side of the Taliban against American troops they expected would invade that country after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
None of the men, however, actually made it to Afghanistan, nor did they fire on American soldiers.
Al-Hamdi admitted in his plea agreement to possessing a .308-caliber rifle with a telescopic sight and various ammunition to train for violent jihad overseas.
He also pleaded guilty to conspiring to undertake a military operation against India by carrying a rocket-propelled grenade while he was in the Lashkar-e-Taiba training camp.
Prosecutors said the men used paintball games played on a farm in Spotsylvania during 2000 and 2001 to simulate military training. Authorities said the games were highly secretive and were used to train its participants in a coming holy war in which Americans were deemed to be legitimate targets. The men who went to trial disputed that characterization, saying the games were merely a form of recreation and exercise.
Authorities said their investigation is continuing.
Under terms of their plea agreements, both Royer and Al-Hamdi are required to cooperate fully with the government in the investigation and prosecution of other people associated with this network.
Royer is a former spokesman for the Muslim American Society./

Load-Date: April 13, 2004


End of Document