Two in England held in terrorism raid
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
June 8, 2006 Thursday
0 Edition


Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 2A
Length: 300 words
Dateline: DEWSBURY, England; DUBAI, United Arab Emirates; TUNIS, Tunisia 
Body


DEWSBURY, England - Police in Britain arrested a 21-year-old man and a 16-year-old as terrorism suspects and were conducting searches at three locations, authorities said Wednesday.
The man, identified only as a resident of Bradford, was arrested Tuesday night at Manchester airport, West Yorkshire police said. Officers searched three houses in Bradford, police said.
Two other homes in Dewsbury, near Bradford, were also searched by police after the 16-year-old was arrested Wednesday afternoon.
Police refused to comment on reports by the British Broadcasting Corp. that the arrests were linked to an alleged terrorist plot in Canada. Seventeen people were arrested there on charges of plotting to attack Canadian targets.
Air Force increases bombing in Afghanistan
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates - The U.S. Air Force increased its bombing of Taliban and other insurgent targets in Afghanistan this spring, making about 750 airstrikes in May alone, Air Force officials said.
Insurgents have mounted a spring offensive against the deployment of U.S.-led troops in the southern Afghan provinces of Helmand and Kandahar, drawing intense bombardments from American warplanes. The surge in fighting has killed more than 400 people, mainly militants, since mid May.
Meanwhile, a roadside bomb hit a convoy of Afghan troops in the eastern Afghan mountains, killing three and wounding four, the Defense Ministry said Wednesday, while the U.S.-led coalition confirmed that two soldiers killed by a roadside bomb Tuesday were Americans.
Man gets 20 years in attack on synagogue
TUNIS, Tunisia - A 44-year-old man was convicted Wednesday and sentenced to 20 years in prison for aiding what investigators called an al-Qaida-linked suicide bombing attack on a historic synagogue that killed 21 people - mostly German tourists.

Load-Date: June 8, 2006


End of Document