Two Studies Cite Confusion On Terrorism 
 The New York Times
August 21, 2003 Thursday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 704 words
Byline:  By PHILIP SHENON 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug. 20  
Body


Two private studies released this week have found that police officers, firefighters, public school safety officers and other emergency response workers believe that nearly two years after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, they are unprepared if terrorists strike again.
     The larger of the studies, prepared for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and made public today by the Rand Corporation, found that police officers and firefighters agreed that "they do not know what they need to be protected against, what form of protection is appropriate and where to look for such protection." 
 The report, which surveyed 190 emergency workers in 40 cities and towns in the nation, said a "majority of emergency responders feel vastly underprepared and underprotected for the consequences of chemical, biological or radiological terrorist attacks."
The second study, prepared for the National Association of School Resource Officers, which represents security officials who work in schools, cited a poll this summer that found that more than 90 percent of its surveyed members said they believed that schools were a "soft target" for terrorists and that 76 percent said they thought their schools were inadequately protected.
The studies mirror the results of other recent studies and offer support to Bush administration critics who say that Washington has done too little to help state and local officials deal with terrorist threats and that billions of dollars in promised federal counterterrorism assistance have been slow to arrive.
The Department of Homeland Security, which oversees federal counterterrorism assistance to state and local governments, said the studies pointed out a concern shared by the administration.
"We share the desire of the first responders to get better prepared and to get the best equipment possible, and that is why we have provided approximately $4 billion this year to further that goal," Gordon Johndroe, a department spokesman, said. 
Public school safety officers "should lead the charge within the education community to get school districts to implement emergency plans," Mr. Johndroe added.
The Rand study, which was requested by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, part of the disease control centers, found that there was widespread confusion among police officers, firefighters and other emergency workers about the proper response to terrorist attacks, especially if they involved chemical, biological or nuclear weapons.
"Such uncertainty frustrates efforts to design a protection program and acquire the necessary technology," the study said.
The report found that the emergency workers interviewed were unsure how well the protective clothing and other equipment for hazardous materials now provided to them would function in the event of a terrorist attack with a chemical or biological agent. 
Much of the available hazardous materials protection "is neither designed nor certified for this new role of terrorism response," the report said, noting that much of the hazardous material equipment used by government emergency-response teams was designed for response to industrial accidents, not terrorism.
An author of the report, Demosthenes J. Peterson, a political scientist at Rand, said in an interview that the report was not intended as criticism of federal counterterrorism programs.
But he said that the study made it clear that emergency response workers "feel exposed against these new threats from terrorists" and that they needed help urgently to plan for the possibility of terrorist attack.
The school safety study, based on a June and July survey of more than 700 school safety officials, said the results suggested that there had been "no significant changes in emergency preparedness and training to deal with emergency situations" despite warnings of new terrorist attacks since 9/11.
On the survey, 51 percent of the respondents reported that their schools did not have specific, formal guidelines to follow when there was a change in the national color-coded threat alert level; 71 percent reported that teachers and administrators in their schools had not received special training on how to respond to a terrorist attack.      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: August 21, 2003


End of Document