TWO ARGENTINE JUDGES WITHDRAW FROM JUNTA CASE
The New York Times
April 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 643 words
Byline: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER
Dateline: BUENOS AIRES, April 11
Body


Two federal judges have disqualifed themselves from trying former junta members for the 1976 coup in a case that is raising questions about national complicity with the military.
The judges, Siro de Martini and Jose Nicasio Dibur, both of whom were appointed by the military, have withdrawn in the last week after Judge Dibur was overruled by the Federal Appeals Court in throwing out the case. The two judges suggested in separate statements that if the junta is guilty of rebellion, they and much of the Argentine public are guilty as accomplices for supporting the coup.
Two federal judges in Argentina disqualify themselves from trying former junta members for 1976 coup in case that is raising questions about national complicity with military; judges, who were appointed by military, claim that if junta is guilty of rebellion, they and much of Argentine public are guilty as accomplices for supporting coup (M)
A spokesman for President Raul Alfonsin, whose four-month-old elected Government replaced the military, said the Government had avoided the issue because the case ''could set a precedent in which no one is held responsible for what happened after the military took over.''
The Government has brought its own charges against the three junta members - the former President and Army Commander, Jorge Rafael Videla; the former Navy Commander, Eduardo E. Massera, and the former Air Force Commander, Orlando Agosti - as well as six succeeding junta members for ordering thousands of murders and widespread torture under their rule.
The added rebellion charges are prickly because the 1976 coup overthrowing President Isabel Martinez de Peron was a widely popular one. Terrorism was rampant and the economy was in chaos. It was after the military was in power that it unleashed its countercampaign of state terrorism.
Judge de Martini said in his withdrawal statement on Tuesday:
''It was the existence itself of the motherland that was found in danger and it was not a crime but a moral duty to undertake the means to save it.''
But the private lawyer who originally brought the case, Jose Pagani, said a ruling was needed to discourage coups after a history of military uprisings in Argentina in which only one elected government in 54 years has completed its term. Argentine law expressly forbids rebellions to overthrow the Government. The maximum sentence under the charge is 20 years in jail.
In throwing the case out of court, Judge Dibur said the 1976 coup did not fit the description of an illegal rebellion. The case was sent back to him after he was overruled by the Appeals Court. After he withdrew, the case was sent to Judge de Martini. Court officials said today that the case was being sent to a third judge but that they feared he, too, would withdraw.
Argentine law prohibits civil servants from working for an illegal goverment, which lawyers here said could expand the case to thousands of other people, making it unmanageable.
A former Federal Appeals Court judge, Victor Guerrero Leconte, and a former Supreme Court public defender, Jorge Manuel Lanusse, both of whom served under the military, have demanded along with a prominent private lawyer, Adolfo Casabal Elia, that they be tried alongside the former junta members for ''covering up'' the rebellion.
Historians and lawyers said the case went directly to the fundamental question of the legitimacy of an unpopular government and its laws, in this case the Government of Mrs. Peron. Judge de Martini said that if the rebellion charges were upheld, Mrs. Peron should be returned to the presidency in place of Mr. Alfonsin, who was elected under the military. Mrs. Peron is living in Spain.
Political leaders have been silent on the case. One reason, according to a Peronist legislator, is that it also strikes at the question of the wider complicity of the population in the repression.


End of Document