Two Men Are Arrested In Terror Case
The New York Times
May 12, 2011 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 22
Length: 305 words
Byline: By AL BAKER; William K. Rashbaum and John Eligon contributed reporting.
Body


Two men who the authorities said intended to carry out a terrorist attack in New York City were arrested late Wednesday, two law enforcement officials said.
Details were not immediately available, and the identities of the men were not released. A law enforcement source characterized the suspects as ''homegrown,'' and another said they were of North African descent.
The case was being prosecuted by the Manhattan district attorney's office, and law enforcement officials said the men were expected to be charged under New York State's terrorism law.
Major terrorism cases are generally investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and prosecuted by the United States attorney's office in federal court. But in this case, a law enforcement official said, one official had told the F.B.I. it was not a terrorism case.
The New York Police Department, working with the F.B.I., is usually involved in such cases. They are not generally handled by the Police Department alone and are seldom prosecuted in state court. A terrorist act, according to state law, is one that is intended to intimidate or coerce civilians, influence government policy by intimidation or coercion, or affect government conduct by murder, assassination or kidnapping.
It was unclear what had prompted the arrests, which, officials said, were made by the Police Department's Intelligence Division. The F.B.I.-N.Y.P.D. Joint Terrorism Task Force, made up of police detectives and federal agents, chose not to become involved, the officials said. There has been a history of tension between the police and the F.B.I., though it was unclear if that played a role in this case.
Paul J. Browne, the Police Department's chief spokesman, did not return calls about the case. An F.B.I. spokesman and a spokeswoman for the district attorney's office declined to comment.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 12, 2011


End of Document