Two Iraqis in Kentucky charged with terrorism
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
June 1, 2011 Wednesday


Copyright 2011 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 353 words
Byline: The (Louisville, Ky.) Courier-Journal
Body


LOUISVILLE -- Two Iraqis living in Bowling Green, Ky., have been arrested and charged with conspiring to kill U.S. soldiers with improvised explosive devices in Iraq. 
The pair also is accused of plotting to send Stinger missiles, cash, sniper rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers to Iraq. 
They allegedly picked up the weapons, including machine guns, from a storage facility in Kentucky, believing that it would all be sent to insurgents supported by al-Qaida. 
In fact, it was all part of an elaborate sting set up by a confidential informant, and none of the weapons ever had any chance of being shipped abroad. 
Waad Ramadan Alwan, 30, and Mohanad Shareef Hammadi, 23, both former residents of Iraq who lived in Bowling Green, were charged in a 23-count indictment unsealed on Tuesday for which they could be sentenced to life in prison. 
They made their initial appearance in a federal court here, where they both pleaded not guilty and were ordered detained. 
Neither is charged with plotting attacks within the United States. 
The FBI, the U.S. attorney's office, the Louisville Joint Terrorism Task Force and the Justice Department's national security division jointly announced the arrests. 
U.S. Attorney David Hale said the indictment should send a message to terrorists. 
"Whether they seek shelter in a major metropolitan area or in a smaller city in Kentucky, those who would attempt to harm or kill Americans abroad will face a determined and prepared law-enforcement effort," Hale said. 
According to court records, the FBI began investigating Alwan in September 2009, a few months after he entered the United States. 
Records indicate that a confidential source for the FBI secretly tape recorded him as he bragged about using IEDs hundreds of times against Americans in Iraq from 2003 until he was arrested by local authorities in 2006. 
FBI Special Agent Richard Green said in an affidavit that investigators discovered Alwan's claims about his use of explosive devices were not idle boasts: The FBI identified two of Alwan's fingerprints on an unexploded bomb recovered by U.S. forces near Bayji, Iraq. 

Load-Date: June 1, 2011


End of Document