Two Faces of Terrorism: Is One More Evil Than the Other?
The New York Times
July 31, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4; IDEAS & TRENDS
Length: 1104 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


THERE was a moment of cruel poignancy last week when Britain bid a long hoped-for farewell to I.R.A. terrorism only to acknowledge that it may now face a still more determined enemy in suicidal Islamic terrorism. Both the hopeful note and the warning involved men named Blair. 
  Within hours of each other, Prime Minister Tony Blair hailed as ''a step of unparalleled magnitude'' the Irish Republican Army's announcement that its ''armed campaign'' was over and Sir Ian Blair, the head of Scotland Yard, warned that the bombers who struck at London's transport network on July 7 and 21 would try to attack again. ''This is not the B team,'' he said. That sporting reference cloaked something much deeper: an evolution in the nature of terrorism that has detached acts of violence from the kind of political aims that Western governments find debatable or negotiable. ''It was as if one flag was lowered while another was raised,'' the columnist Jonathan Freedland said in The Guardian.
 In its broadest definition during most of the 36 years of the I.R.A.'s war, armed struggle was depicted as a means to national self-determination -- sanctified during the second half of the 20th century by anti-colonial struggles. Liberation movements, from the African National Congress in South Africa to the Palestine Liberation Organization, claimed international legitimacy as the custodians of national aspirations. 
  And it followed from their focus on a national destiny that their threat was contained within one region: the I.R.A. never claimed to be the voice of international Catholicism in a campaign to restore the medieval papacy and the Inquisition. Their armed wings and their political wings, moreover, worked in tandem, offering an identifiable interlocutor in harness with the threat of violence. This was true, too, of the African National Congress and the P.L.O. 
  In Northern Ireland and the British mainland, the I.R.A. set off the bombs, the last in 1995, while its political wing, Sinn Fein, went on to negotiate the Good Friday peace accord in 1998 and to contest elections. No such path to bargaining seems available from the bloodstained debris of a subway train in London whose bomber has died with his own explosives.
  Leaders once dubbed terrorists -- from Nelson Mandela to Yasir Arafat -- became national and internationally accepted figures. To the dismay of many, Gerry Adams, whose denials of membership in the I.R.A. have often been met with skepticism, has nevertheless been accepted on the international stage as a statesman. 
  Could that -- ever -- happen with Osama bin Laden? 
  The answer is the clearest and loudest ''no'' the West can muster. 
  Al Qaeda stands ''against everything we stand for,'' said David Davies, a leader of Britain's Conservative opposition, adding, ''You cannot negotiate away the values of an entire civilization.''
  While old liberation movements used terrorist tactics in pursuit of creating nation-states, the newest aim is -- apparently -- quite the opposite: dismantling nation-states as Western governments understand them and replacing them with the revival of a supra-national Islamic caliphate. 
  In the case of the I.R.A., Prime Minister Blair said, ''the political demands of Republicanism are demands that would be shared by many perfectly law-abiding people who are Nationalists in the north, or citizens of the south in Ireland.'' The demands of Islamic terrorism, he said, are ''none that any serious person could ever negotiate on.''
  That presents Mr. Blair with a real quandary. If there is an anger among many British Muslims, whose extremists provided the crucible of the London bombers, it relates directly to Britain's involvement as an ally of the United States in Afghanistan and Iraq. Short of defusing that anger, Mr. Blair cannot hope to undermine the enemy within -- the anonymous bombers from Leeds or north London, no different, superficially, in denim and baseball caps, from a million law-abiding Muslims, yet lethally driven.
  But, in the face of suicidal terrorism, Mr. Blair -- like President Bush -- is not prepared even to hint that the bombers' political stances, unstated and deliberately opaque, may have any hint of legitimacy. The last thing any Western government wants is to permit jihadists to be seen -- by however small a minority -- as the voice of Islam in the way the I.R.A. or the P.L.O. assumed the mantle of national spokesman and liberator. 
  ''We cannot give these people any shred of justification for what they do,'' Mr. Blair said.
  There has been no shortage of civilian bloodshed in the Troubles, as the battle over Northern Ireland is known, with a death toll of 3,600, although the I.R.A. sometimes issued warnings before the bombs went off. Terror's power is drawn from the twin wellsprings of certain bloodshed and gnawing unpredictability. 
  But whatever the philosophical distinctions between terrorist and freedom fighter, guerrilla and holy warrior, the evolution of suicidal attacks -- from Sri Lanka and Israel to, it seems, London -- has changed the tactical considerations of how to fight terrorism. There is no longer even a theoretical separation between ''legitimate targets'' of traditional insurgency -- like the armed forces or political leaders -- and the ''collateral damage'' of civilians caught in cross-fire who invariably account for the most casualties. That distinction, in any event, was no more than a frayed fig leaf for those who lost wives, husbands, brothers and sisters in Northern Ireland. 
  The newest killing draws no such distinction. The victims in London on July 7 died irrespective of faith or race. No one took responsibility or registered a demand. The sense of some proportion between the bombers' actions and their intentions seems to have been lost. Only by the inner logic of what Prime Minster Blair has called an ''evil ideology'' -- the notion that Western intrusion into the Muslim world can only be reversed by a merciless onslaught on Western resolve -- can the most recent events in London be explained. 
  ''There is no justification for suicide bombing whether in Palestine, in Iraq, in London, in Egypt, in Turkey, anywhere, in the United States of America,'' Prime Minister Blair said. 
  ''I think that the difference with this terrorism is that the combination of modern technology and the willingness to kill without limit makes this an appreciably different threat,'' Mr. Blair said. ''I think it is different in its political demands and most essentially it is different in the way that it operates and in the numbers of people it is prepared to kill.''


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: King's Cross Station, Sept. 10, 1973: An I.R.A. bomb seriously hurt six people. (Photo by Eddie Worth/Associated Press)
 King's Cross Station, July 7, 2005: Islamic bombers hit London, killing dozens. (Photo by Sergio Dionisio/Associated Press) 

Load-Date: July 31, 2005


End of Document