TWO ALGERIANS INDICTED FOR ALLEGEDLY PLOTTING TERRORISM
The Columbian (Vancouver, WA.)
January 21, 2000, Friday


Copyright 2000 The Columbian Publishing Co.
Section: Front Page; Pg. a1
Length: 738 words
Byline: LUIS CABRERA, Associated Press writer
Body


SEATTLE -- For more than a year, two Algerians living in Canada helped hatch a plan to blow up buildings or other targets in the United States, a new federal indictment alleges.
Ahmed Ressam and Abdelmajid Dahoumane conspired "to destroy or damage structures, conveyances or other real or personal property within the United States," according to the nine-count indictment filed Thursday.
Ressam was already facing explosives charges. The latest indictment adds terrorism conspiracy allegations and adds details to what prosecutors have described as an international plot involving at least six Algerians or their associates.
Prosecutors say they forged documents, bought or made explosives and sought large-scale destruction.
The indictment, however, does not include specific targets or how investigators traced an alleged plot dating to 1998. A separate federal indictment in New York said the conspiracy began at least a year earlier.
There were several developments in the case Thursday. In New York, a third man involved in the case pleaded not guilty to supporting Ressam. And in Montreal, an Algerian facing U.S. terrorism charges was denied bail after police said he coordinated plans to smuggle explosives into the United States.
At that hearing, police testified that Ressam had links to Afghanistan and Pakistan. Investigators have already indicated they are seeking any connection to suspected terrorists including Osama bin Laden, the alleged mastermind of two U.S. embassy bombings in Africa in 1998 who has taken refuge in Afghanistan.
Ressam, 32, was arrested Dec. 14 at a Port Angeles border crossing in a rental car authorities said contained bomb-making materials. Experts have estimated the amount of explosives could have destroyed a large office building.
Dahoumane remains at large, accused of being Ressam's accomplice.
Authorities have said the two men shared a $ 36 per night motel room in Vancouver, B.C., for nearly a month before Ressam's arrest. Ressam also had a one-night motel reservation near Seattle's Space Needle for Dec. 14, and a plane reservation to London from Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, authorities say.
After his arrest, Seattle canceled the New Year's Eve celebration at the Space Needle amid concerns over terrorism.
Other investigated
At least four other Algerian nationals and one woman married to an Algerian are being investigated. One of the men was to meet Ressam in Seattle, drive him where he needed to go and give him money, police in Montreal said Thursday, but the plan went awry after Ressam's arrest.
That man, Abdel Ghani Meskini, 31, pleaded not guilty Thursday in New York to charges of providing and concealing support for Ressam.
Royal Canadian Mounted Police investigator Serge Haineault testified in Montreal that Meskini was ordered to go to Seattle by Mokhtar Haouri, a 31-year-old Algerian national who faces the same U.S. charges as Meskini and remains in a Canadian jail pending a March hearing.
They are accused of conspiring to transfer fake or stolen U.S. immigration identity cards and passports of other countries, including Canada and France, as well as using fake credit, bank and charge cards over the last year to buy merchandise worth $ 1,000 or more. Their indictment did not say what they are accused of buying.
Haouri also is a member of the Armed Islamic Group, known by its French acronym GIA, Haineault said. Ressam also has been linked by investigators to the GIA, which has been fighting a guerrilla war against the army and is accused of committing atrocities against civilians.
Also in Seattle on Thursday, Abdel Hakim Tizegha pleaded not guilty to immigration charges in U.S. District Court. The FBI reportedly gained key evidence on explosives smuggling from telephone conversations between Tizegha in Washington state and Meskini in New York.
Others linked to the plot include a Canadian woman married to an Algerian, Lucia Garofalo. She was arrested Dec. 19 as she tried to cross into the United States at Beecher Falls, Vt., and later was linked to Ressam and Meskini through telephone records.
She faces seven charges ranging from illegally transporting an alien into the United States to possessing a false passport.
Another Algerian man, Bouabide Chamchi, was arrested with Garofalo. He faces four counts, including possession of a false passport and making false statements to U.S. Customs. Both Garofalo and Chamchi have pleaded not guilty.

Load-Date: January 21, 2000


End of Document