TWO ACCUSED IN PARIS PLOT ALLEGEDLY ARE WITH AL-QAIDA ;
 POLICE IN BRITAIN MAKE MORE ARRESTS AS PART OF ANTI-TERRORISM EFFORT
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
January 18, 2002 Friday Five Star Lift Edition


Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A4
Length: 395 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Dateline: LEICESTER, ENGLAND
Body


Two Algerian men who authorities alleged were involved in a plot to bomb the U.S. Embassy in Paris were charged Thursday with membership in Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida terrorist network.
In raids north of London, police also arrested eight men Thursday under Britain's Terrorism Act as part of a pan-European anti-terrorism effort.
In Leicester, the Algerian suspects, Brahim Benmerzouga, 30, and Baghdad Meziane, 37, appeared briefly in a magistrate's court on various charges.
Meziane was charged with directing terrorism, inciting terrorism overseas, belonging to al-Qaida and conspiracy to support terrorism by raising funds.
Benmerzouga was charged with membership in al-Qaida, possession of racist videos and a solar-powered battery that could be used to power explosive devices, and conspiring to raise money to fund terrorism.
Their next court appearance was set for next Thursday.
The men have been in custody since their arrest Sept. 25, two weeks after the terrorist attacks on the United States. They were arrested in Leicester on the same day that police there arrested Kamel Daoudi, an Algerian wanted in France in connection with the foiled plot to attack the U.S. Embassy in Paris.
Daoudi was extradited Sept. 29 and remains in French custody, along with several others suspected of involvement in the embassy plot. Other suspects in the plot also are in custody in Belgium and the Netherlands.
Police in Leicester, 100 miles north of London, also arrested eight other men whose ages range from 23 to 40.
A British official said on the condition of anonymity that those arrests were made "in connection with an ongoing pan-European anti-terrorist investigation." Officers were searching the raided premises, along with several other addresses in Leicester and a house in London.
Three other people were arrested Thursday in Leicester under similar immigration laws that kept Benmerzouga and Meziane behind bars for four months before they were charged.
Elsewhere on Thursday:
* Police in the Philippines arrested three men with suspected al-Qaida links.
* Sources in Pakistan said five suspects had been arrested after a high-speed chase.
* A news report in Indonesia said a Pakistani citizen had been deported to Egypt in connection with suspected terrorist activities, including last month's alleged attempt by shoe bomb suspect Richard Reid to attack a U.S. airliner.

Notes

WAR ON TERROR

Load-Date: January 18, 2002


End of Document