Two-year extension shifts TRIA debate; Permanent solution sought - Correction Appended
Business Insurance
December 26, 2005


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2005 Crain Communications All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 1088 words
Byline: MARK A. HOFMANN
Body


WASHINGTON-Proponents of a federal terrorism insurance backstop are wasting no time in pondering their next moves after President Bush signed legislation that will extend a scaled-back program through 2007.
That's because the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act-S. 467-doesn't answer what many in the debate consider to be the central question concerning terrorism insurance: What is the best long-term solution to the problem?
House-passed terrorism insurance legislation called for the creation of a broad-based commission-one that would have included at least one policyholder representative-with a mandate to report back to Congress with long-term recommendations.
But that provision was stripped out of compromise legislation that followed almost entirely a much narrower Senate extension bill backed by the White House. Rather than creating a commission, the final version of S. 467 calls on a presidential working group to consult with various stakeholders before issuing a report on the state of the terrorism insurance market (BI, Dec. 19).
The failure of Senate negotiators to accept even part of the House approach as both sides tried to hammer out an agreement before the current backstop created by the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act approached its Dec. 31 expiration date did not sit well with the chairman of the House Financial Services Committee.
In a statement issued Dec. 16, shortly after the compromise emerged, Rep. Michael G. Oxley, R-Ohio-one of the key architects of the House legislation-called the final bill ``short-sighted.''
Members of Congress ``have missed a golden opportunity to frame the TRIA program more effectively and to move to a more market-based solution,'' he said. ``Government and the industry have made little progress since TRIA was enacted in 2002. When members, inevitably, are asked again to renew this `temporary' program, they will correctly conclude that in 2005 the can was simply kicked down the road without any real reform.''
A prominent insurance lawyer who followed the TRIA extension debate closely agreed ``completely'' with Rep. Oxley.
``I think the whole plan of this extension is to deep-six the program after two years,'' said Christopher Kende, New York based vice chairman of the reinsurance group at Cozen O'Connor, a Philadelphia law firm. ``I think the country needs to have something in place, and there should be continued extensive lobbying'' for a long-term program.
A risk manager who has also been involved in efforts first to create the original federal backstop and then to extend it, agreed that lawmakers had missed an opportunity to provide long-range answers to terrorism insurance-related questions.
``For the near term, the extension brings a sigh of relief for risk managers facing sunset exclusions on Dec. 31, and what better way to conclude a rather turbulent year for the risk management community?'' said Bradley R. Wood, senior vp-risk management for Bethesda, Md.-based Marriott International Inc.
``For the longer term, we missed a golden opportunity to make significant headway toward creating a more dynamic marketplace that would have greatly benefited policyholders. Risk managers should be most concerned that this extension is only for two years and the prospects of this program sunsetting are very real,'' he said.
``We can only hope that many of the measures introduced by the House will be seriously considered by the presidential working group and the realities of the marketplace will ultimately prevail,'' said Mr. Wood.
Ellen Vinck, the president of the New York-based Risk & Insurance Management Society Inc., wants to make sure that RIMS is represented on any entity considering the backstop's future.
``Our first concern is we want to make sure that RIMS continues to be at the table-we would like a seat on either the president's working group or any type of working group that continues to address the issues that we have with TRIA long-term,'' said Ms. Vinck, who is also vp-risk management, benefits and safety for United States Marine Repair Inc. in San Diego.
``We really feel when TRIA expires that there has to be some type of either federal or public-private backstop, and that's what will ensure that the pricing is affordable to policyholders. We understand that the federal government might be reluctant to provide a high-level backstop, but then they have to provide the leadership to pass legislation that encourages the commercial market, and this can done either through self-insured groups, captives or pools,'' said Ms. Vinck.
Like Mr. Wood, Marc Racicot, president of the Washington-based American Insurance Assn., said approval of the extension bill provided immediate good news for the markets, but that more action was needed.
``Congressional action prior to TRIA's sunset restores much-needed predictability and stability to the commercial insurance marketplace,'' said Mr. Racicot. ``However, we now have to turn our attention and efforts back to analyzing potential long-term solutions to this complex issue.''
Policyholder input will be critical in the effort to provide some sort of permanent solution, said Peter A. Lefkin, senior vp-government and external affairs for Allianz of America Corp. in Washington.
Insurers have ``got to do more to mobilize their policyholders,'' he said. ``The people who are responsible for determining whether or not TRIA gets reauthorized beyond 2007 are not the insurance companies, but policyholders. They must be both educated and mobilized to make their views known to leaders on Capitol Hill and White House.''
At least one other key issue remains unresolved in the compromise as well, said Alexandra S. Glickman, managing director and practice leader of Arthur J. Gallagher & Co.'s Gallagher Real Estate & Hospitality Services in Glendale, Calif. That's the issue of insuring against nuclear, biological chemical and radiological attacks.
``That's been ignored, and though it's positive news that the backstop has been extended, the fact that underwriters have to accept substantially more exposure will lead to more rigorous pricing for individual clients. And terrorism insurance may very well evolve as earthquake and wind coverage has evolved, with high deductibles and geographic and asset class underwriting,'' said Ms. Glickman.
RIMS also is concerned about the extension bill's treatment of nuclear, chemical, biological and radiological risks, said Ms. Vinck. ``The NCBR exposure really has to be addressed. That is the most noticeable gap in the program,'' she said.
Correction


A story in the Dec. 26, 2005, edition contained an out-of-date affiliation for Ellen Vinck. Ms Vinck works at BAE Systems Ship Repair.
Correction-Date: January 2, 2006

Graphic

 
Art Credit: Rep. Michael Oxley

Load-Date: January 6, 2006


End of Document