U. Arkansas home of largest terrorism research center
University Wire
February 14, 2006 Tuesday


Copyright 2006 Arkansas Traveler via U-Wire
Length: 945 words
Byline: By: Asa Pharr, Arkansas Traveler; SOURCE: U. Arkansas
Dateline: FAYETTEVILLE, Ark. 
Body


The most comprehensive database on terrorism investigations in the United States is managed by the Terrorism Research Center at the University of Arkansas.
Brent L. Smith, founder and director of the program, moved the database from the University of Alabama, Birmingham, to the UA where he is now a professor of sociology.
Smith obtained his undergraduate degree from Ouachita Baptist University in Arkadelphia, Ark.
"Coming to the university here three years ago was an opportunity to get close to home," he said.
The database includes information on nearly 500 terrorism indictments dating from 1980-2002. Through this research an array of data about terrorist activity has been compiled, including the number of counts against defendants, terrorist groups associated with individuals, actual or prevented terrorist targets, and the outcome of the cases.
This program began in 1988 while Smith was a professor at UAB. In 1988 he contacted the Fallow Terrorist Research and Analytical Center, the FBI office dealing with terrorist studies at the time.
"They had never tried to compile these cases," Dr. Smith said, "They had a small budget and a very small unit at the time, just three or four people." They agreed to supply him with the cases, but after his project was initiated, the Commonwealth Privacy Act of 1988 was passed, which prevented independent parties from holding personal information.
Smith's program was inactive until the Oklahoma City Bombing occurred in 1995. Smith spoke as one of the few domestic terrorism experts in two of the four Congressional Hearings addressing the tragedy.
"The FBI became really interested, and Congress did as well in this project, after that time," Smith said. The discontinued terrorism study was recognized as an important tool to be used against terrorism and the information he needed was granted by a congressional request, he said.
Information on terrorists was gathered in this way through Congress until after the Sept. 11 attacks, when the Attorney General Guidelines were altered and Congress passed the Patriot Act. The government's new involvement in defending against terrorism made information more readily available to Smith and ushered in a new age for the study that he had conducted for a decade, he said. In the 20 years before Sept. 11, there had been approximately 500 terrorist indictments, Smith said, but in the last five years there were 185 cases with more than 500 indictments.
Several factors contributed to this dramatic influx in terrorism arrests, Smith said. The largest contributor to the increase in arrests was becase of an alteration made by former Attorney General Ashcroft to his office's guidelines, Smith said.
"Prior to those guidelines being implemented in 2002 the FBI could not open a terrorism investigation without FBI headquarters' approval, and, to be honest, they were pretty hard to get," he said.
After the new attorney general's guidelines were enacted, however, specific moves were taken to involve local authorities and give local field offices the authority to launch terrorism investigations, he said.
This was partially in response to the Zacrias Moussaoui case. Moussaoui was arrested one month before the Sept. 11 attacks after he expressed an interest in learning how to fly without concern for landing or taking off, as well as an interest in piloting a Boeing 747 at a flight instructor school outside of Minneapolis. He was found to be linked to Al Qaeda before the Sept. 11 attacks, but a terrorism investigation was denied by the FBI until after the latest FBI amendments, which re-focused the investigation and found him to be linked to the Sept. 11 bombers.
"The thought was maybe they could have prevented September 11," Dr. Smith said. This finding motivated immediate FBI reorganization that created positions under the Anti-Terrorism Task Force. This included the Anti-Terrorism Advisory Counsel, with a position in each district's U.S. attorney's office. Each member of the council manages terrorist investigations in the area in close coordination with local authorities.
"Information sharing has dramatically increased between the FBI and these local agencies through these anti-terrorism advisory counsels," Smith said.
Another possible factor in the increase in arrests could be the transfer of post-Sept. 11 immigration violations to the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force.
"We have found that many of these cases are immigration cases, many of which didn't really have anything to do with terrorism," Smith said. This could account for preliminary findings that show a majority of recent terrorism investigations involve international U.S. residents.
Smith said the FBI has brought new focus on prevention of terrorist attacks, and this could also contribute to the influx of arrests.
"There have been a number of FBI preventions in the past three of four years," Smith said.
Preliminary figures show that recent terrorism indictments have been made before an act of terrorism was committed. This difference is indicative of a change in the definition of terrorist activities and not an actual increase in terrorism, he said.
Smith's Terrorism Research Center has collected 25 percent of the terrorism cases since Sept. 11, and a study focusing on recent terrorism indictments should be published within the next year. The study will provide a systematic observation of recent terrorist investigations to offer definitive answers to questions of the effectiveness of the war on terror, Smith said.
"Our study is probably as well prepared to assess the impact of terrorism cases post 9/11 as...anybody in the country," Smith said.
(C) 2006 Arkansas Traveler via U-WIRE

Load-Date: February 14, 2006


End of Document