U. Arkansas lecturer says terrorism still present in Colombia
University Wire
April 5, 2002, Friday


Copyright 2002 Arkansas Traveler via U-Wire
Length: 581 words
Byline: By Will Myers, Arkansas Traveler
Dateline: Fayetteville, Ark.
Body


War broke out in Colombia 50 years ago, and more than 40,000 people have died since the war started, a professor told University of Arkansas students Wednesday.
Professor Marc Chernick of Georgetown University spoke to UA students and faculty on the factors that are killing the Colombians. In spite of what Americans might think, "the drug trade did not cause Colombian violence," Chernick said, but "it fuels it."
U. Arkansas
Colombia exports the most cocaine in the world and plays a significant role in the opium and heroin trade, he said. Colombian presidents have struggled to achieve peace, but the United States does not help, Chernick said.
President Pastrana of Colombia reached out to the United States, but "Pastrana's peace proposal did not find Washington," Chernick said. The United States is concerned with "drugs, not peace," he said.
Pastrana proposed a $ 7.5 billion plan called Plan Colombia that addressed multiple aspects of the problem and would have been funded by the United States, the European community and Colombia. Chernick said the United States took this "very interesting plan" and turned it into an "anti-narcotics policy."
The United States created three narcotics brigades and plunged millions of dollars in weapons into the Colombian scene, Chernick said. The increased military involvement did not help the peace process. The political scene is clouded now, but the fighting began for the age-old reason of power, he said.
At the outset of the Cold War, liberal and conservative Colombian parties fought over governmental control. The parties agreed to share power, but the violence did not end because "not everyone handed in their arms," Chernick said. The communist peasants and liberal guerrillas took to the mountains with their weapons.
These separate factions killed each other, but Chernick said the violence was limited mostly to rural areas. This low-intensity fighting continued into the 1970s until a U.S.-backed policy turned peasants into mobile guerrilla groups, he said.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia [FARC] was one group that formed in opposition to the Colombian government. In search for funding, the guerrillas "danced this unethical dance," Chernick said. A group that began as angry peasants became an army of criminals. They ran drugs and ransomed foreigners and Colombians to satisfy their financial needs, he said.
Chernick cited the facts that the Colombian government does not control its territories and the lack of justice as the issues that perpetuate the violence.
As the United States scours the world searching for conflicts in its war on terrorism, Chernick said Colombia is a "real candidate." Chernick enumerated the U.S. policy shift.
The Bush administration has proposed a bill that would change the manner that money is sent to Colombia. The present law maintains that all U.S. funds must be appropriated for narcotics purposes, but the new bill would direct all funds to the purpose of fighting terrorism, he said.
This new wrinkle will only make the problem worse, Chernick said. "I'm convinced that there is no military solution to this conflict," he said.
Answering the question of what is to come of peace for Colombia, Chernick said, "I think the best shot was these last four years, but that door is closed."
With FARC at the height of its power, Chernick said, "this conflict can endure for decades more, but that is a tragedy."
(C) 2002 Arkansas Traveler via U-WIRE

Load-Date: April 5, 2002


End of Document