U. Dayton to offer class focusing on terrorism
University Wire
October 5, 2001


Copyright 2001 The Flyer News via U-Wire
Length: 544 words
Byline: By Jesse Haberman, The Flyer News
Dateline: Dayton, Ohio
Body


Every American mind will always remember Sept. 11, 2001. In a brief instant, everything changed.
America is no longer untouchable. Being sheltered inside the walls of the University of Dayton, it was apparent the community was sickened by the terrorist display.
U. Dayton
The mood around UD was somber, confused, angered and analytical. Students were trying to make due with the little knowledge they had about terrorism and tie it in with the horrendous images they saw on television.
Patriotism was held at its greatest regard on that monumental day. Students found themselves asking: What do I really know about terrorism and how can I gain more insight to hold a solid viewpoint?
In retrospect of this substantial occurrence, the UD political science department will be offering a class that will not only teach students about terrorism, but will also give them a chance to understand, discuss and debate the issue.
UD administrators feel spring will be an opportune time for "Political Violence" to be offered to students because emotions are too strong and the sense of reason and familiarity could prove to be rather low.
The class was offered last year, but the subject matter will correspond more to the issue at hand.
Mark Ensalaco, director of international studies, will offer the class as a way to promote awareness and knowledge about terrorism.
"I really think that there are two issues students have to bear in mind," Ensalaco said. "One is with the immediate terrorist threat of these specific organizations, and what's really important secondly is to have a broad understanding of the historical forces that are sort-of behind this. This attack, although unjustifiable, did not come out of the blue. This is a result of a very long process."
Ensalaco said the terrorist attacks were unprecedented.
"Students want to know why this happened and what I will simply try to do is fulfill the need of really responding to the requests of students to learn more about this."
Adam Schuster, junior finance major said he's interested in the class.
"I've become more interested in Middle Eastern affairs now because of the recent attacks," he said. "But I think it would be good to let students become aware that there is such a thing out there, because everybody does think that we are a little too safe sometimes. Good for our common knowledge I guess. I'd be interested in taking the class."
Kathleen Myron, a junior business major, also believes the class has a lot to offer students.
"I think learning about terrorism will probably help people learn the origination of it, and where it begins and who it starts with," Myron said. "I think it will be good to learn about the types of people that are involved with it and how we can end it."
When asked whether he was impressed or disappointed with student reactions after the terrorist attacks, Ensalaco said, "I'm very impressed in this. I don't see any anger towards Arabs or Muslims.
"I think students have been very intelligent about it, very discerning, very compassionate. I'm very impressed that there are a number of students who are advocating peace or are raising questions about military response. I think they are very courageous."
(C) 2001 The Flyer News via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 5, 2001


End of Document