U. Florida summer study abroad not threatened by terrorism
University Wire
June 11, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Independent Florida Alligator via U-Wire
Length: 533 words
Byline: By Chelsea Ellis, Independent Florida Alligator
Dateline: Gainesville, Fla.
Body


More University of Florida students are studying abroad this Summer than the last -- even after, or maybe because of, Sept. 11.
Many students were frightened to travel after Sept. 11, but that fear quickly subsided, said Dennis Jett, dean of the UF International Center.
"It [Sept. 11] has even encouraged people to study abroad to learn about the world beyond our borders because they realize what a significant impact it plays on our national lives," he said.
U. Florida
Students, Jett said, are beginning to understand the importance of international study for building a resume and becoming exposed to other cultures.
The number of UF students studying abroad this Summer is 840, 100 more than last year, said study abroad adviser Lyn Straka.
This is significant because 70 percent of UF students who study abroad each year do so during Summer.
Derek Thomas, a UF history and political science senior, is traveling to Barcelona to study Spanish during Summer B.
"I knew I was going to do it at some point," Thomas said. "I want to go in the Peace Corps when I graduate, so it's a good experience."
He said he was not worried about the threat of terrorism while he was out of the country, but was taking British Airways "just to be safe."
"Eighty percent of our students travel to Western Europe, and the situation there is no more dangerous than it is here in the U.S.," Jett said. "Students have to take the kinds of precautions any traveler would take, even in quieter times."
The International Center conducts orientation each semester to make sure students are aware of possible risks, he said, but the possibility of health problems or common crime are far greater than the risk of terrorism.
UF will not sponsor study abroad programs to any country where the State Department issues a travel warning.
The International Center was faced with a dilemma in November 2000 when the Department of State issued travel advisory for Israel while students were studying abroad there.
The center canceled all programs to Israel but allowed the students already in the country to finish the semester, because it was thought to be in their best interest.
Some situations are even more worrisome.
"Obviously, if we had students in India right now we'd advise them to come home," Jett said.
"If an incident happens overseas, it gets magnified, and puts UF at a greater risk for focus, and we're aware of that," he said.
He said students, parents and International Center staff are more attuned to security issues this year than in the past.
"Our policy has always been to make safety a priority," Jett said.
"That's not something we discovered after Sept. 11."
Amanda Mulligan, an agricultural and life sciences senior, boarded a plane bound for a summer of learning Spanish in Seville, Spain, although she had never been out of the country before and was worried about the possibility of a terrorist attack.
"It's always been my dream to come to Spain," Mulligan said in an e-mail from Seville.
She said that once she got through the security hassles and the flight, she felt safe and was having a wonderful time.
(C) 2002 Independent Florida Alligator via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 11, 2002


End of Document