U. Kentucky pharmacy course covers bio-terrorism
University Wire
November 12, 2002, Tuesday


Copyright 2002 Kentucky Kernel via U-Wire
Length: 368 words
Byline: By Abby Ghibaudy, Kentucky Kernel
Dateline: Lexington, Ky.
Body


With the lingering threat of terrorism on the United States, University of Kentucky pharmacy students are getting the chance to learn how bio-terrorism works and how to combat threats.
Integrated Therapeutics I, a pharmacy class formed last year, prepares third year pharmacy majors for their role in counter-terrorism.
Antidotes for nerve gases and information on various vaccinations, drug options, how long medications will last, and adverse affects are all points of concentration, said Robert Rapp, a pharmacy professor with expertise in infectious diseases.
U. Kentucky
The class, which holds about 90 students and provides seven credit hours, began one week before Sept. 11, 2001.
Many say the fall of the twin towers has only made the class more important. "We all get emotional about Sept. 11," Rapp said.
He said he is "getting [pharmacy students] organized so we have the proper drugs if a problem arises in Lexington."
The class has become more in depth since the attacks, and it offers two lectures for the entire school of pharmacy, he said.
"Sept. 11 brought to the forefront awareness of the community," said Jennifer Binggeli, a pharmacy major who worked at the UK hospital and Wal-Mart pharmacy last September. She said the class has helped her to "bring everything together so [she] can apply it in practice." The class reflects the growing focus of pharmacy across the nation, said Dorathea Andrews, a pharmacy major.
"Pharmacists are more focused on the drugs [they] need now, and are more focused on stockpiling drugs in case of a terrorist attack," Andrews said. Since Sept. 11, hospitals have made contingency plans, Rapp said. "They used to stock 500 to 600 medications for anthrax -- now they stock enough for 50,000 people," he said.
In the future "anybody who is a member of the health team needs to be prepared for [a terrorist] situation," said Erik Mayes, a pharmacy major who is enrolled in the class.
The fear of war and bio-terrorism war is very real, Rapp said.
"U. Kentucky is ahead of the game (with this class) and everybody is trying to get the word out that this needs to be in your curriculum," Rapp said.
(C) 2002 Kentucky Kernel via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 12, 2002


End of Document