U. Mississippi professor visits Israel
University Wire
June 3, 2005 Friday


Copyright 2005 Daily Mississippian via U-Wire
Length: 365 words
Byline: By Michael Atkins, Daily Mississippian; SOURCE: U. Mississippi
Dateline: OXFORD, Miss. 
Body


University of Mississippi law professor Ron Rychlak is in Israel this week participating in an academic fellowship program offered by the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies.
Titled "Defending Democracy, Defeating Terrorism," the program enables a group of university professors from across the country, including Rychlak, to have the opportunity to learn from and interact with fellow diplomats, military officials and politicians from Israel, Jordan, India and Turkey.
The 10-day program, which focuses on terrorism and the threat it poses to democratic societies, is taking place at Tel Aviv University in Tel Aviv.
"Professor Rychlak's award of this fellowship is a great compliment to him as well as to the School of Law," said Samuel Davis, dean of the Ole Miss law school.
"He has earned quite an international reputation, and his work in the field of anti-terrorism is important not only to our government but to our entire society as well."
The program includes visits to military bases, border zones and security installations, providing participants first-hand knowledge of the practical deterrents to terrorist attacks.
"For me, the funny thing was that we will see all of the historical, cultural and religious sites, but rather than being told, 'This is where Jesus walked,' our guide will say things like, 'This is the spot where terrorists could launch an attack,'" Rychlak said in a news release prior to his departure on May 28.
Rychlak is no stranger to diplomatic work for the U.S. government and has done substantial work with the United Nations.
Just last year, as part of a U.S. Department of Justice delegation, Rychlak traveled to France for a conference held by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
While in France, Rychlak presented and explained to international delegates the U.S. government's policies regarding the Internet and free speech guaranteed in the First Amendment.
Rychlak has been published in journals on topics ranging from the International Criminal Court to a defense of Pope Pius XII and the Catholic Church's actions during World War II in one of his books, "Hitler, the War and the Pope."
(C) 2005 Daily Mississippian via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 3, 2005


End of Document