U. Nebraska prof awarded Fulbright, plans trip to Philippines
University Wire
January 19, 2000


Copyright 2000 Daily Nebraskan via U-Wire
Length: 564 words
Byline: By John Hejkal, Daily Nebraskan
Dateline: Lincoln, Neb.
Body


Terrorism and organized crime stretch beyond national boundaries. In order to address these issues, Chris Eskridge is stretching too.
Eskridge, a criminal justice professor at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, will spend five months in the Philippines.
U. Nebraska
A grant awarded under the Fulbright Program is sending Eskridge to the Philippines to give a series of university lectures.
Eskridge, the executive director of the American Society of Criminology, will also be working directly with Filipino judges on projects dealing with the criminal justice system in the Philippines.
The field of criminology is becoming international in scope, Eskridge said, so the importance of international communication is increasing.
In Eskridge's 22 years teaching at UNL, he has worked with many topics in criminology, but his current interest involves organized crime, terrorism and the court systems.
"Crime is an international phenomenon, and borders don't mean much, especially in the area of terrorism and organized crime," he said.
The Philippines has had problems with terrorism, Eskridge said, from Muslim insurgents in the south and communist insurgents in the north.
Eskridge has been involved in international work before receiving the Fulbright grant.
He has been working with Martin Killias, a professor at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland, to establish a European Society of Criminology, which Eskridge hopes to see up and running by the end of the summer.
He also plans to work on establishing a Filipino Society of Criminology during his stay as a Fulbright lecturer.
Eskridge lived in the Philippines for two years in the 1970s. He was encouraged to return by Rolando del Carmen, a distinguished professor of criminology at Sam Houston State University.
Del Carmen, a former law professor at Silliman University in the Philippines, moved to the United States in 1966.
He said Eskridge's broad knowledge should serve him well in the Philippines.
"Just about every facet of the Philippines' system is based on the American system, so Eskridge can help in all facets," del Carmen said.
Del Carmen said other countries look to the United States for solutions to organized crime and terrorism, so Eskridge's work in those areas should be relevant to the Philippines.
But del Carmen, a former Fulbright grantee, said the program's main benefactor is the person who travels abroad.
"Understanding another culture in depth is the primary benefit of the Fulbright program," he said. "The academic part becomes almost secondary to cultural absorption."
Intermediaries are often used to settle disputes in the Philippines. American society often lacks that aspect of conflict resolution, del Carmen said. He said American society has not fully explored the use of third parties in solving problems.
Del Carmen said Eskridge's interpersonal skills and upbeat personality will make him an effective communicator in the Philippines.
"He was the kind of person who really wanted to go out of his way to understand the people and mix with the culture," he said.
Eskridge said he wants to make sure the lines of communication are open so both countries can become more aware of what they are doing.
"We hope to learn how from them as to what they're doing and how to help them with some of their problems," Eskridge said.
(C) 2000 Daily Nebraskan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: January 19, 2000


End of Document