U. Oklahoma terrorism experts call attacks first step in retaliation effort
University Wire
October 9, 2001


Copyright 2001 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Length: 438 words
Byline: By Scott Hughes, Oklahoma Daily
Dateline: Norman, Okla.
Body


The strikes on Afghanistan by the United States have caused many military and terrorism experts to think hard about what these bold steps mean for the nation.
A number of University of Oklahoma professors agree that the United States is doing the right thing by attacking key Taliban targets.
Visiting professor and CIA officer David Edger thinks that the bombings are a logical first step. Edger foresees the use of limited ground troops in the area around Afghanistan but thinks that this problem cannot be solved by military actions alone.
U. Oklahoma
"We must work to neutralize terrorist cells around the world," Edger said.
Visiting professor Stephen Sloan thinks this is the beginning of a very long campaign. The United States should attempt to destabilize the Taliban and replace it with a group that will help us hunt down bin Laden, Sloan said. Sloan reminds everyone that due to our strikes we have entered a very unstable environment.
"We are facing a very diffuse enemy on many fronts. One must also expect that our adversaries will engage in more attacks on us," said Sloan.
However, Coberg Richard, Oklahoma Community Policing Institute program director, believes that these strikes will not cause more terrorist attacks. He said that attacks would take place regardless of our retaliation. Donald Hamilton, Oklahoma City National Memorial for the Prevention of Terrorism deputy director, does not believe that bin Laden is the most important target to attack in subsequent strikes.
"Osama bin Laden could die tonight and his organization would still be very dangerous. There is no distinction between the Taliban, bin Laden or the al Qaeda," Hamilton said. Hamilton said that the United States' objective for the attacks in Afghanistan and other countries is to drive terrorists to the edge of civilization. Hamilton sees the attacks of Sunday and Monday as a way for the United States to gain air superiority and wreck the Taliban's communications network.
After the initial air strikes, Edger believes the United States must follow with ground troops.
"Militarily we must go in with limited ground troops," Edger said.
Both Edger and Sloan agree that the special forces will play a large role in the ground attacks.
No matter how the United States decides to follow up its attacks, Gov. Frank Keating promises that the nation will not waver in its goal to wipe out terrorism, according to a news release.
"The United States and her allies have no choice but to root out the terrorist networks that threaten the very fabric of civilization," Keating said.
(C) 2001 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 9, 2001


End of Document