U. Oklahoma president talks terrorism on CNN
University Wire
November 5, 2001


Copyright 2001 Oklahoma Daily via U-Wire
Length: 530 words
Byline: By Marissa Fajt, Oklahoma Daily
Dateline: Norman, Okla.
Body


University of Oklahoma President David Boren shared some of his expertise from his time spent as Senate intelligence committee chairman about how the war on terrorism is going Sunday on CNN's Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer.
Boren, former Senate Intelligence Committee chairman during the Persian Gulf War, George Mitchell, U.S. International Negotiator and former Senate Majority Leader, and Robert Oakley, former ambassador to Pakistan, discussed what the United States is doing in the war on terrorism. Boren told CNN a lot of the success in intelligence is never seen, but he believes the United States is making progress.
U. Oklahoma
"I have strong reason to believe that the military action has disrupted their command and control," Boren said. "We've seen far fewer terrorist actions not only in U.S. but in American targets around the world in the past two or three weeks than I think we would have seen if we would not have seen these military actions."
Boren told CNN that the United States now has the best chance that it has ever had to build a lasting coalition among the leaders of the world to fight terrorism. He said while some of the arrangements that have been made with other countries probably will not last after the war is over, the United States should take the opportunity to institutionalize those members of the coalition that could be on-going partners in the war on terrorism.
David Edger, OU visiting professor of political science and CIA agent, said the main reason Arab countries dislike the United States is because of United States support for Israel. "We think of ourselves as neutral, but they see us as pro-Israeli," Edger said.
Edger said another reason people of Arab countries don't like the United States is the propaganda used by leaders. "People in Arab countries are frequently told that any problems are an indirect or direct response to the United States," Edger said. "Everything that goes wrong in the Arab world they blame on us."
Edger said the coalition that has been built to fight the current war should try to maintain and foster relationships.
He said in the past the United States had difficulty in maintaining a balance between countries such as India and Pakistan, which has left the United States with less intelligence and some of those countries feeling abandoned. A good way to handle the problem the United States has with swaying people of the Arab world to the American side is to form a think tank of the best minds around the country to help form strategies, Boren said. The think tank would help devise ways to translate ideas to Arabic people. Jeff Hickman, OU press secretary, said since Boren left the Senate, he has remained active with foreign policy.
This past summer Boren traveled to Russia along with two other former senators to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
"When it comes to foreign police and intelligence (Boren) is one of the most respected figures in the United States," Hickman said.
Hickman said Boren would do whatever he could to help with intelligence and foreign policy as long as it does not mean leaving the university.
(C) 2001 Oklahoma Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 5, 2001


End of Document