U. of Idaho Graduate Student Is Acquitted of Using Web Sites to Foster Terrorism
The Chronicle of Higher Education
June 25, 2004, Friday


Copyright 2004 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 39
Length: 477 words
Byline: BROCK READ
Body


A graduate student at the University of Idaho was acquitted this month of federal charges that he had fostered terrorism by running Web sites devoted to Islamic causes.
The most serious and closely watched charges against Sami Omar Al-Hussayen, a computer-science student from Saudi Arabia, stemmed from a controversial provision of the USA Patriot Act that makes it illegal to provide advice and assistance to terrorist groups.
Prosecutors from the U.S. attorney's office in Boise, Idaho, used the provision to argue that Mr. Al-Hussayen, who managed a pair of Web sites that allegedly featured links to the Palestinian militant group Hamas, had knowingly helped recruit and finance terrorists.
The prosecutors also argued that Mr. Al-Hussayen had offered financial support to a group called the Islamic Assembly of North America, and that he had turned its Web site into a network that promoted terrorism in Chechnya and the Middle East.
The defendant's lawyers said that he had done little to determine the sites' content, and that the sites are protected under the First Amendment.
The Web sites were not kept on university servers. Most of the evidence presented at the trial came from Mr. Al-Hussayen's home computer.
After seven days of deliberation, a jury found Mr. Al-Hussayen not guilty on three counts of terrorism and on three charges of making a false statement and committing visa fraud. Jurors were unable to reach decisions on eight other false-statement and visa-fraud charges, and U.S. District Judge Edward J. Lodge declared mistrials on those counts.
Prosecutors have not decided whether they will retry Mr. Al-Hussayen on the charges that deadlocked the jury, but they expect to reach a decision "within a week or so," according to Jean McNeil, a spokeswoman for Thomas E. Moss, U.S. attorney for Idaho.
Until then, the student, who has been in jail since his arrest, in February 2003, will remain in custody because he still faces deportation for unspecified visa violations. Had he been convicted on the terrorism charges, he could have been imprisoned for 15 years on each count. Neither he nor his lawyers could be reached for comment.
In a written statement, Mr. Moss said he was "naturally disappointed" by the acquittal of Mr. Al-Hussayen, but "we accept the outcome."
Elizabeth Brandt, a professor of law at the university, said the verdict was "a vindication of the judicial system."
"I think 12 jurors understood what was going on," she said, "that the government brought its full power down on one little guy who was active in his faith and put together charitable Web sites."
But, she added, the case may already have damaged foreign students' confidence in due process and their willingness to study in the United States. "Anybody who thinks international students aren't scared by cases like Al-Hussayen's is kidding themselves," she said.

Load-Date: July 26, 2004


End of Document