U. professor says free speech protections should be loosened
Deseret Morning News (Salt Lake City)
July 16, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Length: 381 words
Byline: Jamshid Ghazi Askar Deseret News
Body


 SUN VALLEY, IDAHO ? University of Utah law professor Amos N. Guiora proclaimed Friday that free-speech protections of religious gatherings need to be considerably loosened for the war on terrorism to succeed. Speaking at the Utah State Bar's annual summer convention, Guiora advocated a primary conclusion included in his book, "Freedom From Religion": Law enforcement agencies must monitor what is said in places of worship such as mosques or synagogues when and if authorities have reason to believe that a religious leader is inciting followers to commit acts of terroristic violence. 
"Religious extremism presents today the single greatest danger to civil democratic society," he said. "Words kill? When speech is directly intended to lead someone to (commit) an act of violence, speech does not need to be nuanced." Guiora is a self-described secular Jew and the only child of two Holocaust survivors. He first recognized the strong correlation between religious extremism and terroristic activity during his 19 years working in the Israeli Defense Forces, including a stint as legal adviser to the volatile Gaza Strip. "As a legal advisor to the Gaza Strip, I dealt with Palestinian terrorists; in another posting, I dealt with Jewish terrorists," he said. "So I've truly had the opportunity to spend way too many hours with way too many terrorists. "Over the course of time, I found myself asking the question which you're told not to ask terrorists: 'Why are you intent on killing my children?' The fundamental reason that was given to me ? was religion. That does not mean religious extremism is the sole cause of terrorism, but it is, I argue, the primary cause of terrorism in the year 2010." He conducted research for "Freedom From Religion" via information-gathering trips to England, the Netherlands, Israel and several United States cities. During each visit, Guiora encountered government officials who dismissed combustible speech in the religious setting as not the least bit threatening. "(I have) a very disconcerted sense that decision-makers are refusing to articulate the present danger," he said. "And if you refuse to articulate the present danger, then there is no way that civil democratic society can effectively protect itself." e-mail: jaskar@desnews.com 

Load-Date: July 17, 2010


End of Document