U. S. EMBASSY TERRORISTS NOW LEADERS IN IRAN FORMER HOSTAGES SAY EX-CAPTORS ARE STILL ENGAGED IN VIOLENCE
Charleston Daily Mail (West Virginia)
September 7, 1994, Wednesday


Copyright 1994 Charleston Newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P1A
Length: 1057 words
Body


NEWSDAY
WASHINGTON - At least two dozen of the Iranians who seized the U
.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 and held 52 Americans hostage for more
than a year are now government officials and ambassadors, and many
are suspected of spreading terrorism throughout the world,
knowledgeable U.S. sources have told Newsday.
According to those sources, who have access to government
intelligence, the Iranian officials and their embassies in Latin
America, Europe and the Middle East have been responsible for
bombings aimed at Jewish interests, the assassination of Tehran
opponents living abroad and the recruiting of Arab terrorists.
Their global designs include the spread of Islamic
fundamentalism among South Asia's Muslims and terror bombings in New
York City.
One of those officials, Hosein Sheikh-ol-Eslam, is described as
a "key leader" in the U.S. Embassy takeover.  Now, according to
administration officials, Sheikh-ol-Eslam is Iran's deputy foreign
minister for Afro-Arab affairs and vice director-general of its
foreign service.  From those posts, according to Kenneth Katzman, a
former intelligence analyst who is now an Iran specialist for the
Congressional Research Service, "He is the kingpin, the patron of
the radicals and former hostage holders, the man who assigns them to
their jobs overseas, in embassies and elsewhere."
Former hostage Moorhead Kennedy Jr., then the embassy's
third-ranking diplomat, bitterly remembers Sheikh-ol-Eslam as the
chief interrogator of the Americans, the captor whom they derisively
called "Tooth" because of his gap-toothed smile.
Barry Rosen, the embassy's press officer, now a teacher at
Brooklyn College in New York City, recalls him as a practitioner of
psychological warfare, bringing good news and mail to the Americans
one day, cracking down on them the next.
Katzman, author of "Warriors of Islam," a book on the
Revolutionary Guard Corps, said that under Sheikh-ol-Eslam's guidance
the former hostage-holders - as well as other Iranian officials -
have used embassies to finance, arm and provide logistics and cover
for acts of terrorism and the spread of their brand of Islamic
fundamentalism, controlling government and society.
He rejects the notion that they are merely former
revolutionaries who went on to serve in the government they helped
create.  "The difference," Katzman said, "is that these men have
taken their ideologies and their terrorist tactics abroad."
For example, one of Sheikh-ol-Eslam's colleagues among the
hostage-takers, Ali Reza Deyhim, has been Iran's ambassador to Mexico
since 1993 and is serving concurrently as Tehran's envoy to Belize
.  The Iranian government has said it is interested in expanding its
relations with all of Latin America.
Terrorism expert Vince Cannistraro, a former director of the
CIA's counterterrorism center who served as a staff member of the
National Security Council during the Reagan administration, said U
.S. intelligence sources "are worried because the Iranians are
building up an infrastructure in Latin America." Mexico is
especially important, he added, because "it is strategically placed
and is as close to the U.S. as Iran can get."
Cannistraro said intelligence sources here believe that the July
19 bombing of a Panama commuter plane that killed 23 people, most of
them Jews, "was directed out of Mexico."
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, relying on U.S.
intelligence agencies, has blamed the bombing on Hezbollah, the
radical Islamic group Party of God, which, he said, is financed and
largely controlled by Iran.
Christopher also has blamed Hezbollah and Iran for the July 18
bombing of a Buenos Aires, Argentina, building housing Jewish
agencies, in which nearly 100 people were killed.  He charged it was
part of an effort to undermine the Middle East peace process.  After
Argentinian investigators charged that the bombing was the work of
Iranian agents, Tehran lodged a denial and pulled out its ambassador,
Hadi Soleimanpur.  Cannistraro and Katzman say Soleimanpur was one of
the 1979 hostage-holders, although intelligence sources have been
unable to confirm that.
"The operation (bombing) in Buenos Aires may not have been
directed by the ambassador," said Cannistraro, "but the embassies
supply support, logistics, passports, visas, even weapons, and the
ambassador is usually aware of what's going on."
The CIA and State Department have followed the careers of some
of the hostage-holders as they've gone on to key posts, mostly in
Iran's foreign ministry, and have tracked their continued involvement
in terrorist activities.  Indeed, since 1979 the CIA has written
three classified reports on the issue.
The State Department, in its latest annual report on "Patterns
of Global Terrorism," calls Iran "the most active state sponsor of
terrorism" which has been "implicated in terrorist attacks in
Italy, Turkey and Pakistan." In addition, the report said, "Iranian
intelligence continues to stalk members of the Iranian opposition in
the United States, Europe, Asia and the Middle East."
The report also added another nation to its list of states that
sponsor terrorism - Sudan.  And it notes that Majid Kamal, Iran's
ambassador in Khartoum until July, was largely responsible for
helping to organize, finance and equip terrorist groups operating in
and from Sudan.  Several Sudanese were arrested last summer as part
of a plot to bomb prominent sites in New York City.
The State Department calls Kamal a leader in the 1979 takeover,
which ended 444 days later when 52 Americans were flown out of Iran
as Ronald Reagan was being inaugurated as president.  Former hostage
Rosen, who was held in a Tehran prison, recalls that one of his
captors, who was called Majid, played Western classical music on the
piano while Iranian dissidents screamed under torture in nearby rooms
Before his assignment to Sudan in 1990, Kamal served as Tehran's
top diplomat in Lebanon, where, according to the State Department, he
"guided Iranian efforts in developing the Lebanese Hezbollah
group," which was responsible for holding Americans and other
Westerners hostage for several years.
Rosen, who teaches a course on Iran, said he has given up hope
for now that Tehran will take a more moderate course.  He added,
"It's easy to see Iranians under every bed. But it's not surprising
that these people who held the hostages should still be active now
.They still have the same ideological vision and mission."
IRAN9A Iran 1A

Load-Date: January 31, 1995


End of Document