U. San Francisco prof. to lecture on foreign policy at UC-Davis
University Wire
March 8, 2007 Thursday


Copyright 2007 The California Aggie via U-Wire
Length: 316 words
Byline: By Bo Hee Kim, The California Aggie; SOURCE: UC-Davis
Dateline: DAVIS, Calif. 
Body


Today the University of California-Davis organization Students for Justice in Palestine is hosting "Pax Americana: United States Middle East Policy and the Roots of Terrorism." The event will take place in 2 Wellman from 8 to 10 p.m. with Stephen Zunes as the featured speaker.
Zunes is a professor of politics at the University of San Francisco. He is an advisory committee member and Middle East editor for the Foreign Policy in Focus project as well as an associate editor of Peace Review.
"[The event] will include a lecture followed by a question-and-answer session," said Mohammad Ahmad, a junior managerial economics major and the treasurer for SJP, in an e-mail interview. "Zunes will offer a unique perspective on the effects of U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East. He will provide an in-depth analysis on the reasons for terrorism and how it relates to actions of the United States in the region."
According to SJP, Zunes will be explaining the role of U.S. foreign policy in the development of terrorism in the Middle East and argue why U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East must change.
Marwa Rifahie, a recent UC Davis graduate in political science and Middle East and South Asia studies who is still involved with SJP, said in an e-mail interview that the event will consist of a one-hour lecture, which will be followed by an open question-and-answer session.
Ahmad said he hopes people will come to the event to broaden their understanding of terrorism.
"Hopefully, people will come to this event to hear a different viewpoint and learn something new," Ahmad said. "Often, people do not question the reasons behind terrorism and perhaps change should begin with our policies. This event is important because it affects everyone and it is so relevant in today's world. And it will offer a different approach to the problems in the Middle East."
(C) 2007 The California Aggie via U-WIRE

Load-Date: March 8, 2007


End of Document