U. Texas-area police to use dogs to help fight terrorism
University Wire
June 6, 2003, Friday


Copyright 2003 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 430 words
Byline: By Stuart Reeves, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


The Austin Police Department's new weapon against domestic terrorism isn't a covert operative. It's a dog with a collection of high-tech toys.
Outfitted with special harnesses equipped with Geiger counters, the dogs will be used to detect sources of radiation that may belong to weapons of mass destruction, police officials said. The dogs and their handlers will patrol large public events, such as University of Texas football games, and more security-sensitive areas, like Austin-Bergstrom International Airport.
U. Texas-Austin
APD is the first police department in the nation with a canine radiation-detection unit.
"Since the events of Sept. 11, there has been a greater concern for public safety," said Bobby Inman, Greater Austin Criminal Commission president and a professor at the LBJ School of Public Affairs. The unit is one of several efforts made by APD to close the gaps that may exist in local homeland security efforts.
"We're always looking for new ways to reduce risk to our officers while continuing to be effective," Austin Assistant Police Chief Jim Chapman said.
The canine radiation-detection units are the product of a training program begun by APD in October 2001. The department, working with Signature Science LLC, a hazardous-materials research group, began training its officers to respond to domestic terrorism threats. Over the last year, the idea of using dogs for radiation detection has been accepted by law-enforcement agents as an innovative use of a law enforcement tool closely associated with search-and-rescue operations.
"The goal with the trained canines is to be proactive to threats rather than reactive," said APD Senior Officer Jim Minton.
Adam Hamilton, president of Signature Science, said his company was "glad to help the APD become the best-trained unit with science."
In a scenario offered by Minton, the dogs would move in crowds to detect hidden radiation sources that humans could not. In another instance, the dogs would patrol baggage carousels while monitored by an officer. Minton said future uses of the unit may include searches of cargo holds and wheel wells of aircraft, pending Federal Aviation Administration approval.
Minton said the potential health risks on the dogs from the effects of radiation had been evaluated by the department.
"The department's veterinarians were consulted and concluded the health risks to the dogs were not greater than those to humans," Minton commented.
Each canine will be continuously monitored for lifetime radiation-exposure effects.
   
(C) 2002 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 6, 2003


End of Document