U. Texas professor to lead team against cyber terrorism
University Wire
December 3, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 557 words
Byline: By Chrissy Ragan, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


Adm. Bobby Inman, a University of Texas professor and former director of the National Security Agency and deputy director of the CIA, is putting his knowledge to use in the war against terrorism. Inman, the Lyndon B. Johnson Centennial Chair in National Policy, was recently appointed the head of Texas Attorney General John Cornyn's new advisory committee aimed at protecting the state's computer systems from cyber terrorism.
U. Texas-Austin
The State Infrastructure Protection Advisory Committee will make recommendations to the state on what critical infrastructures' systems are most vulnerable, such as water and energy supply, and address the potential threats they face. Inman said he expects the committee's work to be finished by March 2002.
"There really isn't a model on how to do this in the country," Inman said. "We hope to make Texas a model of what a state ought to do."
SIPAC, which includes officials from the U.S. Department of Defense and the FBI, will come up with ways to improve and secure the computer systems that run the state's telecommunications and utilities, said Mike Viesca, spokesman for the attorney general.
In addition to opening the lines of communication between private industries and federal, state and local governments, the committee will also look at alternative ways of operating the state systems.
"We're so dependent on computers," Viesca said. "If something were to disrupt the system, we would come to a standstill."
The state's infrastructure is indeed vulnerable, Cornyn said, in a Nov. 27 statement. "Safeguarding it against attack is one of the primary goals of the committee."
SIPAC is rooted in the Texas Internet Bureau, the newest division at Cornyn's office. Launched in September 2000, the TIB consists of investigators and lawyers who assist law officers in computer--related crime, such as child pornography, hacking and consumer fraud.
Though the Sept. 11 attacks prompted state officials to organize the committee sooner, Reid Wittliff, chief of the TIB, said the office was already looking into state protection issues.
"As more and more government functions become interconnected through the network, and as the ability to function is dependent on the ability to stay connected, we thought it might be wise to consider issues that have to do with how these functions are protected," Wittliff said. "The events of 9-11 just heightened concerns."
Inman, who is a 1950 University of Texas history graduate, served in the U.S. Navy for 31 years and retired in 1982 with a permanent rank of admiral, becoming the first naval intelligence specialist to attain a four-star rank. While in the Navy, he became director of the National Security Agency and deputy director of the CIA. After retiring, he became Chief Executive Officer of the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation in Austin.
Other members of the 30-person committee include Philip Bobbitt, UT law professor and former director of intelligence at the National Security Council under President Clinton; Richard Clarke, special adviser to President Bush for the Office of Homeland Security; and Ronald Dick, director of the FBI's National Infrastructure Protection Center.
SIPAC held its first meeting Nov. 19 in Austin and is scheduled to meet again Dec. 17 in Houston.
(C) 2001 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: December 3, 2001


End of Document