U. Texas students hold rally to educate on terrorism
University Wire
October 30, 2001


Copyright 2001 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 686 words
Byline: By Ben Heath, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


Students of various ethnicities and nationalities gathered on the University of Texas-Austin West Mall on Monday for an anti-terrorism rally meant to raise the public's awareness of the extent to which terrorism has penetrated the global community.
"We are here to unite in the wake of terror," said Liz Harr, president of the Jewish Students for Palestinian Rights, which sponsored the rally. "We are not here to accuse -- we are here to learn."
The rally, "Terrorism is our Common Problem," consisted of seven speakers who talked about terrorist incidents in Iraq, Kosovo, Israel, Lebanon, New York, Palestine and India.
U. Texas-Austin
"We wanted people to realize the pervasiveness of terrorism," she said. "We wanted people [to hear each] person's account of the attacks so they come away with an awareness of terrorism. It's not confined to any specific ethnicity or race."
Harr said Monday's event was unique because rather than demand political action, the rally's primary goal was to educate people about terrorism around the world. Further, she said JSPR was fortunate to feature several speakers who witnessed terrorist acts first hand.
"Speakers won't be placing blame as much as focusing on personal experiences," she said.
Nadav Shifman, an economics junior from Israel, spoke on the terrorist bombing that he witnessed in Tel Aviv in March 1996. Shifman said he was in a shopping mall when a nearby suicide bomber killed several people and wounded more than 100.
He said that one of the best ways to convey an anti-terrorist message is for victims or witnesses to share their personal accounts of terrorism and its effect on their lives.
"I was in the Israeli army and I've seen a lot of hard-core stuff -- but when you're dealing with [an attack on] a civilian going on his way to work or a downtown Tel Aviv shopping mall, it can change your point of view," he said. "You have feelings of rage. You're powerless. Those feelings are hitting the American public right now."
In relaying his story, Shifman said his main purpose, and that of the rally, was to demonstrate that currently terrorism is an inescapable part of life.
"You can't fight terror with terror," he said. "Terrorism is everywhere. It's a big part of our lives right now, and we're trying to deal with it."
Also among the speakers was freelance photographer Alan Pogue, who spent time in Iraq rehabilitating water treatment plants that suffered damage from U.S. sanctions. Pogue said that by systematically targeting water treatment and electricity facilities, the United States was simply practicing its own form of terrorism.
"I wanted to show that violence that is done to civilians in wartime is not random, it's calculated violence," he said. "It is terrorism.
The only difference is that what the United States is doing is more effective. Terrorists would have to blow up almost every dam in the United States [to achieve the same effect]."
Furthermore, Pogue said the economic sanctions placed on Iraq further worsened the situation.
He said many of these acts are shielded from criticism due to tight control of the media.
"The American government completely understands how necessary it is to control the news," he said.
But Adam Bitter, president of the UT chapter of the Young Conservatives of Texas, argues against any accusations that the United States engaged in terrorism.
"[The United States'] intentions are to take a stand against the government in Iraq," he said. "We understand that any funds we send to the people of Iraq will be intercepted by Saddam Hussein. [The sanctions] are necessary to ensure justice in that country."
Bitter added that YCT will be holding a rally in support of the military personnel in Afghanistan Tuesday on the West Mall.
Shifman, who is not a member of any student organizations, said that he was glad that the rally did not turn into a political one.
"I didn't want it to be Israelis versus Arabs or Americans versus Arabs or anything," he said. "Although folks tried to steer it in that direction, I just gave my story."
(C) 2001 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 30, 2001


End of Document