U. Texas medical branch opens bio-terror defense lab
University Wire
August 11, 2005 Thursday


Copyright 2005 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 364 words
Byline: By Zachary Warmbrodt, Daily Texan; SOURCE: U. Texas
Dateline: GALVESTON, Texas 
Body


System leaders broke ground for a bio-terror and infectious disease defense laboratory at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, Texas, on Wednesday, and were joined by U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas, and House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, R-Sugarland, who stressed the importance of the Galveston National Laboratory in the post-Sept. 11 world.
The midday event was a break from the first executive session of the Board of Regents, which is meeting over two days at UTMB-Galveston.
Research conducted at the lab, expected to be built by June 2008 at a cost of $167 million, will be dedicated to developing vaccines and diagnostic tests for diseases and pathogens such as anthrax, bubonic plague, Ebola, West Nile virus and drug-resistant tuberculosis.
Hutchison, who was born at UTMB-Galveston, praised the campus for having one of only two national laboratories dedicated to bio-terrorism. UTMB-Galveston also has a regional laboratory dedicated to a similar cause, in addition to a contract with Colorado State University to study emerging viral threats that could come from animals.
She said the lab will help protect "everyday" Americans against not only terrorism but also environmental problems, such as pesticides that may harm farmers.
And although the laboratory has been planned since the 1980s, the focus of the event was repeatedly returned to the looming threat of terrorism, specifically the anthrax attacks in 2001.
DeLay said the threat of bio-terrorism has increased dramatically since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.
"At the Galveston National Laboratory, diseases will be studied not to end life as bio-terrorists would, but to save it," DeLay said. "It will be put to use here as a shield, not a weapon."
Keynote speaker Tony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the laboratory fulfills a promise he made to President George W. Bush shortly after anthrax attacks on the U.S. Congress, that academic institutions given the responsibility of developing the nation's biological defenses would not only learn about the dangers, but assist in implementing practical protective measures.
(C) 2005 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: August 12, 2005


End of Document