U. Texas forms research partnership to fight ecological terrorism
University Wire
October 22, 1999


Copyright 1999 Daily Texan via U-Wire
Length: 474 words
Byline: By Angela Entzminger, Daily Texan
Dateline: Austin, Texas
Body


The University of Texas System has formed a partnership with Texas Tech University and the University of South Florida to learn how to combat the threat of chemical and biological terrorism.
Congress allocated $ 13 million last week for the National Center for Countermeasures to Biological and Chemical Threats, a consortium of research institutions designed to search for solutions posed by the dangers of terrorist attacks.
In January, Congress will give $ 13 million to Texas Tech, which Texas Tech will allocate to itself as well as UT-Austin and the University of South Florida. Texas Tech will receive $ 5 million and the University of South Florida will receive $ 3 million.
U. Texas-Austin
UT-Austin will receive $ 4.4 million in grant money, while the UT Medical Branch in Galveston will receive $ 300,000.
The grant money received by the Medical Branch at Galveston will be used to develop drugs to counterattack the effects of diseases, detect biological agents and quickly diagnose them, said Robert Shope, UTMB professor of pathology and principal investigator for the project.
Each school will use their specific skills to find solutions posed by the problems of terrorist acts.
David Schmidly, vice president for research at Texas Tech, said Tech thought the partnership among the schools would be the best way to effectively address the threat of bioterrorism.
Ron Kendall, director of the Institute for Environmental Health and Human Sciences at Texas Tech, said the issue has become a national priority that the country should approach with caution.
"Bioterrorism has emerged as a major national threat to the nation," Kendall said. "At this point, the United States is preparing itself to address this threat."
"Research centers like this one at Texas Tech and at the University of Texas are going to be our first line of defense against bioterrorism," U.S. Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, said in a statement.
The University will develop non-harmful organisms which closely resemble dangerous organisms, test how they work, and create vaccines and antibiotics to counter their effects, said Steve Kornguth, assistant director of the UT Institute for Advanced Technology and principal researcher for Austin's project.
The University will also develop ways to communicate with authorities so they can cope with potential crises without alarming the population, Kornguth said. He added that the University will also create ways to dispense information to other locations about emergency situations.
UT students will have an opportunity in the future to help with this research as well, Kornguth said.
The UT System, Texas Tech System and the University of South Florida's College of Public Health will set more specific goals after more talks with the Department of Defense, Schmidly said.
(C) 1999 Daily Texan via U-WIRE

Load-Date: October 22, 1999


End of Document