U. Utah geography class to examine terrorism
University Wire
November 22, 2005 Tuesday


Copyright 2005 Daily Utah Chronicle via U-Wire
Length: 419 words
Byline: By Dustin Gardiner, Daily Utah Chronicle; SOURCE: U. Utah
Dateline: SALT LAKE CITY 
Body


Could terrorists one day use satellite images, easily accessible on the Internet, to plot attacks on America?
University of Utah geography professor George Hepner plans to examine this and many other issues in his Geography of Terrorism and Homeland Security class this Spring Semester.
Although Hepner said terrorism definitely isn't a new trend in most of the world, new technology is changing the way we can track terrorism and the way terrorists plan their attacks.
"Most Americans think terrorism is new. It's not. From a global perspective, we've had terrorism for a long time," Hepner said. "What's changing is how technology is used to fight terrorism."
The class will first study the origins and causes of terrorism, then it will move into global patterns and technologies that relate to it.
Certain conditions make regimes more prone to terrorism, Hepner said.
Terrorism usually emerges from areas that are remote with an unstable government and a supportive local population, he said. Hepner plans to study which areas of the world are most likely to generate terrorism.
The class will later focus on geographic information systems and geospatial technologies, like remote sensing, and how these technologies can play a part in fighting terrorism.
"We will look at how geography can be used to fight terrorism and help homeland security," he said.
Adam Sobek, director of the geography department's digit lab, said new technologies are changing the fight against terrorism.
"Now we have the capability to track patterns of terrorism. In the past, we couldn't do that, but now that it's here -- how do we use it?" Sobek said.
The class will also examine the way terrorists could potentially use technology to plan their attacks.
Hepner hopes that a broader understanding of terrorism will help to strengthen the fight against it.
"[Terrorism is] going to be with us for the foreseeable future...we need to understand the causes so we can address those issues," he said.
Hepner also said that the current U.S. approach to fighting terrorism is not as effective as it could be. "It needs to be a broader approach...a strong military is only part of the solution," he added.
Sobek said the career field related to the class is growing, and there are many opportunities for students to find post-graduation jobs using geography to fight terrorism for organizations like the CIA. The course is one of several geography classes that the Natural and Technological Hazards Center is offering.
(C) 2005 Daily Utah Chronicle via U-WIRE

Load-Date: November 22, 2005


End of Document