U. Washington officials, students concerned with latest anti-terrorism recommendations
University Wire
June 19, 2000


Copyright 2000 The Daily via U-Wire
Length: 1890 words
Byline: By Scott Gutierrez, The Daily
Dateline: Seattle
Body


A report presented to Congress this month calling for better pre-emptive measures against terrorism is drawing criticism for its recommendation to more closely monitor the activities of international students in the United States.
International program counselors and administrators are concerned that the report is drawing an over-reactive association between terrorism and visiting students and will convey a degrading message to some of the nearly 500,000 foreigners who come to study in the United States each year.
"From a personal standpoint, it's a slap in the face to the mission that we promote -- we don't support viewing international students as prospective terrorists," said Mara Parker, manager of student programs for the Foundation of International Understanding through Students at the University of Washington.
Parker said she will be informing international students at the University of Washington about the report through the group's e-mail list.
"It doesn't promote understanding and peace, it promotes misunderstanding and suspicion," she added.
U. Washington
The National Commission on Terrorism, a panel of private experts and former government officials, was assembled by Congress after the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
In its report, the commission recommended closer monitoring of international students as one of several ways to better prevent future terrorist strikes against the United States.
Although the commission concluded that only "a small minority may exploit their student status to support terrorist activity," it recommended expanding a regional pilot program already in place that would allow the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) to collect information electronically for use in a searchable database.
But some, including one very active international student at UW, feel that it will be unfair for students from countries listed as potential threats by the U.S. government to feel like they are being singled out, especially students from Muslim or Middle Eastern countries.
Gorkem Kuterdem was recently sworn in as president of the Graduate and Professional Student Senate. He also happens to be a student from Turkey pursuing a Ph.D. in electrical engineering. Kuterdem said when he first read about the commission's report last week, it reminded him of another infamous and more fearful era in American history.
"This could become like the McCarthy time period. People will be persecuted for no justification," Kuterdem said.
And Kuterdem wonders how long it will be before certain groups get singled out and what message that will send to the thousands of students who come to the United States to go to school, contribute to research and take part in American culture.
"Someone will say, 'he's an international student,' and people will be put into difficult situations," he said.
Kuterdem, who will finish his degree in 2002, said he understands the fear of external threats, especially because terrorism is a problem in Turkey, too.
But he hopes that the U.S. government will be able to prevent terrorism while still treating people with dignity.
In 1996, Congress required the INS to develop a more effective way of tracking foreign students with a law prompted by the World Trade Center bombing.
Authorities discovered that one of the individuals convicted in the 1993 attack had been a foreign student at Wichita State University before dropping out and joining an Islamic terrorist group.
The agency responded to the law by developing the Coordinated Interagency Partnership Regulating International Students program (CIPRIS), which is already in place at 20 southern universities. The system allows schools to submit information such as name, address, visa expiration date and field of study, to INS over the Internet.
Schools could also more quickly notify INS if a student changed study plans, if they transferred or dropped out.
The system would streamline what is now mostly an archaic paperwork process, said Gary Ausman, director of the UW's Office of International Services.
Ausman said the system would also be used to update work eligibility status for students more quickly.
He likened the CIPRIS program to a Husky card for international students. International students coming to the United States would be required to purchase an electronic ID card, which they would swipe for example, when entering the country or registering for classes.
"We need to do some modernization at some point," Ausman said. "But the collection of a fee and the story behind it -- it's sending the total wrong message to our visitors."
Ausman said that while the University is awaiting the implementation of CIPRIS, the process for obtaining students visas is already heavily regulated. In addition to meeting strict guidelines, students must also be able to prove their English-speaking capabilities, their financial means and that they have a bona fide residency in their home country.
It is also difficult, if not impossible, for foreign students to come here from countries where there are no diplomatic relations, Ausman said.
Ausman said students from certain countries, such as India and Pakistan, have been prevented from studying subjects such as nuclear engineering since their countries violated the nuclear test-ban treaties in 1998.
"I've been around this crazy atmosphere for 25 years and I have a hard time believing students are more of a serious threat to the United States than any other," Ausman said.
Numbers compiled by Ausman's office show that there were more than 2000 international students at the UW in 1999 from more than 90 countries. Seventy-five percent of those students were in graduate programs.
A majority of the students were from Pacific Rim countries such as China, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. Most were enrolled in programs such as engineering, business management and administration, physical sciences, health-related sciences, social sciences, interdisciplinary studies and computer science.
"There's a lot of admiration for the United States," said Kuterdem about his home country. He also briefly pointed out that a lot of the research in the United States is conducted by foreigners.
"Most people who come here are personally wealthy, especially if you are coming here from a country like Turkey, " he said. "If you come here: a) you are very bright, b) you are very wanted so someone will sponsor you to come here or c) you are very rich. I don't see how the United States can lose."
The Justice Deptartment proposes the attorney general -- not schools -- collect monitoring fees.
The U.S. Department of Justice proposed legislation last week that would change one of the more controversial elements of a regional pilot program designed to better track international students studying in the United States.
The legislation comes shortly after a report presented to Congress by the National Commission on Terrorism, which called for the program, known as CIPRIS, to be expanded nationwide.
The CIPRIS fee legislation proposes transferring responsibility to collect a $ 95 fee, paid by international students, from schools to the U.S. Attorney General's office.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service calls the fee an administrative cost for the program.
According to Gary Ausman, director of UW's Office of International Services, many colleges and universities across the country vehemently objected to being placed into the position of a surrogate government agency and dubbed the fee a "terrorist tax."
Because the fee is collected to monitor students, it could undermine the close relationship University administrators and counselors maintain with international student visitors, Ausman said.
Nationwide opposition to the original INS plan for fee collection largely kept the program on hold, Ausman said.
The new legislation would require non-immigrants to pay a fee to the attorney general prior to obtaining their student visas, whether overseas or in the United States.
Some members of Congress are also planing to introduce similar legislation, according to a press release from the Association of International Educators.
(C) 2000 The Daily via U-WIRE

Load-Date: June 19, 2000


End of Document