U.K. LABOUR LEADER LINKS WARS, TERROR AS CAMPAIGN ISSUE
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
May 27, 2017 Saturday
Main Edition


Copyright 2017 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: A; Pg. 003
Length: 524 words
Byline: Gregory Katz and Rob Harris Associated Press
Dateline: LONDON 
Body


 LONDON - Four days after a suicide bombing plunged Britain into mourning, political campaigning for a general election in two weeks resumed Friday with the main opposition leader linking acts of terrorism at home to foreign wars like the one in Libya.
 Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn risked being assailed for politicizing the Manchester Arena attack that killed 22 people by claiming that his party would change Britain's foreign policy if it takes power after the June 8 vote by abandoning the "war on terror."
 "Many experts, including professionals in our intelligence and security services, have pointed to the connections between wars our government has supported or fought in other countries, such as Libya, and terrorism here at home," Corbyn said in his first speech since Monday night's atrocity.
 National campaigning had been on hold to honor the victims of the arena bombing.
 Salman Abedi, the bomber who struck the Ariana Grande concert, had strong links to Libya. His parents were born and lived there before moving to Britain in the early 1990s. They eventually returned with several of their six children, and Abedi traveled there to visit his family on occasion.
 Prime Minister Theresa May, who was attending a summit of the Group of Seven in Sicily, offered a blistering critique of Corbyn's position when she was asked about it at a news conference.
 May said that while she was at the summit rallying support for the fight against terrorism, "Jeremy Corbyn has said that terror attacks in Britain are our own fault, and he has said that just a few days after one of the worst terror attacks" in the country's history.
 "There can never, ever, be an excuse for terrorism," she said, adding "the choice people face at the general election has become starker."
 While Corbyn could alienate some voters with his comments, he is trying to win back the many Labour supporters who turned away from the party in the aftermath of then-Prime Minister Tony Blair's decision to join the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003.
 Blair's backing of President George W. Bush brought more than 1 million protesters into the streets. When the rationale for war failed to pan out because weapons of mass destruction were not found in Iraq, Blair's popularity faded badly after a string of election victories.
 When home-grown terrorists attacked London subway and bus lines in 2005, some blamed Britain's involvement in the Iraq war. Corbyn's speech reflects the view that Britain's actions overseas are at least in part responsible for the increase in extremist attacks.
SIDEBAR:
GRANDE PLANNING BENEFIT CONCERT
 Ariana Grande has vowed to return to Manchester, England, to give a concert to raise money for the victims of Monday's deadly bombing at her show there.
 In a statement on Friday, the pop star says "we won't let hate win" and offered to "extend my hand and heart and everything I possibility can give to you and yours."
 She did not announce a date for the concert.
 Grande suspended her Dangerous Woman world tour and canceled several European shows after the bombing, which left 22 dead. The tour will restart June 7 in Paris.
 Associated Press

Load-Date: July 28, 2017


End of Document