U.K. terrorism coverage plan criticized
Business Insurance
June 28, 1993


Copyright 1993 Crain Communications, Inc.
Section: Pg. 13
Length: 908 words
Byline: By GAVIN SOUTER
Dateline: TUCKER'S TOWN, Bermuda
Body


Insurance against terrorist acts in Britain still does not meet all the needs of policyholders, despite the efforts of government, industry and insurers, a risk manager contends.
Insurers' sudden withdrawal of traditional terrorism coverage from property insurance policies last year created a hole in commercial coverage that has not been filled by the introduction of a government-backed program, he said.
More flexibility and greater spread of risk is needed if the program is to successfully meet policyholders' needs, said Alan Fleming, executive director of the Assn. of Insurance & Risk Managers in Industry & Commerce.  Mr. Fleming took a leave from his position as a director of Imperial Chemical Insurance Ltd., a subsidiary of Imperial Chemical P.L.C., in order to serve the two-year term at AIR-MIC.
However, risk managers also must take action to reduce the risk of terrorist attacks, he said.
If terrorist do strike, companies should be well-prepared to deal with the aftermath, another executive added.
"The only area in Europe where it is not now possible to purchase terrorism cover in the traditional market is the United Kingdom," even though property in other European countries, like Italy and Spain, has been severely damaged from terrorist acts and organized crime, Mr. Fleming said at "Managing the Catastrophe," a conference sponsored by International Risk Management Group Ltd. and held in Bermuda last month.
The withdrawal of terrorist coverage in Britain began Jan. 1 when, citing lack of reinsurance coverage, British insurers inserted a terrorist exclusion in their policies.
British insurers had been pressing the government to offer coverage for acts of terrorism since April 1992, when a bomb planted by the Irish Republican Army exploded outside the Commercial Union tower in London's financial district and caused about $ 700 million in insured damage (BI, May 3; April 20, 1992).
But insurers were late in informing commercial policyholders that terrorism coverage could be withdrawn, said Mr. Fleming.
"AIRMIC first learned of this initiative around Nov. 10, despite the fact that we had had a full meeting with the Assn. of British Insurers on Sept. 15," Mr. Fleming said.  "We had not been advised by any of the composite companies that there was a serious problem."
Eventually, in late December, the government announced that it would become reinsurer of last resort for terrorist risks on mainland Britain.
The government then set up Pool Re to write this coverage (BI, May 17.; Jan. 11).
The Pool Re plan divides risks into two zones: city regions and the rest of the United Kingdom.  Owners of buildings categorized as target risks, like tourist attractions and airports, pay an additional 50% of the terrorism premium.
There are several problems with the Pool Re program that must be overcome.  Mr. Fleming said.
Administering the plan is burdensome, and premiums are excessive, he noted.  "There is a strong view in certain quarters that the rating levels for city risks are too high."
The U.K. government recently ordered Pool Re to raise rates with July renewals, with proposed increases of up to $ 300% in central London (BI, June 7).
In addition, more flexibility must be built into size-related discounts and deductibles, he said.
The high price of city coverage will lead to more companies self-insuring their terrorism exposure, Mr. Fleming said.
To reduce the price, the higher cost of city risks should be shared with risks in the rest of the country because inevitably the whole British economy will have to pay for the damage, Mr. Fleming said.
The definition of the terrorism exclusion in property policies also is unclear, he said.  Would the insurance cover, for example, a bomb planted by animal rights activists?  he asked.
Another problem is the disincentive for brokers to support the Pool Re program because they are not rewarded for their work, he said.
Outside of insurance, risk managers can do more to guard against terrorist attacks, according to Mr. Fleming.
"The most important aspect is to be alert for unusual situations.  You need a good-quality security staff," he advised.
Companies should use closed-circuit televisions, keep the outside area around their buildings uncluttered, have bomb evacuation procedures that move staff far away from the building and have a contingency plan should a bomb explode, he said.
A contingency plan helped Commercial Union P.L.C. recover from last year's bombing and provide all of its services without a break, said Richard Owen, a U.K. divisional director for Commercial Union, who also spoke at the session.
And through implementing that plan, the insurance company learned several lessons in disaster management, he said.
first, the plan should be generic, Mr. Owen said.  "It can't give you the detailed response to every situation, and it shouldn't try."
Once the plan is implemented, authority must be delegated quickly because the crisis management team cannot do everything, Mr. Owen said.
Multisite operations also help companies to recover.  "We were helped immensely by having multisite operations, which gave us immediate and flexible response options," Mr. Owen said.
Effective communications with the public, employees and shareholders is also fundamental, he said.
After last year's bombing, Commercial Union was able to effectively show it could cope with the disaster, highlighting its slogan, "We won't make a drama out of a crisis," Mr. Owen said.


End of Document