U.K. security service missed chances to thwart Manchester bombing: committee report
Stillman Advance: Stillman College
November 24, 2018 Saturday


University Wire
Copyright 2018 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD-NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 623 words
Byline: Steven Clarke
Body


Potential opportunities to prevent the Manchester Arena attack were missed due to a catalogue of failures in dealing with bomber Salman Abedi, a report into the five terror attacks the United Kingdom suffered in 2017 has found.
The report into the terror attacks in London and Manchester of 2017 was published by the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament.
In 2017, the United Kingdom suffered five terrorist attacks in Westminster, theManchester Arena,London Bridge, Finsbury Park andParsons Green, with 36 people losing their lives and dozens injured.
The report said "Abedi had in fact been flagged for review, but MI5's systems moved too slowly and the review had not happened prior to him launching his attack".
The report added that MI5 decided not to place travel monitoring or restrictions on Abedi, meaning he was allowed to return undetected to the United Kingdom in the days before he carried out the attack.
Twenty-two people were killed when suicide bomber Salman Abedi detonated a device in the lobby ofManchester Arena at the end of an Ariana Grande concert.
3 June: Eight people are killed when three attackers drive a van into pedestrians onLondon Bridge and launch a knife attack in Borough Market.
Abedi was not placed on the Prevent anti-terror program.
It is now handling more than 700 live investigations, involving 3,000 people posing the biggest threat and another 20,000 who are also considered a concern.
Mr Grieve said it was "striking" how numerous issues which arose in relation to the attacks a year ago had previously been raised by the committee in its reports on the 7/7 attacks and the killing of Lee Rigby.
Britain's top counter-terrorism police officer said the authorities had thwarted 13 other plots since March 2017.
Trump intensifies his attacks on Chief Justice Roberts
Trump has nominated dozens of judges to the federal bench, including many at the appellate level, fulfilling a campaign promise. The president was referring to the fact that, as "luck" has it, the decision would need to be appealed to the 9th U.S.
MI5 admits for the first time that it made a mistake in failing to track the 2017 Manchester bomber, MPs have said.
The report went on to claim that terrorists had exploited "loopholes" after Communication Service Providers failed to stop their networks being a "safe haven for extremists".
The 18-year-old Ahmed Hassan, an Iraqi asylum seeker, was found guilty of attempted murder in the case ofParsons Green Tube bombing in London in September 2017 - only months after theWestminster Bridge attack.
"We also know and acknowledge the determination with which they approach their work, which we regard as impressive".
He noted that both MI5 and counter-terror police have been "thorough in their desire to learn from past mistakes", adding: "The lessons from last year's tragic events must now result in real action".
"However, it has been striking how numerous issues which arose in relation to the 2017 terrorist attacks have been previously raised by this committee in our reports on the 7/7 attacks [in 2005] and on the killing of Fusilier Lee Rigby [in 2013]".
However, "we have previously made recommendations in all of these areas, yet the government failed to act on them".
The events previous year prompted intense scrutiny of Britain's counter-terrorism apparatus after it emerged that in a number of cases, the perpetrators had previously appeared on the radar of agencies.
"Following the attacks, the government, police and MI5 undertook a series of rigorous reviews to ensure we are all doing everything we can to tackle the evolving threat of terrorism", said Javid.
Home Secretary Sajid Javid said his department would review and formally respond to the report in due course.

Load-Date: November 24, 2018


End of Document