U.K.-Libyan ties anger victims
Pittsburgh Tribune Review
September 7, 2009 Monday


Copyright 2009 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 466 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body


LONDON — Britain made no demands that Libya offer compensation for Britons killed by Libyan explosives supplied to the Irish Republican Army for fear it could jeopardize ties with Tripoli, according to new documents released Sunday. 
The revelation prompted accusations that Britain had acted to protect energy deals, and added to questions about whether trade ties influenced last month's decision to release Lockerbie bomber Abdel Baset al-Megrahi. 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown said his government "does not consider it appropriate to enter into a bilateral discussion with Libya on this matter," according to a letter to victims' lawyer Jason McCue released by Downing Street. 
The news outraged British survivors of IRA bombings — particularly because U.S. victims of IRA attacks have secured a separate compensation deal with Tripoli. 
Brown later told reporters in Berlin he would offer diplomatic support to private efforts to secure compensation, but he still shied away from pursuing the issue with Libya directly. 
"I desperately care about what has happened to the people who have been victims of IRA terrorism," he said. 
McCue said he was overjoyed at the announcement of diplomatic support, predicting a compensation deal could now be negotiated within weeks. 
The foreign affairs spokesman for Britain's opposition Conservatives, William Hague, said Brown should have provided diplomatic support "as a matter of course, not as a result of public pressure." 
Brown argued that his government had previously avoided broaching the issue with the Libyans out of a desire to wean the North African nation away from its sponsorship of terrorism and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. 
"It is these concerns — security and terrorism, not oil or commercial interests — that have been the dominant feature of our relationship," Brown said. 
Libya once supplied weapons and explosives to terrorists around the world, including several tons of Semtex plastic explosive sent to IRA rebels fighting to drive Northern Ireland out of the United Kingdom. The IRA used those explosives in the 1980s and '90s. 
But Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi performed an about-face in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks, renouncing terrorism, dismantling his country's secret nuclear program, and accepting his government's responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing, the 1988 attack which killed 270 people, mostly Americans. 
Brown and other government officials stressed the need to keep Libya on that route when explaining why they did not press the Libyans for compensation for the IRA's attacks. But documents released Sunday — including a letter sent from Middle East minister Bill Rammel to Jonathan Ganesh, a survivor of one of the IRA bombings — suggest that the government was also keeping Libya's vast oil wealth in mind. 

Load-Date: September 7, 2009


End of Document