U.K. BOMBINGS   A REMINDER OF RISKS:  'STEADY MARKET' FOR TERRORISM COVERAGE REPORTED  
Business Insurance
May 03, 1999


Copyright 1999 Crain Communications Inc.
Section: International; Pg. 15
Length: 851 words
Byline: SARAH GODDARD  
Body


LONDON-Terrorism threats have resurfaced as significant exposures for U.K. businesses after two bombs exploded in busy London streets within the past three weeks.
Less than a month after a survey published by the Assn. of Insurance & Risk Managers and Lloyd's of London showed that the only exposure risk managers are less concerned about this year is terrorism, two nail bombs were detonated on successive Saturdays in neighborhoods with particularly high ethnic concentrations.
''The fact is that, since the survey, there is no doubt that the risks (of terrorist attacks) have risen,'' said David Gamble, executive director of AIRMIC. The survey took place at the beginning of the year, though the results were not published until AIRMIC's annual conference in late spring.
Philip Perry, terrorism underwriter with Lloyd's agency Hiscox Syndicates Ltd., stated in the survey that risk managers should not become complacent about the threats posed by terrorist organizations. Mr. Perry acknowledged initiatives such as the Northern Ireland peace process, which has led to the Irish Republican Army calling a cease-fire. But, speaking to Business Insurance last week, Mr. Perry warned that there are still ''maverick elements'' of the IRA that could strike at any time.
He also warned that there are other organizations that may be threats. ''There's a lot going on behind the scenes that the general public does not get to know about,'' he said.
''I see there's no reduction in terrorism business'' for insurers, commented Ben Garston, terrorism underwriter at Wellington Underwriting Agencies Ltd. ''It's a very steady market; prices have dropped, but the purchases are still steady.''
Mr. Garston pointed out that even though the main IRA has called a cease-fire, there is one renegade unit in particular that is still active. He added that ''membership is quite fluid'' and that people will drift from one branch of the IRA to another.
Of particular concern at the moment is the possibility of revenge attacks by Serbian nationals resulting from the campaign of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in the Former Yugoslavia. Wellington recently developed a coverage for retaliatory bombings in London, New York and the capitals of other NATO countries (BI, March 29), and there has been media speculation that the London bombings and the murder last week of a prominent British television personality may be linked to Serbian nationals. A police spokeswoman said the force is ''keeping an open mind'' about the source of the attacks.
So far, several right-wing extremist groups have claimed responsibility for the two recent bombings in London. These include Combat 18, an offshoot of the British National Party with links to European neo-Nazi organizations.
Brixton, an area in south London, was the site of the first explosion. It has a large Afro-Caribbean population. Only one insurance claim has reached the London market, from Iceland Frozen Foods P.L.C., headquartered in Deeside in Wales. The bomb, containing between six and 10 pounds of nails, exploded directly outside its Brixton-based store, shattering a plate-glass window. A spokeswoman for Iceland declined to comment on its security measures, but she said, ''It is an appalling act, and our feelings are with those who are injured and their families.'' Almost 40 people were injured in the attack.
A week later, an almost identical device exploded in Brick Lane in the East End of London. The area is well known as a center for London's Bangladeshi community and is particularly famous for its restaurants. Although several buildings and two cars were severely damaged, the fact that most businesses in the area are small, family-run operations means that claims most likely will be low. ''We tend to be in much bigger risks in London,'' said a spokesman for multiline insurer CGU P.L.C.
Currently, the Metropolitan Police is treating the two bombings as racially motivated. This means that any claims will fall under fire policies rather than specific terrorism coverages, unless the attacks are recategorized as terrorist-linked.
Terrorism coverage has been excluded from standard fire policies since the IRA bombing of London's financial district in April 1992. As a result, Pool Reinsurance Co. Ltd. was set up as a government-backed reinsurer of last resort. Pool Re Chief Executive Leslie Lucas said the two recent London events are highly unlikely to affect the pool, because its policies have a standard deductible of L100,000 ($161,450) per class of coverage. Even if the acts are defined as terrorism events, the losses resulting from the two bombs are unlikely to hit that level, Mr. Lucas said.
Late last year, Pool Re announced an 85% premium discount as a result of low claims incidents in recent years. The alternative terrorism market-including Wellington and Hiscox-has reduced its rates in line with Pool Re's decision, though several marine syndicates at Lloyd's decided to stop writing the coverage following the reduction, said Hiscox's Mr. Perry.
''The market has reduced in capacity, but the demand is still there,'' he said.

Load-Date: May 3, 1999


End of Document