U.N. Council in Rare Accord: Fight Terrorism
The New York Times
October 20, 1999, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Foreign Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 361 words
Byline: By BARBARA CROSSETTE 

By BARBARA CROSSETTE 
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 19
Body


At a time when the United Nations Security Council often has trouble reaching agreement on whether one crisis or another constitutes a threat to international peace, the 15-member panel has been able to coalesce solidly on the growing dangers of international terrorism. Today, the Council voted unanimously to wage a common fight against terrorists everywhere.
"The resolution adopted today is, in a way, an antiterrorist manifesto," said Sergey Lavrov, Russia's representative, who introduced the measure while serving as the Council's president this month. Russia has recently been the target of a series of terrorist bombings.
"We are convinced that one can fight against terrorism only jointly, on a solid foundation of international law," Mr. Lavrov said during a rare open Security Council debate. His remarks echoed those of others in speeches that were unusually harmonious, given the varied histories of member nations and their representatives. They include former revolutionaries who would once have justified as political acts what others would have called terrorist crimes.
"That these acts may be of a political character do not make them any less reprehensible," said Agam Hasny of Malaysia, a country that has not been quick to join campaigns of interest to Western powers.
Richard C. Holbrooke, the American representative, said: "We must not be dissuaded by phony arguments about 'just causes.' All of us have a stake in this fight, and all of us have a responsibility to act accordingly."
The vote today follows another unanimous decision last week on a bellwether resolution threatening the Taliban movement in Afghanistan with sanctions for harboring Osama bin Laden, a Saudi-born financier and Muslim militant who is wanted on charges of complicity in the bombings of American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania last year.
The resolution calls for better cooperation and the sharing of information among nations and international organizations. It also asks governments to prevent terrorist groups from raising money, to deny such groups safe haven and to be vigilant against false refugee claims made by terrorists seeking new bases of operation.
      

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 20, 1999


End of Document