U.N. panel sees no link between Iraq, al-Qaeda;
The leader of the terrorism committee said the U.S.
offered no evidence to support its prewar claims.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 27, 2003 Friday CITY-D EDITION


Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved


Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A09
Length: 589 words
Byline: Warren P. Strobel and Jonathan S. Landay INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


Members of a special U.N. terrorism committee investigating al-Qaeda said yesterday that they had seen no evidence of the terrorist network's alleged ties with Iraq, which were a major justification President Bush cited for going to war.
"Nothing has come to our notice that would indicate links between Iraq and al-Qaeda," Michael Chandler, the committee's chief investigator, said at a briefing at U.N. headquarters in New York.
Members of the committee, created to monitor al-Qaeda and its financing, also said the U.S. government had given them no information to support its claims of collaboration between al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden and the former regime of Saddam Hussein.
Chandler, in a later telephone interview, cautioned that the committee's mandate is not Iraq but the global al-Qaeda network, and therefore it may not be privy to all relevant information about Iraq.
The White House is coming under increasing pressure to provide evidence that Hussein had reconstituted his weapons-of-mass-destruction programs and had ties to bin Laden, as Bush and his aides claimed before the war.
On Capitol Hill, Republican and Democratic lawmakers on the House Appropriations Committee agreed that the panel would look into a Pentagon office that was set up by pro-invasion hard-liners to process intelligence from Iraqi exile groups that the CIA, the Defense Intelligence Agency, and the State Department regarded as untrustworthy.
Rep. David R. Obey of Wisconsin, the committee's senior Democrat, said a preliminary inquiry by bipartisan staffers had found news reports were credible that the Pentagon's "Office of Special Plans" had failed to share some intelligence with regular intelligence agencies and had provided information directly to Bush that was not verified through proper channels.
Meanwhile, Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D., Calif.) introduced legislation that would establish an independent commission to examine the intelligence the Bush administration used in portraying Hussein as a threat to U.S. security. The proposal appeared unlikely to pass over Republican opposition.
The House and Senate intelligence committees are conducting closed-door reviews.
Administration officials said yesterday that the discovery in Iraq of 12-year-old buried components for a centrifuge that could be used to purify uranium for a nuclear weapon helps make their case. They also rebuffed suggestions that two mobile labs that the CIA says were biological-weapons production plants might have been constructed for other purposes.
On the terrorism issue, administration spokesmen repeated their position that Iraq had ties with al-Qaeda.
A U.S. official said intelligence agencies had received new information since Hussein's overthrow in April of past cooperation between his regime and the terrorist network.
"We have received additional information that tells us our reasons for concern were well-founded," said the official, speaking on condition of anonymity because the information is classified. He declined to elaborate.
Other knowledgeable officials said that intelligence suggesting such a link was tenuous at best, and that while some al-Qaeda associates might have been in Iraq, there was no evidence of active cooperation in carrying out terrorist operations.
"The bottom line is that most of what the administration put out about Saddam making common cause with al-Qaeda was politics, not intelligence," said a defense official who requested anonymity.
Contact reporter Warren Strobel at 202-383-6033 or wstrobel@krwashington.com.  

Load-Date: August 1, 2005


End of Document