U.N. UNANIMOUSLY CONDEMNS HOSTAGE-TAKING
The New York Times
December 19, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk
Length: 542 words
Byline: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 18
Body


The Security Council adopted a resolution today that condemns ''all acts of hostage-taking and abduction'' and calls for the immediate, safe release of all hostages and abducted people.
Vernon A. Walters, the American delegate, said in a statement after the meeting that ''this is a historic step, almost without precedent in the entire 40 years of the United Nations.''
The resolution, initiated by the United States and drafted in closed-door sessions, was endorsed unanimously by all 15 members. It is binding on all countries in the United Nations.
It also urges them to strengthen measures to prevent and punish hostage-taking, and calls on countries where hostages are held to win their safe release.
Mr. Walters, in his statement to reporters, said:
''We can only hope that all states, all parties, that have any influence over groups now holding hostages, will take to heart today's clear and unanimous message and work for the immediate and safe release of all hostages.''
This month's Council president, Leandre Bassole of Burkina Faso, said: ''Never have I attended a Council meeting where unanimous agreement was reached in such a short time. It proves how urgently we need to solve the problem.''
He said members were so eager to pass the resolution that they waived long public speeches.
Sir John Thomson of Britain said the resolution would make it easier ''for all governments to take action to see that hostages, if they are seized, are released.''
But, he added, ''it would be naive to assume that there is going to be no more terrorism.''
In previous years, attempts to condemn hostage-taking or acts of terrorism were opposed by countries that demanded acceptance of the activities of ''liberation movements'' and condemnation of ''state terrorism,'' which in United Nations language refers to American support for Nicaraguan rebels and Israeli intervention in Arab territory.
But the kidnapping of Soviet diplomats in Lebanon last fall helped change the Soviet attitude toward such resolutions, and other nations followed suit, according to diplomats.
Sir John, the British delegate, said that the resolution reflected an increased recognition at the United Nations that all nations were affected by terrorism.
''This is not something that would have happened a year ago,'' he said.
Meanwhile, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar told the General Assembly today that the United States would violate its treaty obligations under the United Nations Charter if it went ahead with plans to withhold part of its financial contribution next year.
He attacked legislation signed by President Reagan in August that will hold back financing unless the United States gets more power over the United Nations budget. He called such actions ''destructive to the orderly implementation of the organization's mandated programs.''
The Secretary General, who addressed the Assembly as it was considering a $1,663 million, two-year budget, had been mildly critical of the legislation, known as the Kassebaum amendment, after its sponsor, Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas.
But his remarks today reflected impatience with American intransigence, according to aides. For the first time, they noted, he asked for the legislation to be modified.


End of Document