U.N. Security Council Strongly Condemns Terrorist Attack In Iran
RTT News (United States)
October 21, 2009 Wednesday


Copyright 2009 NoticiasFinancieras/Grupo de Diarios America All Rights Reserved
Length: 447 words
Body


(RTTNews) - The United Nations Security Council has condemned the week-end suicide-attack in southeast Iran that killed 57 persons, including 15 members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards.
Vietnamese U.N. Ambassador Le Luong Minh, who holds the rotating presidency of the Security Council this month, said in a statement: "The members of the Security Council condemned in the strongest terms the deadly terrorist attack that occurred in the border city of Pishin in Iran October 18, causing at least 57 deaths and 150 injuries."
The statement also expressed condolences of Security Council members to the families of the victims, as well as to the people and the Government of Iran.
The members underlined the need to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of the reprehensible act of terrorism to justice, and urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate actively with the Iranian authorities in this regard.
The statement further said the members reaffirmed the need to combat by all means, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts. The members reiterated their determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations.
The members reminded States that they must ensure that measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law, the statement added.
Meanwhile, U.N. chief Ban Ki-moon on Tuesday condemned the devastating suicide-attack in southeast Iran. In a statement, Ban&apos;s office said that the secretary-general strongly condemns Sunday&apos;s terrorist attacks in the Sistan-Baluchistan province of Iran which resulted in the death of a large number of people and many injured.
Jundullah, a Baloch Sunni group which operates in Sistan-Balochistan province in Iran and has links with Taliban in Pakistan, accuses Iran&apos;s Shia-led government of discrimination against Sunnis. The group has claimed responsibility for Sunday&apos;s attack, the deadliest in Iran in recent years.
The Iranian ambassador to the U.N., Mohammad Khazaee, had earlier said that Tehran is determined to take all the measures necessary to bring this terrorist group to justice.
"We expect the international community, including neighboring countries, to fulfill their international obligations in this regard," he added.
For comments and feedback: contact editorial@rttnews.com
Copyright(c) 2009 RTTNews.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Load-Date: April 17, 2010


End of Document